1356
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
partment’s preliminary view, however, that this step does not alter the
conclusions from the meeting.
4. For Cairo: By septel4 you will receive instructions on how to re-
spond to Cairo 18176.5
5. For Jidda and Damascus: I–G meeting produced consensus that
Saudis are the one moderate Arab power with real influence in Da-
mascus now and under likely successor regimes. We will shortly be
sending you an instruction to raise the Syrian situation with the Saudis
in an effort to begin sharing our perception about, and interests in
Syria’s future. In the meantime, we would appreciate Jidda’s best in-
house assessment of the Saudi-Syrian relationship, including Saudi in-
terests and objectives, points of actual or potential friction, and forms of
Saudi assistance to regime and/or its opponents. Conversely, we
would welcome Damascus’ comments on Syrian perception of Saudi
connection.
6. For Damascus, Jidda, Tel Aviv, Cairo, Amman, Beirut and
Baghdad: We are pouching for Ambassador copy of the discussion
paper6 which served as the basis for the I–G meeting discussions. We
could welcome comments and suggestions about paper, as well as con-
clusions from I–G meeting.
7. For all addressees: This cable is for your information only and
should not be discussed with host government officials at this time.
Given the sensitivity and completeness of this report posts should also
ensure that any comment to Department is sent in Nodis channel.
Muskie
4 Not further identified.
5 Not found.
6 The discussion paper, produced by the Department of State in response to a July
22 request from Brzezinski, was forwarded to Brzezinski under an August 21 covering
memorandum from Tarnoff. In the covering memorandum, Tarnoff stated that the De-
partment of State believed “the situation in Syria justifies the convening of an IG
meeting” which the Department would convene. Copies of the paper and the covering
memorandum are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Country File, Box 74, Syria: 7/77–1/81.
