Negotiating Channels 471 may leak, but we recommend that it take place in order to assure ourselves on the release of our people. It will be in the mutual interest of both parties to keep this secret. Since we have asked for direct contact and they have responded positively, it might be a setback if we shied away now. 4. We propose the following immediate steps: —Jordan and Saunders would arrive in New York by 0900 Monday5 and see Waldheim as early as possible, with Secretary Vance if at all possible. (If this is approved, we hope the Secretary might call Waldheim Sunday and arrange this appointment secretly at Waldheim’s residence.) —Precht and interpreter would move to Paris as point of communication with our French contacts throughout the week and to arrange the Sunday meeting. Our contacts will be on the phone to Tehran from Paris daily, and direct communication may be essential in keeping this scenario on the tracks. —It would be extremely helpful if Hamilton could call around midnight here (1800 Washington time) to determine whether or not to proceed on the basis of this message. 5. We want to emphasize that it is essential to do everything possible to limit knowledge on our side about the meeting next Sunday. 6. Begin text. Revised Scenario I. Principles and Procedures (no change from earlier draft) The United States and Iran agree: 1. To accept the principle of the establishment of a scenario, the first stages of which would be defined precisely, and the subsequent stages would be defined in detail as events evolve; 2. To manage this scenario with the help of persons agreed to by both sides; 3. To proceed, within the framework of this scenario, by stages each involving reciprocal actions to be defined in advance; 4. That these points are intended to allow the earliest possible resolution of the present crisis by peaceful means. II. Establishment of a Commission of Inquiry (changes show detailed sequence of events—all times below are New York time) 1. It is agreed in the approval of this scenario that the Secretary- General of the United Nations should establish a Commission of 5 February 11.
