National Security Policy  437
the world balance of power against us. Although we must have active 
and passive defensive capabilities to reduce the disastrous effects of a 
Soviet nuclear attack and should undertake preparatory measures to 
facilitate national recovery after attack, the primary component of our 
general war deterrent is our strategic nuclear striking force.
3. If our deterrent is to be effective, the Communists must be con­
vinced that retaliation will be inevitable. This requires that our strategic 
striking force be relatively invulnerable. As the USSR will know the loca­
tion of most fixed installations (air bases, missile sites, etc.) in the non-­
Communist world, mobility and elusiveness are among the qualities we 
should emphasize in the further development of our striking force.
4. A relatively invulnerable US strategic striking force would make 
impracticable a pre-emptive Soviet nuclear attack to disarm us. It would 
also reduce the risk of war by misadventure as we would not have to 
react instantaneously to an ambiguous threat of major Communist 
aggression; we would have time to verify the threat; we might also 
have time for maneuver.
5. The Communists must also be convinced that our strategic strik­
ing force could inflict a scale of damage that would be fatal to the struc­
ture of their empire. It may not be necessary that we be able to destroy 
most Communist military targets, with the side effect of killing most of 
the Communist peoples. It may be sufficient to have a known capability 
to destroy the imperial control centers and power bases. A capability 
so designed would be more acceptable to our allies and the uncommit­
ted peoples than a counter-­force capability with its attendant danger of 
severe fall-­out effects extending around the world.
B. Overt Limited Aggression
6. We must deter a wide range of possible overt limited aggres­
sions by Communist imperialism. This kind of Communist aggression 
can best be deterred by further development of our present strategy of 
forward defense.
7. We should continue to encourage states on the periphery of the 
Communist empire to maintain armed forces commensurate in their 
economic capacity. Where the threat is great and the will to resist strong, 
but the indigenous economy weak, we should, as we have in the past, 
provide appropriate assistance upon request to enable the endangered 
state to maintain forces at least capable of harassing and delaying a 
Communist invasion.
8. We should also continue to encourage those few non-Commu­
nist states that have the requisite military experience, manpower and 
economic capacity to develop armed forces that could be made avail­
able outside their national territory for collective defense. We should 
where necessary provide military aid to this end.
