Arms Control and Disarmament  1281
e. Detection of Soviet Concealed Underground Nuclear Tests.3
“Under a test moratorium, it is possible that the Soviets might 
endeavor, because of overriding technical considerations, to conduct a 
limited series of low yield, underground tests on a surreptitious basis. 
Therefore, the seismic component of the inspection system within the 
USSR must be capable of detecting signals generated by an underground 
test, and the moratorium agreement should permit access for on-­the-­
spot ground inspection of suspect areas upon presentation of seismic 
records that cannot be properly explained as a natural phenomenon.
“Should such evidence of a possible test be obtained from seismic 
data or other intelligence sources, it must be promptly evaluated in 
terms of all available information, including the pattern of normal seis­
mic disturbances within the USSR. If the data cannot be discounted as 
a natural phenomenon, a small mobile inspection team should be dis­
patched to the area pin-­pointed by the information at hand. In the event 
of underground tests, a mobile inspection team would provide the only 
capability for confirming the fact of a nuclear explosion, other than that 
derived inferentially from repeated suspect activity at a given site.
“Such teams must be able to move rapidly into the suspect area 
before instrumentation and other physical evidences of testing have 
been removed; conduct low altitude aerial reconnaissance; follow roads 
and car tracks, and inspect on the ground any unusual activity; and, if 
justified, interrogate residents in the vicinity and obtain, under extreme 
conditions, the right to drill for core samples. Such drilling operations 
are time-­consuming and difficult, but provide the only proof that a very 
low yield deep underground test has been conducted.
“This elaborate inspection system and the concurrent use of all intelli­
gence sources will not guarantee detection of such underground tests, par­
ticularly since seismic signals from a low yield underground test cannot be 
consistently distinguished from normal earthquake signals. However, these 
elaborate precautions should raise serious doubts in the minds of the Sovi­
ets as to whether they should risk such an attempted evasion. We believe 
it more likely under these circumstances that they would abrogate a test 
moratorium under some false pretense rather than by surreptitious testing.
“The expansion of the nuclear test detection system to include 
geophysical stations and mobile inspection teams within the USSR will 
greatly increase our overt and covert intelligence collection capabilities 
against a wide range of other Soviet activities. While this does not of 
itself justify implementing the proposed test moratorium and inspec­
tion system, it is a bonus therefrom that would have direct bearing upon 
military order of battle, early warning and economic intelligence.”
3 These opinions of the Central Intelligence Agency were prepared by the Assistant 
Director of CIA for Scientific Intelligence, Dr. Herbert Scoville, Jr. and are included at 
this point in the AFOAT–1 report at the request of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Panel on 
Nuclear Test Limitation. [Footnote is in the ­original.]
