Human Rights
41
Recommendation
1. That Warren Christopher meet with Congressional human
rights leaders on your behalf.3
2. That you call Cranston, Kennedy and Fraser before your trip to
inform them of this.4
Attachment
Action Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of
State for Congressional Relations (Jenkins) to Secretary of
State Vance5
Washington, February 3, 1977
Meeting with Congressional Human Rights Leaders
Principal congressional Members interested in human rights, Don
Fraser in the House and Senators Kennedy and Cranston in the Senate,
although pleased by the Administration’s public stance on human
rights, are becoming increasingly restive about not being consulted on
how it will be put into practice. This restiveness will increase if, lacking
a full understanding of what the Administration proposes to do in the
human rights field, they judge program levels for security assistance as
the sole indicator of our human rights policy. I suggest an early
meeting with them before your Middle East trip.
I believe the meeting should be an exploratory session. You could
reiterate the Administration’s commitment to human rights without
getting into specifics and draw the Congressmen out as to the ideas
they have in the area—and they have many. In the process we would
hope to reassure them of our determination to move on this matter. We
would also hope to channel their energies into a constructive search
with us for effective ways to bring about improvements in the protec-
tion of human rights, and to steer them away from a sterile sniping at
3 Cahill initialed Vance’s approval of this recommendation on February 11. A
stamped notation reads: “Feb 14 1977.”
4 Cahill initialed Vance’s disapproval of this option on February 11. A stamped no-
tation reads: “Feb 14 1977.” At the bottom of the memorandum, Christopher wrote:
“*1) Question trying to meet with all three together. 2) Know all of them quite well, so
your call may be unnecessary. 3) This might be occasion to introduce Derian to Cranston
& Kennedy.”
5 Limited Official Use. Drafted by Pezzullo; concurred in by Wilson. Ortiz initialed
the memorandum. A notation in Cahill’s handwriting on the first page of the memo-
randum reads: “Treat as original.”
