966 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II tegration between sectors in utilizing new techniques to lower costs is another possibility. Finally, between industrialized countries there are major issues that need examination and action: opening of trade in “know-how”, decreased restrictions on importation of foreign hardware and software, joint pooling of efforts in “public technology” R&D fields such as energy, pollution control and mass transit. Also problems in East-West transfer should be examined. Space Technology (1) LANDSAT: A decision will be needed concerning whether and in what way to move toward an operational LANDSAT system. The relationship between LANDSAT and other systems (such as meteorological satellites) for gathering data on various global problems will need to be considered. The possibility of a “global problems” information system should be considered. Various approaches to internationalizing LANDSAT should be considered. Also, ways should be sought to ameliorate the “analytical gap” between countries able to analyze and make their best use of LANDSAT data and those lacking such capabilities. (2) Space Shuttle: A variety of problems and opportunities related to the space shuttle will need to be examined. These should include an examination of opportunities for cooperation and of the potential effects of the space shuttle on widening access to space. (3) Communications Satellites: A continuing effort is needed to find beneficial ways of employing emergency communications satellite techniques. Transborder Data Flows The flow of data between computers across borders has presented new regulatory and privacy problems. An approach to those problems should be developed initially in concert with other industrialized nations. International Health This is an obvious area for a more integrated and focused US policy. The needs are many and there are a number of promising approaches, including greater use of para-medical personnel, increased preventive health programs, greater attention to tropical diseases, etc. The problem is that we do not have the managerial resources and policy capability in State or elsewhere to carry out an increased effort. Naturally, a special problem will be to integrate this field with our other efforts. General Comments My final observation is that we are not well organized to deal with most of these problems. We do not always have the right people. We
