Covert and Overt Operations
807
meets its political needs. The oral message transmitted herewith is
intended for President Bani-Sadr, and you may also give a copy to
Ghotbzadeh. We suggest that with others you simply use these ideas
in conversations.
2. Begin text of oral message for Bani-Sadr: The Iranian radio, TV
and various newspapers, as well as public figures, are again speaking
of the possibility of placing our diplomats on trial. You are aware of
our strong and very serious concern about the dangers of this proce-
dure. We are confident our view is fully shared by almost all other
governments who also reject the idea of further violations of the immu-
nity of diplomats. The International Court of Justice has clearly
expressed a unanimous judgment that our diplomats should not be
involved in judicial proceedings.2 We are also sure that Iran’s leaders
agree that it is essential to civilized international order to preserve the
principle of diplomatic immunity.
The American people and others throughout the world who have
shown their sympathy for Iranian feelings would not understand or
accept trials of innocent diplomats. By no standard of international
law, human rights or religion could our diplomats reasonably be placed
on trial.
In the interest·of the stability of Iran and of its region, we want to
see the present crisis urgently settled in a peaceful, honorable and
harmonious manner, at the earliest opportunity. We have said, and we
have understood Iranian leaders to say, that there is no wish to humili-
ate the other side. If the crisis can be resolved without acrimony or an
attempt to debase the other side, efforts can be made to remove the
damage to Iran which has resulted from the seizure of the hostages.
An official trial of the hostages would seriously impair international
respect for Iran for a long time to come and place in jeopardy diplomats
of all nations, including Iran, throughout the world.
We recognize the deep and abiding feeling in Iran that Iran’s griev-
ances are not being adequately reflected in world opinion. We have
said repeatedly that we have no objection to the provision of appropri-
ate means for expressing Iran’s grievances if that would help solve the
crisis. It was with this thought in mind that we cooperated in the
establishment of the UN Commission. We understand that Iran
intended the recent conference in Tehran for this purpose.3 We under-
stand further that the new Parliament will examine the hostage issue.
There should be sufficient opportunity in its deliberations for the
2 See footnote 2, Document 286.
3 See footnote 9, Document 291. Sick placed brackets around this sentence and
stated in his June 6 memorandum to Brzezinski (see footnote 1 above) that he thought
it was “gratuitous.” Brzezinski approved the telegram with this sentence deleted.
