1955 329 14. I said only prompt, full and faithful implementation agreed announcement could dispose of agenda item one. Self evident that words of announcement in themselves dispose of nothing. Only imple­ mentation of words in announcement could dispose of problem return of Americans. Until this accomplished I had to continue consider that first item agenda remained our first order of business. I had returned to it and would continue return to it as long as there remained question with respect implementation agreed announcement. 15. I said I had, however, taken note of fact that 10 Americans whose release he informed me of September 10 had arrived Hong Kong and that some of 12 Americans whose exit permits he had promised had also departed. Therefore, in expectation his government would act expeditiously on remaining 19 Americans and thus dispose of agenda item one, and in further effort demonstrate my government’s earnest desire these talks should progress I desired today to discuss with him topics we should discuss under agenda item two. 16. I said he had proposed two subjects one of which my govern­ ment considered procedural matter which could not be considered practical matter at issue between our two countries. My government desired put forward two subjects: one was “renunciation of use of force for achievement of national objectives” and other was “accounting for US personnel.” 17. Wang asked for repetition subject headings and then asked what we had in mind under second heading. 18. I replied we would get to that when we discussed the topic. I then continued by saying my government considered subject of renunciation force of fundamental importance to our discussions under agenda item two and that this subject should therefore be discussed before subject he termed economic embargo. I suggested we agree to discuss subjects each had raised in following order: (a) accounting for US personnel, (b) renunciation use of force for achievement national objectives, and (c) economic embargo. 19. Wang replied he had made it clear many times his side willing implement faithfully agreement under agenda item one and his side certainly would do things according to agreement. It provided that agreed announcement should be given wide publicity, object of which was to inform everyone about it, and PRC was giving wide publicity in this manner. If I had concrete opinions on agreed announcement, provided they were reasonable, he suggested assistants both sides hold meeting to discuss them. In past US had taken steps detain and obstruct departure Chinese students and these measures had left deep impres­ sion on minds of students. Therefore, in future necessary US in fact
