September 18–December 16, 1978
475
137.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State1
Cairo, November 14, 1978, 1717Z
24816. Subject: Sadat’s Reaction to President Carter’s Letter. Ref:
A) State 287747,2 B) State 288539.3
Summary. Gave Sadat President Carter’s letter and supplemented
this with approved talking points. Sadat’s reaction was one of disap-
pointment. His first reaction was that we are “speaking different lan-
guages.” He would not sign a treaty with Israel and put himself at the
Israelis’ “mercy” with respect to West Bank/Gaza, regardless of what
the extent of USG involvement may be. Israelis will simply stall. Min-
imum GOE will accept, Sadat stated, is arrangement whereby self-
government in Gaza will be established during first phase of Israeli
withdrawal from Sinai, even if completion of first phase has to be de-
layed for several months. GOE will also not agree to priority of obliga-
tions language in present treaty draft.4 Sadat plans meet later today
with VP Mubarak and PriMin Khalil to study Carter letter and draft
West Bank/Gaza letter.5 He will then instruct Mubarak, who leaves for
Washington tomorrow, to carry an answer6 to President Carter. Mu-
barak authorized spend as much time in Washington as he deems nec-
essary to work with President Carter “to search for a way out of this sit-
uation.” Sadat professed to believe that a USG confrontation with
Begin is needed. Mubarak will have considerable discretionary au-
thority, but will have Sadat’s instructions very much in mind. End
summary.
1. I met with Sadat and VP Mubarak early this afternoon in Is-
mailia. I presented President Carter’s letter to Sadat with addition au-
thorized paragraph 1, ref B. I then read him, slowly, the text of Presi-
dent Carter’s letter. Several times during my reading of the letter, Sadat
shook his head in obvious disagreement. I also read him revised text of
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 55, Middle East: Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel, 11–12/78. Secret; Cher-
okee; Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in
the White House Situation Room. At the top of the telegram, Brzezinski wrote: “Sadat’s
response. ZB.” Carter initialed “C” in the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the
telegram to indicate that he saw the document.
2 See Document 136.
3 See footnote 4, Document 136.
4 See Document 131.
5 Ibid.
6 See Document 139.
