Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 Energy No issue we face today more clearly demonstrates the interests we share with the people of the developing world than energy. The commuter buying gasoline in Seattle and the peasant farmer buying kerosene near Khartoum both face the harsh reality of rising world petroleum prices. Governments in the richest countries and those in the poorest must deal with the impact of higher energy costs and rising energy demand on their national economies. Let me be frank. The worldwide energy situation, already serious, is likely to get worse before it gets better. For the foreseeable future, in the absence of substantial new efforts, worldwide growth in energy demand will continue to outpace worldwide growth in energy production. We must do what is necessary in our own country to restrain consumption and increase domestic production. But we cannot solve the energy problem by what we do here alone. It is a global challenge. Thus, we have a direct interest in helping developing countries devise their own effective energy policies—helping them identify their energy resources, determine their current and future energy demand, identify the technology they need, and obtain the necessary financing. Let me tell you what we are already doing in each of these areas. We are now helping several developing countries survey their national energy resources, define their future energy needs, and construct alternative energy strategies. With our strong support, the World Bank is significantly expanding its program to help developing countries finance further exploration and development of fossil fuels. The Bank envisages loans amounting to as much as $3 billion over the next 5 years. We are devoting substantial financial resources to research on renewable energy sources. In addition to private financing, the Department of Energy has budgeted over $600 million this year to study, develop, and demonstrate renewable energy technology. We have asked the Congress for more than $700 million for these efforts next year. These programs can lead to technological developments that directly benefit the developing nations. The Agency for International Development (AID) has requested $42 million in FY 1980 for the actual application of renewable energy technologies in developing countries. We have accelerated our training and technical assistance programs for energy professionals and institutions in the developing countries. We have proposed a new institute for scientific and technological cooperation, which would become an important element of our foreign
