Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
583
Energy
No issue we face today more clearly demonstrates the interests we
share with the people of the developing world than energy. The com-
muter buying gasoline in Seattle and the peasant farmer buying kero-
sene near Khartoum both face the harsh reality of rising world petro-
leum prices. Governments in the richest countries and those in the
poorest must deal with the impact of higher energy costs and rising en-
ergy demand on their national economies.
Let me be frank. The worldwide energy situation, already serious,
is likely to get worse before it gets better. For the foreseeable future, in
the absence of substantial new efforts, worldwide growth in energy
demand will continue to outpace worldwide growth in energy
production.
We must do what is necessary in our own country to restrain con-
sumption and increase domestic production. But we cannot solve the
energy problem by what we do here alone. It is a global challenge.
Thus, we have a direct interest in helping developing countries de-
vise their own effective energy policies—helping them identify their
energy resources, determine their current and future energy demand,
identify the technology they need, and obtain the necessary financing.
Let me tell you what we are already doing in each of these areas.
We are now helping several developing countries survey their na-
tional energy resources, define their future energy needs, and construct
alternative energy strategies.
With our strong support, the World Bank is significantly ex-
panding its program to help developing countries finance further ex-
ploration and development of fossil fuels. The Bank envisages loans
amounting to as much as $3 billion over the next 5 years.
We are devoting substantial financial resources to research on re-
newable energy sources. In addition to private financing, the Depart-
ment of Energy has budgeted over $600 million this year to study, de-
velop, and demonstrate renewable energy technology. We have asked
the Congress for more than $700 million for these efforts next year.
These programs can lead to technological developments that directly
benefit the developing nations.
The Agency for International Development (AID) has requested
$42 million in FY 1980 for the actual application of renewable energy
technologies in developing countries.
We have accelerated our training and technical assistance pro-
grams for energy professionals and institutions in the developing coun-
tries. We have proposed a new institute for scientific and technological
cooperation, which would become an important element of our foreign
