Guatemala  689
1. The question of how to help maintain President Ydígoras in 
office for his full term and of how, in so doing, to ensure his succession 
by elements friendly to or willing to work with, rather than against the 
United States.
2. The leftist swing of popular sentiment in Guatemala, and the 
problem of growing communist and pro-­communist activity.
3. The “Arevalo Problem.”
4. Inter-American Highway
1. YDÍGORAS:
Ydígoras has not forgotten nor been allowed to forget we were luke-
warm toward his plans to reach the Presidency of Guatemala in 1954, 
1957 and 1958. He was somewhat placated during his post-­electoral 
visit to the United States and our relation ran fairly smoothly until a 
few months after the visit to Guatemala of the Dr. Milton Eisenhower 
mission. Despite all the efforts made to forestall such a development, 
Ydígoras wanted to believe and did believe that we would heed a large 
part of his requests for $95 million dollars in loans. Perhaps this belief 
was encouraged by the fact that his submissions were prepared with 
the assistance of Americans whom the Guatemalans consider “quasi 
official”, i.e. Klein & Saks experts.3
It now becomes apparent that in announcing that Guatemala 
wanted to shift from grants to loans Ydígoras did not mean quite what 
he said. He was playing up to growing nationalist sentiments and 
expected us to play along with him. His subsequent resentment over 
the “relatively high” interest rate assigned to the rubber development 
loan indicates he had hoped for token interest rates that would have 
turned grants only technically into loans. It must be recognized that 
Clemente Marroquin Rojas’ loud complaints that United States aid is 
a “national shame” have wide appeal even to persons who feel that 
United States aid must be continued.)4 These people therefore look for 
ways to remove the stigma attached to aid (i.e. the supposed 
3 A report on Guatemala by the consulting firm of Klein and Saks is in decimal 
file 814.00/2–2858. In a memorandum of a conversation with Ambassador Antillón on 
June 10, Assistant Secretary Rubottom pointed out that more than $30 million of the 
Guatemalan request for loans was for assistance to a housing program, and “overall pol-
icy made it impossible to satisfy Guatemalan hopes in this connection, but that other 
ways have been and are being sought to help Guatemala find a solution to its housing 
problem.” (Rubottom Files, Lot 61 D 279, “Guatemala, 1959”)
4 In a note to Foreign Minister Unda Murillo, May 11, Mallory asked if Marroquín’s 
statements of May 8, expressed the views of the Guatemalan Government. (Enclosure to 
despatch 624 from Guatemala City, May 13, 1959; 714.00/5–1359) On May 13, Mallory 
met with Unda Murillo who gave him a copy of a note in reply and then said that 
the statements of the Minister of Agriculture of May 8 did not reflect the views of the 
Government. (Memorandum of conversation by Mallory, May 13, 1959; ARA/OAP Files, 
Lot 63 D 146, “Ambassador Lester D. Mallory: Guatemala, 1959”)
