242
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
points. He warns against pressuring the Japanese with such zeal and
single-mindedness on trade matters that we lose sight of the broadly
convergent interests we share with Japan. He notes with some fore-
boding that grievances are accumulating on both sides of the relation-
ship, and he underscores our own stake in maintaining cordial and mu-
tually beneficial ties. He reminds us that we must pursue our economic
objectives with a realistic awareness of the constraints that are built into
Japan’s political system. We must avoid the impression that we are in-
sensitive to Japan’s economic and political interests, and are giving
little more than lip service to preserving our wider partnership with
them. He suggests that we forego publicly lecturing the Japanese on
our conceptions of their responsibilities. These are useful and timely re-
minders of important truths. We should bear them in mind.
They are not the only considerations, however, that should guide
us in the weeks ahead. The Japanese have been derelict in meeting their
international responsibilities in the economic field. Our discussions
with them on this subject during the past nine months have produced
nice communiques but few tangible results. Many Japanese leaders still
regard their massive current account surplus and their bilateral trade
surplus with us as cyclical problems which are likely to prove transi-
tory. They are looking for short-term, cheap palliatives which will get
us off their backs for a while in hopes that some other issue will emerge
to divert our attention. Our most pressing requirement is to strengthen
the hand of those within Japan who are prepared to contemplate
far-reaching changes in their trade practices—particularly their atti-
tudes toward the import of manufactured goods.
Japanese diplomacy on commercial issues tends to be reactive and
defensive. Rapid movement toward equilibrium in Japan’s trade or
current accounts will not come without the determined application of
strong external pressures. And even those Japanese who find such
pressures distasteful generally acknowledge that they are an indispens-
able prerequisite of change. We must apply these pressures adroitly,
yet persistently, and we can anticipate some adverse fallout on our po-
litical relationship. This should be manageable. Indeed Japan’s concern
to keep it within bounds will be one of our prime levers (just as it was
one of Japan’s in the Tokai dispute).4 Our prospects of success will de-
pend on careful and detailed exposition of what we want, persistence
in seeking results, clear signals regarding the consequences of inaction,
and some patience and good humor.
4 Reference is to the U.S.-Japanese disagreement over the opening of the Tokai
Mura nuclear reprocessing facility in Japan. On September 1, the countries announced
that they had reached an agreement that would permit the plant to open. (Andrew H.
Malcolm, “U.S. and Japan Agree on Tokyo’s Opening of Atom Fuel Plant,” The New York
Times, September 2, 1977, p. 1)
