684  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
stability. The following decisions are designed to help achieve that 
goal by making a best faith effort to resolve the issues that they 
address. (C)
1. ALCMs and SLCMs. Building on current areas of agreement 
with the Soviet Union and existing guidance, the U.S. can accept a 
package that includes the following elements:
ALCMs
a. 600 km range threshold provided that non-­nuclear ALCMs such 
as Tacit Rainbow are excluded from START limits. (S)
b. Except as provided in subparagraph (d) below, current and 
future U.S. heavy bombers equipped for nuclear-armed ALCMs will 
be counted at 10 nuclear-­armed ALCMs per bomber and will not be 
equipped for more than 20 nuclear-­armed ALCMs per bomber. (S)
c. Except as provided in subparagraph (d) below, current and 
future Soviet heavy bombers equipped for nuclear-armed ALCMs will 
be counted at 8 nuclear-­armed ALCMs per bomber and will not be 
equipped for more than 12 nuclear-­armed ALCMs per bomber. (S)
d. Subject to a mutually acceptable definition of “as equipped,” 
the U.S. may agree that any U.S. heavy bombers equipped for nuclear-­
armed ALCMs in excess of 150–180 will count against the 6000 warhead 
limit on an “as equipped” basis. Soviet heavy bombers equipped for 
nuclear-­armed ALCMs in excess of 140 percent of the 150–180 thresh-
old also will count against the 6000 warhead limit on an “as equipped” 
basis. (S)
e. As an alternative to subparagraph (d), the U.S. may accept a 
sublimit on the number of U.S. heavy bombers equipped for nuclear-­
armed ALCMs that adequately protects options for the duration of the 
START Treaty. Under this approach, the Soviets may deploy up to 40 
percent more heavy bombers equipped for nuclear-­armed ALCMs than 
the U.S., subject to other START constraints, including the 1600/6000 
START limits. (S)
f. The U.S. requires a continuing right to convert up to 100 non-­
modern heavy bombers to “former heavy bombers” that would not be 
counted within the 1600/6000 START aggregates. The U.S. may pro-
pose that “non-­modern” heavy bombers be defined as being those of a 
type that has been deployed longer than 10–15 years. (S)
SLCMs
As part of the ALCM/SLCM package, the U.S. may propose that 
each side make a declaration of policy concerning nuclear-­armed 
SLCMs with ranges in excess of 600 km that includes the following 
elements:
a.  A statement that the declaration will be politically binding. (S)
b.  A specification of the maximum number of nuclear-­armed 
SLCMs that will be deployed for each of the next five years. This speci-
fication would be updated annually. (S)
c.  A statement that no more than 875–1000 nuclear-­armed SLCMs 
will be deployed at any one time for the duration of the START Treaty. (S)
