814 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement for an Advisor to the Military School and an informal request for an Advisor to the First Battalion. The Embassy has strongly supported the former. The latter is still in the preliminary stages. It is assumed that these two Advisors would be under the general jurisdiction of the Military Mission. This, together with the furnishing of personnel for the Engineering Construction Unit described below under the Military Security Program, is the full extent of any increase that is contemplated. Apart from this, I do not personally recommend any further expansion of the activities of the Missions. By means of its program of news dissemination, the U.S. Information Service contributes toward all four of the objectives stated above. The same may be said of the cultural and educational exchange programs, which it administers in the field. These programs are extremely important for Honduras and, in fact, deserve far greater emphasis and support than they have received in the past year. For several months the USIS in Honduras has been represented by one U.S.-­assigned officer, who has had far too great a work load to handle without assistance. Apart from the serious staffing weakness of the USIS itself, the bilateral cultural center has been without a U.S. director for nearly a year. (This position has just been filled.) In terms of money spent, personnel employed, and direct influence on the achievement of the above objectives, the U.S. Operations Mission, through its administration of the Mutual Security Program, is of special importance. It should be noted that the technical assistance part of this program has existed in some form in Honduras since 1942, although the major part of the ICA activity dates from 1951. In recent years there have been certain large-­scale loans and grants from Special Assistance funds, but the backbone of the MSP in Honduras continues to be technical cooperation, and it is by this aspect that the agency is best known. It may be said that although the USOM, through one or more of its projects, attempts to realize all four of the major U.S. objectives, through its emphasis on technical cooperation it is especially effective with respect to Objective 2, the development of a strong and expanding national economy. The MSP in Honduras in the past has tended to follow the traditional lines of this program in Latin America, with emphasis on the major fields of agriculture, public health, and education. Certainly these activities are basic in Honduras, which needs help to realize its legitimate aspirations for a better standard of living and higher level of culture. I feel strongly convinced that a much greater emphasis should be given to assistance in basic education. The illiteracy rate in Honduras is very high and the level of education of those who are literate is extremely low. The manpower requirements, not only for mutual programs but for normal national activities, are impossible to
