1164
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
fact is that that would be a multilateral approach, not just with two or
three countries. They think others should be involved, including the
West Europeans, and self-determination should be included. These de-
velopments the Palestinians believe should be done now. Such alterna-
tives seem more promising to them.
Ambassador Linowitz asked how. Would they try to seize the West
Bank and Gaza?
Mr. el-Baz said that if there were negotiations under a different um-
brella . . . Israel is there, but there could be another 242, and add a reso-
lution on self-determination. They could try to get the Soviet Union and
the socialists in. The Palestinians believe objective factors would lead to
a different outcome.
Ambassador Linowitz asked whether Mr. el-Baz believed it in that
approach.
Mr. el-Baz said he believed it was wrong, or Egypt would be pur-
suing it. They honestly tell the Palestinians their view. The Palestinians
feel there are other options. Second, if the Israeli government doesn’t
give anything—and the Palestinians hear this from former Cabinet
members and Kreisky and others, they believe there is a disincentive to
join Camp David. They wait until Israel changes; they wait for another
government.
Secretary Vance asked if the “they” was the predominate Pales-
tinian element, or just some of them.
Mr. el-Baz said that this is hard to measure. But it is the prevailing
view among many PLO members and on the West Bank and Gaza.
They see the best alternative as waiting, and maybe to get a better deal.
The President said that the Palestinians would get a pretty good
deal in Camp David.
Mr. el-Baz said he believes therefore that we should try to
strengthen it. This would be the key work to attract the Palestinians.
Assistant Secretary Saunders said we don’t know what the Israeli
Labor Party would say about a better deal or a territorial deal. There-
fore the issue is confused in Palestinian minds.
Dr. Brzezinski said that when the Palestinians see the map, it will
not be a better deal.
Assistant Secretary Saunders agreed: since it is not concrete, the Pal-
estinians don’t see this.
Ambassador Linowitz said that this approach was a disservice.
Mr. el-Baz agreed.
Ambassador Linowitz asked Mr. el-Baz to say more.
Mr. el-Baz said that if we could get a good agreement, this would
reassure the Palestinians about their fears of the Israelis. The Pales-
