1282 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement VE–35. Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State (Murphy) to the President1  Washington, September 10, 1959 SUBJECT Venezuela: Imports of Residual Fuel Oil For the reasons set out below, the Department of State proposes that the importation of residual fuel oil be liberalized. Because of large United States private investments in the Venezuelan oil industry and the strategic importance to us of the large Venezuelan oil reserves, demonstrated by the Second World War, the Korean conflict and the Suez crisis, the Venezuelan people have come to expect privileged treatment from us. The Venezuelan Government accordingly protested when the imposition of our import controls restricted their access to their largest market. It also protested the exemption from our controls of oil imported by overland means on the ground that this was discrimination in favor of Canada even though this action probably will prevent, for an indefinite period, Canadian restrictions on the importation of Venezuelan oil and even though the limited increase in Canadian exports resulting from the exemption have not yet displaced Venezuelan oil. At the same time, there exists in Venezuela a growing nationalism directed principally against the foreign oil companies, which are accused of depleting Venezuela’s irreplaceable oil reserves while making unconscionable profits. The present Venezuela Minister of Mines, who thus far has enjoyed the complete confidence and support of President Betancourt, seeks to exploit this situation. On the one hand, he has proposed that Western Hemisphere oil be exempted from our import controls and, on the other, he has publicly announced his intention of a) progressively increasing the Government’s share of industry profits; b) invading management prerogatives in the production, exportation and marketing of oil; and c) encouraging Near Eastern oil producing states to increase their share of profits and to cooperate with Venezuela in the control of prices. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.316/9–1059. Confidential. Drafted by Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary of. State for Economic Affairs, on September 8.
