398 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement CR–5. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Costa Rican-Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1  Washington, March 27, 1958.2 SUBJECT COSTA RICA: Visit of President-Elect Mario ECHANDI Jimenez PARTICIPANTS Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary William A. Wieland, Director Middle American Affairs C. Allan Stewart, Deputy Director Middle American Affairs Ambassador Whiting Willauer Ambassador Robert F. Woodward Herbert B. Leggett, Officer in Charge, Central America and Panama Affairs Henry L. Taylor, Costa Rica Desk Officer Mario ECHANDI Jimenez, President-­elect of Costa Rica Jorge Hazera, Minister Counselor of Embassy of Costa Rica MEMBERS OF ECHANDI OFFICIAL PARTY Sr. Alfredo Hernandez Volio Sr. Jorge Borbon Castro Sr. Joaquin Vargas Gené Sr. Tomás Federico Guardia Herrero Mr. Rubottom extended a warm welcome to Mr. Echandi and the members of his official group. He congratulated Mr. Echandi on winning the Presidential elections and commended Costa Rica for the democratic manner in which the Presidential and Congressional elections were held last February 2. Mr. Echandi replied that he was honored and pleased to be in Washington and expressed his appreciation for the magnificent attention he and the members of his group were receiving. The visit lasted one and one-­half hours, during which time the following subjects were discussed. Economic Conditions Mr. Rubottom said it appeared in general that Costa Rica’s economy was in fairly good condition. He said, however, he realized a reduction in world market coffee prices—Costa Rica’s principal source of foreign exchange—­could cause severe economic repercussions to the country’s economy. Mr. Echandi said this was correct and that he was concerned over the possible drop in coffee prices. Mr. Echandi expressed the 1 Source: Department of State, OAP Files, Lot 61 D 7, “Memorandum of Conversation: Costa Rica, 1958.” Confidential. 2 This memorandum of conversation was prepared on March 31.
