International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
961
290.
Memorandum From Harry Blaney of the Policy Planning
Staff to the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kreisberg)1
Washington, July 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Checklist of our Global Challenges
Per your request you will find below a brief summary of some of
the key global issues we need to face in the next two or three years. I
thought something more than a heading was required but tried to keep
the description brief. Even so, to do justice to any of these subjects
would require a major paper. Wreath and Sandy2 have contributed
their ideas to this paper in areas of their special expertise. I suggest a
meeting sometime to examine these issues with the concerned
members.
Environment
This is a very broad area which has been seriously neglected by
this Department with little or no supervision or oversight by our prin-
cipals. The main areas needing attention and increased leadership
include:
(1) Marine Pollution: Our oceans are becoming more and more pol-
luted with oil, organic matter and toxic wastes to a point in which their
ecological function may be threatened. We are actively working unilat-
erally and multilaterally to reduce pollution (mostly oil) from ships.
There are a number of important initiatives which will require effective
followup, including President Carter’s Marine Pollution Package.3 Yet
more than 80% of the pollution in the oceans comes from landbased
sources and this is the most difficult area to deal with. The problem is
that we have not even started to focus on this problem or propose amelio-
rative programs. Finally, despite efforts to establish, by UNEP, a global
marine pollution monitoring system, we still have not received any
meaningful data and this important program is languishing. One idea
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 7, TL Papers on Specific
Mtgs./Appoint 1977. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Garten, Grose, Gath-
right, Vogelgesang, and Theodore Moran. According to handwritten notations on the
memorandum, a meeting concerning the issues raised within the memorandum took
place on July 22; no minutes of this meeting were found.
2 Reference is to Wreatham Gathright and Sandra Vogelgesang.
3 On March 17, President Carter announced measures to address the risks of ocean
transport of oil. See Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 458–459.
