1980 781 defense consisting of several hundred SA–10s and a new “lookdown shoot-­down” interceptor (a modified MIG–25 with AA–X–9 missile). These Soviet systems will begin deployment in the early 80’s, will erode the B–52s penetrating capability by the mid-80’s and make it untenable by the late 80s. The solution to this problem is the cruise missile which becomes operational in 1982, and reaches a deployment of 1800 missiles by the mid-80s. The cruise missile by virtue of its low detectability and large numbers will be able to penetrate the new Soviet air defense system. On the other hand, the FB–111B/C, which is well behind the cruise missile’s schedule, is almost as vulnerable as the B–52s to the new air defense system. Its radar cross-­section, only slightly lower than the B–52s, is 100 times as great as the cruise missile. (S) The FB–111B/C cannot fly supersonic during low altitude penetration, when its speed is only Mach .8 to Mach .85. While this is faster than the B–52 (which penetrates to about Mach .6), it is not fast enough to degrade the effectiveness of the new Soviet air defense systems. Because of these limitations the only chance of either the FB–111B/C or the B–52 successfully penetrating these new defenses is for them to have an effective ECM system. Neither the B–52 or FB–111B/C has a modern ECM system in which we could have much confidence. An improved system (designed for the B–1) could be installed on the B–52s for several billion dollars. A similar additional expense would be needed for the FB–111B/C, but because of space limitation, it is doubtful if the full ECM capability could be installed on that plane. At best, a new ECM set would give us only a fair confidence of penetrating the new Soviet air defense system because of that system’s extreme use of monopulse radars which are highly ECM resistant—­this was a principal reason for deciding not to produce the B–1 aircraft. (S) There are other, less important, problems with the FB–111B/C. It is short-­legged, requiring two tankers to give it full target coverage. If we dedicate these aircraft for the strategic forces, we deflect them from the valuable function they perform for our conventional forces. In fact, during the several years of airframe modification (during the peak of the so-­called “window of vulnerability”) they will not be available for either tactical or strategic forces. (S) We already have underway significant programs to strengthen our strategic forces before M–X is deployed. We will be deploying about 300 TRIDENT I missiles and 1800 cruise missiles during that period. If it is necessary to augment further our strategic forces prior to M–X deployment, we have two alternatives available to us much more attractive than the FB–111B/C proposal. First, we could increase the production and deployment rate of our cruise missiles (60 per month instead of 40 per month) giving us 1000 more cruise missiles deployed by 1986, at a cost of about $2B. Second, we could deploy sea launched
