478 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV and NATO planning could help to alleviate these concerns. However, to make such plans effective requires more responsive and survivable C3 and intelligence, and even closer integration of employment planning and crisis management between the U.S. and its allies at both the military and civilian levels. For the longer run, the availability to SACEUR of an option to target a full range of threats to Allied Command Europe (ACE) without invoking the SIOP would also strengthen deterrence and the confidence of our allies. There is no plan at present for launch under attack of only the ICBM force. If the ICBMs were launched against their current SIOP targets there would be substantial collateral damage to Soviet population and this would likely invite retaliation against US urban/industrial assets. In any event, the set of targets for our ICBM force is not in itself planned to meet any specific objective. We ought to have an option to launch only our land-­based ballistic missiles against a target set which would serve some defined objective while minimizing collateral damage, thereby reducing the prospect of retaliation against a broad US urban/ industrial target set. The launch under attack doctrine should not be seen as a solution to the problem of ICBM vulnerability. In many situations, LUA, would, in effect, rule out a real choice by the President. The President should not be forced to make a “use or lose” choice if there are other options available. Reliance on LUA increases the risk of an accidental war and thus would increase instability in a Soviet-US crisis. However, we do believe that targeting plans should include a LUA option for ICBM forces only that is less escalatory than current plans. The current SIOP targeting policy for China is out of date. It was based on a period when China was seen as a threat comparable to the Soviet Union. We believe that our China targeting policy should be reformulated to bring it more into line with current political and military realities. China poses no strategic nuclear threat to the US today and will only have a minimal capability within the next several years at least. At present, US-Chinese relations are improving, and the PRC is clearly more menacing to our adversaries than to our allies. Political relations could change, but we would likely have a good deal of warning. In any case, while it is not clear what will deter China, it seems unlikely that a primarily agrarian society with a small industrial base will be deterred from regional aggression against its neighbors by the threat of massive attacks on industry. We not only do not understand the recovery process as it relates to China, but we are quite arbitrary in assigning value to those targets we select. The current requirement to program at least one weapon on an industrial facility in the top 125 urban areas in the PRC, drives, to a large extent, the high weapons requirements for China targeting even though over 50 percent of China’s industry is located in 25 cities.
