776  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
181.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, March 29, 1980
SUBJECT
The U.S.-Soviet Military Balance
I have reviewed my recent public characterizations of the U.S.–
Soviet military balance, as well as my testimony before Congressional 
committees and responses to questions from Members on this subject. 
In the course of this review I have also examined media reporting to 
see how accurately my assessments have been quoted and in what 
context; I recognize that we have to take some responsibility for what 
we are perceived as saying, as well as full responsibility for what we 
actually say.
The products of this review are attached. On reflection, I think my 
characterization has been accurate—­neither alarmist nor inappropri-
ately comforting.
The basic elements of my explanation of the balance are:
• In 1960–63, the U.S. spent 30% more on defense than did the 
Soviet Union; in 1980 we will spend 30% less. The turnaround is the 
result of a doubling of Soviet defense spending, while U.S. defense 
spending remained level.
• The Soviet Union has, for over two decades, spent vast sums of 
money in a determined effort first to equal, and then to surpass, the 
United States in military strength. That they have not yet succeeded in 
surpassing us is not a reflection on their determination or, indeed, on 
their achievements. It is partly because we were well ahead when they 
began their build-­up, partly because our allies and their adversaries 
must also be weighed in the balance, and also because we remain ahead 
in a number of important technological areas.
• In strategic nuclear forces, the Soviets have come from a position 
of substantial numerical inferiority 15 years ago to one of parity today. 
Their forces have improved in quality as well as numbers. The Sovi-
ets have a potential for strategic advantage if we fail to respond with 
1 Source: Library of Congress, Harold Brown Papers, Box 106, Secretary Brown Eyes 
Only, Jan–June 1980. Confidential; Eyes Only. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of 
the memorandum: “I have read this carefully. It is a good analysis—­and your presenta-
tions seem balanced. It is difficult to include NATO v. W. Pact, PRC border, air defense etc 
in every statement. My concerns are not fully alleviated because in general, the impres-
sion is that we & our allies are inferior—­now—­seriously we still need to work on this 
problem—­with $ and with words—Thanks, J.C.” A stamped notation on the first page of 
the memorandum indicates Brown saw Carter’s note.
