March 27–December 31, 1979 959 Egyptian military supply relationship based on a proposed level of U.S. support as follows: 1. $350 million of additional credits in FY 81. 2. Cash flow financing of the Egyptian program. 3. $800 million in credits per year for five years (FY 82–FY 86). 4. Approval in principle to sell F–16 aircraft and M60A3 tanks. (S) Discussion Secretary Brown reported to the PRC on the results of the highlevel delegation3 which visited Egypt in mid-August for discussions with the Egyptian military leadership, and on subsequent discussions he had conducted with Vice President Mubarak in Washington.4 It was his judgment that Egypt has very substantial legitimate security needs. Given the withdrawal of Arab financial support from Egypt, the fact that Sadat has in effect burned his bridges by turning to us, and our own political commitment to Egypt as part of the on-going peace process, he saw no alternative to the United States accepting a major program of support for Egypt for some time to come. This analysis was endorsed fully by the Department of State, the JCS, and the NSC. Admiral Turner added that, without substantial U.S. support, Sadat might be in trouble domestically. (S) Secretary Brown noted that Egypt was previously reported to be receiving $800 million per year from Arab sources. That funding was assumed to be available when we proposed the $1.5 billion, three-year “Peace Package” for Egypt.5 Although Egypt has requested at least $8 billion of military equipment, our own analysis of Egypt’s security needs indicates that it requires a military program of about $4 billion through FY 86. He proposed that the United States consider a program of FMS credits over a five-year period (FY 82 through FY 86) of $800 million per year. He also noted that some additional assistance would be required before FY 82 in order to permit Egypt to begin working out its military priorities and to begin placing orders. Otherwise, there would be no tangible progress on the Egyptian program during the next two critical years. He proposed that this be accomplished in two ways: —That we agree to finance the Egyptian program on a “cash flow” basis. This procedure, which is now used with Israel and Jordan, permits available credits to be used to cover actual expenses in a year, with the implicit understanding that additional credits will be available 3 See footnote 4, Document 274. 4 See footnote 5, Document 293. 5 See Document 212.
