1977  169
concept has not yet evolved of how this interaction between the NCA 
and other involved organizations might occur.
(U) The announcement by Secretary Schlesinger of the new US 
employment policy was widely interpreted as indicating that the US 
was shifting its nuclear targeting to a silo-­busting, counterforce strat-
egy which would require acquisition of new strategic weapon systems 
and capabilities. In fact, the changes in the targeting, and the addi-
tional flexibility incorporated in the employment plans have not as 
so far carried out entailed purchase of new systems. Schlesinger did 
acknowledge, however, that the doctrine would be improved if certain 
qualitative improvements were funded for the forces and command 
and control systems. The contemporaneous discussion of better US 
hard target capability related to a distinct issue—­avoiding the percep-
tions that he believed would result if the USSR were thought to have a 
great edge over the US in any particular category of strategic capability. 
Neither did the doctrine represent a radical shift in targeting emphasis. 
On the contrary, prepared US nuclear war plans had always included 
options for attacking both urban-­industrial and military (hard and soft) 
targets, but heretofore they always involved the expenditure of several 
thousand nuclear weapons. The concepts of NSDM–242 were meant to 
provide greater flexibility to the NCA by providing a wide spectrum of 
variously sized options from which to choose an appropriate response 
at any level of aggression.
(TS) In implementing NSDM–242, the Secretary of Defense’s 
NUWEP guidance directed that Major Attack Options and Selected 
Attack Options (MAOs and SAOs) be included in the SIOP. MAOs pro-
vide for massive attacks against the primary military resources (nuclear 
and conventional), the recovery resources, and the national leadership 
of the USSR and PRC and their allies. SAOs provide for generally large-­
scale (although smaller than MAOs) attacks against selected military 
targets, and are target sub-­sets extracted from the MAOs. SAOs con-
tribute to the objective of escalation control by providing preplanned 
options within the SIOP to respond to large-­scale Soviet or PRC nuclear 
attacks against military targets of the US and/or its allies.
(S) Limited and Regional Nuclear Options (LNOs and RNOs) 
were also required by NSDM–242 and NUWEP. LNOs and RNOs pro-
vide smaller, more discrete alternatives to the larger retaliatory attacks 
planned in the SIOP as MAOs and SAOs. LNOs are generally small-­
scale preplanned attacks by nuclear-­capable strategic or theater forces 
against fixed targets. RNOs are attacks, normally by nuclear-­capable 
theater forces, designed to counter deployed attacking enemy forces and 
supporting resources. These non-SIOP options, which normally vary in 
size [2 lines not declassified], are developed by the unified and specified 
commanders (CINCs) and reviewed and approved by the Joint Chiefs
