558
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
in the Israeli/Egyptian peace talks. We have a deteriorating position,
and perhaps worse, with our European Allies. Finally, our relationship
with the Soviet Union is dormant and perhaps deteriorating as well.
On this latter point, the President said that he and President Brezh-
nev do not understand one another. The President said he does not
know what Brezhnev’s next step is and what he is aiming to accomplish.
Perhaps Brezhnev is in the same position. Both of us, he said, must
assume the worst of each other.
On Iran, the President said we need to increase our pressure.
Although the latest election returns are favoring Bani-Sadr, the Ameri-
can people are getting sick of the situation. Indeed, the President said,
he was sick of it as well. He thought that we had been quiet to the
detriment of all concerned. We have been holding off criticizing the
Iranians and taking direct action in order to create the most favorable
circumstances for a settlement, but we verge now upon accepting the
status quo. He said we could not sit still until May without placing
greater pressure on Iran to take action to release the hostages.
[Omitted here is material on Afghanistan, the Soviet Union, the
Middle East, and the U.S. Defense Posture.]
The President said that all of these issues are interrelated. He
needed the top people in each of the agencies to get together to evaluate
these problems and determine our options. The President said that he
had to assert his own role and to improve at least the image of our
performance in foreign policy. He thought that there are possibilities,
ultimately in Iran, for success. He thought the naive European rush
towards neutrality negotiations on Afghanistan needs to be dealt with.
He said we need to increase public support for the Olympic boycott.
He thought that Sadat’s and Begin’s visit will dramatize once again
the importance of the Middle East peace talks and that this might offer
a glimpse of hope.
[Omitted here is material on the Soviet grain embargo.]
As far as Iran is concerned, the Secretary of State said that there
are a few steps, though not major, which can demonstrate that we are
willing to tighten the screws without closing the door on negotiations.
He said these had been discussed in the SCC this morning and that
the President would get them shortly.
[Omitted here is material on Afghanistan, the Soviet Union, the
Middle East, and the U.S. Defense Posture.]
The President proposed that the group get together to discuss some
of these issues on Saturday.2 Dr. Brzezinski said that we will go forward
with these preparations.
2 March 22. See Document 217.
