Chapter 2, January–June 1989  111
DST 002—Deployment rights after a non-­withdrawal period. Again, 
all agencies, except the JCS, favor returning to Geneva with our cur-
rent position (option 1.). This position, building on the Washington 
Summit Joint Statement, would explicitly give the sides the right 
to deploy defenses after a non-­withdrawal period, upon giving six 
months notice. The rationale behind this position is that we are trading 
our non-­withdrawal pledge for freedom to deploy defenses after the 
non-­withdrawal period. This quid pro quo was worked out between 
President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev at the 1987 
Washington Summit.
The JCS has suggested that we not resume D&S negotiations until 
fundamental U.S. objectives for D&S have been reaffirmed at the 
Cabinet level. (This was to have been discussed at last week’s NSC 
meeting, but was deferred in favor of more pressing issues.) The 
Chiefs’ concern is premised on the belief that the ABM Treaty offers 
real protection from Soviet breakout, and that if the sides are free to 
deploy defenses, we may be unable or unwilling to exercise this right. 
The JCS position is obviously extreme. Not yet having the NSD on SDI 
hurts. Nonetheless, the President presumably approved resumption of 
the NST negotiations in June. Thus, we would hope that your meeting 
could be used to test the seriousness of the JCS position. Unless Adm. 
Crowe is prepared to argue to the President that we should not resume 
D&S negotiations, the option should come out of the paper.
Options 3 and 4 are possibly promising variants on the U.S. posi-
tion. Option 3 would entail differentiated periods of non-withdrawal 
from the ABM Treaty followed by a non-­deployment period. During 
the first period we would be bound by the restrictive interpretation; 
during the second by the broad interpretation. Option 4 would change 
our quid pro quo for a non-­withdrawal pledge to greater freedom to 
test ABM systems during the period. No agency now favors them, but 
most agree they merit further study. They were included in the paper, 
frankly, to give the President options other than returning to Geneva 
with our current position and not returning at all.
START Fundamental Limits. A discussion paper prepared by the 
PCC on START numerical limits and heavy ICBM limits is at Tab B. 
The paper identifies three issues which at least one agency believed 
should be reviewed before we return to Geneva. We recommend that 
you guide the discussion through these issues in the order they are pre-
sented in the paper.
1. Delivery vehicle limit. Should we propose to raise the 1600 limit 
on delivery vehicles (heavy bombers, SLBMs, and ICBMs)? There was 
consensus in the May 20 Deputies meeting on the Defense Strategy 
Review that we should retain this limit for now. The paper reaches a 
similar conclusion. (You should note that, while there is consensus on
