Chapter 4, February–April 1990 499 To advance the discussion of ways to ensure predictability in the development of the US-Soviet strategic relationship, the Secretary of State said the United States would make a further proposal on predictability measures during the current round of the defense and space talks in Geneva. Soviet Counter-Proposal Strike first sentence in the US proposal and insert instead: On ABM and space matters, the Soviet side reiterated the approach put forward in September 1989. In accordance with that approach, there shall be no pre-­conditions for signing and observing the START Treaty, other than observance of the ABM Treaty as signed in 1972. Then, if the US insisted on keeping its sentence on predictability measures: The Soviet side stressed that such measures should make both sides confident that their ABM-­related activities are conducted in compliance with the ABM Treaty. The Soviet proposal was unacceptable to the US side, including Secretary Baker himself. Smith, ASD Hadley, and AMB. Nazarkin worked on alternatives for several hours during the evening of Friday, Feb. 9. It was clear Nazarkin was trying to backfill the Soviet position to say things Shevardnadze did not say and to put a different spin on what he did say. This is Smith’s attempt to write down the direction in which the draft was headed based on Nazarkin’s comments: The Soviet side reiterated its approach put forward in September 1989. It stressed that the supreme national interest withdrawal clause in the draft START Treaty implies the right of one side to withdraw from START in the event the other violates, or withdraws from, the ABM Treaty. The Soviet side believes such an understanding should be recorded by agreement on the two relevant draft joint statements it has proposed in Geneva. The Soviet side confirmed that reaching such an agreement is not a pre-­condition to signing and implementing START. According to the Soviet approach, the only pre-­condition for START is observance of the ABM treaty as signed in 1972. The US side welcomed Soviet confirmation that neither a defense and space agreement or treaty nor agreement to any joint statements is a precondition for signing and implementing START. The US side emphasized that it retains the right to interpret treaties as it believes correct and that the exercise of its legal rights under the ABM treaty cannot justify the other side’s withdrawal from START. Any language on predictability measures would have followed these paragraphs.
