208 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Attachment Paper36 Washington, June 7, 1989 INSERT FOR NEW INITIATIVES PAPER Option: Ban future MIRVed ICBMs. This option would stop MIRVed ICBMs at the Soviet SS–24 and the US MX, while allowing future single-RV missiles. It could take the form of a ban as of a negotiated date on production of any rocket motor for a MIRVed ICBM, thus precluding both new types and modification of existing types (except for backfits of already-­produced missiles). The production ban would be monitored by PPM, as provided for in our current proposal. The production ban could be supplemented by a ban on releasing or simulating the release of more than one RV during flight testing of any single-RV ICBM. We also might want to add volume, launch weight or throwweight constraints on future single-RV ICBMs to constrain breakout through uploading of additional RVs. Finally, we might want to extend the production ban to preclude recasting of solid propellant motors, which would force the solid MIRVed ICBM forces of the sides to atrophy over the long term. (Our ability to verify such a provision could be questionable, however.) This could be accompanied by a provision requiring the phaseout of liquid MIRVed ICBMs over a similar extended period. If we wished to constrain modernization further, the production ban could be supplemented with a provision limiting flight tests of existing MIRVed ICBMs to a number high enough for reliability testing but too low to develop a new mod (at least at a normal rate of development). Consideration might also be given to additional means of constraining improvement of existing types (e.g. no change in weight of RVs tested), but such means could introduce verification difficulties and possible limits on US flexibility. Arguments for this option are as follows: — It focuses on those MIRVed missiles, ICBMs, which are considered by most to be destabilizing, while excluding SLBMs, for which MIRVing is considered by many not to be destabilizing. 36 Secret.
