1492 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement The supporting and technical personnel of an inspection team, transportation, and equipment shall be provided by the state on whose territory the inspection is to be carried out. In the event that such state is not in a position to provide the necessary equipment and the sup­ porting and technical personnel, the procedure to ensure the inspection shall be determined by the Commission. An inspection team shall include controllers designated by the founder states of the Control Organization on the basis of two sides. The size of inspection teams must be determined in each individual case in accordance with the FBYB assigned to the respective team. An inspection team shall be under the Commission, and shall carry out all its instructions. An inspection team shall submit to the Commission and to the government of the state where inspection is carried out a report on the investigation carried out on site. 18. Flights in the air-­space of sovereign states to collect air samples for the purpose of inspection shall be made, with the participation of a representative of the Commission, by decision of the Commission in aircraft of such states along routes determined in advance and agreed upon with the governments of such states. The Relationship of the Commission with the Governments of the States Participating in the Control Organization 19. In order to ensure day-­to-­day mutual relations between the Commission and the appropriate authorities of the states on whose ter­ ritory a control post is located, the government of each such state shall authorize one of its government agencies to have continuing contact with the Commission on matters which are within the competence of the Control Organization. 20. The Commission shall establish mutual relations with such agency on the following matters: The selection of the location of control posts; The construction of control posts; The selection of personnel for the staff of the Commission and con­ trol posts; Transportation and means of communication for the Commission; Assistance in the carrying out of inspection; and the provision for all other measures relating to the competence of the Commission. Other Matters 21. The Commission and its technical system should be located in one of the European neutral states. End verbatim text. Villard
