Negotiating Channels
463
1. We cannot make a conscious decision to wait until after Bani-
Sadr takes office in late February to try to resolve the present crisis.
2. The delay also risks the chance that something could happen to
Khomeini, who by all accounts will have to be personally involved in
freeing the hostages from the compound.
3. That Bani-Sadr does not know what the political situation will
be when he takes office. It could very well be that resolving the hostage
situation will be more difficult for him then than it is for Ghotbza-
deh now.
It might be possible through the French contacts and the political
leverage of the Revolutionary Council to create a situation where Bani-
Sadr has no choice but to tolerate/actively cooperate in pursuing a
strategy of early release. In fairness to Bani-Sadr, he may think that
only he will have the muscle and the influence to resolve the crisis,
and that it is less a matter of who gets the credit but more a matter of
who can pull it off.
Finally, you should read the enclosed Memcon from Cottam.5 Cot-
tam says that Ghotbzadeh could not risk direct contact with us without
the knowledge of Bani-Sadr, the Revolutionary Council and even Kho-
meini. He says that if we had an opportunity for direct contact, we
would have to take advantage of it.
One final comment about our French contacts, particularly Mr. B.
They are not the stooges of Ghotbzadeh. One preferred Habibi for
President and the other Bani-Sadr. They have been dealing with the
Foreign Minister because they have been told to by the Revolutionary
Council and by Ghotbzadeh. They told me last weekend that if Ghot-
bzadeh tried to block them from seeing Bani-Sadr or the other members
of the Revolutionary Council, they would “wash their hands of this
matter”.
The Iranian experts at the State Department who have seen a flurry
of stories and hints coming out of Tehran and the UN think strongly
that the French proposal which we were involved in has been seen
and is being discussed and debated by different members of the Revolu-
tionary Council. They assume that Bani-Sadr would have to be a part
of any such discussion. All of the various stories coming out which
contain precise details are generally compatible with the scenario that
we jointly evolved.
5 Not attached.
