3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 347 the best way for the Government to act was to continue to exert pressure quietly while private organizations kept up public pressure. Gold asked for the Secretary’s opinion on possible prisoners exchanges involving Shcharanskiy, a subject which had appeared in the press. The Secretary replied that there was nothing to report with regard to an exchange for Shcharanskiy. We had no proposals from the Soviets on which to act. The Secretary asked Luers to comment on Gold’s question about the potential for an exchange in the future. Luers said we felt the Soviets were still deciding what to do on the case and might be trying to find a way out. We continue to believe that they will have a trial and convict Shcharanskiy but they may be thinking of a post-trial expulsion or an exchange. Either of these could take place, even after Shcharanskiy was imprisoned. Luers noted that we were treating the exchange issue very delicately now, since we do not want to close off options for the future. In response to Gold’s and Schindler’s questions about how we follow up on the lists we present to the Soviets, the Secretary said that we keep track of progress on these cases here and in Moscow. Our impression is that there has been some progress. Luers remarked that we were considering, along with Ms. Derian’s office, following up with the Soviets on CSCE matters and that emigration and family reunification were subjects which could be covered. Goodman said the NCSJ’s records show that the list of refused Jewish emigrants remains about the same in size, but that the people on it change. Some are allowed out but others receive new refusals and take their places. The Secretary said we felt the presentation of a list was a prodding factor which had a positive effect in general. Gold and Schindler agreed with this assessment. Goodman asked the Secretary if he felt the relatively better emigration flow in recent months would continue. The Secretary said he wanted to be cautious in making predictions, but that he guessed that the improved situation would continue. Gold mentioned that the NCSJ had shown some flexibility in testifying on the Humphrey-Findley Bill which would exempt CCC credits from the Jackson-Vanik restrictions. Congressman Findley had told them that he was interested in helping American farmers, but that he felt China was more important in this regard. He therefore said he would be willing to consider any proposal by the NCSJ which would exclude the Soviet Union from the Bill. Gold and Goodman pointed out that the NCSJ had decided not to present such a proposal and that while they did not support the Bill, neither had they tried to institute a
