Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1191 stated on September 27, 1991,2 however, the United States will accelerate its elimination of ICBMs scheduled for deactivation once START is ratified). The central limits also include a restriction on the aggregate throw-weight of deployed ICBMs and deployed SLBMs, which is to become effective seven years after entry into force of the Treaty. LIMITS AND RESTRICTION ON NON-DEPLOYED AND OTHER ITEMS In addition to the central limits on deployed items, the Treaty contains numerous limits and restrictions on non-deployed items. For ICBMs and SLBMs, the limits include numerical limits on non-­ deployed mobile ICBMs and their launchers (including a sub-limit for non-deployed rail-mobile ICBM launchers), non-deployed ICBMs at mobile ICBM base maintenance facilities, non-deployed ICBMs and sets of ICBM emplacement equipment at ICBM bases for silo launchers of ICBMs, and ICBMs and SLBMs located at test ranges. The Treaty includes numerical limits on non-deployed mobile ICBM launchers, with a sub-limit on non-deployed rail-mobile launchers. The Treaty also limits the number of non-deployed mobile launchers allowed at certain maintenance and training facilities, and the number of test launchers, silo training launchers, and mobile training launchers. There are also numerical limits on: heavy bombers equipped for non-nuclear armaments, former heavy bombers (a classification of heavy bomber that meets specific requirements and that is not equipped for nuclear armaments or non-nuclear air-to-surface armaments), and training heavy bombers; dedicated space launch facilities for ICBMs and SLBMs used for delivering objects into the upper atmosphere or space (and the ICBMs/SLBMs and their launchers located at such facilities); transporter-loaders for road-mobile ICBMs (transporter-loaders for rail-mobile ICBMs are banned); ballistic missile submarines in dry dock locations within a certain distance of submarine bases; ICBMs/ SLBMs and their launchers on static display; heavy bombers and former heavy bombers used as ground trainers; storage and repair facilities for ICBMs or SLBMs; and on the duration of transits of certain items from one location to another. The Treaty also restricts where the Parties can locate non-deployed missiles and launchers, and the proximity of certain facilities. These locational restrictions build stability in two ways. First, by segregating non-deployed ICBMs and SLBMs from ICBM and SLBM launchers, the locational restrictions further reduce the possibility of rapid or covert augmentation of existing forces with non-deployed assets. Second, 2 See “Address to the Nation on United States Nuclear Weapons Reduction,” Public Papers: Bush, 1991, pp. 1220–1224.
