430
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
there as you know. Thus, an Egyptian presence is certain to facilitate
the process. Second, the political climate there is much more conducive
to prove to all Palestinians that the change we agreed upon in Camp
David, to bring about in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, is both gen-
uine and feasible. This formula is apt to whip up support in Jordan and
the West Bank for joining in with us before it becomes too late. It is also
certain to generate more enthusiasm among the Palestinians at large for
the Camp David Accord.
If I sign a peace treaty without having the agreement of the Israelis
on what to take place in Gaza and West Bank, I would be concluding a
separate agreement indeed.
This could be in contradiction not only with the basic line of our
policy, but also with what we agreed upon in Camp David. You will
undoubtedly recall that I told Prime Minister Begin in the clearest
terms during our tripartite meeting on September the 7th and the 8th
that I refuse to conclude a third disengagement agreement, a partial
peace settlement or a separate agreement.
Needless to say that what I am proposing is the only course of ac-
tion which serves the cause of peace. Postponement would lead to a
veritable crisis in the near future and may abort all our previous efforts,
and is apt to discourage and demoralize Palestinians who are willing to
cooperate, leading to a situation over which we will have no control.
Israel would also be expected to take certain measures in the
coming few weeks to improve the political climate in Gaza and West
Bank, and stimulate the interest of their inhabitants. Such measures in-
clude permitting political activities, granting amnesty to political pris-
oners and permitting the reuniting of families by the return of their dis-
placed members.
Dear President Carter,
In order to overcome the other problems, which have arisen in the
course of negotiations due to the insistence of Israel to have a privi-
leged position, the normalization of relations with Israel can only be re-
alized on treating her on equal footing with other nations within the
context of our laws, the international law and the United Nations
Charter. Friendship and cooperation would only grow if there is a
sense of fairness. For the treaty we are going to sign with Israel will be
an example and model for the others. I am sure that you agree with me
that such a model needs to be a solid and well founded one to stand any
test.
In conclusion, please accept my best wishes and warm regards.
Mohammed Anwar El Sadat. Unquote.
Eilts
