December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 745 213. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 RP M 79–10152. Washington, March 15, 1979 SUBJECT Arab Reactions Arab renunciation of President Sadat and the Egyptian-Israeli treaty is building toward a crescendo. We expect the effort by Iraq, Syria, and Libya to stampede the more moderate Arabs into unqualified condemnation of the treaty to be largely successful. The culmination of the effort will be a new conference in Baghdad—possibly timed to open the day a treaty is signed—and a vote to impose sanctions against Egypt. [handling restriction not declassified] We detect some initial ambivalence on the part of Saudi Arabia and Jordan toward “punishing” Sadat. It will be difficult to keep them that way until the early, largely hostile Arab reaction has run its course. The sentiment, moreover, is tentative and the full weight of anti-Sadat pressure has not yet been applied. That will occur at Baghdad, where there will be few significant countervailing pressures. We doubt that the moderates have the self-confidence to stand against the hardliners given their own reservations about the treaty. We should not rule out that the Iranians will ask to participate, adding to the pressure on Saudi Arabia. [handling restriction not declassified] The day of reckoning that the Saudis have long feared appears to be at hand. In their eyes a treaty forces them to choose between two pillars of Saudi foreign policy—Arab unity and a special relationship with the United States. They seek a middle ground, but developments since Sadat’s trip to Jerusalem seem to have denied them this option. [handling restriction not declassified] The signs in recent months indicate that—for the Saudis—the Arab option is in the ascendency, although the issue is a contentious one within the leadership. Foreign Minister Saud told Ambassador West on Wednesday2 that the immediate and “automatic” consequences of Egypt’s signing a treaty would be ouster of Egypt from the Arab 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services, Directorate of Intelligence, Job 82T00150R: Production Case Files, Box 6, Folder 119, Arab Reactions. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A notation on the first page reads in part: “Prepared by the Office of Regional & Political Analysis.” 2 Likely, a mistaken reference to West’s March 13 meeting with Saud and Turki in Riyadh. A full report of the conversation is in telegram 419 from Riyadh, March 14; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790118–0437.
