1955  113
government what it should do. Only his government could and should 
decide measures to take to deal with practical situation.
I pointed out I had not used the word “detained” in agreement and 
as used in my statement meant to refer only to those Americans pre­
vented from leaving China. Whatever the reasons we both recognized 
that Americans being prevented from leaving his country. I was not 
suggesting his government say anything my government was unwill­
ing to say. As I had pointed out, his paragraph one did not in any way 
solve problem American nationals.
I had thought it possible we could quickly reach agreement on 
some form that would resolve situation our nationals. Seemed to me 
my paragraph did that. I didn’t hold any brief for exact wording but 
thought contained there must be embodied in any announcement. 
I  had come here to discuss return of American nationals. Statement 
their cases being reviewed did not bring about their return. I was not 
suggesting how Wang should handle matter but asked him how we 
were to solve first item, that is, return of our nationals.
I said these were my preliminary remarks, that I was always willing 
consider minor changes in wording. As for term “China mainland” if he 
preferred to substitute “People’s Republic of China” would not object.
Referring to Wang’s desire that draft announcement provide for 
action by individual’s government on his behalf I repeated my state­
ment at last meeting that this unnecessary. Said Wang had pointed out 
some nationals in past had written directly to his government. How­
ever if arrangement we were suggesting were in effect this would be 
unnecessary as Chinese in US could communicate directly with Indian 
Embassy. I pointed out my draft specifically provided that representa­
tion by the Indian Embassy on behalf of Chinese nationals would only 
be undertaken if desired by his government.
Wang said problem lies in first paragraph of proposed agreement. 
First paragraph his draft already included idea of ours. Of course he 
agreed we were here to resolve practical issues rather than discuss 
theoretical concepts. Two points were involved. One that both sides 
declare nationals of each in other desiring return be allowed to do so 
without restriction and other that any such national involved in civil 
or criminal case might also return as soon as his case settled. There 
was no intention include anything unfair to one side. Merely attempt 
settle practical issues. Point to keep in mind was mutual respect of 
each for other’s law or sovereignty. Wang said he had not been in US 
and not familiar with situation there but could easily imagine case 
of a foreign national doing business there who happened incur debt 
he unable to clear. Could US Government allow him leave before he 
had cleared debt? Suppose foreign national driving automobile killed 
someone. Could American Government permit him leave without
