National Security Policy 545 operational capability with 10 prototype ICBMs of 5,500 n.m. range at some time during 1959. While it is possible that a limited capability with comparatively unproven ICBMs might have been established in 1958, we believe this to be unlikely. We believe that Soviet planners intend to acquire a sizeable ICBM capability as soon as practicable. 24. Air defense capabilities will increase through improvements in the performance characteristics of weapons and equipment, a higher proportion of all-­weather fighters, further incorporation of guided mis­ siles in the defenses of numerous targets, and especially through wide employment of semiautomatic air defense control. But the Soviets will continue to have difficulty in opposing very low altitude attack, the air defense system will still be subject to disruption and saturation, and the problem of warning time will become more critical. The USSR will probably not have a weapon system with even limited effectiveness against ballistic missiles until 1963 or later. 25. The ground forces, estimated to have 67 mechanized or motor­ ized rifle divisions, 75 rifle divisions, 23 tank divisions, and 10 air­ borne divisions, have been extensively modernized and reorganized, in accordance with revised Soviet tactical doctrine which supplements standard tactics and training with those designed for conditions of nuclear warfare. These forces are closely supported by tactical aviation consisting of fighters trained in the ground attack role (in addition to their air defense role) and light and medium bombers trained in ground support bombing techniques. With appropriate air and naval support, Soviet ground forces are capable of conducting large-­scale operations on several fronts into peripheral areas, separately or concurrently. The increasing availability of nuclear weapons and guided missiles during 1959–1963 will bring further evolutionary changes, but probably no major alterations in size or deployment of forces. Tactical and naval air units, some of which have already received jet medium bombers, will probably receive new supersonic fighters and bombers. Increasing attention is being paid to the development of airborne forces and air transport capabilities. 26. The present Soviet force of about 440 submarines includes about 260 long-­range craft of postwar design and construction. A recent slowdown in construction probably reflects a shift to new types, including nuclear-­powered submarines and submarines designed specifically to employ guided missiles. A submarine-­launched ballis­ tic missile system with a missile range of about 1,000 n.m. will prob­ ably be available for first operational use in 1961–1963. Construction of conventional submarines will probably continue, but the greater complexity of nuclear-­powered and missile submarines will probably result in a total annual production rate considerably below the high levels of recent years.
