90 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 entry for government imports. The port of Khorramshahr is up the Shatt al Arab River, which is used both by Iran and Iraq. The remainder of Iran’s foreign trade passes through rail and road links with Turkey and the Soviet Union or through minor ports on the Caspian Sea. [portion marking not declassified] Iranian Vulnerability to Economic Sanctions The principal economic levers available to the United States include: (a) a partial or complete unilateral trade embargo against Iran, (b) a collective embargo by the United states and its main allies, and (c) a US naval blockade. Of these, a naval blockade would be most disruptive to the Iranian economy. [portion marking not declassified] Unilateral Embargo on Exports An embargo imposed by the United States alone would exert only slight economic pressure on Iran. With a few possible exceptions, other suppliers could be found for most categories of Iranian imports, including food. The cutoff of US food shipments to Iran would likely cause only a few months of disruptions. Even before the recent flare-up, the Iranians were diversifying their sources of agricultural imports in order to become less dependent on the United States. [portion marking not declassified] • Vegetable oil imports—half of which normally come from the United States—could be obtained in South America and Western Europe, albeit with considerable delay. Brazil, for example, has frozen export sales of soy oil until the next crush is completed in March 1980 due to a poor crop. • Rice—now supplied almost entirely by the United States—is available from other sources, especially Japan. • Wheat is available on the world market. While the United States once supplied 90 percent of Iranian imports, Tehran has already substantially diversified its source of supply by signing agreements with Australia for 520,000 metric tons and Turkey for 50,000 tons. [portion marking not declassified] The transhipment of US food through third countries would be extremely difficult to control. Export agents have already started to designate the Persian Gulf and Pakistan as destinations in order to overcome problems associated with the refusal of US longshoremen to load Iran-bound cargoes. There have also been reports in recent months of extensive shipments of US rice to Dubai, undoubtedly for transhipment to Iran. [portion marking not declassified] While other indusrialized countries, including those of Eastern Europe and the USSR, could eventually replace the United States as suppliers of most raw materials and spare parts, some items can only be provided by the United States, at least for an extended period of
