734 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I The SALT II agreement is a major accomplishment of my administration. It contributes directly to the security of the United States, and we intend to abide by the treaty’s terms as long as the Soviet Union, as observed by us, complies with those terms as well. Of course, we will seek its ratification at the earliest opportune time. The time is also fast approaching when we must think beyond SALT II, to negotiating wider and more comprehensive arrangements dealing both with additional categories of strategic nuclear weapons and with weapons of less than intercontinental capability. If the decade of the 1980’s is not to become the decade of violence, we must make renewed efforts to stabilize the arms competition and to widen the scope of arms control arrangements. After close consultation with our allies and with the Soviet Union we intend to pursue these expanded efforts to control weapons of all kinds. De´tente with the Soviets remains our goal, but de´tente must be built on a firm foundation of deterrence. The Soviets must understand that they cannot recklessly threaten world peace. They cannot commit aggression, and they, in doing that, must realize that they cannot still enjoy the benefits of cooperation with the West, and specifically with us. They must understand that their invasion of Afghanistan has had a profound adverse effect on American public attitudes toward the Soviet Union. We represent a strong but peaceful nation, and there can be no business as usual in the face of aggression. The Soviets will not succeed in their constant efforts to divide the Alliance in Europe or to lull us into a false belief that somehow Europe can be an island of de´tente while aggression is carried out elsewhere. But let me be equally clear that the way to improved relations is open if the Soviets alter their conduct. That is the path we prefer. Together these five objectives that I have outlined are the compass points that guide America’s course in this world of change and challenge. They link our specific actions to each other, to the past, and to the future. Our foreign policy is designed to be responsive to the revolutionary age in which we live. To be effective it must have the wise understanding and the wide support of the American people. That depends on public realization that foreign policy is not a matter of instant success. We must expect prolonged management of seemingly intractable situations and often contradictory realities. To play our historic role of protecting our interests and at the same time preserving the peace, the United States must be steady and constant. Our commitment to American ideals must be unchanging, and our power must be adequate and credible.
