Uruguay 1161 commitments would do the job. We explained to Lacarte that the Bank was reluctant to define its requirements in the manner desired for two reasons, (1) it did not want to become involved in an essentially Uruguayan-IMF problems; (2) many of the Directors were fearful of the effect on the overall policy of close collaboration with the IMF of a deviation from that policy in the case of Uruguay. Given the general desire to do something for Uruguay, the consensus in the Bank was that they could not go beyond receiving commitments voluntarily entered into by the Uruguayans without in any way participating in the formulation of such commitments. For this reason they didn’t even want to let Lacarte know informally what they would expect to find in a letter of commitment from the Uruguayan Government. While unhappy over this turn of events, Lacarte appeared to understand the Bank’s position. Our various efforts to obtain formal cancellation of the countervailing duty this much appear to have failed. After speaking with Secretary Anderson early this week, Dick wrote him a letter explaining why it would be important for the Department of the Treasury to waive some of its requirements and cancel the countervailing duty promptly. A copy of the letter is enclosed.4 This letter produced a meeting in the Treasury Department which I attended and at which time we made all of the points we could in favor of prompt action.5 We found the Treasury people sympathetic but not ready to take action without the complete elimination of the differential. The reasons given were legal and political. They felt that the law very specifically prohibited the Treasury Department from eliminating the countervailing duty as long as there was a differential between wool tops and the general average as defined in the Treasury Department’s formula. They could not see their way clear to get around this provision of the law. They also felt that violation of the law, even if feasible, would entail unacceptable political risks. They felt that cancellation would inevitably be followed by the prompt demand of the wool industry for an explanation of the basis on which cancellation was made. Since the formula and the facts involved were already known to the wool industry it would be easy for them to verify the violation. The net result could easily be renewed pressure from protectionist groups to put teeth into the countervailing duty legislation and enforce it all across the board. As it is today, the Treasury Department has adopted a passive attitude toward reported violations and takes action only when forced to do so by the industries concerned. Until now the only action has been the one against Uruguay. They shudder to think of anything forcing them to take further action of this nature. We then went through the exercise of recalculating the formula on the basis of giving the Uruguayans the benefit of the doubt in all 4 Not printed. 5 No record of the meeting has been found.
