636  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
The main arguments in favor of option A are that land-­based mis-
siles provide the easiest way to achieve a quick response force with 
rapid reliable C3 and the capability to destroy all types of targets—­in 
fact the land-­based options being considered under option A have sig-
nificantly lower life-­cycle costs than SLBM or strategic aircraft forces of 
equivalent size.
The main argument for option B is that it does not require us to 
solve the collection of technical, environmental, and verification prob-
lems associated with option A. On the other hand, no matter what we 
say, abandoning the idea of a survivable ICBM force will be seen as a 
defeat for the U.S. It would also permit the Soviets to concentrate their 
efforts on jeopardizing our other forces.
If you choose option A, you must then decide on which approach 
to take in achieving ICBM survivability. DOD is strongly opposed to 
the air-­mobile system because of its high cost and low endurance, and 
dead-­set against truck mobiles because of their dependence on strategic 
warning and/or their high public impact when dispersed. Thus, the 
basing mode choice appears to be between MPS and the track-­mobile 
systems. (See Tab B.)
The main technical distinction between these systems is the speed 
with which the missiles would move from shelter to shelter. This dis-
tinction leads to major differences in the systems’ verifiability, envi-
ronmental impact, and their acceptability. The MPS system shuffles 
its missiles relatively slowly, which implies a critical dependence on 
maintaining the security of missile locations, and the required security 
measures complicate verification. The track mobile system uses high 
speed transporters that allow complete randomization of missile loca-
tions within the flight time of a Soviet ICBM. This feature costs perhaps 
$2 billion more than the corresponding MPS system if the tracks are 
on the surface, but makes missile location security less important and 
leads to a system that is considerably easier to verify. A track system 
in an openable trench would be less verifiable than one on the surface 
and somewhat more expensive—­whether it would have more or less 
environmental impact is not clear. (S)
The choice of which missile to deploy must also be made unless 
you choose option B, which makes sense only with the common mis-
sile. As I see it, we are eventually going to want to build the Trident 
II missile independent of what we do for the land based force. This is 
because once a dozen or so Trident submarines have been built, it will 
become more cost effective to go back and fill those submarines with 
the largest possible SLBM than to build toward an equivalent capability 
using only the Trident I. Thus, the issue is do we want a significantly 
different land based missile? (S)
