The Government of Chile may submit to the Arbitrator such arguments in
reply as may seem appropriate for its defence.
“2. In case the holding of the plebiscite should be declared in order, the
Arbitrator is empowered to determine the conditions thereof.
“3. Should the Arbitrator decide that a plebiscite need not be held, both
Parties, at the request of either of them, shall discuss the situation brought
about by such award.
“It is understood, in the interest of peace and good order, that in such an
event and pending an agreement as to the disposition of the territory, the
administrative organization of the provinces shall not be disturbed.
“4. In the event that no agreement should ensue, both Governments will
solicit, for this purpose, the good offices of the Government of the United
States of America.
“5. Included in the arbitration likewise are the claims pending with regard to
Tarata and Chilcaya, according to the determination of the final disposition of
the territory to which Article 3 of the Treaty refers.
“This Agreement is an integral part of the Protocol to which it refers.”
Ratifications of the Protocol and Supplementary Act having been exchanged, the
President of the United States of America accepted the office of Arbitrator, and the
Cases and Counter Cases of the respective Parties have been submitted in accordance
with a schedule of arbitral procedure proposed by the Parties and approved by the
Arbitrator. The record, comprising nearly six thousand pages, having been carefully
examined, the Arbitrator now renders the following Opinion and Award.
TREATY OF ANCON
Article 3 of the Treaty of Peace of October 20, 1883, known as the Treaty of Ancon,
reads as follows:
“Art. 3. The territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica, bounded on the
north by the River Sama from its source in the Cordilleras on the frontier of
Bolivia to its mouth at the sea, on the south by the ravine and River
Camarones, on the east by the Republic of Bolivia and on the west by the
Pacific Ocean, shall continue in the possession of Chile subject to Chilean
laws and authority during a period of ten years, to be reckoned from the date
of the ratification of the present treaty of peace.
