Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
65
“Unfortunately, experience in the past has shown that these de-
velop a life of their own. Once started they are hard to turn back.”
(Vance Nomination; Hearing Before the Committee on Foreign Relations,
United States Senate, Ninety-Fifth Congress, First Session, on the Nomina-
tion of Hon. Cyrus R. Vance to be Secretary of State, January 11, 1977, pages
1, 4–6, 7–8)
On January 14, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted 15–0
to approve Vance as Secretary of State. President Carter formally ap-
pointed him on January 21.
15.
Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter highlighted the connections among
strength, freedom, and responsibility in his inaugural address, deliv-
ered on January 20, 1977:
“Our Nation can be strong abroad only if it is strong at home. And
we know that the best way to enhance freedom in other lands is to dem-
onstrate here that our democratic system is worthy of emulation.
“To be true to ourselves, we must be true to others. We will not be-
have in foreign places so as to violate our rules and standards here at
home, for we know that the trust which our Nation earns is essential to
our strength.
“The world itself is now dominated by a new spirit. Peoples more
numerous and more politically aware are craving, and now de-
manding, their place in the sun—not just for the benefit of their own
physical condition, but for basic human rights.
“The passion for freedom is on the rise. Tapping this new spirit,
there can be no nobler nor more ambitious task for America to under-
take on this day of a new beginning than to help shape a just and
peaceful world that is truly humane.
“We are a strong nation, and we will maintain strength so suffi-
cient that it need not be proven in combat—a quiet strength based not
merely on the size of an arsenal but on the nobility of ideas.
“We will be ever vigilant and never vulnerable, and we will fight
our wars against poverty, ignorance, and injustice, for those are the en-
emies against which our forces can be honorably marshaled.
“We are a proudly idealistic nation, but let no one confuse our ide-
alism with weakness.
