893.00/6841: Telegram [Document 454] The Minister in Chirm (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State PEKING, December 11, 1925—7 p.m. [Received December 13—5:04 a.m.39 ] 524. 1. Following is summary of radiograms from General Connor40 at Tientsin, intercepted messages from international train to General Connor, and other official sources: International train which left Peking December 10, 8 a.m., for return trip to Tientsin fired upon by Li Ching-lin artillery 4 miles south of Yangtsim presumably early this morning. Train slightly damaged by shrapnel but no casualties; returned to Yangtsim. Two of Feng’s armored trains were immediately behind international train and it is possible international train was fired upon in view of this circumstance. Foreign commandants at Tientsin are protesting to Li. General Connor obtained permission to send relief train at 2 o’clock today to Yangtsun with food, etc., and to bring passengers to Tientsin. Contingent of Feng’s forces has occupied railway station at Yangtsun and the area surrounding it with one or more batteries of artillery which have begun firing on Li’s troops who are returning fire. Passengers on the train sought safety underneath cars during the battle which is now raging with shells falling about them. French Legation guard has direct telephone communication with Yangtsun and promises to give me half-hourly bulletins concerning state of affairs there. 2. Senior minister, on behalf of Heads of Legation, and myself are now leaving to call upon General Lu Chung-lin, representative of Marshal Feng Yu-hsiang in Peking, to protest against violation of article 9 of 1901 protocol41 since we have always maintained that this article gives foreign railway guards exclusive right to occupy Yangtsun and other points named in article 9. We will endeavor to persuade Feng to withdraw his forces from Yangtsun and to accord international train every possible protection. Likewise we will protest against international train being closely followed by any military trains. 3. Following as background. Telephone communication with Tientsin has been interrupted for 2 days; regular train service has likewise been interrupted for that period owing to heavy troop movement, removal of rails at various points, and at least partial blowing up of Bridge 31 at Yangtsun. International train in question left Tientsin at 10 o’clock morning of December 9th only arriving Peking 3:55 on the morning of 10th, the delay being occasioned by the necessity of repairing the bridge at Yangtsun and the rails at various points and likewise on account of congestion of troop trains.
