1980  759
come to you later this year with recommended adjustments as appro-
priate. (S)
Lastly, your reply to Claytor’s request provides an opportunity 
for you to lend emphasis to the development of our rapid deployment 
capabilities. I suggest that you task DOD to consider ways to minimize 
delays in production of the new CX cargo aircraft—­to include assign-
ment of the “Highest Priority” and, perhaps, streamlined management 
procedures. Since no aircraft production program has yet been assigned 
the “Highest Priority,” DOD, Commerce and FEMA will have to do 
some thinking to find ways to smooth the production process.4 (C)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the memo at Tab A that grants Claytor’s request and 
directs consideration of ways to minimize CX production delays.5 (U)
Tab B
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Claytor) to 
President Carter6
Washington, January 10, 1980
SUBJECT
Request for Presidential Approval of the XM–1 Tank, PERSHING II and M–X Mis-
sile Systems as Programs of Highest National Priority
(U) Highest priority for industrial resources is essential to meet 
development/procurement and deployment schedules for the above 
systems.
(U) Your approval will allow assignment of a Brick-Bat (DX) indus-
trial priority rating to our contracts with industry. This priority will 
assure the three weapon systems will receive materials, components 
and other resources first in the event of conflict with other Defense or 
commercial contracts.
4 Carter drew a question mark in the right margin next to this paragraph.
5 Tab A was not attached. Carter approved the recommendation and wrote at the 
bottom of the memorandum: “Retype memo, J.” In a February 19 memorandum to 
Brown, Carter wrote: “I approve your request to assign the highest national priority to 
the XM–1 tank and MX and PERSHING II missile programs. Additionally, I would like 
you to consider ways to minimize delays in production of the XC cargo aircraft. Please 
provide me your recommendations as soon as possible.” (Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 6, Defense Department: 2/80)
6 Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.
