986
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tives for the Conference itself. We expect the paper to be reviewed by
Father Hesburgh, who will be chairman of the US delegation.
5. North-South Relations: There is a major need in the government to
assess continually where we stand overall with the developing coun-
tries with respect to such policies as trade, foreign assistance, commod-
ities, technology, investment, arms sales, non-proliferation, etc. (We’ve
attached the annex to the PRM 8, which discusses many of these issues
in detail.) In the months ahead there will be a need to reassess how we
are doing and where we are going, how our various policies fit to-
gether, and what the broad implications are for specific policy choices
which we will be making. This is an area where the State Department is
expected to lead and where you would be particularly influential in the
interagency context.
6. Other Global Issues
There are a number of other global issues or problems that cut
across bureau and agency lines, and which will require high-level di-
rection. These relate to some of the areas described above but they have
a certain substantive or bureaucratic independence. They include the
following:
—Implementation of our population policy and objectives. There is a
need to ensure that our assistance funds are directed towards the most
important population growth countries and not spread out into lower
priority areas. In addition there is a need to integrate our population,
health and nutritional programs so that they reach into rural areas and
the poorest sectors. Close coordination between AID and State and a
strong diplomatic effort will also be required to enlist the support and
resources of the LDC governments. (In addition, the internal State/AID
bureaucratic problems, which we once discussed, still remain.)
—The coordination, successfully, of a number of international health ini-
tiatives. Soon there will be an action memo to the President, prepared
by Peter Bourne’s office, outlining a comprehensive U.S. international
health strategy, probably with a number of initiatives.3 In addition, the
White House has approved a U.S. initiative with the Soviets to jointly
work together to develop health projects in LDCs.4 Obviously, State
will be centrally involved in these areas, and we will require extensive
coordination among several bureaus and AID as well as strong State
leadership in the interagency process.
3 See Document 302.
4 See Document 286.
