1978 371 power (threatened or used) in extending their economic, diplomatic, or ideological influence, miscalculate our will or ability to resist pressures, and precipitate a conflict which neither side wants or intends. • In sum, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the central security challenge of the 1980’s—­and the fundamental issue which the FY 1980 Budget must confront directly—­will be to deny the Soviets any such real or perceived incentive to pursue options based on a preponderance of military strength. 5. (S) In our view, the first step should be an explicit and visible commitment that, until and unless Soviet military expansion becomes restrained, the United States will maintain at least the present balance through sustained and substantial growth in our own defense programs. We should also do everything possible to persuade our allies to follow suit. In the context of the 5-­year budget levels as specified in the Consolidated Guidance, the Joint Chiefs of Staff regard the decremented level as a “reduce and withdraw” budget, the basic level as a “perpetuate the current trends” budget, and the enhanced level as a “retain the balance” budget.5 Recognizing that, in a constrained resource environment, the judgment on the size and allocation of limited defense dollars becomes fundamentally a risk assessment, we believe the enhanced level of funding is well justified by both the objective and perceptual considerations discussed above. 6. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff further believe that increased US defense spending should be only one element in a more confident and assertive national strategy. Without being arrogant or provocative in the use of our national power, we believe that the United States has the material and moral resources to arrest and reverse the dangerous trends discussed earlier, to force the strategic competition with the Soviet Union away from the military sphere and toward areas where the risks of violence are less and the incentives for negotiated force reductions are greater, and to support our national policy of eventual reduction of tensions. We will continue to study new alternatives for contributing to the military component of such a strategy. For the Joint Chiefs of Staff: David C. Jones 5 For Brown’s summary of the Consolidated Guidance, see Document 54.
