Non-Proliferation 839 erating London understanding between the exporting countries, in which the Soviet Union, the United States and others were active. In the course of such consultations we could also review the effectiveness of IAEA functions, and discuss the question of sanctions. We had a great deal to do. The Secretary said that he would welcome that. Gromyko said that was very good. He would ask that both sides specifically reflect on when they could consult on setting a specific schedule. The Secretary agreed to do that. Gromyko said he wanted the US Government and President Carter to know that the Soviet Union attached signal importance to the entire issue of non-proliferation. The Soviet leadership liked it when the President, or the Secretary, or others, stressed the importance of this issue in the view of the United States. The Secretary said that was very good. The President will be very pleased to hear of this Soviet position. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.] 333. Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany to the Department of State1 Bonn, March 29, 1977, 1851Z 5585. Department please pass Moscow for Secretary Vance. Subject: Presidential Nuclear Policy Statement. Ref: (A) State 67973;2 (B) Bonn 5498.3 Begin summary: After carefully reviewing talking points outlining substance of forthcoming presidential statement on nuclear policy and making several comments and inquiries regarding specific points, Chancellor Schmidt said outline would be studied immediately and 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840084–2207. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. 2 See Document 331. 3 In telegram 5498 from Bonn, March 29, Stoessel said “In the interest of our own credibility,” the United States should “expedite the issuance” of enriched uranium licenses to the FRG “in all cases where such action would not run directly contrary to our broader non-proliferation policy.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770107–0555)
