462  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
The Secretary added that mobility, of course, created difficul-
ties in verification. For this reason we believed that special measures 
should be adopted to limit and account for the total inventory of mis-
siles that might be deployed in a mobile mode. The missiles covered 
by the U.S. proposal would be all of the Soviet SS–24s and SS–25s. The 
U.S. Peacekeeper and Small ICBM would be covered just as soon as 
they were flight tested from mobile launchers, thereby ensuring reci-
procity. The Secretary then presented a paper on elements of common 
ground on non-­deployed missiles that spelled out the details of the 
U.S. proposal. As he had indicated the previous night, we believed this 
responded directly to Soviet concerns in Geneva; we hoped it would 
be possible to reach agreement on this basis so that people could tackle 
the verification and inspection questions that depended in large part on 
what is done about non-­deployed missiles.
On telemetry encryption, the Secretary continued, his understand-
ing was that Ambassadors Burt and Nazarkin had made considerable 
headway in Geneva on this subject since the Ministers’ last meeting. 
We hoped to finish the job here in Moscow. Based on their earlier con-
versations, the Secretary was encouraged in this regard. He knew this 
was a highly technical subject and he hoped that Burt and Nazarkin 
could take it up with a view toward reaching agreement. The Secretary 
said we again had a paper with proposed elements of common ground 
spelling out our proposals.
Shevardnadze joked that we should include all the U.S. documents 
in the ministerial joint statement without any changes. The Secretary 
quickly replied that this was a very good idea. He asked whether 
Shevardnadze would like to hear the U.S. proposals on mobile ICBM 
verification. Shevardnadze said he would first like to comment on the 
other issues and then move on to that question.
Shevardnadze said that the Soviet view was that the exchange 
the previous day on ALCMs had been very productive. He wanted to 
say from the start that the sides appeared to be expanding the area of 
common ground, although there were still complex issues outstanding. 
Additional efforts would of course be needed. Several difficult issues 
related to the number of warheads attributed to the B–52 and B–1 and 
future heavy bombers. On the first item in the U.S. paper, counting 
rules, the U.S. side was well aware of the Soviet position. According 
to the U.S. formula either side would get an advantage with additional 
numbers of warheads. Therefore this provision needed a further look. 
The Soviet side had mentioned 100 heavy bombers, but perhaps some 
possible solution could be found.
Another important provision in the U.S. proposal, Shevardnadze 
continued, was to allow inspections of heavy bombers not equipped 
for ALCMs so that it could be demonstrated that these were not so
