572
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
ingly difficult. Americans and American installations have been at-
tacked. There have been no serious injuries to persons as yet but these
may occur any day.
h. The withdrawal or sharp curtailment of the number of Amer-
ican dependents in Iran would cripple the Technical Assistance pro-
gram in Iran, as the very nature of the program requires a compara-
tively large staff of technicians and most of these technicians will not
come to Iran or remain in Iran unless their dependents are with them.
3. Alternatives available to the U.S.
None of the alternatives is easy. Some of them are extremely diffi-
cult. The following represent a few of them with comment on the prob-
able effects.
Alternative A
We could inform the Iranians that under present conditions in Iran
it was impossible for our Technical and Military assistance programs to
operate, and that we were curtailing their number or if necessary with-
drawing all of them and reducing our diplomatic establishment to a
minimum type of operation.
Comment:
Favorable: This action might give the Iranians pause. Under condi-
tions in the foreseeable future the emphasis on the TCA and Military
approach requires the presence of large numbers of U.S. technicians
and their families, which is and will be a mounting irritant to the Ira-
nian public. The removal of a sizeable number of Americans would
lessen Iranian public irritation over the presence of Americans and also
indicate to the public that U.S. did not intend to maintain Americans
where they were not wanted.
Unfavorable: This might merely hasten chaos in Iran and speed up
the coming into power of a Tudeh or Tudeh controlled government. It
could be interpreted as a defeatist policy on our part at a time when
positive action is called for. It would discourage many of our friends
and encourage our enemies. Furthermore, the help which our aid mis-
sions render still contributes to Iranian stability in spite of the diffi-
culties which these missions are encountering.
Alternative B
We could inform the British that we considered the situation in
Iran so serious that we could no longer continue to refrain from pur-
chasing Iranian oil or from granting Iran financial or substantial eco-
nomic aid. This in effect would mean the adoption of a policy inde-
pendent of that of the British. Such a policy could take two forms.
