1664  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
political preparation. He felt that until we have such studies we cannot 
go into this subject seriously.
The President recalled that beginning three or four years ago he 
had the idea of stopping atmospheric tests. He encountered enormous 
resistance and found very little support initially. The lesson is that the 
great task is to bring thinking along, since in a democracy public opin­
ion weighs so heavily. He did not think that we need big bodies study­
ing these questions. Rather the need is for a few basic, good ideas. He 
thought that a small sub-­committee may usefully be set up to develop 
the technical basis for disarmament. Dr. Killian commented that this 
effort would tie in very closely with the terms of reference submit­
ted to the President by Mr. Herter in relation to the whole question of 
disarmament.
Dr. Killian said the second item the group had in mind to discuss 
with the President had been the subject of a study of a panel under 
Dr. Bronk. The idea is one of greatly enlarged international exchange 
of scientific information. Dr. Bronk said that the scientists think they 
are especially well positioned to build international understanding. He 
thought that they could contribute to a better understanding of the U.S. 
by foreign countries as a country devoted to freedom and well-­being 
of its people. As an example, he suggested exploring the possibility of 
encouraging young people to give several years of their lives to service 
abroad in technical and scientific fields, including the teaching of sci­
ence and technical subjects. He thought there is need for an overhaul­
ing of the concept of exchange of scientific information between the 
United States and countries abroad. For example, he thought the “quid 
pro quo principle” applying to the exchange of people is too restrictive 
to guide the exchange of scientific information.
The President said he certainly agreed in principle but would ask 
how the group considered that thinking should be organized on this 
matter so as to get qualified people working on it. In other words, what 
is the next step. That is what he would like to hear.
Dr. Rabi, at Dr. Killian’s request, reported that he had visited in 
Russia for six days. He had been well received and relationships were 
excellent. He said he had visited a large nuclear accelerator at Dubna 
(?) of about one-­half mile diameter. This is being run as an international 
laboratory with personnel from many of the satellite nations working 
together as a team. He thought that perhaps the United States is failing 
to use some of its facilities in a way that would promote better interna­
tional relations. What he had in mind was the possibility of making the 
Brookhaven Laboratory or the Lawrence Laboratory a “Pan-­American” 
facility. He said that the NATO Science Committee, after a slow start, 
is beginning to see the light. It is necessary for the U.S. to keep up the
