3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 237 undermining the collaborative relationship they felt they had established in the joint statement.4 They may have been influenced by Sadat’s statement that a letter from the President inspired his initiative. His closing of Soviet cultural and consular centers will deepen their suspicion that we are prodding him into anti-Soviet actions. Their reaction is likely to be virulent. 3. The Kremlin probably sees the Secretary’s visit to the area—with its implication of a new US role as mediator between Sadat and his Arab critics—as indicating US willingness, if not intent, to leave the Soviets on the sidelines. Recent US statements putting Cairo rather than Geneva at the center of the peace process at present, probably strengthens this view. Meanwhile they continue their efforts to discredit next week’s meeting, though they are keeping their options open to see what emerges. 4. In their present state of mind the Soviets also might read into our handling of the Indian Ocean and CTB talks a belief that we are dragging our feet and backing off agreed positions. So far, however, we have not encountered such a reaction. Their approach at this resumption of both talks was businesslike. The Soviets in fact initially responded positively to Paul Warnke’s presentation on CTB. 5. Of perhaps more immediate concern is academician Sakharov’s hard-hitting speech to be read to the AFL–CLO convention which opened December 8. In it he praises George Meany and the philosophy behind Jackson-Vanik, calls for a more militant VOA policy, and castigates Soviet observance of Helsinki Basket III. Were he someone else these statements would be grounds for immediate incarceration or dramatic expulsion. Embassy Moscow’s obvious role as his communication link to the AFL–CIO will undoubtedly be protested once the speech is read. 6. We have many programs going forward with the Soviets which they regard as useful, such as cooperation under our agreements on space and agriculture. But their main criterion for assessing the relationship continues to be SALT. Continued progress toward a SALT agreement should be an important stabilizing factor. 7. There are unpredictable elements however, including Brezhnev’s own amour-propre. There is a danger that he will add up a number of these current developments and take them as a signal that the Carter Administration has demonstratively brushed aside his offer of “friendly relations” made in his November 2 speech5 and reiterated here by his colleague Solomontsev. 4 See footnote 2, Document 52. 5 See footnote 2, Document 58.
