890
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the chief international concern of Tito’s successors will be to deprive
Moscow of any plausible excuse to intervene in Yugoslav affairs. In
consequence, they will probably desire and expect nothing more than
a prompt declaration of continued US and West European interest in
the preservation of Yugoslavia’s independence and integrity, coupled
with every possible effort to prevent an escalation of hostile emigre
activities. Although there is little reason to suppose that emigre activi-
ties alone pose a real threat to the regime, Tito’s successors view them
as such and will certainly exaggerate their potential impact and treat
Western behavior toward them as a test of Western intentions.
36. If they are faced with escalating Soviet pressure, Tito’s succes-
sors could request and/or welcome Western representations to Mos-
cow on their behalf. Within relatively short order, moreover, they are
likely to seek active help in preserving and extending their financial
relations with the West, including not only bilateral relations but
relations with the Common Market. In addition, they could turn to the
West for larger supplies of arms, especially in areas of high technology.
And, under extreme Soviet pressure, they could appeal to the United
States and NATO to exert economic and political pressure on Moscow,
to bolster and alert the 6th Fleet and other forces on NATO’s southern
flank, and, if need be, to provide direct military support.6
37. No amount or kind of Western support can stop Tito’s succes-
sors from engaging in a self-destructive succession struggle or prevent
Yugoslavia’s constituent nationalities from embarking on a civil war,
if they are determined to do so. However, skillfully timed and carefully
designed and orchestrated Western support could make a very large
difference to the consolidation and survival of a potentially viable post-
Tito leadership and thereby to the preservation of a stable regional,
continental, and global balance of power.
6 For a more extensive discussion of Tito’s foreign policy legacy and the ways in
which post-Tito policies toward East and West may interact, see volume II, annex E,
“Foreign Policy.” [Footnote is in the original.]
