566 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV (S) The system would be based in the southern part of the U.S. where weather problems would be minimal. Each of the bases would have security appropriate for the protection of nuclear weapons on day-­to-­day alert. The TELs would be kept in the open at known locations to facilitate verification. On the receipt of strategic warning, the TELs would go out on public roads at maximum speed until they were so widely dispersed that they could not be successfully barraged. (S) The baseline system would have 250 TELs and missiles and 1250 warheads. We estimate the acquisition cost at about $16B (in FY 78 dollars) which is about $5B less than MPS. Annual O&S costs would be about $0.5B, about $0.1B more than MPS. For a postulated attack of 70% of the Soviet ICBM RVs (the same threat we used for MPS and Air Mobile calculation), a) None of the systems survive a surprise attack, even with a full 30 minutes of tactical warning; b) With 1 hour of “strategic” warning, none survive; c) 50% of the systems survive an attack for which we have 4 hours of strategic warning; d) 80% of the systems (1000 RVs) survive an attack for which we have 6 hours of strategic warning. (S) To achieve a degree of survivability against a surprise attack it is necessary to maintain some percentage of the systems dispersed on the highways. The difficulty with peacetime dispersal is the public interface problems created by moving nuclear missiles about on public highways and the possibility of an accident. We will continue to examine the legal and environmental aspects of such a peacetime dispersal. Off-Road Mobile: (S) In the off-­road mobile concept, the missile achieves its survivability by being moved about on its TEL at frequent intervals. To avoid public interface problems, its movement during peacetime is limited to Defense Department bases in the southwest (Yuma Bomber Range, Nellis Air Base, e.g.). Because of the possibility of barraging this limited area, the TEL would have to be very hard [less than 1 line not declassified] and therefore very heavy (on the order of 1,000,000 pounds), and expensive. If confined to DOD land, such a system would be able to provide the equivalent of 1,000 to 2,000 independent aim-­points for Soviet 1 MT warheads. (U) Further consideration and detail will be included in my presentation of ICBM rebasing options to you following a PRC on the subject later this month. Harold Brown
