National Security Policy 65 Communist China. While the Japanese value US protection, they are also clearly seeking a more independent position, and their deep aver­ sion to nuclear weapons suggests that they would make great efforts to extricate themselves from any threatened conflict in which such weap­ ons might be used. 38. In general, we believe that the US will encounter increasing trou­ ble in retaining overseas bases on terms assuring their availability and effectiveness in case of need. In particular, the US may well encounter new problems over the next few years in its attempts to increase allied military strength through the establishment of missile bases or the fur­ ther deployment of nuclear weapons overseas. Although our Western European allies have agreed in principle to the installation of IRBMs, some of them will refuse to accept them in their own countries, and others—­believing that the US considers their establishment crucial to its own defense for a period of time—­may attempt to exact a stiff price for accepting them. These difficulties will be especially serious in those coun­ tries where it is believed that establishment of such bases would substan­ tially increase the likelihood of Soviet attack in case of war, would make disengagement impossible if international tension increased, or would hinder negotiation with the USSR to settle outstanding issues. The IRBM issue may become a symbol which will divide those people who seek early negotiations from those whose principal concern is to maximize the military strength of the alliance before negotiating. The issue will cer­ tainly offer opportunities for exploitation by the USSR in both Europe and the Asian-African world and for maneuvers designed to delay the installation of IRBMs. 39. Beyond these considerations the dual control provisions of the IRBM agreements will introduce new elements into the operation of the NATO alliance. On the one hand, these provisions may stimulate closer coordination of political decisions affecting East-West relations—­a pro­ cess which may be used to influence the US toward adopting positions agreeable to its European partners. On the other hand, joint decision may lead to hesitation in major crises, with consequent slowing and weakening of Western response. B. Europe 40. Even though the Atlantic alliance has declined in vitality, the Soviets still must find Europe the most frustrating of the areas of com­ petition between the US and USSR. Despite ten years of Communist control, the vast majority of the Eastern European peoples are still anti-Soviet. In Western Europe, the Communists have retained sig­ nificant support in the labor movements of certain key countries, but they have been conspicuously unable to gain political strength. Nevertheless, the Soviet leaders have remained faithful to their belief
