Chapter 2, January–June 1989  167
— On ALCM counting rules, the current U.S. position, as reflected 
in Options 24 and 3,5 includes our willingness, stated to the Soviets last 
year, to attribute to Soviet bombers a number of ALCMs different from 
the ten ALCMs we would attribute to each U.S. heavy bomber. The U.S. 
has not proposed specific numbers for Soviet heavy bombers. (S)
— Concerning the issue of a minimum range threshold for START-­
accountable ALCMs, the representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
would make available additional information on the range require-
ments of U.S. programs. (S)
— With regard to the issue of whether to propose a requirement to 
convert or eliminate a ballistic missile coincident with launcher destruc-
tion, Option 26 would be revised to task a study to determine the feasi-
bility of specific approaches. If an acceptable approach is developed, a 
proposal would then be made to the Soviets. (S)
4 Option 2 reads: “Retain the existing ALCM attribution rule of ten per bomber, 
but add a limit on the maximum ALCM carrying capability of individual bombers (this 
would respond to the Soviets’ stated concern that we could deploy wide-­bodied aircraft 
with dozens of ALCMs).” See Document 27.
5 Options 3 reads: “Do not change the U.S. position on counting rules; retain the 
existing ALCM attribution rule of ten per bomber.” See Document 27.
6 Options 2 reads: “Require missile conversion or elimination incident to launcher 
destruction. Task an interagency study of the best approach for implementation.” See 
Document 27.
29.	
Memorandum From Richard Davis of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Gates)1
Washington, June 8, 1989
SUBJECT
Deputies Committee Meeting, Friday, June 9, 1989, 10:00 a.m.—START Positions on 
Mobile ICBMS, Mobile ICBM Verification and New Initiatives
This Deputies Meeting will be the last of three meetings to review 
the specifics of our START position before the negotiations resume 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, H-Files, NSC/DC Meetings Files, OA/ID 90010–012, NSC/DC 033—June 9, 
1989—NSC/DC Meeting on NSR-14 re: U.S. START Position on Mobile ICBMs, Mobile 
ICBM Verification and New Initiatives. Secret. Sent for action. Sent through Kanter.
