Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Yugoslavia is entirely independent from both blocs. We are a founding member of the non-aligned movement, and we are deeply interested in the non-aligned. The movement rests on principles of importance, principles we think should be applied throughout the world. There are hot points in the world, in Africa, for example, that threaten to turn into something bigger. There is, first of all, the Arab- Israeli conflict, then Southern Africa—it is a different category with the problems of South Africa, Rhodesia and Namibia. There are conflicts between the non-aligned. India and Egypt have bad relations. There are problems in Ethiopia. I read today of an attack by Rhodesia on Mozambique. V.P.: One of the points I want to make clear, Mr. President, is our respect for the non-aligned movement. We respect your independence and your foreign policy. These past two days pressed my country in the forefront of the issues you have mentioned, I met with Prime Minister Vorster in Vienna. I made clear that we expect an independent Rhodesia, with majority rule, with elections by 1978. We want an independent Namibia under the outlines of Resolution 385, with elections by the people and withdrawal of South African forces. I said that we reject their policy in South Africa, and that failure to make progress on all three of these issues would result in deteriorating relations. In that regard, we directly objected to incursions by Rhodesia into Mozambique and Zambia. Under President Carter, the U.S. has a more direct policy, a policy of clarity and strength on the issues of independence, and we wanted the South Africans to know clearly our views so that they don’t miscalculate. Tito: What was his answer? V.P.: He didn’t like it. I think that is why I got sick (laughter). He said he would support independence for Rhodesia in 1978. He also agreed to meet with the Contact Group on Namibia by the end of the month. There may be hope there. The thing we are worried about is the interim arrangement for Namibia. Within South Africa itself, Prime Minister Vorster gave us the line about how the Africans are happy, the coloreds are happy, the Indians are happy. They all played football together. It is a slow story. Tito: It is very important about the football. V.P.: Actually it’s soccer, rather, rugby. What we wanted to do, Mr. President, was to make clear we mean business. If they want to get along there must be progress. There must be true independence. In our country in the past, unfortunately, we have not made this an issue, but we have made it an issue now.
