[Paraphrase.] Previously, when Viscount Ishii and I objected to calling a
plenary session, stating that we considered it wisest to discuss our divergent
views in private session and then announce to the public our decision,
Bridgeman, you will recall, insisted upon a plenary session. Only upon his
statement that he desired that the British views be given at a plenary session
did Viscount Ishii and I agree to this. Under these circumstances, I
considered that the responsibility for calling off the meeting should be
placed upon Bridgeman and not upon the American or Japanese
delegations. Therefore, I sent the following reply to Mr. Bridgeman, after
consulting Saburi, who was entirely of my opinion: [End paraphrase.]
“I have just received your note of this evening in regard to the
desirability of deferring the plenary session called for tomorrow.
As I stated yesterday afternoon, I should be glad [to] explore any
possible method of meeting our present difficulty with regard to
the cruiser question. Frankly, as you will understand, there has not
been sufficient time to determine whether the methods discussed
yesterday afternoon, and also between our experts, will hold out a
substantial hope of settling our present problem. For that reason I
hesitate to hazard an opinion with regard to your suggestion of
delaying tomorrow’s meeting on this account.
If, however, you feel that it would be wiser to defer the public
meeting for the present I shall be glad to acquiesce in your
decision and I would only suggest that you send word this
evening to Hugh Wilson in order that he may know whether to
continue preparations for tomorrow or to cancel the orders which
have been given and notify the various delegates accordingly. As
I say, I shall readily abide by any decision you may reach.”
[Paraphrase.] While no reply was addressed to me last night by Bridgeman,
he intimated that he was desirous of consulting Cecil and the various
Dominion delegations this morning. … I understand that there was a
divergence of opinion among the British delegation and that postponement
of the meeting had been urged upon Bridgeman by his own associates. [End
paraphrase.]
