World Hunger and Food Policy 893 With the changing conditions in Indochina, the Commission believes that it is essential to clarify U.S. policy toward Kampuchea and neighboring states. This information, as well as details of the relief effort, should be requested in Congressional hearings. The Commission also stands ready to provide information or witnesses for such hearings. The Commission recommends that the Congress draw out of the Foreign Assistance bill the $30 million appropriation for relief of victims of the Kampuchean famine and immediately appropriate those funds.12 The Foreign Assistance bill appears to be stalled at the present time,13 for reasons unrelated to Kampuchea. Yet, time is of the essence and the lives of thousands depend on the availability of the $30 million for relief assistance. Some of these crucial funds have already been spent from authorized borrowings from other programs. Continued delay could also cause serious problems for those programs from which borrowings have been made. Currently, estimates of U.S. contributions to the international relief effort for Kampuchea total approximately $106 million, or about one-third the United Nations appeal for $311 million. Of the U.N. total, about $251 million is intended for ICRC/UNICEF relief of hungry Kampucheans, primarily located in Kampuchea, and about $60 million for UNHCR activities with refugees in Thailand. The U.S. share of the relief funds is intended to be divided between the two areas, in approximately the same proportion. In practice, of course, the distinction between relief areas is not that clear. ICRC/UNICEF is financing some activities in Thailand. Imported food aid is being distributed on both sides of the Thai-Kampuchean border, although most of the food being distributed in Thailand is purchased in that country. The Commission recognizes the difficulties involved in the relief effort but strongly urges that every effort be made to distribute the food where the greatest need for it exists. 12 Tarnoff expressed the Department’s concurrence with this recommendation, adding: “The President, the Secretary of State, and other senior Administration officials have repeatedly urged the leaders of Congress to break the log-jam on these bills.” (Ibid.) 13 Presumable reference to the FY 1980 appropriations bill (H.R. 4473). A House–Senate conference committee held up the bill at the end of the 1979 legislative session. As a result, Congress funded existing foreign aid programs under an emergency funding resolution (H.J. Res 440; P.L. 96–123; 93 Stat. 923–926) enacted on November 20, 1979. (Congress and the Nation, Volume V, 1977–1980, p. 74) Lincoln Bloomfield, of the NSC Global Issues Cluster, briefed the PCWH on December 20, 1979, urging Commission members to “lobby to get the AID bill (containing the ‘Zablocki $30 million’)” once Congress resumed in January 1980. (NSC Global Issues Cluster Evening Report, December 20, 1979; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues— Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 37, Evening Reports: 9–12/79)
