Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  431
in these longer-­range stand-­off missiles may grow given prospective 
improvements in Soviet air defenses.
Nuclear/Non-­nuclear Distinguishability. We have also concluded 
that the value to the U.S. of future long-­range non-­nuclear ALCM 
options outweighs the risk that comparable Soviet ALCMs could be 
converted to nuclear ALCMs. Moreover, the FY 1989 and 1990 Defense 
Authorization Acts clearly state the sense of Congress that non-­nuclear 
cruise missiles should not be limited. If the range threshold in START 
is lowered from 1500 km, an increasing number of potential future U.S. 
conventional ALCM programs would be captured by START limits 
if they are not protected by a distinguishability rule. Even at a 1500 
km threshold, the Long-Range Conventional Cruise Missile (LRCCM) 
would be captured unless we negotiate a distinguishability rule.
Despite our clear interest in protecting conventional ALCMs 
from START limits, we have been unable to identify meaningful and 
monitorable design differences between nuclear and conventional 
ALCMs. The considerations above have led us to propose an essentially 
declaratory verification type rule, “distinguishable by NTM,” to dif-
ferentiate between accountable nuclear ALCMs and non-­accountable 
conventional ALCMs. Soviet incentives to cheat in this area (by covertly 
deploying ALCMs on non-ALCM carriers), as well as increases in the 
threat if they do cheat, may be small. This is because the deployment 
of additional gravity bombs on these bombers, which are permitted 
by START, would be a more effective option for the Soviets, given the 
absence of U.S. air defenses.
Conventional Bombers. Flexibility for U.S. force planning has also 
led us to propose an exclusion from START numerical limits for up to 
115 heavy bombers converted for non-­nuclear capability. These con-
verted heavy bombers would be subject to an inspection procedure to 
confirm that they were indeed “converted” according to agreed proce-
dures. However, no such procedures could prevent a realistic breakout 
capability represented by the re-­conversion of conventional bombers to 
nuclear bombers. The current U.S. position in START concludes that the 
conventional capability gained by up to 115 “converted” bombers out-
weighs the breakout threat from Soviet heavy bombers. An additional 
consideration is whether defense budget cuts make the conversion of 
older B-52s to conventional bombers more or less attractive.
Options:
Counting Rules
Each of the options below would permit a range of mixes between 
ALCM carriers and penetrating heavy bombers. The key variable in 
evaluating alternative U.S. forces is the number of ALCMs assigned to
