1526  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
407.	 Letter From Eisenhower to Macmillan1
Washington, January 12, 1959
Dear Harold:
I have now had an opportunity to think about your letter on our 
position in the Geneva nuclear test negotiations and to discuss it with 
some of my advisors.
We have considered the course of the negotiations to date as well 
as the points you set forth and we are prepared to drop our insistence 
that any agreement we may reach with the Russians have in it an 
explicit requirement that cessation of nuclear tests depend on disarma­
ment progress. I agree with you that to a certain extent this link is an 
academic one since, as you point out, the central issue is whether we 
now have an opportunity to get the Russians to accept a real control 
system. Certainly, if the Russians were to accept the kind of controls 
which we both believe are necessary, this very fact would mean that 
one of the principal bars to future progress in disarmament would have 
been removed. This is a point we might well make in explaining our 
attitude on this question.
Although, on the basis of the progress to date, it seems to me that 
the prospects are not bright that the Russians will accept an effective 
control organization in the current negotiations, I agree that our public 
position would be much better if we remove as a point of contention 
the issue of the link to disarmament, which the Russians may use as a 
screen to evade accepting responsibility for failure in the negotiations 
or to evade facing up to the control problem.
I believe that we can propose in the negotiations that we accept as 
a principle that the ban on weapons tests would be indefinite in dura­
tion. The arrangement, we believe, should include schedules for the 
construction and operation of the control system. Withdrawal from or 
suspension of the treaty would be possible if on annual review it were 
found that the control system was not being installed on schedule or not 
being operated properly. If desirable, we will agree to the first annual 
review being held two years after the treaty enters into force; thereafter, 
the review automatically would be on an annual basis.
Obstruction or violation of the agreement itself would, of course, 
be cause for withdrawal.
1 Source: Agrees to drop linkage of cessation of nuclear testing to progress on disar­
mament. Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, Eisen­
hower to Macmillan.
