756  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
of the gourde, the continued flow of essential imports, and the payment 
of international obligations. It is estimated that Haiti will require 
$1 ­million monthly or a total of $8 million of external financial assistance 
from February through September 1959 to maintain international sol-
vency and to import foodstuffs, petroleum, medicines, machinery, and 
other essentials. Part of this $8 million requirement can be met from the 
$1.5 million of remaining Special Assistance funds from this fiscal year. 
It is hoped that $1 million can come from the IMF under the terms of 
a revised standby agreement which recognizes the changed situation 
because of the small coffee crop. The IMF money, however, will most 
probably not be available unless Haiti meets the internal financial crite-
rion of a balanced budget. There remains $5.5 million, assuming the uti-
lization of the IMF million, that Haiti must obtain if we are not to have 
the imposition of exchange controls and devaluation and resultant eco-
nomic, political and social chaos as the import flow is sharply reduced. 
In the face of such a critical situation, which I believe to be a temporary 
emergency affecting U.S. interests and security, it is recommended that 
immediate action be taken to assure Haiti a minimum essential level 
of imports to September 30, 1959 by either of the following measures:
1) The allocation and commitment as grant aid of $5.5 million from 
the FY 59 funds available under the President’s Contingency Fund 
under Chapter III of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended, or
2) The allocation and commitment as grant aid of $4 million from 
the FY 59 funds available under the President’s Contingency Fund and 
the allocation of $1.5 million from Special Assistance funds to be avail-
able for FY 60 of the $4.5 million being requested for Haiti.
In view of the extreme urgency of the case, the possibility that 
Congress may delay in voting the FY 60 Mutual Security Program 
appropriations, and the probability that all the $4.5 million of Special 
Assistance will be required in FY 60, it is believed that the first recom-
mendation should be followed.
In closing I would like to point out some political consequence of 
a collapse in Haiti. This country is the only Negro republic in Latin 
America. The rising nationalities of Africa are well aware of the close 
relationship which has existed between Haiti and the U.S. Failure on 
our part to give effective assistance at this critical time is likely to be 
regarded most unfavorably among those countries in Africa which are 
now independent and those which will soon become so. The mainte-
nance of political stability in the Caribbean is important to our security, 
and we should try to alleviate the causes of unrest in that area. Since the 
Duvalier Government was duly elected by Haitians in elections as free 
as could be expected by Haitian standards and President Duvalier has 
taken steps to reconcile the political opposition, including a promise to 
give up his emergency decree powers, our financial assistance would
