538  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Soviet authority in Eastern Europe. A return to a harder course prob­
ably seemed desirable on these grounds alone. But at the same time, 
it appeared justified by the Soviet leaders’ belief that, in power terms, 
there had been an enhancement of the Bloc’s position and a decline in 
that of the West. This belief probably was based in the first place on 
Soviet weapons advances and scientific achievements. There was also 
a feeling that the outlook was good for new advances in Bloc economic 
strength after a period of some difficulty in 1956–1957, while at the same 
time Western economies were believed to be showing symptoms of eco­
nomic crisis. Then, too, the Soviet leaders considered that Communist 
influence was generally growing stronger in underdeveloped countries 
of Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, while Western influence continued 
to decline. The confidence of the Soviet leaders that they were entering 
upon a promising phase in the “struggle against imperialism” has been 
articulated in a new doctrine, namely, that an irrevocable shift in the 
relation of forces in the world has taken place to the advantage of the 
Communist Bloc.
4. This more confident and militant attitude on the part of the 
Soviet leadership does not mean that it has revised its attitude toward 
war as an instrument of policy. We continue to believe that the Soviet 
leaders have no intention of deliberately initiating general war and still 
wish to avoid serious risks of such a war. They almost certainly believe 
that, even with the acquisition of long-­range missiles capable of strik­
ing the US, the scale of damage they would suffer in a general nuclear 
war would threaten the survival of their regime and society. Moreover, 
they regard the final victory of Communism as inevitable, and to be 
achieved mainly through political forms of struggle. The maintenance 
and further strengthening of great military power is primarily intended 
to deter a resort to force by the “imperialist” enemy, and to count as 
a weighty factor in persuading him to submit peacefully to a succes­
sion of political reverses as the revolutionary tide advances. Situations 
might arise, however, in which the Soviets would judge that military 
force could be used without unacceptable risk or that an imminent 
threat left them with no recourse but to initiate military action.
5. Currently, while the Soviets still wish to avoid serious risks of 
general war, they probably believe that the Bloc can increase its pres­
sure on the West and can exploit local situations more vigorously, per­
haps even through the use of Bloc armed force, without incurring the 
same degree of risk as they would have previously. While we have 
always considered it possible that Bloc forces would be used in overt 
local aggression if this could be done without much risk of serious 
involvement with Western forces, we do not believe that the likelihood 
of such aggression has increased. The Soviets may even believe that 
the West, also conscious of Soviet gains in military power, will be more
