Afghanistan
627
these units moved into Afghanistan with their parent divisions.3 In any
event, if the Soviets were planning fairly widespread use of persistent
chemical weapons and operations in contaminated areas, additional
chemical defense units probably would be required. ([classification mark-
ing and codeword not declassified])
Soviet ground and air units operating against Afghan insurgent
forces have weapon systems capable of delivering chemical agents.
There is no direct evidence, however, that lethal chemical munitions
have been issued to Soviet forces.4 ([classification marking, codeword, and
handling restriction not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
3 [text not declassified] “A large, well-equipped and well-trained chemical-biological-
radiological (CBR) organization is organic to the USSR Joint Service Structure. Each
combat unit down to the regiment level has a sizeable contingent for CBR defense and
chemical specialists are assigned down to company level.” Noting that the Soviet military
was “known to have developed a variety of modern agents, multiple delivery systems,
and the tactical doctrine necessary for large-scale use,” the cable continued: “According
to a former Afghan Army officer who is now a member of the insurgent movement,
Soviet forces first used lethal chemical agents on 27 December 1979 against insurgents
in Badakhshan and the Northern Hindu Kush area. During the week of 13–19 January
additional lethal attacks were reported near Faizabad, Jalalabad, and in Bamian and
Takhar provinces. More recently, attacks on 3 and 11 February took place in Badakhshan
and Nuristan provinces. Aircraft dropped bombs filled with chemical agents that were
dispersed in airbursts. The CW agent was described as a vapor which felt damp against
the skin. Inhalation of the vapor resulted in difficulty in breathing, excretion, vomiting,
blindness, paralysis, and death.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box
5, JCS Support Request 80–81)
4 Attached but not printed is a memorandum from Zellmer to Turner, March 26,
that reported on [text not declassified] study, entitled “Evidence Bearing on the Alleged
Use of Chemical and Biological Warfare Agents by Soviet and Afghan Forces, May 1979–
March 1980.” Zellmer summarized the study, also attached but not printed: “We have
advised [less than 1 line not declassified] of the intelligence community’s increased concern
over the Soviet use of toxic substances in Afghanistan. To date, there is no [less than 1
line not declassified] evidence to conclude that the chemical, microbe, or other toxic
substances the Soviets employed have been lethal.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office
of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential
Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 23, folder 9)
