456 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement In regard to the water works project which is pending before the Export-Import Bank, you are, I am sure, aware that the International Cooperation Administration has already made available $20 thousand to bring up to date the engineering report concerning this. Just as soon as this report has been brought up to date the Export-Import Bank will, we are assured, give this its most prompt attention. I hope to be able soon to report further progress to you concerning both of these projects. Please permit me to express again the gratitude of the United States Delegation to the recent Foreign Ministers meetings in San Jose for the warmth and hospitality of the Costa Rican Government and people. We were all distressed here to learn of the recent floods in your wonderful country and hope that the situation has been brought under control. Nancy joins me in sending to you and Mrs. Echandi our warmest greetings and best wishes. With greatest respect and esteem, Sincerely yours, Thomas C. Mann CR–28. Telegram from the Chargé in Costa Rica (Kimmel) to the Department of State1  San José, November 15, 1960, 6 p.m. 256. DEPARTMENT PASS DA FOR ACSI AND G–2 USARCARIB, CINCARIB Discussed NIACT 3562 this morning first with Foreign Minister and then with President explaining U.S. prepared respond Ydígoras appeal for U.S. assistance similar to that made by GOC during weekend.3 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 717.00/11–1560. Secret; Niact. Repeated for information to Managua and Guatemala. 2 Telegram 356 to San José, also sent to Managua, and repeated for information to Guatemala City, November 14, 1960, expressed concern over possible “Castro-Cuban- Communist involvement disturbances Costa Rica, Nicaragua, and Guatemala.” It offered U.S. air and naval assistance to Guatemala to prevent entry of armed forces or supplies from abroad, stated that a Guatemalan request for OAS action under the Rio Treaty probably should follow the request for U.S. assistance, and instructed Embassies at Managua and San José to offer similar assistance. (741B–5811/11–1460) 3 See Document CR–29.
