214 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 77. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Warning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (MacEachin) to the National Intelligence Officer for Warning, Central Intelligence Agency (Lehman)1 [memorandum number not declassified] Washington, October 26, 1979 SUBJECT USSR-Afghanistan 1. We are concerned that in the month that has elapsed since the USSR-Afghanistan Alert Memorandum and the IIM Soviet Options in Afghanistan were issued,2 the Soviets appear to have put themselves in position to move a larger ground combat force into Afghanistan in less time and affording less advance warning than was believed possible at the time those papers were written. [classification marking not declassified] 2. Activity at the Soviet ground force installation at Kushka, some five kilometers from the Afghanistan border, indicates that the readiness of the motorized rifle division whose units are located there has been substantially increased. Indeed, the evidence suggests that through the last month at least some elements probably have been fleshed out with reservists to full combat strength. This division sits on the best surface route into Afghanistan. With full manpower and equipment, it could move by road in armed convoy from its present location to as far as, for example, Kandahar in Afghanistan in about 24 hours. [classification marking and codeword not declassified] 3. The Soviet motorized rifle division units at Termez, also located directly adjacent to the Afghanistan border at a major crossing point, have been unusually active recently. The activity there has not been as extensive in either scale or duration as that at Kushka. This division would not be able to move by surface routes into Afghanistan as easily as the one at Kushka because it would have to cross the Oxus by barge. Nevertheless, if the division is at increased manning and readiness, as the evidence suggests, at least major elements could move into the Mazar-i-Sharif area of Afghanistan in 24–48 hours. [classification marking and codeword not declassified] 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job 93T01324R, Box 4, Afghanistan. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed are an October 29 covering memorandum from MacEachin, a map of Afghanistan, a distribution list, and a memorandum from [text not declassified] to MacEachin, October 30, registering INR’s endorsement of MacEachin’s memorandum. 2 See Documents 62 and 67.
