International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 645 mentalists on coal and the expansion of nuclear plants. We should tell our personal representatives to provide a paper which includes all those devices needed for overcoming opposition and a thoughtful, clear message on the enlargement of nuclear production. It would also be helpful to have something on coal. This would help Jimmy Carter as well as us in the FRG. It would help to include in the communique language needed at home to deal with the opposition to the substitutes for oil and with the environmentalists. I agree with Valery Giscard that it is important to show to the suppliers in OPEC that we are taking this matter seriously and have a sincere approach to reducing oil demand. Then, when OPEC meets, we can build on this impression and strengthen the hands of the moderates. We should not leave the OPEC moderates out in the cold. We will have credibility only if we have medium range and long-term policies. For the rest of the century oil prices will have to go up because oil reserves are gradually being used up. Also, there can be political events like Iran,6 and these can increasingly lead to crunches. Coal and nuclear energy must be expanded. Also, we should use shale, tar sands and North Sea oil. Lots of money will be needed for pure and applied research for renewable energy, which should come on stream by the middle 90’s and by the end of the century enable us to use solar, geothermal and nuclear energy more. I foresee a situation in the next century when we may not wish to use hydrocarbons any more. I can envisage that in one or two decades scientists will say we are heating up the outer atmosphere of the globe, when it will not be tolerable for nations to do this—when there will be too much heat and too little water, as in the Sahel. There may be a time when we have enough bio-mass, coal and petroleum but will be told that we should not use it. We should back up our studies by looking ahead one or two decades into the next century. If we cannot avoid egotistic national policies, there could be a monetary crisis, high unemployment, and starvation and hunger in the LDCs. With respect to short term energy goals and measures, I dislike what we were given in the draft communique—with the energy section blank. We should stress that our aides should give us a draft communique especially on energy, and especially on targets which we can 6 The Iranian Revolution, which began in 1978 and culminated in the January 1979 flight of the Shah from Iran and the establishment in April of an Islamic Republic under the Ayatollah Khomeini, precipitated a second energy crisis due to decreased oil production.
