National Security Policy  135
countries in the matter of building prototype shelters. These countries 
have had much more experience than we have in this field, and we 
could probably obtain this information from them for nothing.
In conclusion, Secretary Dulles stated that his own Planning Board 
Member (Assistant Secretary Gerard Smith) had gone along with the 
recommendations in NSC 5807 100 percent. He, Secretary Dulles, didn’t 
go quite that far. He would cut out the construction aspects of NSC 
5807, and would stress the use of private funds. He strongly opposed 
any massive shelter construction program.
When Secretary Dulles had concluded his observations, General 
Cutler said he understood that Secretary McElroy had some rather spe­
cial reservations with respect to the Interdepartmental Committee’s 
report, and that these probably related to the possible impairment of 
active defense measures if a large-­scale shelter program were adopted by 
the United States. He called on Secretary McElroy to express his views.
Secretary McElroy said that of course he was concerned about the 
costs of a shelter program in relation to other programs deemed vital 
by the Department of Defense. This, however, was not the point that 
he wanted to emphasize at the present time. He then explained that the 
several research programs described in NSC 5807 were quite acceptable 
to him. Where he differed from the Interdepartmental Committee was 
on the matter of the program of public education. Secretary ­McElroy 
believed that until the Government had sufficient knowledge and infor­
mation to answer the public’s questions, we should not expose them to an 
educational program. We don’t yet know enough to answer their ques­
tions, and we needed to undertake further research and study before we 
launched a program of public education as to the nature of radioactive 
fallout and the hazards resulting from all-­out nuclear war. Furthermore, 
added Secretary McElroy, he was not at all sure that it was at present in 
the public interest for the Government to urge the people of the United 
States to store large amounts of food, water, and drugs in basement shel­
ters, at a time when we may need to encourage other types of investment 
and consumer buying by our people. Such a proposal might hurt our 
economy at a serious time.
The President observed that he wished to ask a couple of ques­
tions with respect to the assumptions or the frame of reference which 
the Committee had adopted in order to carry out its task. Addressing 
himself to Governor Hoegh, he said that he judged that the Committee 
was talking about protection from radioactive fallout rather than pro­
tection from the blast and thermal effects of nuclear detonations. But 
if the primary targets of the enemy are to be our U.S. cities, then such 
things as subways and the like won’t help to provide shelter—­unless, 
of course, we prove to be wrong in our assumption that the Soviets 
will aim their attack on our population centers. Governor Hoegh
