National Security Policy  263
9. In the light of the foregoing, the Department of Defense con­
siders that the military section of NSC 5810/1 adequately sets forth 
the military role in national strategy and provides the necessary basic 
guidance for development of the U.S. and Free World force structure in 
the national security interest. Accordingly, the Department of Defense 
recommends no change in the military section of NSC 5810/1 and rec­
ommends adoption of paragraphs 13 and 14 thereof, as already tenta­
tively approved.
/s/ Neil McElroy
79.	
National Intelligence Estimate1
NIE 100–7–58
Washington, July 22, 1958
SINO-SOVIET AND FREE WORLD REACTIONS TO US USE OF 
NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN LIMITED WARS IN THE FAR EAST
THE PROBLEM
This estimate was requested by the NSC as a result of a study pre­
pared by the Departments of State and Defense and the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff, with appropriate participation of the Central Intelligence Agency, 
on US and Allied Capabilities for Limited Military Operations to 1 July 1961, 
29 May 1958. Among the limitations under which this study was pre­
pared were that it did not examine US and Allied capabilities against 
overtly employed Soviet armed forces; nor against an enemy employing 
nuclear weapons, since the latter case was construed as overt employ­
ment of Soviet forces. On the other hand, it was assumed that the US 
used nuclear weapons selectively from the outset in four hypothetical 
cases involving Communist aggression in the Far East.
This estimate examines whether or not the enemy would employ 
nuclear weapons if the US employed them, and assesses the impact 
on world attitudes if either the US or both sides employed them. It 
confines itself to assessing the above reactions in the four hypothetical 
cases given in the State-Defense study where the US employed nuclear 
weapons at the outset in response to Communist aggression through 
mid-1961: (1) North Korean invasion of South Korea, (2) Chinese 
1 Source: “Sino-Soviet and Free World Reactions to US Use of Nuclear Weapons in 
Limited Wars in the Far East.” Top Secret; Limited Distribution. 12 pp. DOS, INR–NIE Files.
