748 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 should do nothing to relieve them of this fear, as long as the hostages are held. At the same time, we need to find ways to persuade the clerics that the U.S. will not interfere in Iran or retaliate against Iran once the hostages are released. The line intermediaries might take with Beheshti and the clerics could include these points: —Continued confrontation with the U.S. creates additional prospects for Soviet influence, contrary to the interests of the Iranian revolution. The left is gaining every day in Iran. —The Europeans and Japanese wish to have good relations with Iran; they can be helpful to Iran in many ways. But this is impossible so long as the hostages are held. They are approaching the Iranians not out of altruism, but because their interests are involved, and they are worried about the future course of events. —The U.S. is dangerous, unpredictable, and is prepared to give full support to the opponents of the revolution unless the crisis is resolved. The anger toward Iran within the U.S. is widespread and deep. —The intermediaries would be prepared to press the U.S. to agree to the following points: —It is for Iranians themselves to decide on the policies of their new government. —Iran must maintain its integrity. —Iran must maintain its independence from the Soviet Union. —Iran must acquire political stability to prevent subversion from within. —The U.S. would forego retaliation against Iran after all the hostages are released safely under honorable conditions. —The release of the hostages is a necessary step in the removal of obstacles to such an agreement. —They would be in a position to guarantee these points once the hostages are released. The Channels 1. Ambassador Lang: Now that Switzerland is our protecting power, we might if the Swiss are willing put more emphasis on Lang as our chief negotiator and representative to present official U.S. views, particularly with Bani Sadr. 2. Bourguet and Villalon could continue their concentration on Ghotbzadeh and other secular members of the Revolutionary Council. Despite their contacts with Bani Sadr, they tend to see the situation through Ghotbzadeh’s eyes, and it seems a reasonable division of labor to ask Lang to cultivate Bani Sadr while they stick with the Foreign Minister. 3. Key Islamic states (including the Saudis and Bangladeshis) could explore the possibility, especially with the clerics but also with the lay
