National Security Policy  557
45–50 percent greater than the 1957 level. Achievement of the esti­
mated 45 percent growth in Soviet GNP would mean that the defense 
burden, taken in the aggregate, would be slightly heavier in 1963 
than at present, though still not as heavy as in the years immediately 
prior to 1957. Defense requirements will impose burdensome claims 
upon various types of resources needed for investment and economic 
growth.
58. Most of the increase in defense expenditures will result from 
increasing allocations to more costly aircraft, to guided missiles, mili­
tary research and development, and nuclear weapons. These programs 
together probably account for about one-­third of total expenditures 
at present. By 1963 they are expected to require about twice as much 
in resources as at present and to account for about 45 percent of total 
defense programs.
59. Soviet defense expenditures in recent years, when converted 
into dollar values, appear to be of roughly the same magnitude as US 
defense expenditures. As stated above, the USSR, with a much smaller 
GNP than the US, produces military goods and services with a dollar 
value roughly the same. It is able to do this primarily because in the 
USSR military end-­items are less expensive, relative to consumption 
items, than they are in the US, and because the average level of real pay 
and subsistence provided Soviet military personnel is much lower than 
in the US.
Industrial Prospects
60. The eventual aim of overtaking US industry in per capita pro­
duction continues to dominate Soviet planning for industry. Shifts in 
the allocation of resources during the period 1953–1955 in support of 
the economic innovations of the post-Stalin regime—first Malenkov’s 
broad consumer goods program and then Khrushchev’s agricultural 
consumer goods and housing programs—contributed to a moderate 
decrease in the rate of growth of heavy industry. Heavy industry was 
expected to benefit, however, from a new program of automation and 
re-­equipment and from changes in industrial management, planning 
and control, introduced during this period. But by 1956 the failure to 
provide sufficient new capacity in the raw materials industries caused 
a severe shortage of industrial raw materials, particularly steel, coal, 
and cement.
61. The leadership’s response to this situation during the last 
two years has been to abandon the Sixth Five-Year Plan, cut back 
industrial output goals for 1957 and subsequently for 1958, and to 
order the formulation of a new Seven-Year Plan for the period 1959–
1965. It also launched a remedial investment program which was to 
increase capacity in raw materials industries while still maintaining
