78 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —neither Egypt nor Israel should be surprised by the other two parties. —inducements to either Israel or Egypt should not make it more difficult for the other side to make concessions. As we discussed, I am enclosing with this memo a copy of the memo4 which I sent to the Secretary of State on September 2. 4 Attached but not printed. In his September 2 memorandum to Vance, Sanders discussed Israeli security concerns about territorial concessions and moves the United States could take to assuage those concerns. The United States, Sanders suggested, should make “clear” that any peace settlement should provide for “demilitarization of the contested areas,” “Israeli (or joint) presence on key terrain to provide early warning and, at least initially, to control access to populated areas in Israel and perhaps in the West Bank,” “Israeli overflight rights in some areas to provide early warning,” “border adjustments to eliminate particularly dangerous areas,” “reduction of Arab forces contiguous to demilitarized areas,” and strict limitations on “foreign forces in Jordan.” Moreover, to win Israeli confidence, Sanders added, the United States should also consider a number of bilateral arrangements including “exempting Israel from restrictions on exceptional technology transfer,” increasing FMS credits to Israel, “guaranteeing a U.S. resupply of Israel if a war breaks out because of a failure of the agreement,” including Israel among nations “completely excluded” in annual arms transfer ceiling, offering Israel a Mutual Defense Pact, and “incorporating Israeli legitimate security concerns into our own proposals.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 52, Middle East: Camp David Cables and Memos, 9/78) 26. Editorial Note President Jimmy Carter travelled to the Presidential retreat at Camp David shortly after noon on September 4, 1978, to complete his preparations for the summit meeting with Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin scheduled to begin the following day. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) Describing the day in his personal diary, Carter wrote: “This was a hurried morning, with everybody wanting to give me last-minute advice or information about the summit.” Upon arriving at Camp David, Carter spent the rest of the day “studying the voluminous notes, maps, past history of negotiations, [and] psychological assessments of Begin and Sadat.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 216) As part of his preparations, he drafted a list of the themes and issues which the summit would have to confront. For the text of this note, see Document 27. Recalling the final pre-summit preparations years later, both Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski reflected on the importance of the forthcoming negotiations for Carter’s admin-
