520  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
377.	 Telegram 1203 from Geneva1
Geneva, November 18, 1955, 4 p.m.
1203. From Johnson.
1. It will be noted Wang’s prepared statement at yesterday’s meet­
ing was very hard and until last sentence I had feeling he was prepar­
ing ground for break. However, should also be noted he has not yet 
accepted my invitation at November 3 meeting to give their views on 
trade. They have impoliticly [implicity?] accepted our position renunci­
ation force first and most important item although they of course con­
tinue link it with FonMin meeting.
2. While they have dropped immediate demand for withdrawal 
US forces from Taiwan they are of course trying to maneuver us into 
position of issuing statement which would provide strong basis for 
demanding our withdrawal. At same time they have interpreted refer­
ence to “individual and collective self-defense” in juxtaposition to Tai­
wan area in operative para our draft as requiring recognition by them, 
on one hand, of US right unilaterally to defend Taiwan, and, on other 
hand, validity of US defense treaty with GRC. From this it would fol­
low that they are precluded from even raising question “withdrawal 
US forces from Taiwan” as well as abandoning their over-all position 
on GRC and Taiwan. Therefore, it is empty to speak of not prejudicing 
their policies. Stripped of polemics believe this is genuine position they 
were setting forth in paras 8 and 11 Wang’s statement (Mytel 1200) and 
that from their standpoint it has considerable point.
3. Do not suggest any amendment our draft at this time but believe 
we should be considering how point might be met if it appears desir­
able attempt do so.
4. Also suggest we be considering whether and how our draft 
could be amended consistent with our over-all position so that it would 
make specific reference to intent both parties settle disputes by peaceful 
means. What I have in mind is possibility inclusion some general state­
ment intent both sides peacefully negotiate disputes including possi­
bly specific reference to Taiwan area which would serve as substitute 
their para on FonMin meeting without commitment as to any partic­
ular form of negotiation. Believe if something along this line could be 
formulated it would substantially strengthen present draft and might 
slightly increase its acceptability.
5. However, as Department is aware it is my considered view that 
we cannot now anticipate CHICOMS will publicly make such major 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–1855. Secret; Priority.
