642  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
ES–42.	
Memorandum of Conversation with the President, 
Prepared by the President’s Staff Secretary (Goodpaster)1
 
Washington, December 1, 1960.
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretaries Dillon and Irwin
General Goodpaster
Mr. Dillon and Mr. Irwin met briefly with the President to discuss a 
difference of view regarding recognition of the government which took 
power in El Salvador as a result of the recent coup. Mr. Dillon said he 
realized that Defense had receded from its position of offering objec-
tion, although he understood Defense still disagreed with the action. 
He said that the State Department view is that if the United States does 
not recognize the new government, we will be “throwing in the towel” 
so far as sending good people into the area to try to influence the situa-
tion. He said that State considers that if we extend this recognition, we 
will be able to hold off the Communist effort there.
He added that other Latin American countries have recognized the 
new regime, including Argentina, Brazil and Chile. He said that before 
extending recognition, we will ask the Salvadorans to make a statement 
whether they support OAS commitments. If so, we will recognize them. 
He added that the CIA supports this action, but that Defense takes the 
stand that the government there is more Communist-­influenced than 
State believes is true.
Mr. Irwin said that Defense has thought that there might be a 
counter coup in the area. However, it has not developed. Defense has 
considered that we should avoid tying our hands in El Salvador as in 
Laos through hasty recognition of a regime which will come under 
Communist domination. He added that Defense is concerned that 
recognition of Communist-­oriented governments hurts our friends in 
other countries. However, Defense considers that the points have been 
brought out and they withdraw on the matter on the grounds that the 
question is one of State Department responsibility.
The President gave his assent to going ahead with recognition on 
the basis described by Mr. Dillon.
[Here follow discussion on Yugoslavia.]
A. J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, “DE Diaries.” Secret. This memoran-
dum was prepared on December 7, 1960.
