1979 623 estimates vary for this system—OSD is saying roughly $6B more than MPS, the Air Force is saying $10–12B. —MPS with vertical shelters, or for $1–2B more, with sliding roof horizontal shelters that should ease verification concerns. —­a variation of the original Option 5 that deploys Trident II in submarines, deploys a missile with some degree of commonality in STOL aircraft and silos, and accelerates the cruise missile carrier program. This option costs somewhat more than MPS but offsets much of the high cost of the airmobile deployment with the reduction in the numbers of Trident subs, that can be justified by building a large SLBM. (S) Agency Positions and Arguments on Basing OSD champions the first option. They appear to believe that MPS even with horizontal shelters is a non starter with the White House, and they have decided that the dash-­on-­warning feature of the trench option is the only way to beat the nagging doubts about whether the Soviets will be able to discover the locations of missiles deployed in an MPS system, perhaps without our knowledge. JCS prefers MPS but is willing to go along with the trench concept. (S) The Air Force still prefers MPS and argues that building MPS with horizontal shelters should give it verification properties as good or better than those of the trench. The Air Force is also concerned that the uncertainties of the trench scheme may lead to further delays in fielding a survivable ICBM. Finally, they argue that the costs of building the trench system are $4–6B more than the OSD estimates. (S) OMB feels that the President must make a decision on the basing mode very soon and that the trench concept is too uncertain to be choosable. They further argue that the Option 5 variant is not politically feasible in that it would not satisfy the Air Force, and choosing it would hurt SALT II ratification. OMB thus leans toward MPS. (C) Partly on the basis of its panel’s report, OSTP feels that the trench concept has too many uncertainties to be chosen right now. They argue that we haven’t yet taken a serious look at the security and verification issues, and there is no way to evaluate shelter hardness and thus TEL speed and land requirements until DOD settles on a shelter design. They also say that the system has much poorer location security than MPS and could thus be vulnerable to a 2 phased attack in which SLBM’s are used to deprive the system of its mobility and then ICBM’s are used to destroy the missiles which would be located by covertly planted sensors. Given the problems it sees with the other options, OSTP suggests that the President announce a decision to proceed with the mostly common missile (which would keep all basing options reasonably open) and commit the trench to perhaps another month of study. (S)
