698
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
degree of buoyancy in the world economy. A pause in economic ac-
tivity may be necessary now to break inflationary expectations; but it
should only be a pause. A corollary of these concerns is that we should
keep our markets open to the products from developing countries so
they can earn the foreign exchange they need to buy food and capital
goods and to repay their debts. If these two conditions are not met, car-
rying out our foreign policy will be very much more difficult in many
parts of the world.
Energy Policy
We are probably more vulnerable today to foreign threat than at
any time since General Howe landed in New York and set out north-
ward to divide the American colonies. The danger now is not from
physical attack, but from an attack on our economic well-being (and
our political cohesion) arising from our extreme dependence on oil im-
ported from politically unreliable and possibly unstable countries.
What happens in the world oil market is vitally important to four of our
cherished aims.
—It is important for macroeconomic policy, since rapidly rising oil
prices virtually assure both recession and inflation.
—It is important for the well-being of other developed and devel-
oping countries who cannot easily stand the strain of inflation, severe
balance-of-payments difficulties, and low growth.
—It is important for preservation of unity between us and our
major allies, for, as within the United States, nothing is more divisive
politically than a scramble over limited supplies of oil.
—It is important for maintaining our freedom of action in foreign
policy and for garnering allied support for that policy, e.g., with respect
to the Soviet Union or the Middle East, because Japan, Europe and even
some Americans feel hostage to our current dependence on Middle
East oil.
I conclude from this that we need a major domestic effort to reduce
our dependence on imported oil. Only by reducing this dependence
can we abort the threat and restore the confidence within the United
States and with our allies that is necessary for an effective foreign
policy. As with macroeconomic policy, domestic energy policy is a cru-
cial element of foreign policy.
We must also press, through the International Energy Agency and
the Venice Summit, other major countries to conserve oil as well. Our
main energy efforts must be in the consuming countries. For reasons I
can spell out if you wish, I am deeply skeptical about striking a “global
bargain” on oil prices and oil supply with the OPEC countries, al-
though of course we should maintain our good relations with Saudi
Arabia and other OPEC moderates.
