784
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
318.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Belgium1
Washington, January 24, 1977, 1530Z
15111. Tovip 3. Subject: Sensitive Nuclear Exports and NPT.
Vice Presidential party, eyes only for Aaron
1. Per request transmitted by Hyland,2 following is State Depart-
ment evaluation of impact of NPT on sensitive nuclear exports. Text of
treaty is being made available to party. As party aware, FRG Under
Secretary Hermes in discussions with Secretary Vance3 cited alleged in-
consistencies between US statements during NPT negotiations and US
position now on sensitive transfers. As overall observation, Depart-
ment would note the potential pitfalls of allowing FRG officials to en-
gage party in narrow, legalistic debate over interpretation of NPT4 in
context of discussion of US policy on sensitive nuclear transfers.
2. The basic objective of NPT is to prevent the further spread of nu-
clear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices without impeding the
development, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful pur-
poses. Consistent with this objective, the treaty requires all parties,
when acting as suppliers, to ensure that transfers of nuclear material
and equipment are subject to IAEA safeguards. Article I obligates
nuclear-weapon states party to the treaty “not in any way to assist, en-
courage, or induce any non-nuclear-weapons state to manufacture or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other explosive devices.” Article
II obligates non-nuclear weapons states party to the treaty not to ac-
quire nuclear weapons or explosives from any source.
3. At the same time, Article IV states that nothing in the treaty
“shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all parties to
the treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Ar-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840084-0745. Se-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Also sent immediate to Bonn. Drafted by Jerome Kahan (S/P);
cleared by Louis Nosenzo (PM), Edward McGaffigan (T), Charles Van Doren (ACDA),
and Peter Sebastian (S/S); and approved by Bartholomew (S/P).
2 Not found.
3 No record of a meeting between Vance and Hermes was found. According to the
German documentary record, Hermes visited Washington and delivered a Non-Paper on
non-proliferation to Mondale on January 16. See Akten zur Auswa¨rtigen Politk der Bundes-
republik Deutschland, 1977, Part One, p. 16. The Non-Paper was not found.
4 The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons or Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) was signed on July 1, 1968 by 56 nations, including the United States, the
United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union. The U.S. Senate ratified the Treaty on March 13,
1969, and it entered into force on March 5, 1970. See Document 250 in Foreign Relations,
1964–1968, vol. XI, Arms Control and Disarmament.
