424 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI high range threshold to ensure that they are not constrained. Indeed, we already have signaled to the Soviets that if an acceptable solution on other ALCM issues can be found, we probably could agree on a compromise on the range issue at a 1000 km threshold. The Soviets have proposed that conventional ALCMs be distinguished from nuclear ALCMs by “on site inspection” but it is far from clear what they have in mind. At the same time, it is important to recognize that the details on how we might move in the direction of the Soviet proposal for OSI can have a substantial impact, particularly with respect to the costs and risks of intrusive inspection. For example, to what extent should we be willing to permit Soviet access to (a) bomber bases, (b) bomber aircraft, including B–2, and (c) ALCMs, including those that have stealthy and other sensitive characteristics? Put differently, how big a price should we be prepared to pay to reach a compromise with the Soviets on this issue, recognizing that none of these measures would make a major contribution to verification? On the other hand, there are some signs that the Soviets may be tough on distinguishability. Rick Burt believes it could turn out to be an unexpectedly serious stumbling block in the negotiations. Range We are interested in a high range threshold (e.g., 1500 km) for three principle reasons: (a) to protect future conventional ALCMs if we cannot prevail on the distinguishability issue, (b) to protect the option of deploying long range theater nuclear ALCMs deployed on tactical aircraft, and (c) to protect the option of deploying long range SRAM-­ like weapons on penetrating bombers to offset future improvements in Soviet air defenses. Not even a 1500 km threshold would exclude “strategic” ALCMs because cruise missiles launched from stand-­off bombers require much longer range to reach their targets. There currently is one conventional missile, Tacit Rainbow, with a range in excess of 600 km. A range threshold in START of 800 km probably would safely exclude Tacit Rainbow from START limits. As noted above, we do not know of firm plans (i.e., beyond paper design studies) for any other conventional or nuclear ALCMs with ranges in excess of 600 kms. The issue, therefore, is what kinds of future options we want to protect, and how much we think the Soviets would pay for an agreement on a lower range threshold than we have proposed. JCS believes that a 1000 km range threshold would adequately protect capabilities that may be needed in the future. Conventional Bombers The Soviets at Wyoming indicated a willingness to exclude about 100 conventional bombers (compared to the U.S. proposal to exclude
