Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II of human rights conditions rather than specific individual actions. Supporting assistance is more political in nature; this means that sudden changes are less disruptive but also that there may be overriding political arguments against using it to pursue human rights objectives. Nonetheless, there are possibilities for additional action which could be considered. —Automatic cutoff of development and security supporting aid to flagrant violators. This should be reserved for extreme cases only. It would not preclude humanitarian assistance to meet disasters. —Increase development and/or security assistance to reward positive steps. It is difficult to programmatically justify short-term responses in development assistance. —Respond to longer-term human rights trends by raising or lowering programmed aid levels. This is more consistent with sound use of development resources. Could be coupled with demarches in capitals to explain this policy. —Develop projects specifically directed to enhancing the respect for rights. —Consult with other donors to achieve coordinated action. This would require considerable time and effort, but could be effective over the longer term. A.I.D. will continue to reflect, in its development assistance policy, continuity and perseverance of support of the respect for human rights, including the fulfillment of such basic human needs as food, shelter, health care, and education. A.I.D. will continue to examine the appropriate mix of these possibilities for additional action. Food Assistance The new food aid legislation pending in Congress9 contains a provision that no Title I assistance be provided to any country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violation of internationally recognized human rights, unless the agreement directly benefits the needy. An agreement will not be considered to directly benefit the needy unless either the commodities themselves, or the proceeds from their sale, will be used for specific projects or programs which the President determines would directly benefit the needy. The following are some additional measures which the Administration might consider for using food aid to promote human rights, together with discussions of their possible usefulness and drawbacks: —Publicize U.S. intentions to include human rights considerations in food aid programs. Instruct Ambassadors and Chiefs of Mission to inform host governments. Make the point in speeches and statements by senior officials.
