174
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of human rights conditions rather than specific individual actions. Sup-
porting assistance is more political in nature; this means that sudden
changes are less disruptive but also that there may be overriding polit-
ical arguments against using it to pursue human rights objectives.
Nonetheless, there are possibilities for additional action which
could be considered.
—Automatic cutoff of development and security supporting aid to
flagrant violators. This should be reserved for extreme cases only. It
would not preclude humanitarian assistance to meet disasters.
—Increase development and/or security assistance to reward pos-
itive steps. It is difficult to programmatically justify short-term re-
sponses in development assistance.
—Respond to longer-term human rights trends by raising or low-
ering programmed aid levels. This is more consistent with sound use of
development resources. Could be coupled with demarches in capitals
to explain this policy.
—Develop projects specifically directed to enhancing the respect
for rights.
—Consult with other donors to achieve coordinated action. This
would require considerable time and effort, but could be effective over
the longer term.
A.I.D. will continue to reflect, in its development assistance policy,
continuity and perseverance of support of the respect for human rights,
including the fulfillment of such basic human needs as food, shelter,
health care, and education. A.I.D. will continue to examine the appro-
priate mix of these possibilities for additional action.
Food Assistance
The new food aid legislation pending in Congress9 contains a pro-
vision that no Title I assistance be provided to any country which en-
gages in a consistent pattern of gross violation of internationally recog-
nized human rights, unless the agreement directly benefits the needy.
An agreement will not be considered to directly benefit the needy
unless either the commodities themselves, or the proceeds from their
sale, will be used for specific projects or programs which the President
determines would directly benefit the needy.
The following are some additional measures which the Adminis-
tration might consider for using food aid to promote human rights, to-
gether with discussions of their possible usefulness and drawbacks:
—Publicize U.S. intentions to include human rights considerations
in food aid programs. Instruct Ambassadors and Chiefs of Mission to
inform host governments. Make the point in speeches and statements
by senior officials.
9 Reference is to P.L. 95–88; see footnote 6 above.
