Peru  1031
to trade unions but included politicians and students. Twenty of the lat-
ter had recently returned from a visit behind the Iron Curtain.
President Prado mentioned his long-­standing antipathy to 
Communism and his efforts in 1942 to persuade President Roosevelt 
that Communism would be a major threat after the war. Neither 
Roosevelt nor Mrs. Roosevelt had agreed. In response to the Vice 
President’s request, he agreed that the latter might refer in his press 
conference tomorrow to President Prado’s long-­standing antipathy to 
Communism and that he continued to hold the same views.
In concluding the conversation, the President stated that Peru 
shared U.S. principles on both economic and political matters and that 
Peru could always be depended upon as a friend of the U.S. in the UN 
and elsewhere. He mentioned his initiative for coordination between 
the OAS and NATO in dealing with the world Communist threat. The 
Vice President expressed appreciation for Peru’s cooperation.
PE–7.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor for 
Economic Affairs of the Embassy in Peru (Linville)1

Lima, May 8, 1958.
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. Augusto Thorndike, Minister of Finance and Commerce; Mr. Federico Hilbok, 
Minister of Development & Public Works; Mr. Andres Dasso, President Central 
Reserve Bank; Mr. Hipólito Larrabure, General Manager Central Reserve Bank; 
Mr. Fernando Berckemeyer, Peruvian Ambassador to the U. S.; Rud. Carlos Jurgens, 
Archbishop of Cuzco; Mr. Herbert Havlik, I.B.R.D. Mission to Peru; Mr. Roger 
Chaufournier, I.B.R.D. Mission to Peru; Mr. Samuel G. Waugh, President Export-­
Import Bank and Francis A. Linville.
SUBJECT
PERUVIAN ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PROBLEMS.
Mr. Thorndike said that Peru’s need for economic assistance from 
abroad is very great. Something must be done to improve the economic 
position of the Indian population, especially in the South of Peru. In 
that area the Communists have become very strong. He asked the 
Archbishop of Cuzco, who had played a vital role in maintaining peace 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 823.00/5–958. Official Use Only. The 
source text was sent to the Department of State under cover of despatch 835 from Lima, 
May 8.
