1957 1445 impartial evidence. If he continues to refuse to accept these facts, I can only draw my own conclusions as to the reasons. 5. I continued. The facts with regard to Americans in his country are equally clear. It is entirely clear and indisputable that of the 19 Americans in his prisons at the time of our Agreed Announcement and concern­ ing which that Agreed Announcement said his authorities would adopt measures for expediting their return, after over two years six still remain in his prisons. It is a fact that since December 1955 not one American has been returned prior to serving the full sentence imposed upon him. It is the normal practice for every country of which I have knowledge to remit substantial portions of sentences for normally good behaviour of prisoners. Since having entered into the Agreement, these Americans seem to have been deprived even of this privilege. Thus, apart from the very serious and solemn question of obligation of his authorities under the Agreed Announcement, the position of these prisoners seems mark­ edly to have worsened since the announcement of the Agreement. Apart from their obligations under the Agreement, the action of his authorities to continue to keep these persons in prisons is utterly in contradiction to professions of desire for settling of questions and improvement of relations between us. I and my government can only conclude this is a deliberate policy. 6. Wang replied. He made a statement this morning with regard to the tens of thousands of Chinese nationals residing in the U.S. including 5000 students, but this was not the same as saying that they wanted all these to return or that all wanted to return. What he had specifically made clear was that among these people, regardless of whether they were ordinary residents or students who were in the U.S. to acquire knowl­ edge, many do desire to return to their homeland. That he had given me a limited list of specified persons explained the fact that these persons desired to return to their country. All these persons desired to return to their country. All these persons have expressed a desire to return, but have encountered difficulties in doing so. From the experiences of those Chinese who succeeded in returning recently is explained the fact that there exist various barriers and difficulties ­preventing their return. Some of those who have returned complain that once they made known their desire, they got in trouble with our authorities, who had them interro­ gated. There are cases in which my authorities tried to press persons who made known their desire to go to his country to go to Taiwan instead. There are cases in which persons whose desire to return to his country were given such short notice they got into trouble in making preparations to leave. There are cases of persons departing who have had their property sequestered. These circumstances and the possibility that they might encounter in departing some form of difficulty inhibited their nationals from making up their minds to return to his country.
