308
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
lines of communication among the Middle Eastern leaders. The whole
world has a great stake in the success of these efforts. This is a precious
opportunity for a historic settlement of a longstanding conflict—an op-
portunity which may never come again in our lifetime.
“Our role has been difficult and sometimes thankless and contro-
versial. But it has been constructive and it has been necessary, and it
will continue.
“Our third major foreign policy goal is one that touches the life
of every American citizen every day—world economic growth and
stability.
“This requires strong economic performance by the industrialized
democracies like ourselves and progress in resolving the global energy
crisis. Last fall, with the help of others, we succeeded in our vigorous
efforts to maintain the stability of the price of oil. But as many foreign
leaders have emphasized to me personally and, I am sure, to you, the
greatest future contribution that America can make to the world
economy would be an effective energy conservation program here at
home. We will not hesitate to take the actions needed to protect the in-
tegrity of the American dollar.
“We are trying to develop a more just international system. And in
this spirit, we are supporting the struggle for human development in
Africa, in Asia, and in Latin America.
“Finally, the world is watching to see how we act on one of our
most important and controversial items of business—approval of the
Panama Canal treaties. The treaties now before the Senate are the result
of the work of four administrations—two Democratic, two Republican.
“They guarantee that the canal will be open always for unre-
stricted use by the ships of the world. Our ships have the right to go
to the head of the line for priority of passage in times of emergency
or need. We retain the permanent right to defend the canal with our
own military forces, if necessary, to guarantee its openness and its
neutrality.
“The treaties are to the clear advantage of ourselves, the Panama-
nians, and the other users of the canal. Ratifying the Panama Canal
treaties will demonstrate our good faith to the world, discourage the
spread of hostile ideologies in this hemisphere, and directly contribute
to the economic well-being and the security of the United States.”
The President then acknowledged the applause from the audience
before referencing two moments that had taken place during his recent
trip to the Middle East, South Asia, and Europe that also “confirmed
the final aims” of U.S. foreign policy:
“One was in a little village in India, where I met a people as pas-
sionately attached to their rights and liberties as we are, but whose chil-
