516 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI The Solution: An ICBM Initiative The following could be the main components of an ICBM package proposal to deal with the problem: 1) Propose a ban on MIRVed mobile ICBMs, with either (a) no ceiling on them other than the existing 1600/4900 limits or (b) a ceiling of 500 on single-­warhead mobile ICBMs. • Having no ceiling on singles would reinforce the de-MIRVing theme, but the JCS and OSD prefer to cap Soviet SS–25s on the grounds that it would facilitate our targeting requirements. This argument, however, is inconsistent with our emphasis on survivability and stability—­ themes you and Scowcroft have emphasized publicly and themes the President emphasized in his letter on arms control he sent Gorbachev last June.5 • Alternatively, a ceiling of 500, while less visionary, would still allow both sides a significant single-­warhead mobile ICBM force while meeting OSD and JCS concerns. It may, however, create a problem with the Soviets who may want to increase deployments of SS–25s above the 500 level if they are forced to give up SS–24 rail-­mobile deployments. 2) Withdraw our proposed limit of 3300 on all ICBM warheads in favor of a new sublimit on silo-­based MIRVed warheads. This sublimit would have several functions. At a minimum, it would prevent the Soviets from moving SS–24s from rails to additional silos (which would be destabilizing) and would single out a particularly destabilizing category of strategic arms for further cuts in START II. Depending on its level, it could also result in further cuts in heavy ICBMs (SS–18s) without requiring the Soviets to lower the 154 ceiling explicitly. • At 2000, it would accommodate current Soviet plans for 154 SS-18s and close to 50 silo-­based SS–24s. • At 1500–1750, they would have to cut an additional 25–50 of those missiles, but they would have the flexibility to decide what mix of the two types to retain. 3) Agree to the Soviet proposal that we undertake in START I to pursue follow-­on START II negotiations, while proposing a commitment that land-­based MIRVs will be further reduced or phased out in START II. • Placed in this context, the ban on mobile MIRVs would be a first step toward a de-MIRVing of land-­based missiles in START II. • It would also put a Bush stamp—­strategic stability as the overriding goal—­on nuclear arms control. 4) Retain the agreed 154 ceiling on heavy ICBMs, while relaxing our proposed ban on heavy ICBM modernization (ban on flight testing 5 Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts.
