264
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
factor in Iran. While the urban middle class is becoming increasingly
articulate, it is not homogeneous, its intellectual outlook is confused,
and its aims as a social group are so inchoate as to be practically
non-existent. Its political energies are devoted exclusively to the na-
tional aim of eliminating British influence. Beyond that, all that the
members of this group appear to want at present is the opportunity to
plan a more active role in political affairs. In a political sense, therefore,
the needs of these people have been filled, at least temporarily, by the
manner in which the National Front has appealed for their support and
by the National Front’s uncompromising attitude toward the British in
the oil controversy. In other respects, the National Front’s ideas con-
cerning basic reforms and economic development are even less devel-
oped than those of past governments, and the desire of its leaders for
political power as an end in itself is even more apparent.
8. Finally, the impact of the National Front movement on the tradi-
tional bases of power in Iran appears to have been something less than
revolutionary. The Shah, through his command of the Army, continues
to occupy a key position in the state. His reluctance to withdraw his
support from Mossadeq stems from sympathy with the basic policy of
oil nationalization, his desire not to over-step the bounds of a constitu-
tional monarch, and most important of all his conviction that his own,
as well as his country’s, best interests are served by keeping in step
with public opinion. Consequently, his decision not to act against Mos-
sadeq until the latter’s position has been undermined by the course of
events does not in itself indicate that his position is weak. The vital ele-
ments of his position—his prestige in the country, his command of the
armed forces and the loyalty of the armed forces to him—do not appear
to have been seriously affected.
9. Moreover, the position of the traditional ruling group does not
appear to have been seriously undermined, even though its members
have been conspicuously absent from the highest government posts
during the past year. The economic basis of their power, the land
tenure system, has not been touched by the National Front regime, and
because of their wealth they are in a much stronger position than the
civil servants, the factory and oil workers, and the middle class in gen-
eral to bear the economic consequences of the oil nationalization policy.
Moreover, like the Shah, they are beginning to realize the political im-
portance of the emerging middle class and that political power rests
with those who can win its support. For all these reasons the members
of the “old guard” have been “rolling with the punch” during the past
year. They have supported oil nationalization and the elimination of
British influence as strongly as the National Front has itself. However,
they have, particularly since last fall, placed progressively more em-
phasis on Mossadeq’s failure to solve the critical financial and eco-
