World Hunger and Food Policy 785 —Commitment to a system of international food reserves to alleviate starvation during cyclical famines, and to stablize prices during times of shortage.6 —Food aid. Present programs (P.L. 480) need to be revised so that they reach and have the greatest impact on the truly hungry people.7 —Trade and investment policies need to be made more favorable to the LDC’s.8 —Expanded private sector involvement. Ambassador Young has proposed a multinational food corps which the group supports in principle, and which is currently being reviewed by the State Department.9 Attachment Summary of the Report of the Interagency World Hunger Working Group10 SUMMARY OF THE REPORT OF THE INTERAGENCY WORLD HUNGER WORKING GROUP Introduction The President’s memorandum of September 29 established a World Hunger Working Group charged with developing a set of U.S. Government policy options designed to make a significant impact on world hunger.11 We have actively sought the views of key agencies represented on the Working Group, the Congress, international organizations, and more than 150 individuals and institutions in the private sector, including farm, business, labor, religious and philanthropic groups. This summarizes the major findings which we hope can form the basis for a Message to the Congress at the time the President signs 6 The President underlined the word “reserves.” 7 The President underlined the word “aid.” 8 The President underlined the word “trade” and the phrase “investment policies.” 9 The President underlined the phrase “private sector involvement.” Young delivered the 10th annual McDougall Memorial Lecture—in honor of Australian economist and FAO founder Frank L. McDougall—on November 14, 1977. After presenting a brief historical overview of food policy, Young commented: “One of the mechanisms which has emerged as a creative challenge to the problems of bureaucracy is the utilization of the volunteer. As a concept to help the agriculturally less developed nations of the world, I like the idea of national, regional, and perhaps even international volunteers for food production.” The complete text of Young’s address is printed in Department of State Bulletin, January 1978, pp. 33–36. 10 No classification marking. 11 See Document 230. The memorandum is dated September 30.
