Comprehensive Test Ban
567
230.
Memorandum From Secretary of Energy Schlesinger to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 4, 1979
SUBJECT
CTB-RELATED ENHANCED TEST PROGRAM
Following up our telephone conversation of yesterday afternoon,2
this memorandum highlights two major problem areas regarding the
study of an enhanced nuclear weapons test program that DOE and
DOD have been preparing.
The study defines a two-year enhanced test program which in-
cludes an additional 16 tests through FY 80 and 13 in the first half of FY
81. This program would be expensive—on the order of an additional
$123 M through the end of FY 80 and a total of $284 M in FY 81; this
would require $31 M in FY 79 and $92 M in FY 80 over the current Ad-
ministration program. In view of the extremely tight budget constraints
facing the DOE, the existing FY 79 and FY 80 test program levels were
judged to represent the best balance of DOE resources within the de-
fense programs’ area. These incremental costs could not be accommo-
dated from within DOE’s resources without significantly affecting our
ability to meet Presidential guidance on the production of weapons re-
quired for DOD systems.
Due to the large incremental costs involved, I believe it would be
most useful to obtain an initial Administration estimate on the amount
of money to be made available for this enhanced effort and then size the
test program to this sum. I believe that the potential political repercus-
sions of any other potential courses of action could be substantial. If the
recommended program were to be reduced for financial reasons, ques-
tions would undoubtedly arise concerning the Administration’s com-
mitment to do all that is necessary to prepare for a CTB. This would be
far worse, having recognized a significant enhancement to be advis-
able, than not proceeding on the recommended path.
It should be borne in mind that DOE, in FY 79, has already sent to
the Congress a $12.8 M supplemental for the two additional confidence
tests; we have two additional supplementals pending with OMB total-
ling $81 M—$40 M for Pershing II warhead and $41 M for NOVA (the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 13, Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB), 1/79–9/80. Secret; Restricted Data. Copies were
sent to Brown, Jones, and Press.
2 Not found.
