974 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II the part of the United States to dealing with this problem, and (6) to examine ways in which our contribution to the global health effort can be fully integrated with the activities of other nations and of multinational bodies particularly the United Nations Organizations. The fundamental philosophical concept that we are attempting to communicate which differs somewhat from that of other studies going on with regard to international assistance is that we should define the international health area as a global problem and not a problem exclusively of the developing nations. This will allow us to get away from the traditional dichotomy that has plagued us in the past of donor and recipient nations, in which, the United States was in the posture of giving to other countries in need without a sense of shared responsibility for dealing with the suffering of their people. Even the concept of a North-South dialogue maintains the notion of donor and recipient, the only difference being that the United States has broadened the responsibility to include other industrialized nations. But it is still a question of charity, in which the wealthier nations have some obligation to the poorer nations. We hopefully will get beyond this, and conceive of health as being something which is a responsibility of all the people of the world regardless of where they live or what diseases they are locally afflicted by. In many respects the success in dealing with the problem of smallpox is a model which exemplifies this concept. There was a joint commitment by the countries throughout the world and by the World Health Organization that together the problem of smallpox would be attacked and defeated using a model that was quite different from our traditional foreign aid effort. And on this basis the problem has largely been virtually eliminated. Specifically our project should be aimed at the following goals: (1) Inventory all health resources within the federal government, in detail both in terms of personnel, budget and programs, so that it is possible to rapidly assess the extent of the federal resources in terms of the effort going into a given country or diseases entity or major programs area such as research or manpower training. (2) We should examine the organizational structure of the federal government in order to determine the manner in which the international health issue can best be incorporated into the development of foreign policy. Military power has traditionally been the key ancillary component of our foreign policy. Over the years international economic policy has been incorporated as an important consideration in foreign policy development and has been placed managerially within the State Department structure. Even though President Carter has made clear that concern with basic human needs is a fundamental element in his overall foreign policy there is currently no single mechanism within the State Department to allow for the effective incorpora-
