United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 33 Mr. Smith5 expressed agreement with the views of Mr. Waugh. He felt that a clear idea of the objectives of the Institution, particularly in the field of development, was needed, as well as a view of the extent to which the Bank could make funds available at reasonable interest rates. Mr. Dillon expressed concurrence with the Chairman’s views on the time schedule. He felt that October should be used to develop the United States position, following which talks could begin with the Latin Americans to ascertain what kind of bank they desired. He agreed with the Staff emphasis on technical assistance activity, which really involved improvement of planning, and suggested that these activities be referred to as development planning so as to avoid confusion with existing technical assistance programs. He saw the task as having two parts, first to work out the objectives of the Institution, and second to determine what should be in the articles of association. He recalled that the basic motive was political, to meet the Latin American desire for a special association with the United States, and expressed preference for a flexible approach to the purposes of financing, currency of repayment, and similar matters. He expected it would be difficult to define the idea of supplementing and not competing with the existing institutions. He felt that the form of capitalization would depend to some extent on the kinds of loans to be made, and agreed that the Bank should not accept deposits. He felt the suggestion of limiting the Bank to economic development projects should be sharpened, but that too categorical a view should be avoided. He suggested that the drafts prepared by the Staff include draft policy statements for internal U.S. consideration. Mr. Schaefer6 agreed that the new Institution’s activities should supplement those of existing institutions and noted that the paper offered no suggestions for using foreign currencies now available to the United States. Mr. Reid felt that principles to apply to development banks generally were needed, and hoped that the United States would not go so far in the Latin American case as to prejudice our position in other areas. On the illustrative figures in the paper for the amount of capitalization, he felt it was difficult to determine amounts without a clear idea of the Bank’s objectives. He noted that the prospective increase in the resources of the International Bank and International Monetary Fund presumably would affect the needs of Latin America and therefore the capitalization of a new Institution. The Chairman summarized by saying that the Staff work through October should not be considered binding on any agency with respect 5 Marshall M. Smith, Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, Department of Commerce. 6 Walter Schaefer, Assistant to the Director for Finance, ICA.
