Shameen and so have most of those of other nationalities although a few French and Japanese women and children still remain. A few American women and children continue to live in the missions in the suburbs but these are being urged to go. As can well be imagined the shooting has produced much bitterness and excitement amongst the Chinese who suffered such unexpectedly great losses. There does not seem to be so much feeling against the French although a large proportion of the casualties were evidently inflicted by French machine guns. The British are blamed for starting the shooting. The Japanese had no part in the Canton affair but they are blamed for their part in the Shanghai troubles. The boycott is directed against the British, French, and Japanese but not against the Americans. From their side the English insist that the first shots came from the Chinese and that the British officers did everything in their power to stop the firing as soon as possible. They regret the large number of casualties and especially the killing of students, but point out that the concessions were being attacked by fully armed Chinese soldiers who far outnumbered the European defenders. The students were near the soldiers and probably came under an indirect fire. It is estimated by the French that fully a thousand armed Chinese troops were facing Shameen at the moment the shooting commenced. In addition more troops were seen extended down the native bund. The people on Shameen were afraid that there would be trouble while the parade was passing and the Consuls and naval authorities concerned took every possible precaution to prevent an outbreak, and at the same time safeguard the concessions. Everyone deplores the affair which can only serve to increase the difficulties of an already complicated and dangerous situation. No foreigners have gone into the native city since the shooting and it will probably be a long time before they will find it safe to move about freely, except Germans and Russians who will probably wear arm bands indicating their nationality. In the suburbs conditions are easier for the Chinese are more or less personally acquainted with the foreigners they see there. Business is at a standstill. No steps have been taken as yet to open negotiations for a settlement and it will probably be some days before anything can be done. Every effort is now being directed toward the prevention of another outbreak which could easily develop into something far more serious than the affair of June 23. As this is being written the French and British are busily engaged in strengthening the defenses of the two concessions. More barricades are being erected and the system of communication improved. There are rumors that troops are massed in the city behind Shameen and that another demonstration may be expected shortly. The more
