298 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI feed in provisions which would allow the two possible U.S. systems to function effectively. Thus far, we have been primarily designing a regime for soviet systems and practices. We are preparing a fairly detailed cable on what we have learned this round and what work is needed on the U.S. position. Nazarkin is suggesting that the sides update the elements of common ground, presumably at the September Baker-Shevardnadze meeting. — SLCMs This subject is not ripe for settlement at the ministerial or any other level, but it is time for further U.S. thinking. It is clear that this issue is a treaty-­breaker. A more immediate problem is that the lack of U.S. willingness to engage in discussion of a solution may well be causing the Soviets to hold back on other issues. I hope we will not wait until the Soviets actually table their proposal to ban either all nuclear SLCMs or all nuclear weapons on ships except for SLBMs before we begin to think about the U.S. response. The Soviets are again pressing for an experts group to consider possible approaches to SLCM verification. It is becoming increasingly difficult to avoid this issue. Roslyakov told me August 3 that there are two pieces of unexecuted guidance on the Soviet side. One is on modernization of heavy ICBMs. The other is a proposal to have a combined limit on both nuclear and non-­nuclear SLCMs. The combined number from the current Soviet position would be 1000, but it could be higher. Roslyakov emphasized that he had no instructions on the matter, but asked how 2000 would be received by the U.S. I declined to speculate on this, but asked how it would be verified. He said he did not know, but thought some system applied at loading points would be sufficient. An alternative would be a kind of counting rule for types of ships, similar to that for ALCMs, but he recognized that SLCMs are far more complicated than ALCMs. In any case, he emphasized strongly that some solution to the SLCM problem must be found—­it will not go away. Medium-Level Issues 8. In addition to the few major issues, we need to begin to fill in the blanks in the U.S. position on a considerable array of medium-­level issues that fell between those addressed in the strategic review and in the technical JDT review. Examples would be the RV counting rule for future types of ballistic missiles, the ban on MIRVed cruise missiles, ASBMs, ICCMs, new types definition, warhead definition, schedule of reductions, heavy bomber and ALCM distinguishability, etc. Recommendations 9. Avoiding stagnation or failure will require some reinvigoration of the process by high levels of the USG, as well as some changes in the way we do business. The delegation has gone about as far as it can go
