784 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III over-concentration of administrators who live in relative opulence in Washington and other capitals. The Administration is seeking to address each of these issues. Congressman Reuss agreed on the need to support IFI’s. He volunteered the desirability of a “Congressional declaration supporting the Administration view that human rights are important and that we will use our vote and any other leverage in the IFI’s to advance human rights.” The Administration faces a moment of truth tomorrow on two multilateral loans to Argentina. The President replied that the Administration would “err on the side of human rights” decisions involving multilateral loans. He stated, however, that there can be no absolute standards as the Korean case shows.2 A declaration by Congress with regard to human rights in the IFI’s would be fine, the President said, as long as it left the Administration some flexibility.3 The President noted that the IFI’s have exerted “conservative lending pressure” on borrowers which has been healthy for inflation control. Senator Humphrey noted that while India gets 40 per cent of IDA loans, it is not at the top of the list on a per capita basis. The President stated that India had made remarkable progress recently not only because of good crops, but in human rights as Mrs. Gandhi has taken steps away from totalitarianism. Senator Case switched the discussion to his concern that foreign assistance decisions should not be contingent upon any U.S. domestic pressures. It has been argued, he said, that U.S. assistance is actually spent in the U.S. and benefits American industries, that P.L. 480 helps 2 Speaking before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations on February 24, Vance announced reductions in U.S. assistance to Argentina, Uruguay, and Ethiopia on the grounds of their poor human rights records; Vance noted, however, that assistance to strategically important countries like South Korea would not be cut. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Security Links Cited,” The New York Times, February 25, 1977, p. 1) 3 In a March 11 memorandum to Carter, Blumenthal noted that after Carter’s March 9 meeting with Congressional leaders, “Henry Reuss agreed informally with Treasury and State on a draft of legislation directing the U.S. to advance the cause of human rights in its participation in the international financial institutions. The draft would leave intact the legislative requirements (the Harkin amendment) that already exist for the Inter-American Development Bank, which we feel is necessary if Harkin and other proponents of mandatory voting provisions are to be brought along. We feel that the Reuss draft is the best obtainable in the circumstances.” Carter initialed Blumenthal’s memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 21, Treasury Department: 2/77–3/78) The Harkin Amendment was attached to P.L. 94–302, a 1976 law governing U.S. participation in the IDB and ADF. The amendment authorized the U.S. IDB Executive Director and the U.S. ADF Governor to vote against loans for countries whose governments violated human rights.
