594 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I new, even more secure Trident submarines will be going to sea, and we are working on a more powerful and accurate Trident II missile for these submarines. Our cruise missile program will greatly enhance the effectiveness of our long-range bomber force. These missiles will be able to penetrate any air defense system which the Soviet Union could build in the foreseeable future. We are substantially improving the accuracy and the power of our land-based Minuteman missiles. But in the coming decade missiles of this type, based in fixed silos, will become increasingly vulnerable to surprise attack. The Soviets have three-quarters of their warheads in such fixed-based missiles, compared to only one-quarter of ours. Nevertheless, this is a very serious problem, and we must deal with it effectively and sensibly. The Defense Department now has under consideration a number of options for responding to this problem, including making some of our own ICBM’s mobile. I might add—and this is very important—that the options which we are evaluating would be far more costly—and we would have far less confidence of their effectiveness—in the absence of SALT II limits. For without these limits on the number of Soviet warheads, the Soviet Union could counter any effort we made simply by greatly increasing the number of warheads on their missiles. Let me emphasize that the SALT II agreement preserves adequate flexibility for the United States in this important area. Our strategic forces must be able to survive any attack and to counterattack military and civilian targets in the aggressor nation. And the aggressor nation must know that we have the ability and the will to exercise this option if they should attack us. We have had this capability—which is the essence of deterrence—in the past; we have it today; and SALT II, plus the defense programs that I’ve described, will ensure that we have it for the future. The SALT II agreement will slow the growth of Soviet arms and limit the strategic competition, and by helping to define future threats that we might face, SALT II will make our defense planning much more effective. Under the agreement, the two sides will be limited to equal numbers of strategic launchers for the first time, ending the substantial Soviet numerical advantage which was permitted in the currently effective SALT I treaty. To reach these new and lower levels, the Soviets will have to reduce their overall number of strategic delivery systems by 10 percent— more than 250 Soviet missile launchers or bombers will have to be dismantled. Naturally, the Soviets will choose to phase out their older systems, but these systems are still formidable.
