762 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 238. Memorandum From Gregory F. Treverton of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 4, 1977 SUBJECT Summary of Your Meeting with Yugoslav Ambassador Belovski, August 3, 1977 For your information, the following is a summary of the main points made in the meeting: Tito’s Trip Belovski said that Tito would be gone for nearly a month; he was uncertain whether the Soviet Union portion was an official visit or a vacation. In any case, he said it was important for the Yugoslavs to “normalize” their relations with Moscow. In the last year the Soviet approach has included many “old” aspects—talk of “brotherhood,” invitations to bloc meetings despite clear Yugoslav indications that it will not participate, military approaches—and a persistent tendency to retain Yugoslavia as a member of the “family.” You agreed that Yugoslavia was doing just what a country that wanted to retain its independence and territorial integrity should do. Korea In response to your question why Tito was going to North Korea, the Ambassador said: (1) the Yugoslavs had been frankly impressed by the sincerity of the North Korean desire for peace on the peninsula (an argument he repeated); and (2) North Korea had opted for nonalignment, which was important to Yugoslavia not because of the U.S. but because of the Soviet Union and the PRC. When you asked why Belgrade did not recognize Seoul, the Ambassador evaded, with vague talk of their original cease-fire proposal and their desire to see the UN force withdrawn. You indicated that there had been no change in our plans for withdrawal from Korea. You indicated that we would be prepared to open communications with the North, provided the South Koreans were involved. There are two Koreas and the North must recognize 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977. Secret. Sent for information. Brzezinski sent a copy of the memorandum to Vance on August 15 and underscored his hope that Tito would “get some of these points across to Brezhnev.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 122, Vance, Misc. Communication with: 7–8/77)
