512 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX a “working Congress,” this quinquennial meeting addressed primarily domestic concerns. In a thematic context which both emphasized and called for more trust between Party and people, the Congress in effect ratified the Kadarist domestic course, including new economic reform measures. (C) 173. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Hungary1 Washington, September 6, 1980, 0128Z 237207. Madrid for Zimmerman, CSCE Del. Subject: Hungarian Ambassador’s Meeting With the Counselor. 1. (C)-entire text 2. Summary: Meeting with Counselor Ridgway following home leave consultations in Budapest, Hungarian Ambassador Esztergalyos confirmed Hungary’s intent to maintain and extend positive bilateral relations. Esztergalyos expressed concern about the President’s reference to Hungary’s human rights practices in his nomination acceptance speech,2 and exchanged views with the Counselor at some length on CSCE-Madrid topics. The Counselor praised careful management by both sides of the bilateral relationship and took note of Esztergalyos’ remarks about the President’s comment. The conversation touched also on economic and business topics. End summary. 3. Bilateral relations. Esztergalyos said his home leave consultations confirmed that in Hungary’s view, nothing has changed for the worse in bilateral relations and Hungary’s aims and goals remain as before. He had been gratified to see his colleagues in Budapest on the same wavelength as himself concerning the positive nature of the relationship. Ridgway responded that a well-managed, realistic approach by both sides had yielded positive results. Neither side has exaggerated 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800424–0288. Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Madrid. Drafted by Longo; cleared by Bridges and Barry; approved by Ridgway. 2 Referring to human rights in his August 14 speech accepting the nomination of the Democratic Party, Carter said, “ask the former political prisoners who now live in freedom if we should abandon our stand on human rights. Ask the dissidents in the Soviet Union about our commitment to human rights. Ask the Hungarian Americans, ask the Polish Americans, listen to Pope John Paul II.” He continued: “As long as I am President, we will hold high the banner of human rights, and you can depend on it.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–1981, Book II, p. 1536)
