342  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Foley responded that measurements made on a missile must be 
broadcast in a way that gave the other side full access. No measures 
could be taken to deny such access.
Burt said that he had proceeded on the assumption that the pro-
posed data denial agreement reflected considerable common ground. 
He hoped this was still the case.
Nazarkin said it was, but that it was important to understand the 
issues more precisely.
Burt asked whether Nazarkin was satisfied with the explanations.
Nazarkin nodded affirmatively. He then turned to the question of 
duration covered in Article VI of the agreement. As had been explained 
earlier, the Soviet side wanted to make the data denial agreement of 
unlimited duration. This would remove from the table a big issue that 
needed to be resolved in START and would thus move the negotiations 
forward. Would such an approach be acceptable in principle to the U.S.?
Burt said he thought the two sides were close on the substance of 
the issue, but he had questions about why the Soviet side wanted the 
agreement to be of unlimited duration. The U.S. wanted to record the 
level of agreement that had been reached to date. However, it didn’t 
want to foreclose the possibility of improvements being included in 
the completed START Treaty. As the Soviet draft umbrella agreement 
pointed out, one purpose of these measures was to serve as a trial to 
enable us to learn more and help us work out a better START agreement.
Nazarkin reiterated that making the agreement of unlimited dura-
tion would remove one of the difficulties in the way of START. It should 
not be viewed as only a trial measure.
Burt said that early agreement on data denial should not prejudice 
either side’s position on the issue in the completed START Treaty. He 
asked whether Nazarkin had any ideas on how to put the agreement 
into effect without foreclosing the possibility of future improvements. 
The two sides could return to the issue at the next meeting. One last 
point on telemetry. The two sides seemed willing to list test ranges. Was 
the Soviet side ready to do so?
Nazarkin didn’t foresee any difficulty, although his instructions 
didn’t cover this point. He would see if this problem could be overcome.
Khromov asked whether the U.S. was willing to apply the agree-
ment to all types of missiles, cruise missiles as well as ballistic missiles.
Burt said the U.S. proposal focused on areas of common ground, 
and so it covered only ballistic missiles. He then suggested turning 
to short-­time-­of-­flight (STOF) SLBMs. The U.S. had developed an 
approach that in its view balanced effective limits on the acquisition of 
STOF capabilities with minimum interference on testing unrelated to 
STOF. Under this approach, both sides would in parallel declare their
