September 18–December 16, 1978 445 131. Editorial Note On November 11, 1978, two meetings took place in Washington between the U.S. and Israeli delegations on the outstanding issues of the proposed West Bank/Gaza negotiations letter, the proposed Israeli letter to Secretary of State Cyrus Vance covering the list of unilateral actions Israel would take in its relations with the Palestinians prior to the opening of autonomy talks, and the time-phasing of the Israeli withdrawal to the agreed interim line. No memoranda of conversation for these meetings have been found. However, the Department of State sent a summary of the talks written by Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold H. Saunders in telegram 287424 to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem, November 13. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840153–2234) In addition, Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Moshe Dayan provided an account of the meetings in his memoirs. (Dayan, Breakthrough, pages 238–243) The first meeting, lasting approximately three and a half hours, among Vance (who was involved only for the first two hours), Saunders, and Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., on the U.S. side and Dayan and his negotiating team on the Israeli side, produced “essentially sterile discussion.” (Telegram 287424 to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem, November 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840153–2234) In his memoirs, Dayan noted that Atherton provided him with a U.S. draft of the letter on unilateral Israeli moves vis-a`-vis the Palestinians. Intended for Dayan’s signature, this draft committed Israel to lift restrictions on “the freedom of political expression” of the Palestinians and “their freedom to engage in political activities,” to relocate the Israeli military government headquarters from Gaza and Bet El to “new locations outside of the Arab municipalities,” to grant “amnesty for certain prisoners and detainees” in the West Bank and Gaza, and to agree to the establishment of an Egyptian Liaison Office in Gaza. A copy of this draft letter is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State— 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 4, unlabeled folder. Upon receiving the text, Dayan promised only to forward the draft letter to Begin and to Jerusalem, informing Atherton that he believed its terms were “not acceptable.” (Dayan, Breakthrough, page 239) The second meeting, involving Vance, Atherton, Dayan, Israeli adviser Aharon Barak, Department of State Legal Adviser Herbert J. Hansell, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Michael E. Sterner, and Israeli Attorney General Meir Rosenne, lasted until 1:30 a.m. the following morning. This meeting, however, produced agreement to revise the West Bank/Gaza letter, converting the format to a letter from President Jimmy Carter to Egyp-
