266  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
leaders ascribe the progress of Moscow’s policy of detente since the late 
1960s in large measure to the growth of their military power.
10. Where a palpable Soviet military preponderance can be 
achieved, the Soviets believe that it will, over time, encourage regional 
actors to seek security arrangements based on Moscow’s good will, 
with attendant political and military concessions, especially as the 
alternatives of military self-­help and countervailing alliances prove less 
attractive. They view this as a long-­term process best promoted by per-
sistent diplomatic efforts and the steady amassing of military strength 
to alter the security environment gradually while avoiding unwanted 
crises. But the Soviets know that this process is subject to disruption by 
circumstances they can neither foresee nor be wholly confident they 
can control. In any crises that may supervene, military power is seen by 
the Soviets as necessary for defending their interests and for levering 
crisis solutions in directions acceptable to them.
11. Soviet foreign policy has long displayed both conservative and 
assertive behavior. Soviet leaders themselves see their foreign policy 
as essentially revolutionary, resting on the expectation of fundamental 
changes in the international system and within the states that constitute 
it, and deliberately seeking—­though cautiously and intermittently—­to 
help bring these about. Their ideology and their experience in world 
affairs impart to Soviet leaders a mentality that permits near-­term tem-
perance and agile pragmatism to coexist with a deep sense of manifest 
destiny for Soviet power in the world. It sustains Soviet policy in steady 
pursuit of systemic shifts in the world through small steps, and guards 
its fundamental beliefs against demoralization and massive reapprais-
als in the face of reversals. The Soviets see the sweep of postwar inter-
national affairs as broadly confirming their convictions about the march 
of history. Because their beliefs about the course of world politics have 
deep cultural roots and stem from an ideology that confers domestic 
political legitimacy, even profoundly novel or disconcerting develop-
ments, such as the appearance of nuclear weapons and the defection of 
China, have not undermined their governing orthodoxy.
12. On balance, the performance of Soviet foreign policy under 
their rule is rated by present Soviet leaders as a success, and much of 
this success is attributed to the cumulative political impact of growing 
Soviet military power. This judgment is drawn in the light of a previous 
history of gross inferiority and desperate conditions in which options 
for assertive foreign policies were seriously constrained. Not only did 
Soviet policy succeed in averting disastrous possibilities, but it secured 
acknowledged coequal superpower status with the United States and 
moved the Soviet Union steadily into new areas at relatively low risk.
13. Although they expect fluctuations in their fortunes abroad, the 
Soviets still see basic trends in the world as positive for themselves and
