Chapter 7, January–May 1991 1029 group. Brooks said that he had been considering Nazarkin’s concern with the term “suspect site” inspections. Perhaps, Brooks said, the sides could use the term “challenge” inspection, a term used in other treaties. Nazarkin said that he had planned to make the identical suggestion. 10. Brooks said that he did not understand the Soviet concerns with right of refusal SSI, and thus was at a loss to suggest how to proceed. Nazarkin said that during the break he had failed to convince Moscow that there were no hidden traps in a right of refusal regime. Despite Nazarkin’s insistence that such inspections could only occur if the Soviet government allowed them to occur, Moscow appeared convinced that it would somehow be compelled to accept unwanted inspections which would compromise Soviet security. Brooks said the ability to refuse inspections was central to the U.S. approach. Clearly there were facilities in both countries where the presence of foreigners would be intolerable. Nazarkin said it would be helpful for Brooks to make that point in front of the Moscow experts. Brooks said he would do so. 11. Nazarkin recalled the approach the sides had taken with regard to inspections in third countries. In that case the sides had not used any term for inspections but had acknowledged that the JCIC could resolve concerns in a number of ways, not excluding inspections. Whether inspections were called “right of refusal” or “challenge”, they would be decided by the joint commission. Thus, Nazarkin continued, it might be possible to use the solution reached on third countries as a model for describing right of refusal SSI. 12. Brooks said that he would consider such an approach. Brooks noted, however, that there was a political commitment in the 1987 joint summit statement to SSI. It was important to the United States politically that the START treaty meet the standards established by the previous administration. Thus, while the name was unimportant, something that could be considered to meet the sides’ obligation to include provisions for inspection of suspect sites needed to be included in the treaty. Nazarkin said he understood. The two agreed to return to the issue early in the coming week. 13. Comment. The bound eight by ten folder which Nazarkin characterized as his instructions was quite lengthy. Nazarkin consulted page 43, which was only slightly over half-­way through the document. It was not clear from the context whether these were new instructions or a consolidated set; in either case they were extensive. End comment. 14. Documents exchanged: none.
