66 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX both Moscow and the East European states. Second, it can pursue a more cooperative relationship with Moscow while not emphasizing a cooperative approach to Eastern Europe. Third, it can pursue a cooperative relationship toward Eastern European states while de-emphasizing the cooperative approach to Moscow. Fourth, it can de-emphasize cooperation with both Moscow and Eastern Europe. These analytical distinctions can be arrayed as follows: Similar Policies Different Policies toward Moscow toward Moscow and and East Europe East Europe More Cooperative 1/Toward Moscow 2/Toward Moscow but and East Europe not East Europe Less Cooperative 4/Toward Moscow 3/Toward Moscow but and East Europe not East Europe Our real policy choices, to be sure, are not so tidy. This framework, nonetheless, can help us think about some of the causal relations within the real choices. To some extent, we have pursued all of these variants at one time or another in the last three decades. Although they are set down with excessive sharpness here, that sharpness clarifies an inherent ambivalence about goals in U.S. policy. On the one hand, there is a desire to loosen the Soviet grip on East European states; on the other hand, there has been a recurring desire for detente with Moscow. Even in the high time of the cold war, the United States was reluctant to go all the way in helping an East European state escape the confines of the Warsaw Pact. In the high time of the most recent detente period, the U.S. did not wholly ignore differences between Moscow and East Europe that were exploitable for loosening Soviet control, but it did go quite far in giving the impression that we would not work very hard toward loosening the grip, presumably because that could deny us the larger fruits of cooperation with Moscow. A number of arguments for and against can be provided for each of the four options in the matrix. The following ones should be taken merely as suggestive pros and cons for starting the discussion. 1. Emphasize cooperation with both Moscow and East Europe. The justification for this approach could be that it tends to loosen authoritarian control in all members of the Soviet Bloc by setting in motion economic, social, and finally political change, which presumably will benefit the West. This approach assumes that political factors are driven by economic and social considerations even to the point of systemic transformation, albeit in a slow evolutionary process. The objection to this approach is that political factors can and probably do set firm limits to the evolutionary process. Furthermore,
