336
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
96.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, October 20, 1978, 7:30–10:40 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of President’s Meeting with the Israeli Delegation
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Mr. David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Hon. Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Mr. Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President
Mr. Herbert Hansell, Legal Adviser to the Department of State
Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff
H.E. Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister
H.E. Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense
H.E. Aharon Barak, Justice of the Supreme Court
H.E. Meir Rosenne, Legal Adviser to Minister of Foreign Affairs
H.E. Simcha Dinitz, Israeli Ambassador to the United States
The President reviewed his talk2 earlier in the day with the Egyp-
tian delegation. He confirmed that the Israelis would be able to use the
Suez Canal for their ships immediately upon signing of the peace
treaty. On the question of priority of obligations, the President sug-
gested that Barak might meet with our legal advisers to see if some ac-
ceptable language could be found.
Barak said that this problem had caused them great concern. It was
a political and a legal question. Barak and Rosenne had gone to Yale
today to meet with Professors [Eugene] Rostow, [Leon] Lipson, and
[Myres S.] McDougal. They had explained their problem with the ques-
tion of priority of obligations. The professors suggested some lan-
guage. They all felt that the American draft3 was inadequate, and might
even be worth nothing at all. Rosenne proceeded to read suggested lan-
guage on this issue. Barak said that it did not solve all of the problems,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 36, Memcons: President, 10/78. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cab-
inet Room. The memorandum was found attached to an October 25 covering memo-
randum from Quandt to Brzezinski.
2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Boutros-Ghali and El-
Ehrian in the Oval Office from 4:10 p.m. to 4:55 p.m. on October 20. (Carter Library, Presi-
dential Materials) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found.
3 See Document 95. As part of a package of negotiating materials for this October 20
evening meeting, including copies of the preamble, the Egyptian draft letter, and draft
language on UN forces, Brzezinski forwarded an annotated text of the treaty (numbered
Draft 5A) upon which Carter added his own notations. This copy of this draft of the
treaty is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 66, Middle East: Non-Meeting: 2–12/78.
