Chapter 5, May–June 1990 749 the rug. Karpov: My people want a framework. Burt: We should separate offense from defense. Karpov: There was an impression that talk on defense and space can start without any delay, but talk on offense can start only after ratification of the initial treaty. There would be consultation without delay on offense, but talks later. Burt: We have no agreement on defense and space, like we hope to have on START. What is wrong with continuing the negotiations? Are you saying because of the delay in START, D&S should stop? Karpov: We should have defense and space at the same time as START. Offensive and defensive arms should be dealt with at the same time, and have the same status. When there are consultations on offense, there should be consultations on defense. When there are negotiations on offense, there should be negotiations on defense. Burt: Because the cycle is different doesn’t mean they have different status. This is a new concept we are hearing. Are you saying that the day we complete START, until we continue future negotiations on START, there will not be negotiations on defense and space? Karpov: There can be consultations, but not negotiations. Burt: We talked about just the opposite in Geneva. This is not an acceptable concept. Bartholomew: We have been repeatedly clear about our view that defense and space must continue without interruption. These talks should continue within the existing framework. I was pleased when I saw this solution had been achieved in Geneva. It establishes continuity. What you have proposed here reverses the field. It wipes out all the changes we have been prepared to make earlier. We are in fact not entirely content with the Nazarkin/Burt approach. We made big adjustments—­ especially on omitting reference to cooperative transition. We were already wondering whether we could get by with this language. You have made it easy for me. Your proposal does not protect the framework and continuity of defense and space. You have told me it doesn’t. Karpov: In 1985 we established the negotiations on nuclear and space arms, with three elements. Now we have two issues—­offensive arms and defense and space. That is the framework. We should negotiate on both at the same time. Bartholomew: We are reaching conclusion on one element of the nuclear and space talks—START. We will then pause for ratification. The words in the draft about resuming at the earliest practical date—­ that is what that means. The whole statement is about continuity. Karpov: The negotiations on offensive and defensive arms are linked. Let me just remind you what was agreed upon at the beginning of those negotiations. The joint statement says the sides agree the subject will be considered as a complex, and all aspects will be considered
