Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III (4) U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal, and for an initiative on retroactive terms adjustment. A discussion of each of these four possibilities follows. A. NO US/EEC PROPOSAL AND NO OTHER INITIATIVES Proposals from the developing countries (G–77) for generalized debt relief will be on the table at Geneva. The developed countries (Group B) have not yet agreed to place proposals on the table. Last year at the Conference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC), the U.S. and the EEC tabled a joint proposal on “features” to guide international action in situations involving debt-servicing problems. It was tabled as part of the CIEC package of the developed countries on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. The proposal was not accepted by the LDCs, but the Ministers agreed that it could form a useful basis for consideration elsewhere. The proposal was rejected by the LDCs. At USG insistence, this proposal has not been “activated” for consideration at the UNCTAD Ministerial. The EEC, supported by Japan, has been pressing to table it as the centerpiece of the Group B position for the Ministerial. If the LDCs rejected it a year ago, there is a presumption that they would reject it again. In the absence of any U.S. initiative, other Group B countries might: a. choose not to move forward on debt at this juncture; or b. choose to go ahead with the US/EEC proposal (or a modified version of it) without the U.S.; or c. abandon the US/EEC proposal with each country advancing as far as it can to meet LDC demands. In the absence of significant Group B initiatives, the G–77 might: a. downplay the significance of the setback by agreeing to hold further technical discussions; or b. hold fast to their more extreme demands for generalized relief and pursue them in other UN fora, such as the UN Overview Mechanism; c. break off the discussions charging bad faith on the part of Group B, and raise the stakes by making debt relief their major objective at UNCTAD V (May 1979 in Manila). In short, the pros and cons of going to the UNCTAD Ministerial “with an empty bag” are the following: PROS: —Ensures that the U.S. position on debt is not eroded. —A hardline position, if supported by Group B, might defuse expectations for future concessions in the debt area. CONS: —Destroys Group cohesion on debt.
