Human Rights 161 (b) Expanding information in developing regions can both educate and promote greater human rights observance. 5. Initiatives to promote refugee relief: (a) Improved access into the U.S. for refugees and dissidents by increasing conditional entry numbers and conforming definition of refugee to UN non-discriminatory language, both involving legislation. (b) Additionally, we might submit legislation to remove any numerical limitation on refugees the President could admit under a parole where he is responding to a legitimate international appeal or where an emergent refugee situation is of special concern to the U.S. 6. Initiatives in international organizations: (a) Coordinate effort to obtain a United Nations Commissioner for Human Rights. (b) Promote human rights in U.N. specialized agencies. (c) Strengthen independence and increase resources of United Nations and Inter-American Human Rights Commission. (d) Promote creation of African Human Rights Commission. III. Competing Interests: National Security Considerations: A. The national security interests of the U.S. may be affected by decisions to promote human rights where the end result is less identification with a country engaged in human rights violations. 1. Close identification with a repressive regime during this period also may risk longer term alienation of U.S. from the people of that country and any following government identified with democratic principles and human rights. B. US-Soviet de´tente: 1. The overriding importance of nuclear arms control to both the Soviet Union and the United States, as well as the human rights related goal of avoiding nuclear war would argue against linking this issue to specific human rights improvements. 2. A similar argument would not hold in relation to other aspects of de´tente, such as improved economic relations, expansion of trade and commerce, or non-contentious relations. Linkage in these areas, privately applied, could be feasible and fruitful. C. Friendly states and allies: 1. Emphasizing human rights concerns with such states in few instances could produce significant impacts on U.S. national security concerns. In fact, the failure to demonstrate those concerns in the cases of Greece and Spain may have produced a threat to maintenance of U.S. military bases in those countries. 2. Emphasizing those concerns with friendly states and allies who are not human rights violators (Western Europe) could promote greater cooperation and joint action in this area.
