In cases where the customs appraiser is not satisfied as to the valuation entered and has
not available data upon which he can base a valuation, he will find it necessary to cause
an investigation to be made abroad to ascertain these data. For the purpose of this
instruction, these will be divided into ordinary “market value” and “cost-of-production”
investigations, numbered 1 and 2 herein. To make such investigations, the United
States Treasury Department has assigned a number of customs attachés to foreign
posts. These customs attachés in the foreign field are the authorized representatives of
the Secretary of the Treasury and function as instrumentalities of the appraising
operation, and make particular investigations upon the request of the customs
authorities of the United States Treasury and in connection with the admission of goods
which have been entered at the United States customs. These officials also make
original investigations of “market” value when they have any reason to believe, from
information lodged with them or from their own observations, that undervaluation
exists in any particular instance or industry. If such an inquiry should extend to cost of
production, it will be governed by the special instructions from the Treasury
Department referred to herein.
An extract from a memorandum submitted by the Treasury Department on this subject
follows: “In making these investigations, the customs attachés of the United States
Treasury Department abroad are always disposed to give to manufacturers and shippers
the fullest information as to correct invoicing of their merchandise or anything else
about which they may make inquiry or request assistance.”
1. The customs attachés abroad, when it is necessary to investigate the foreign value or
export value of certain goods, customarily call upon the firm which has made the
shipment and request data as to sales price for home consumption and/or exportation to
the United States. In the course of this investigation it is usually necessary to request
the shipper to exhibit his records of other sales of the same or similar goods on
approximately the date when the consignment in question was exported. Such records
tend to establish the actual foreign value or export value at the time of exportation,
which is the valuation prescribed by the Tariff Act of 1922 as the valuation to be
considered in the application of the tariff. (Sec. 402–b and c).
A foreign shipper presumably would not refuse to make available to the customs
attaché the above-mentioned information unless he misunderstood the terms of the
Tariff Act of 1922. It may be emphasized here that in the “market value” investigation
the Customs Attaché does not usually request data as to the cost of production; he
merely requests the exhibition of documentary evidence that the valuation declared in a
particular consular invoice upon a shipment of goods to the United States is not lower
than upon sales in the exporting country for home consumption or for export to the
United States. In case the valuation declared by the shipper with respect to the
shipment to the United States has been made in good faith, there would seem to be no
