Romania 617 pursue a somewhat independent foreign policy, they are most repressive at home. Their lack of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms follows a Stalinist pattern. Although acknowledging Romania’s independent stand on some foreign policy issues, I, nevertheless, pointed out aspects of Romania’s shortcomings with respect to human rights in the course of one of my interventions at the Belgrade meeting. It is interesting that the Romanians did not reply to this criticism. But it is also interesting to note that at no point did they attempt to defend the manifold shortcomings of the Soviet Union in the human rights area. II. HUMAN CONTACTS & HUMANITARIAN PROVISIONS With respect to the humanitarian provisions of the Final Act (Basket III), Romania has a mixed record of compliance. The Romanians have permitted substantial emigration (several hundred thousands) of Jews from Romania since World War II. However, during the period of April 1977 to March 1978, emigrants declined 14% from the comparable period of the preceeding year (1559–1345). There are only 50,000 Jews remaining in Romania and the government says those still there are largely old, infirm and unwilling to leave. Jewish sources say that the decline is due to formidable bureaucratic obstacles making it extremely difficult for Jews and, for that matter, anyone else to emigrate. The Chief Rabbi of Romania, Rabbi Rosen, asserts that Romanian Jews are permitted a reasonable degree of freedom to exercise their religious beliefs. Without in any way denigrating Rabbi Rosen, a distinguished clergyman and fine humanitarian, there is substantial evidence to the contrary. The great exodus of Jews proves that there was and is no future for them in Romania. Moreover, Baptists have provided convincing documentation of religious persecution of a sweeping character, and the same is true of other Christian denominations. A substantial Hungarian minority group likewise has publicized through Western media large-scale ethnic repression. The principal source for this information is surprisingly a prominent leader of the Romanian Communist Party, albeit of Hungarian origin. Romania has the highest unsettled number of binational marriage cases with the U.S. of any country in Eastern Europe, even though there has been some reduction in those outstanding during 1977 as contrasted with 1976 (71 to 54). Settlement of family reunification cases with the United States has improved somewhat in the last year (21% increase over 1976), but Romanian procedures on emigration cases generally have not improved as a result of CSCE. I would believe it entirely appropriate that the President raise these human rights issues with President Ceausescu, both on the merits and in light of Romania’s professions of fidelity to the Helsinki Final Act.
