National Security Policy 917 Mr. Gray; that is, a Soviet attack on our rataliatory capability followed by an ultimatum to surrender or suffer attack on population centers. He felt the whole idea of a war-­game needed more study and that it would be better not to have such a game until further study was com­ pleted. He wondered how much time would be required to conduct the war-­game. Mr. Gray said two successive days would probably be required for the senior participants in the game. All preparations would be made in advance and would not involve the senior participants. The two days would allow for two different assumed situations, one to be covered each day. The President, Mr. Gray continued, had always requested Cabinet Members to be available for participation in OPERATION ALERT, but many members had not found participation possible. If the President decided to have a war-­game, he would have to request the senior participants to devote two days to the exercise. Mr. Patterson pointed out that Secretaries Herter and Mitchell had participated in the last OPERATION ALERT. Mr. Patterson also thought that a better name than war-­geme should be applied to the exercise. Mr. Gray said he understood the Joint Chiefs of Staff had partic­ ipated in OPERATION ALERT largely on the logistic side. General White said the Joint Chiefs of Staff, however, had participated in other alert exercises. One such exercise, just completed, had involved the Secretary of Defense and the unified commanders. Secretary Douglas felt that a clearer statement of the questions to be decided in connection with relocation was needed. There were perhaps good reasons for conducting a war-­game, but he felt a more detailed proposal was required before the Defense view on the subject could be formulated. Secretary Dillion said his feelings were similar to those of Secretary Douglas. Mr. Gray asked whether it was not the consensus of the Council that the notion of a war-­game to test national security policy-­making in a crisis has possibilities, but that the Council wants further information before proceeding. Mr. Allen, referring to the paper on war-­gaming, asked what “free­ dom of the game” meant? General White said he assumed this phrase referred to whether or not the game was “canned”. Mr. Gray confirmed General White’s view. General White said he wished to make two addi­ tional points. First, the Joint Chiefs of Staff would like to participate in any military situation assumed as part of the war-­game; and secondly, war-­gaming would involve a great many people and a great deal of time. Secretary Dillon said State would have problems as to time and person­ nel if political decisions were involved in the war-­game. Mr. Gray said the war-­gaming proposal should be discussed further in the Planning Board. He wished to point out, however, that the war-­gaming proposal
