Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1041
regard proposing 15 percent volume changes did not help, and propos-
ing a smaller volume change would not be any better.
Throw-­Weight Information
17. Brooks said he would like to make a personal proposal. The 
Soviet side objected to saying whether the throw-­weight of the SS–N–
18 was based on tests with seven or three warheads. The Soviet side 
had, however, asked a similar question about Poseidon. The Soviet side 
also objected to giving dates on which maximum throw-­weight was 
demonstrated.
18. Brooks could agree not to pursue the question on the SS–N–18, 
if the Soviet side agreed not to pursue the question on the Poseidon. In 
addition, with respect to the dates on which throw-­weight was demon-
strated, the U.S. side was principally concerned with three missiles. If 
the Soviet side agreed to provide dates of flight tests for those three, 
Brooks would agree, on an ad ref basis, to drop the request for the other 
dates.
19. Obukhov said that the Soviet side was not at all happy about 
exchanging data on past flight tests. Soviet experts believed the U.S. 
side sought this data to allow “calibration” of U.S. national technical 
means. Obukhov recalled that Brooks had objected to the Soviet sug-
gestion that the U.S. side be compelled to explain how it used NTM to 
select sites for mandatory SSI. Obukhov had been sympathetic to U.S. 
concerns. The Soviet reluctance to provide information was based on 
similar logic. The Soviet side did not see any reason why it should help 
improve U.S. national technical means.
20. Nonetheless, Obukhov continued, he would report Brooks’ pro-
posal to Moscow. It would help if Brooks could tell him the three mis-
siles involved. Brooks said he would consider this question. Obukhov, 
later in the conversation, stressed his view that calibrating NTM for 
throw-­weight would open a Pandora’s box and would be difficult for 
the Soviet side to accept.
CFE Meetings in Washington
21. Brooks said he was not planning to attend upcoming CFE dis-
cussions, despite suggestions from Moscow that START would also 
be discussed. The U.S. side was not planning to discuss START. The 
best thing that could happen for START would be to get CFE cleared 
up. Obukhov said he also would not attend, but that Ambassador 
Kvitsinsky would represent the Soviet foreign ministry. Obukhov had 
prepared general talking points on START but did not expect the sub-
ject to be discussed in detail.
