884 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 a meeting with some Iranians. As they said to you, they are hesitant about going to Iran themselves, although it has to be recognized that this may be the only realistic way to arrange direct contact. We will be working out separately possible ways for them to conduct their own appeals and probes for possible contact which might open the door to the hostages being turned over to their families. Congressional Initiative. We know that some Iranians have been interested for some time in the possibility of a meeting involving members of our Congress and the Iranian parliament. We could approach members whom we know interest the Iranians and encourage them to try to arrange such a meeting. We understand that Senators Stevenson and Bellmon11 have been considering the idea, and they might be an appropriate nucleus for a small group. We would have to tell them that we would publicly distance ourselves from their effort to increase the likelihood of its acceptability in Tehran and its independence of the Executive. Their first objective might be to arrange a meeting with counterparts simply to explore how issues between Iran and the United States might be worked out. They might go prepared to agree—in the context of an understanding on a scenario for the release of the hostages—that hearings would be held in the U.S. examining Iran’s grievances and past U.S. involvement in Iran. From our perspective, it would be more desirable for them to trade the commitment to hearings for release of the hostages than to agree that the report on the hearings would be issued concurrent with the release.12 The advantage of both the Congressional and the hostage family initiatives is that both provide independent mechanisms for dealing with the hostage situation which would be available should Khomeini decide the time is right for release. They could be complemented by exchanges between our two governments to the extent that would be necessary to lend credibility to these non-Executive initiatives and to provide a channel for working out arrangements for such steps as unfreezing blocked assets. A Proposed Scenario We have divided our proposed scenario, somewhat arbitrarily, into three steps. The further approaches under Step #1—some of which have already begun at your direction—would be taken at an early date, once it becomes more probable that the formation of a new government is underway. This is a stage of probing and exploration designed to 11 Senator Adlai Stevenson III (D–Illinois) and Senator Henry L. Bellmon (R– Oklahoma) 12 Carter wrote in the left margin beside this paragraph: “All of this should be pursued aggressively & without delay.”
