132  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
ETA–53.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by Joseph Carwell of the 
Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs1

Washington, September 30, 1960.
SUBJECT
Meeting on Central American Regional Bank
PARTICIPANTS:
Dr. Lugo Marenco, Minister of Economy (Nicaragua)
Lic. Jorge Bueso Arias, Minister of Economy (Honduras)
Lic. Roberto Ramirez, President, Central Bank of Honduras
Dr. Pedro A. Delgado, Acting Minister of Economy (El Salvador)
Dr. Alberto Fuentes Mohr, Special Representative, Minister of Economy (Guatemala)
Ing. Mario Dalponte, Economic Counselor, Embassy of El Salvador
Dr. Alfonso Rochac, Executive Director, BID
Ing. Alfredo Hernandez, BID
Lic. Manuel Benfeldt, Minister of Finance (Guatemala)
Department of State:
ARA-Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann; ARA-Mr. Milton Barall;
REA-Mr. Alex Rosenson; OAP-Mr. Joseph Carwell
Assistant Secretary Mann opened the meeting with the statement 
that it is his hope that the United States Government will be able to 
make available to the proposed Bank $10 million ($5 million from 
the Development Loan Fund and $5 million from the International 
Cooperation Administration), and that he understood that ICA might 
be willing to grant $2 million (non-­interest bearing) cash in the present 
fiscal year, as part of the “capitalization” of the Bank. A Presidential 
determination for the additional $3 million for the following year 
would be required. Mr. Mann underscored the fact he could not speak 
for the DLF and ICA, even less for the Congress of the United States, 
and that present plans must be considered to be tentative.
Mr. Mann pointed out that regarding the DLF portion of the 
finances, there are strong policy grounds for not paying out money in 
advance of actual need, and that Congress has been critical of DLF for 
channelling too much money through development banks rather than 
directly. ICA has more flexibility in this regard. Whether the additional 
$3 million financing Aram ICA will be in the form of a loan or grant, is 
uncertain. However, Mr. Mann stated, he will try to persuade ICA that 
it be in the form of a grant.
Mr. Delgado raised the question as to whether it was possible for the 
United States to increase its contribution to the Bank above $10 million. 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 813.14/9–3060. Confidential. Drafted 
on October 6.
