First Responses
91
time. The most critical items include military equipment and spares,
spare parts for civilian aircraft, turbine compressors for gas pipelines,
pumps, drilling rigs, power generating equipment, and telecommunica-
tions equipment. How long it would take for an embargo on these
items to have some effect would depend in part on inventories in
Iran. While we do not have specific information on inventories, recent
trading patterns would suggest that stocks are extremely low. Stocks
of kerosene, in short supply earlier this year, have been rebuilt, and
kerosene should not be a problem as long as the oil refineries are kept
operating. [portion marking not declassified]
Collective Embargo by the West
A collective ban on exports to Iran is only a remote possibility as
long as Iranian oil continues to flow. Given their heavy dependence
on Iranian oil and worsening domestic economic conditions, Japan,
Western Europe, and major LDCs such as Brazil would oppose actions
that could lead to a complete oil cutoff. Collective action by even a
few countries would probably prove difficult as illustrated by the in-
ability of the United States to get support for its trade embargo against
Cuba. [portion marking not declassified]
Upon extreme Iranan provocation—a cutoff of oil exports or the
killing of US Embassy hostages—a collective export embargo might
be feasible. Such action, if rigidly enforced, would affect some three-
fourths of total Iranian imports, including over 50 percent of all food
imports and most manufactured and industrial imports. The problems
associated with controlling a US embargo would also apply in the case
of a collective embargo. Although the USSR and other suppliers, mostly
less developed countries, would be unable to replace all the embargoed
trade, they could supply most essential imports. Replacement of spare
parts for Iranian industry, which was developed largely with West-
ern equipment, would be especially difficult. [portion marking not
declassified]
Naval Blockade
An effective naval blockade of Iran would have the most serious
disruptive effects on the economy. The international support of a block-
ade would depend upon whether it was seen as an unprovoked US
unilateral action or as a countermeasure to extreme Iranian measures.
Barring further Iranian provocations, such action would probably be
vigorously opposed by the major foreign oil importers. If employed
as a countermeasure, it would receive more support in the West. [portion
marking not declassified]
History has shown that efforts to interdict a nation’s lines of com-
munications on a sustained basis are rarely completely successful.
