National Security Policy  1075
258.	 Special National Intelligence Estimate1
SNIE 100–6–60	
Washington, August 9, 1960
PROBABLE REACTIONS TO U.S. RECONNAISSANCE 
SATELLITE PROGRAMS
THE PROBLEM
To estimate Soviet reactions to US launchings of earth satellites 
with military reconnaissance capabilities,2 and other world reactions to 
these launchings.3
THE ESTIMATE
I. INTRODUCTION
1. Man’s excursion into outer space presents many new problems, 
and adds a new dimension to some old ones. The possibility of mili­
tary reconnaissance conducted from orbiting space vehicles is one of 
these problems, which is now coming to the fore because the US has an 
urgent requirement for photographic and electronic reconnaissance of 
the Soviet Union and other denied areas.
2. The Soviets are aware of this requirement from the U–2 case 
and other US air reconnaissance. They have been cognizant of offi­
cial American interest in reconnaissance satellite systems since 1948, 
and have noted recent US disclosures of active developmental pro­
grams leading toward operational reconnaissance satellites within a 
few years. They probably realize that satellite systems are not likely 
in the near term to produce the quality of information that can be 
obtained by other means. However, they almost certainly do assume 
that satellite reconnaissance has considerable potential for intelli­
gence collection.
II. PROBABLE SOVIET COURSES OF ACTION
3. There is no doubt that the Soviets do not want the US to orbit 
military reconnaissance vehicles over the USSR. The Soviet press and 
1 Source: “Probable Reactions to U.S. Reconnaissance Satellite Programs.” Secret. 
5 pp. DOS, INR–NIE Files.
2 This estimate is concerned primarily with photographic reconnaissance systems, 
although under certain circumstances it would also apply to infrared early-­warning or 
elint vehicles, particularly if the US were to announce that such satellites were engaged 
in reconnaissance activity. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 It is emphasized that this estimate deals only with foreign reactions to US launch­
ing of reconnaissance satellites; it does not consider various other implications of such a 
program. [Footnote is in the original.]
