International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1129 work. The Embassy asks: “Will men assist women in the larger rice fields, or will already overburdened women cultivators simply face a much heavier burden?” “What will be the effects on social, family structure?” These thoughtful proposals show that many Embassies have developed a variety of diplomatic and practical strategies for encouraging the advancement of women. Although the major responsibility for carrying out some of the proposals rests ultimately in Washington, where coordination with USICA, Peace Corps and AID is already underway, Embassies and other posts clearly have a role to play. The issue of women’s rights and status is an integral part of the human rights equation. As such, it is integral to US foreign policy. The Copenhagen Conference lends new urgency and relevance to the US role. Vance 337. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs (Pickering) to Secretary of State Muskie1 Washington, May 19, 1980 SUBJECT Release of Global 2000 Study The Global 2000 Study, which the Council on Environmental Quality and State jointly carried out at the request of President Carter, is now being printed. (A description of the study and principal findings is attached.) We anticipate that the study will be ready for release in July. Still unknown, however, is the degree of publicity the White House might wish to accord it—and also the timing of the public release—since the nature and severity of the population, resources and environmental problems the study identifies may be viewed as more “bad news” at the wrong time. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Under Secretaries of State for International Security Affairs—Files of Lucy W. Benson and Matthew Nimetz: Chronological Files, Human Rights Country Files, Security Assistance Country and Subject Files, 1977–1980, Lot 81D321, Box 6, Matthew Nimetz May 1980 Chron. Unclassified. Sent through Nimetz. Drafted by Long on May 16. There is no indication that Muskie saw the memorandum.
