802  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
HO–2.	
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Middle 
American Affairs (Wieland) to the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow)1
Washington, March 26, 1958.
SUBJECT 
Political Situation in Honduras
I am deeply concerned over the outlook for continued political stability 
in Honduras. As you know, President Villeda Morales came to power 
largely on the strength of a liberal campaign of promises verging on the 
Tammany type. As yet, however, he has accomplished virtually noth-
ing, for lack of economic means.
It would be a severe blow to United States interests if the present 
Honduran government were to collapse. While it is impossible to pre-
dict what sort of government would emerge from such a collapse, it is 
unlikely that it would provide as favorable an atmosphere for the solu-
tion of the country’s fundamental problems or adopt as friendly a policy 
toward the U.S. as now prevails. A period of political chaos might also 
follow with adverse repercussions in the neighboring countries. The 
present Villeda government, while far from perfect, is sincerely striving 
to establish representative democracy in Honduras and solve the coun-
try’s basic problems. Villeda is very friendly to the United States. He has 
shown a keen awareness of the dangers of the communist movement in 
Honduras and he has taken steps to combat it. Coming into office as a 
result of honest popular elections, he symbolizes the trend toward the 
establishment of democratic government which has been noted in other 
parts of Latin America. We would like to see him succeed.
Unfortunately there are signs of political trouble ahead for Villeda. 
Many of those who supported him in the belief that he would do some-
thing for them are beginning to grow restless. Our Ambassador in 
Tegucigalpa2 reports a growing feeling that Villeda will not remain in 
office through this year.
As Villeda’s popularity declines, his opposition can be expected to 
become more active. The communists, who had been quiet for several 
months, in February stepped up their activities in the labor field and suc-
ceeded in forming a communist-­dominated federation of trade unions 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 61 D 110, “Briefing Materials—
Honduras—1958.” Confidential. Drafted by John L. Gawf of the Office of Middle 
American Affairs.
2 Whiting Willauer was Ambassador to Honduras until March 24, 1958. Robert 
Newbegin was appointed Ambassador on March 26 and presented his credentials in 
Tegucigalpa on April 21.
