826 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III and V of the PRM response. The LDCs being considered here are two types of Sam’s7 “regional influentials”—the oil rich (Saudi Arabia) and the industrialized (Brazil). The concern is how to “bring them into the system” so that they will cooperate when so many US policies are presently creating problems with many of them (proliferation, human rights, arms sales, trade protectionism, etc.). While some group members carried this particular concern to extremes, all recognized the validity of the policy problem posed. Since State (IO) let us down sadly on a paper for this problem, the Group can do no better than to call for a specific type of follow-on study (for 8–12 countries) if the President is concerned enough about the problem to approve further review. As described on page 45 of the PRM response, a major focus of the country studies would be how these “local Leviathans” can be better integrated into existing and new regional and international institutions. Issue #3—The “Absolute Poverty” Problem and the Concept of Fulfilling Basic Human Needs There have been three major ways of trying to undercut placing an option before the President which would allow him to support a “significant increase” in US efforts and resources consonant with a BHN strategy, despite manifest agreement by all working group members that, at the least, steady movement in the BHN direction was highly desirable. The first attempt to undercut the option takes the form (Bergsten, Boeker, etc.) of claiming this really isn’t an issue (“we’re all for it—its a false issue”) and at the same time requesting that no figures be discussed and no new mechanisms to administer such a program be discussed (“this problem can easily be handled incrementally”). My personal view, elaborated in Appendix Paper #6, is that incremental moves and no new institutions will quite probably lead to another Alliance for Progress fiasco in the BHN area. The second attempt to undercut the option is to focus on the obvious opposition which an emphasis on the approach will initially evoke from LDC elite groups which are doing just fine the way things are. Sometimes the economic “incrementalists” use this line because they do not want any major shifts in emphasis in present US policies; sometimes the political analysts (CIA) press it because their concern is that we should respond more to the demands of LDC governing groups. And BHN surely is not at the head of any list of LDC demands. The final attempt to undercut the BHN approach has come singularly from Ted Van Dyk. It takes the form of argument that there should 7 Possibly Samuel Huntington of the NSC Staff.
