Comprehensive Test Ban
351
151.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 23, 1977
SUBJECT
SALT, CTB, Indian Ocean, Africa, Middle East, Belgrade Conference, Vietnam,
Fukuda Visit, Claims/Assets, Exchange Program
PARTICIPANTS
People’s Republic of China
Ambassador Huang Chen
Counselor Tsien Ta-yung
Third Secretary Hsu Shang-wei
United States
The Secretary
Richard Holbrooke, EA
Harry E.T. Thayer, EA/PRCM (Notetaker)
Michel Oksenberg, NSC
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
CTB
The Secretary said that another subject for discussion would be the
issue of a comprehensive test ban. We would discuss the possibility of
negotiating for a ban on all tests of nuclear weapons for a limited pe-
riod. As the President had indicated to Huang,2 this is an issue between
the Soviets and ourselves; but we would hope that some time in the fu-
ture other nations would join such an agreement.
The Secretary said he expected that a number of issues would be
raised in this connection, such as peaceful nuclear explosions being
permitted under this test ban. Second, what kind of verification would
be required under such an agreement? Third, whether or not the So-
viets are prepared to enter such an agreement if it is only a bilateral one.
The Secretary said that, at this point, we have no idea as to how the dis-
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, NODIS Memcons, 1977. Secret; Nodis.
Drafted by Thayer; and approved in S on April 5. The memorandum is printed in full For-
eign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIII, China, Document 21.
2 On February 8, Carter told Huang Chen “We have offered the Soviet Union a com-
prehensive test ban treaty. This would be a bilateral agreement with the Soviets. If it can
be worked out, then perhaps others such as China or France can consider joining in some
form, but at the present time this is just an effort with the USSR. At the same time we will
maintain our equivalent strength and will keep the Chinese Government informed.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Far East, Box 55, Oksenberg
Policy Process, 10/76–4/77) The conversation is printed in full in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XIII, China, Document 5.
