376 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 106. Memorandum of Conversation1 Jidda, undated Participants Crown Prince Fahd bin Abd al-Aziz Al-Saud John C. West, American Ambassador SUMMARY Crown Prince Fahd, in a two hour late night session at his Jidda home on October 24, outlined in detail the actions which he and SAG are taking to provide all-out support for President Carter’s efforts to implement the Camp David accords. Actions taken or underway include: (1) A message of “strong” support to Sadat including assurances of continued economic and political support. Specific assurances include commitment to $108 million in aid for purchase of military vehicles and a “set aside” of $350 million as down payment on purchase of F–5s. On political side, Fahd has guaranteed that Egypt will not be embarrassed at Baghdad Summit;2 (2) A message to King Hussein urging him to support the Camp David accords by at least encouraging Palestinians on the West Bank to join the process; (3) In communication with Iraq, making plain that the Saudis will not tolerate any action at Baghdad designed to embarrass or isolate Egypt; (4) To insure that Baghdad Summit does not embarrass Egypt, a “time bomb” understanding with YAR to raise the abortive October 15 coup3 as issue with consequent embarrassment to Libya and Iraq; (5) Visit by FonMin Saud to each of Gulf states to make Saudi position clear and secure support therefore. Further, the Crown Prince said he was summoning Yasser Arafat to Saudi Arabia and proposed to tell him in clear, unmistakable terms: (1) that Saudi Arabia is supporting the Camp David accords and strongly recommends that the PLO do likewise; (2) that if the PLO is truly the leader of the Palestinians, its leadership can be affirmed and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 67, Saudi Arabia: 6–12/78. Secret; Nodis. The memorandum of conversation was found attached to an undated covering memorandum from Vance to Carter in which Vance observed that Fahd’s comments “appear to represent a real breakthrough in our effort to obtain Saudi support for Camp David.” At the bottom of the covering memorandum, Brzezinski added the handwritten notation, “To save time, see marked passages on pp. 6–7.” At the top of the covering memorandum, Carter wrote, “Excellent! J.” Carter extensively underlined the first page of the memorandum of conversation. 2 See footnote 7, Document 91. 3 On October 15, a coup attempt, launched against the government of Yemen Arab Republic President Lt. Col. Ali Abdullah Saleh, was crushed by the YAR armed forces. (“North Yemen Crushes Revolt,” Chicago Tribune, October 16, 1978, p. C16)
