Romania
555
appreciation for his willingness to listen and for frank responses, show-
ing that he was thinking seriously about the problem.
9. Comment: Romanians clearly saw Counselor’s visit as Bucharest
opener for process leading up to Ceausescu’s visit in the spring, and
Patan’s upcoming trip will be opener in U.S. just as clearly, multi-year
MFN review will be the repeat the central issue in preparing successful
Presidential visit. Macovescu’s frank references to Transylvania also
suggest political context in which Romanians see these matters, and
Department may wish to consider next steps in U.S.-Hungarian
relations in this context as well as broader Soviet-EE framework.
10. As Ambassador discussed with Counselor, we feel it important
to keep bearing in mind our own interests—both political and commer-
cial—in achieving a more solid long term relationship with Romania.
Patan’s visit should be used to further the process of helping GOR to
understand the context in which multi-year MFN might become possi-
ble. In fact the pre-Ceausescu visit period needs to be thought of in
terms of how we can best make use of the Romanian push for a revised
MFN status.
Barnes
186.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 15, 1977
SUBJECT
A Presidential Letter for Romanian President Ceausescu
Ambassador Rudolph Aggrey, the new US envoy to Romania, will
be leaving shortly to take up his post in Bucharest. I think it would be
appropriate when he presents his credentials also to deliver a letter
from you to Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu.2
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nicolae Ceau-
sescu, 2/77–12/78. Confidential. Sent for action.
2 Aggrey suggested the letter during a meeting on November 11 with Aaron. King
edited a Department of State version and forwarded it to Brzezinski on November 14.
Aaron wrote on King’s memorandum to Brzezinski: “ZB—I think this is worth doing
so that we have our channel.” Brzezinski approved the recommendation. (Ibid.)
