1955  223
I answer PRC allegations that our Treaty with the GRC and the accompa­
nying exchange of notes, together with our supply and equipment to the 
GRC, simply proves that we are approving and supporting the military 
activities of the GRC against the mainland? Also what do I say when the 
PRC quotes GRC official statements in questioning whether the GRC has 
in fact accepted the principle of non-recourse to force with respect to the 
mainland? Perhaps there are easy answers to these questions, but I must 
confess that I do not know what they are.
When this entire question comes up, I believe we should antici­
pate the possibility of PRC proposing to us a joint declaration perhaps 
something along the lines of Chou’s “five principles” or perhaps even 
Article I of our Treaty with the GRC which would not in the slightest 
affect their “right” to use force to “liberate” Taiwan as long as they treat 
it as an internal matter. If, as I assume, we reject any joint declaration, 
what are we proposing in its stead? Do we want a general unilateral 
declaration on renunciation of force so worded as also to specifically 
apply to the Formosa situation, and, if so, are we not asking for some­
thing which the GRC would refuse to do? Or rather than a renunciation 
of force, are we looking for a de facto cease fire between the PRC and 
GRC? If so, this seems to be outside the scope of these talks as clearly 
something that directly involves the GRC.
All the foregoing I realize is very confused as it simply reflects my 
very confused thinking which I am sharing out loud with you and know 
that you will treat it as such. I will appreciate all the thoughts you can send 
me, however preliminary they may be, as I would very much like to have 
this thought through clearly in my own mind before I come up against it. 
I am sorry that there was not sufficient time while I was in Washington 
really to talk these things through. I hope that you will have an opportu­
nity thoroughly to do so with the Secretary and Walter Robertson.
Give Walter my best and tell him I am glad to know that he is back 
on the job.
I would appreciate your having someone stick into an envelope 
for us:
a. The Sino-Soviet Treaty,
b. Something containing Chou’s “five principles”,
c. DRF study on the Bandung Conference, including the Chou 
En-lai speech,
d. Something giving quotations by Chinese Communist leaders on 
the liberation of Taiwan (We have DRF study No. 6858, “Chinese Com­
munist Views on Taiwan”, which is primarily historical, and
e. Indochina Armistice Agreement.
With kindest regards.
Sincerely,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
