Human Rights
385
—Congress has expressly requested that information published
by international non-governmental organizations be included in the
report.
—The Department of State will not distribute these reports to the
press or public or otherwise draw attention to them. However, they
will be made a matter of public record by the Congress and we expect
they will receive attention in the press.
110.
Memorandum From Michael Armacost and Michel
Oksenberg of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Agenda for Human Rights Meeting
You have agreed to meet with several of us on Tuesday, January
31, from 6:30 p.m. until 7:30 p.m. on human rights in the Situation
Room.2 We suggest that the task of the meeting is to discuss the mecha-
nisms through which our human rights policy can be best imple-
mented. Our assumption is that the mechanisms now in place can be
improved. In order to have a focused discussion, we propose that we
concentrate on the following concrete agenda items:
1. Can we establish clearer priorities in our pursuit of human
rights as between (a) protecting the integrity of the individual; (b) im-
proving economic justice; and (c) proselytizing on behalf of our polit-
ical ideals?
2. Through what procedures can we best define practicable and re-
alistic human rights objectives in particular countries?
3. How can we implement our human rights approach in a way
which relies less on punitive sanctions and more on positive
inducements?
4. Are we in fact obliged by the language of Congressional statutes
to abstain or oppose loans by IFIs or regional banks to the “trouble-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1978. Confidential. Sent for action.
Copies were sent to Tuchman, Erb, King, Quandt, and Thornton.
2 See footnote 8, Document 100. No record of this meeting has been found.
