896  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
program by current taxes and not by deficit financing. The result is 
that we must cut off every unnecessary excrescence. He said he is 
fighting to get the budget below $80 billion, which is an enormous 
figure in his judgment, and he is the first President to have stressed 
economy in recent years. He said he knows that every man in Defense 
is concerned regarding our security and safety. Someone must how­
ever look at the Defense establishment afresh and restudy its needs, 
since changes in technology change the needs of defense. He felt we 
are putting too much money in certain things—particularly the tra­
ditional things—and are not giving tough enough restudy aimed at 
eliminating everything not needed. Some increases are inevitable. For 
example, there is an increase of $70 million this year in retired pay. 
A number of these things add up very quickly. Now the question is 
how we do what needs to be done within a pattern that will keep our 
economy healthy and expanding.
The President reiterated that he felt we should go to the 630,000 
man National Guard and Reserve force. We should get what we need 
for the job these forces do. He recognized that the Congress might over­
ride him, and recalled that they had overridden him as Chief of Staff in 
providing retired pay for National Guard and Reserve inactive service. 
Admiral Burke asked if there is any way to get the states to pick up 
more of the cost of National Guard forces, and General Lemnitzer said 
he saw no hope of this. The President said he wanted to have what­
ever meetings are needed to find a program in which all would believe. 
Then he thought all should stand and present this to the people, to the 
Congress, etc. with unity. Each staff must accept this as the view of its 
own Chief. As to General Taylor’s opposition to his policies, he was 
confident that Taylor would not get enough support to override him. 
He reiterated that he thinks that the Chiefs must look for every excres­
cence. He said he is afraid of some of the things we are doing in science, 
devoting resources to many unnecessary things. He said that whenever 
the Chiefs want to see him they could do so, and that he had in mind to 
see them at least once a month. He asked them to continue to work on 
what they think is right, taking account of the fact that a sound econ­
omy and a sound defense are inseparable.
He repeated that he did not favor the 700,000 man program 
for the National Guard and the Reserves. General Lemnitzer said 
that one problem in the reduction is that it looks like an arbitrary 
10% cut. The President commented that the other services are cut­
ting personnel through a wringer process and that this reflects the 
results of advances in technology that come from our outlays on sci­
ence. General Lemnitzer said he has taken a hard look at personnel, 
which is now stretched to the breaking point, with 40% of the people
