848 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI before departing for Moscow that we reject the proposal, although the door is left ajar for some simplification of these provisions. 7. The IC people here have been the most strongly opposed to any simplification of the NDM regime. One aspect of the Soviet proposal is that facilities related to NDMs which are not limited numerically—i.e., silo-­based ICBMs and SLBMs—­would be subject to suspect-­site inspections. Thus we could drop by periodically and satisfy ourselves that these facilities were not being used illegally to produce or store non-­ deployed mobile ICBMs. This sounds reasonable to me and some others here, but the IC fears it would “dilute” the list. Another fear is that the sudden (and in my view unwise) penchant for numerical reciprocity in everything would force us to expand the U.S. list of facilities subject to SSI, which would be a hardship for us. 8. My understanding of the genesis of the relevant parts of the U.S. portion is that they were a bone thrown to OSD when we dropped numerical limits on silo-­based ICBMs and SLBMs and that there was little substantive justification. As you know, I have advocated simplifying our position on NDMs for years. In the wake of our rejection of the Z package, there is some feeling here that the solution lies in getting the Soviets to buy our position by agreeing to some sort of “management regime” for ALCMs. I believe this would be moving in the wrong direction—­adding additional unnecessary complications when what is needed is simplification. I suggest a solution along the following lines: — for non-­deployed mobile ICBMs no change. — for non-­deployed mobile launchers of ICBMs, no change except drop tagging. — for non-­deployed silo-­based ICBMs and SLBMs: – declare production, storage, repair, etc. facilities. Make these subject to mandatory SSI, but under a separate (small) quota from other facilities on the list. – drop declarations of the numbers of these missiles. – drop transit notifications for these missiles. — for long-­range nuclear ALCMs, recognize that these are subject to (non-­numerical) constraints in the treaty and accept a provision which makes clear when an ALCM becomes subject to treaty constraints in Article VI—­i.e., when it leaves a production facility. In exchange for all the above, the Soviets would drop all provisions on non-­deployed ALCMs other than those locational restrictions already agreed in principle. 9. This subject has major implications for several aspects of the treaty and deserves careful attention in Washington. Kangas
