Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1003
Tab II
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council5
Washington, February 4, 1991
DOWNLOADING ISSUES
I.  Issue:
The US recently proposed to grandfather the downloading of both 
the SS–N–18 and the Minuteman III missiles, but to ban further down-
loading (see attached talking points). The Soviets rejected this US pro-
posal. In preparation for the upcoming Bartholomew-Obukov meetings 
in Geneva, the US should review its downloading position.
II.  Background on Downloading:
The US initially proposed downloading primarily to permit the 
deployment of MM IIIs with one RV, thereby allowing the US to retain a 
larger silo-­based ICBM force in START I. The right to download SLBMs 
also is of interest in the context of a hedge against a possible 3000–4000 
accountable warhead START II limit.
The USAF currently plans to download Minuteman III missiles by 
1 or 2 warheads each on 300 missiles at two bases. A right to download 
an aggregate of 600 RVs would protect this Minuteman option.
The Navy would require an aggregate of at least 864 RVs to protect 
future SLBM downloading requirements, assuming that downloading 
provisions would allow the downloading of the current two types of 
missiles on the Trident submarines or that the D–5 would be backfitted 
to all submarines.
Taken together, these MM III and SLBM options would require the 
right to download 2 RVs from each of 2 or 3 types of missiles, within an 
aggregate limit of about 1500 downloaded RVs.
The Soviets, after an initial resistance to downloading, announced 
that the SS–N–18 should now count at 3 RVs instead of 7 RVs per mis-
sile (a difference of 896 RVs), and propose to allow downloading of an 
aggregate of 1250 warheads on 2 additional types of missiles.
In order to use this large aggregate limit effectively, the Soviets 
would probably seek to download their SS–N–20 and SS–24 missiles by 
at least 5 RVs each. A right to download an aggregate of 1060 RVs (in 
addition to the SS–N–18) would probably be required to satisfy Soviet 
5 Secret.
