September 18–December 16, 1978
235
VANCE: The answer to the latter question is—Yes. The question of
settlements was not discussed.
MAJALI: The biggest issue is whether the borders would include
the Israeli settlements and whether the settlers would vote.
VANCE: I assume they would vote but I must get a clarification on
this.
MAJALI: How would the government be financed and who would
sponsor elections?
VANCE: Regarding elections—Israel, Egypt, Jordan and the Pales-
tinians would sponsor them. We assume there is no problem in
bringing in the UN or others to supervise elections. The greatest
problem is the question of the status of the West Bank. At any rate these
are all questions that would be worked out during the three month
period.
MAJALI: The central question is where the West Bank borders
would be. These must be defined.
ABUODEN: Everyone admits that the psychological aspect is im-
portant, especially in the Arab world. We have asked our people to
read the documents closely and taken pains to see they have been pub-
lished. We have surveyed our people and found that they have no
feeling of assurance about the outcome of the transitional period. If we
could have a phrase saying that the transitional period is a stage on the
road to reaching a treaty and thus achieving a durable peace and that it
would be conducive to the attainment of Palestinian self-determination
as provided for in Resolution 242, then we would have a different situa-
tion. If at the end of the five-year period there is no agreed solution or,
alternatively, if the Palestinian voters rejected then what is the result?
This is a very ambiguous situation.
VANCE: We have provided for three stages in the transitional
framework. Your questions are good ones but we do not believe that
amending the document is realistic. Perhaps you could get a clarifica-
tion during the negotiations.
MAJALI: The document makes no mention of past UN resolutions.
VANCE: There is mention of Resolutions 242 and 338. Further-
more, President Carter said in his speech to Congress that all pertinent
UN resolutions “had to be taken into account regarding the refugee
problem.”
SHARAF: What does the U.S. envisage for the future of the other
Palestinians outside the West Bank (who are armed)?
VANCE: We recognize that problem and it must be addressed, but
in a broader spectrum—involving Lebanon and Syria. As to immigra-
tion into the West Bank, this is a problem not easily resolved, although
the question of displaced persons has been resolved.
