244  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
US be informed of Announcement and of the right of Chinese who 
express desire return mainland China to communicate with Indian 
Embassy if they wish to do so.
8. The Indian Government of course is aware that it is always free 
disseminate any type public information it may desire in US including 
full information concerning its function under Agreed Announcement, 
without reference to US Government.
Hoover
187.	 Telegram 722 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 14, 1955, 1 p.m.
722. From Johnson.
1) I opened this morning’s meeting with a prepared statement 
along lines of Deptel 718 closing with hope Wang would give me simi­
lar detailed information on implementation announcement. He replied 
with some general statements that wide publicity given in China and 
proposed US “present official text agreed announcement to UK” and 
they would do likewise with India “which would complete official pro­
cedures after which PRC would formally notify UK Charge in Peking”.
2) I replied by asking series questions on method whereby Amer­
icans in China unable to read Chinese would obtain information on 
announcement, how those in jail would be informed, facilities for those 
in jail communicate with UK Charge (particularly concerned this point 
as still 4 persons in jail from whom no letters whatsoever received), 
arrangements for UK Charge interview Americans in jail when in 
accordance announcement US desires facts be investigated, meaning 
“prescribed period” within which Fathers Gordon, Hyde and Joyce 
ordered to leave, date and time 10 Americans notified last meeting will 
arrive Hong Kong, and specific information on health and welfare each 
American in jail not yet released.
3) Wang replied full text announcement would be carried in English 
language publications in PRC, those in jail would have announcement 
translated and read to them. Did not reply on freedom prisoners com­
municate with UK Charge, said investigations by Charge would be “in 
accordance with terms of announcement”, would subsequently inform 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–1455. Confidential; Niact.
