348  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
particularly your veto message, would be a key in countering such a 
misapprehension. I believe that we probably can show that a veto is not 
intended to weaken defense, by including in the veto message a num-
ber of points, including all of the following:
a. concentrating on the nuclear carrier, about whose wastefulness 
we have laid a substantial predicate over a period of six months;
b. making it clear that we urgently want to restore the more impor­
tant items that were deleted in the Congressional authorization and 
appropriation process to make room for the CVN within the budget;
c. including in our proposed restoral Navy ships—­some deleted 
by the Congress and some that we had anticipated funding in future 
years—­to show that we can indeed get more ships if we avoid spending 
too much on a few ships.
d. making it clear that we want the Congress to appropriate funds 
in the full amount of $126 billion, which was your budget proposal.
We would all, of course, work hard to persuade the Congress to 
return to the $126 billion level through the bill which would replace one 
vetoed. But if the Congress did not, a supplemental request would be 
essential, and the intention of seeking one in the event the $126 billion 
level is not reached in the basic bill would be a necessary part of a veto 
strategy. It is also important that this not be the only authorization or 
appropriation bill vetoed.
A clear Congressional, media and public understanding of our 
reasons for a veto would be absolutely essential. The public and the 
Congress would need to understand that you are firmly committed to a 
$126 billion level for defense for FY 79. The nature of the veto message is 
an essential element in establishing such a position. I believe that with 
the message whose text is attached, a veto would be appropriate.2
Harold Brown
2 Attached but not printed are undated talking points for Carter’s veto of the 
defense procurement authorization bill for FY 1979 (H.R. 10929), which he announced 
during an August 17 press conference in the Old Executive Office Building. (Public Papers: 
Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 1439–1447)
