836 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Helmand The settled farmers along the Heland river have engaged in little antigovernment activity. Although they are Pathans, their tribal martial tradition is much weaker than among mountain dwellers. Because they depend on government irrigation projects—largely funded by the US— they are among the few Afghans who regard the central government as a benefactor instead of an enemy. Since the Soviet invasion, attacks on government installations have increased, the government has lost control of many of the non-riverine districts, and local officials fear that the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, may be attacked. Annex C5 Afghan Exile Organizations There are dozens of Afghan exile organizations, most of them based in Pakistan, some in Iran, and the rest scattered throughout the world (the US, Western Europe, Egypt, India). Apart from those in Pakistan and Iran, they have a very limited impact on the insurgency. Pakistan-Based Organizations Islamic Alliance for the Liberation of Afghanistan (IALA). This umbrella organization was formed by the six most important exile groups in Peshawar in January 1980 to enable the exile groups to present a united front at the special Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference held in Islamabad in late January. It also hoped to encourage aid from Muslim countries that objected to the fragmentation of the insurgent movement. One group, the Islamic Party, left the Alliance while it was being established. The IALA is headed by Abdul Rasoul Saif, who was apparently chosen because he posed no threat to the ambitions of the leaders of the five remaining member organizations. —The Afghan Islamic League (Jamiat-Islami-Afghani). The League is headed by Burhanuddin Rabbani, a former professor at Kabul University. The organization reportedly receives financial support from a small, conservative political party in Pakistan and is closer to the Afghan National Liberation Front than to the other members of the Alliance. Rabbani’s group reportedly has a military arm, but its capability is unknown. —The Afghan National Liberation Front (Jabhe-i-Negat-i-Melli). The group’s leader, Sebqatullah Mojededi, is a member of an important religious family that has a following in Kabul and other urban centers 5 Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
