1977  207
—Government needs to clarify the relation of public cryptography 
to classified cryptography.
—Government needs to balance the impact on National Security of 
the needs for public cryptography and academic freedom.
RELATED QUESTIONS:
—How “good” should public cryptography be?
—In view of export problem
—In view of domestic surveillance needs
—How can academic freedom be provided and minimize damage 
to National Security?
—How will ITAR interpretation apply?
—Is new legislation needed?
—How should the Government interface with Academe/Industry 
in public cryptography? Should the Government support unclassified 
research? How can the classified work interface with the unclassified 
work?
—How should DOD and DOC employ classified tools for public 
cryptography? Should DOD “go it alone”?
—How does the U.S. Government deal with the U.K. for public 
cryptography? Should there be separate contact from both DOD and 
DOC?
—What public statements should be made? By whom? When?
The Chairman stressed the need for a mechanism to respond to 
academia.
Tasking: The Department of Justice is to evaluate the applicability 
of ITAR and its relationship to research, publications or presentations 
about public cryptography by the academic community; regardless of 
whether the foregoing be verbal or in the form of papers and whether 
the research is supported by private or government funds.
The Department of Commerce as lead agent, working with the 
NSA shall propose a position paper outlining a national policy for gov-
ernment use. This position paper is due to the working group com-
prised of OSTP, Commerce, NSA and Justice by January 20, 1978. The 
lead agent is enjoined to contact the National Science Foundation and 
Department of State who may be asked to contribute in their respective 
areas (State for the U.K. coordination effort). The President’s Science 
Advisor shall be responsible for all public coordination.
The Director, OMB and Manager, NCS shall attend all future 
meetings.
The next subcommittee meeting is tentatively scheduled for the 
week of January 23–27, 1978.
