1246 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement DISCUSSION August 29 proposal—Present policy provides for a first stage reduc­ tion to 2.5 million men, and sets a lower limit of 1.5 on force levels (1.7 in August 29 proposals) ceilings, but makes them conditional on prior political settlements. Proposed position—The figure of 2.2 million in the first recommen­ dation was selected because it represented the same relation to existing force levels (2.5 million men) that 2.5 million represented at the time it was agreed, i.e., a reduction of 300,000 men. This reduction would probably be accomplished by the United States within the next few years in any event. Current Soviet force levels are estimated as being somewhere around 3.8 million. The establishment of ground control posts in the U.S. and USSR and at their foreign bases plus the mobile ground and aerial inspection of central Europe should ensure that these Soviet forces were substantially reduced, with some concomitant decline in the Soviet capability for limited aggression. With regard to the second recommendation: the nuclear cut-­off would justify us in accepting the more extensive conventional reduc­ tions, while the reductions—which would be of sufficient size to affect our overseas posture—might induce the USSR to accept the cut-­off. We could not accept the conventional reductions without the nuclear cut-­ off or either one without adequate inspection, which would involve aerial and mobile ground inspection of the countries concerned. This proposal no longer attaches political conditions to a more sub­ stantial reduction in conventional forces. It is believed that the advan­ tages for the U.S. of a nuclear cut-­off and unlimited inspection of the U.S. and USSR against surprise attack warrant agreement to such a reduction, which could have significant advantages in itself. This proposal would make clear to the USSR under precisely what conditions the U.S. would accept lower force levels and more far-­ reaching conventional arms cuts in a way that would receive full sup­ port by world public opinion. Probable reaction of our allies U.K., France and Canada—would probably support. Germany—may consider the second part of the proposal too drastic without reunification as a pre-­condition, but probably could be per­ suaded to accept, in view of fact that reunification would no doubt be pre-­condition to any reductions below 1.8 million and in view of fact that Soviets would probably reject the second proposal.
