114  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
NO FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DISTRIBUTION
The enclosed Policy Information Statement—­forwarded to the Post 
for use us outlined in Foreign Service Circular No. 49, November 18, 
19532—­is also being transmitted to USIA und other interested agencies 
in Washington for their information and guidance. You are requested 
to make it available to appropriate officers of USIS and other interested 
U.S. agencies assigned to your Post.
Instructions regarding USIS treatment of this subject will be issued, 
as required, by USIA Washington.
HERTER
SPECIAL COMMITTEE OF THE COUNCIL OF THE ORGANI-
ZATION OF AMERICAN STATES TO STUDY THE FORMULATION 
OF NEW MEASURES FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION (COMMIT-
TEE OF 21)
SUMMARY
The Special Committee of the Council of the OAS to Study the 
Formulation of New Measures for Economic Cooperation, popularly 
known as the Committee of 21, will begin its third meeting in Bogotá, 
Colombia, September 5, 1960. The Committee’s meetings are considered 
to be of significant importance by American Republics Governments 
and high-­level national representation is anticipated. The United States 
delegation will be headed by Under Secretary of State Douglas Dillon. 
General items to be discussed may be placed within the following 
headings:
1. Financing of Economic Development.
2. Agriculture, Education, Productivity and Technology.
3. Fluctuations in the Prices of Basic Products.
Thus the Committee plans to address itself to primary matters 
affecting the economic well-­being and the stability of the inter-­American 
community. The President of the U.S.3 has said that the economic devel-
opment of Latin America is of vital importance to the strength and well-­
being of the Free World and that “we are determined to press forward 
with the concrete measures necessary to make inter-American coopera-
tion in the economic field as fruitful as it has been in the political field.” 
Our full and sincere participation in the work of the Committee, and the 
sub-Committee of 9, demonstrate our determination. Further evidence 
2 In Foreign Service Circular No. 49, November 18, 1953, the Department of State 
defined its substantive relationships with the United States information Agency and distrib-
uted this information to all Foreign Service posts. A copy of this circular is filed in the Records 
Management and Research Division of the Bureau of Personnel’s Office of Management.
3 Dwight D. Eisenhower.
