1226 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement should enter into negotiations settle controversial issues Taiwan area. Was it not fact Chinese made untiring efforts these talks and repeatedly put forth proposals with view improving relations between two coun­ tries? Was it not fact US repeatedly refused any improvement in rela­ tions between two countries? To sum up facts very clear. Problem facing us not for China do thus and so but problem was for US to improve negotiations and contribute to solution of problems. They on their part always desired and always made efforts overcome difficulties so that problems might be resolved. They had made many efforts this direc­ tion. Now that in these talks whole series of question and even some minor ones had not been resolved, spite all their efforts, was it not time consider holding FMC rpt FMC to resolve all these questions? Could it be that US Govt determined continue present situation these talks without settling any issues and on other hand refused to raise level of negotiations? They hoped that in interest improved relations between China and US and in interest peace, US will not take that course of action. Hoped US Govt would give careful and favorable consideration to proposal he had made this morning concerning holding FMC. 13. I replied, he had spoken of mutual benefit in negotiations. I certainly agreed. We entered into this agreement on civilians on understanding it was to be of mutual benefit. Fortunately there was way of undisputable demonstrating to whose benefit it had operated. There were facts with regard to it that did not rest on unsupported assertions. Facts were that under third party arrangement with which we agreed, my govt had not received single allegation any obstruc­ tion offered to any of tens thousands Chinese in my country. Facts were as I cited this morning that in addition to Americans covered by agreement still remaining in prison his govt had rejected repre­ sentation of third party made in accordance with that agreement and had prevented third party from operating even limited way set forth that agreement. I’d hope at our next meeting he would be in position assure me this situation been corrected. 14. Wang replied, also wanted point out fact many Chinese impris­ oned in America. They had not seen any initiative taken by US improve their situation. As he had mentioned previously Chinese in US still sub­ ject to many unreasonable restrictions. Hoped US would improve lot. He meant such restrictions as so-­called Taiwan entry permit. 15. I replied, no Chinese in US ever forced go Taiwan against his will. No Chinese who desired return his country had in any way been obstructed doing so. Only action of his govt prevented third party from determining in impartial manner desires of Chinese who imprisoned for common crimes. Might mention that since last informed him, to our knowledge, 222 Chinese have returned his country since Aug 1 last
