Chapter 2, January–June 1989  65
want to be an impediment. But the key was to reaffirm the WSJS and its 
reaffirmation in Moscow.
The Secretary asked Under Secretary Bartholomew to comment.
Bartholomew stated that the U.S. agreed that the WSJS was an 
important milestone. But as his colleague Ambassador Burt had 
explained in the working group, both sides understood that it was not 
the final word. Each side interpreted that language differently. This lack 
of agreement was the problem we needed to tackle. This said, the U.S. 
could confirm that our position remained that we should build on the 
WSJS language in negotiating a Defense and Space agreement.
The Secretary added that in January 1988, in the first plenary meet-
ing after the Washington summit, the U.S. made clear it intended to 
exercise its right to deploy advanced defenses if these proved feasible. 
Secretary Shultz had also said that there must be a clear right to deploy 
at the end of the non-­withdrawal period. Thus there was a clear differ-
ence of view: the WSJS language was a conscious effort to bridge the 
gap by finding a formula whereby the U.S. could observe the narrow 
interpretation while preserving its right to go to the broad. It was hard 
to conceive trading this off for Soviet compliance vis-­à-­vis Krasnoyarsk.
Shevardnadze rejoined that it was not a matter of a trade-­off. The 
U.S. had an equal interest in preserving the ABM Treaty. If the U.S. 
implemented its SDI-­related programs, the Soviets would find an 
appropriate response. This had been said in the past but now could be 
said with greater certainty, since Shevardnadze now better understood 
Soviet capabilities. There was an objective interest on both sides in see-
ing the ABM Treaty observed. This was what our two countries’ leaders 
had agreed to. It was not fortuitous that the Secretary had quoted from 
a statement by his predecessor and Shevardnadze’s good friend George 
Shultz, whereas he, Shevardnadze, had quoted from a document signed 
by the two leaders to preserve the ABM Treaty “as signed in 1972.” 
All the points of emphasis in the WSJS formula had been made in a 
clear way. If the sides could reaffirm and abide by it, then Krasnoyarsk 
would not be a problem.
The Secretary reiterated that the WSJS language was subject to dif-
ferent interpretations. We had neither rejected nor renounced our right 
at a later date to interpret broadly the ABM Treaty. This issue had not 
been resolved.
Shevardnadze said he wanted to stress the following passage: “not 
to withdraw from the ABM Treaty for a specified period.” As regards 
what would happen afterwards, that would be subject to negotiation. 
An understanding had been reached on this score.
Bartholomew said the U.S. continued to subscribe . . .
