358
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
135.
Letter From H. Ross Perot to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Dallas, January 8, 1980
Dr. Brzezinski:
My associate has returned after spending thirty-six days in Tehran.
The situation surrounding the hostages is unstable and unpredicta-
ble. Anything can happen. Theories, opinions and estimates about what
is most likely to happen have little value.
Turmoil and confusion in Tehran make it feasible to infiltrate and
maintain an unconventional rescue team inside the city, as we did
last February.2
Vehicles, weapons, and other equipment can be acquired in the city.
My associate is willing to go back in to assist the team. Other
reliable Iranians can still be recruited to assist the operation. There is
the possibility of getting aid from dissident groups of Iranians—but
only if the team is in Tehran to organize such activity through carefully
selected Iranians.
The cornerstone of our presentation to the CIA and Department
of Defense on the seventh day of capture was to put a rescue team
into position in Tehran—
—A U. S. based rescue team is of no value.
—A rescue team located in a nearby country is of some value.
—A team in Tehran is of great value. It can react quickly to events,
an important asset, since most events are outside our control. The
only delay would be the short time required to send aircraft to a
pickup point.
While waiting in the city, the team members will get an invaluable
first hand feel for the actual conditions in which they will have to
operate. The rescue plan will be improved as a result of experience on
the streets.
I am told that the team and its leaders are superb—this is all that
matters. As I reflect upon the capabilities of this team, the present
conditions in the city, and contrast this team to our inexperienced
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 31, Subject File, Iran [Retained] 1/80. No classification marking.
2 In February 1979, Perot financed the successful rescue of two Electronic Data
Systems (EDS) employees imprisoned by the Iranian Government in a contract dispute.
The rescue occurred amidst a prison break during the chaos of revolutionary upheaval
in Iran.
