Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX and Havemann triggered a series of protests from individuals. A group of eight dissident writers sent a letter to Honecker criticizing his cultural policies. The government counterattacked via Neues Deutschland by printing letters and speeches by pro-regime writers and officials that publicized the existence of the dissent and directly attacked some of the critics for carrying on a “hate campaign against socialism,” collaborating with the “enemy mass media,” and being “washed-up types” out of touch with “real socialism.” This foreshadowed the expulsion of Heym and others from the Writers Union for “anti-communist agitation.” (C) The expulsions—which reportedly were not unanimously approved by the Writers Union membership—fueled the GDR’s cultural crisis. Even such pro-regime persons as Writers Union President Hermann Kant and Academy of Arts President Konrad Wolf admitted at a June meeting of the GDR Cultural League that there were serious problems with some aspects of East German cultural policy. Nevertheless, the dissidents soon fell into disarray and were generally dispirited by the turn of events. Even such a stalwart personality as Heym indicated that he had little taste for more battles with the regime, especially given the implications of the penal code revisions. (U) Honecker couched his justification for the cultural actions in highly ideological terms: “Artistic creation in socialism and for socialism is taking place not at some remote distance from the ideological struggle between the two big social systems of our era but right in the middle of it. In this field, as you know, the struggle has exacerbated. This was last but not least a result of the attempts of the capitalist mass media to interfere in the internal affairs of our country and to poison the atmosphere. . . . It is informative in this context, however, that in the FRG precisely those people who are doing all they can for the preservation of capitalism, eloquently defend every one who allegedly wishes to improve the real socialism of the GDR.” (C) The GDR’s repressive moves apparently have paid off, at least for the moment. Critical intellectuals have been silenced, journalists’ contacts have tended to dry up, and in general, citizens are more cautious about contacts with Westerners. It will likely be some time before the dissidents reemerge with the same force they manifested in the spring of 1979. (C) Youth: Another Source of Concern Perhaps of longer term concern to the regime than the highly publicized dissidents is its failure to capture the allegiance of the vast majority of youth. Numerous observers of the East German scene have been struck in recent years by the erosion of family cohesiveness in the urban centers and the increasing manifestation of anti-social, apolitical
