1978 235 The fact that something must eventually be done about Minuteman’s growing vulnerability seems clear. We have just completed an analysis of the potential impact of extending to 1985 the current SALT II modernization limits. The results support RAND’s presentation to you—Soviet difficulties in trying to achieve a high confidence attack capability against Minuteman would increase, but such limits would not significantly reduce the rate at which our confidence in the survivability of Minuteman is decaying.2 And SALT II protocol limits would foreclose a matching ICBM hard-­target capability raising all the political problems Senator Nunn indicated. However, deploying the M–X missile in the Minuteman silos seems like a poor solution. While it would reduce the developing asymmetries in throw weight and hard-­target kill capabilities, it also would increase crisis instability. By putting both sides’ knockout punch in a vulnerable position, there would be a premium on the side that starts first. Adopting a launch under attack strategy has significant problems too. Its credibility depends on public knowledge, but public knowledge will precipitate a heated political debate over whether this strategy is possible without predelegation of your authority to order nuclear attacks—­a very sensitive matter. For these reasons many pro defense and pro arms control legislators on the Hill are united against putting M–X missiles in silos. Indeed the program has survived politically because it has held out the possibility of being a survivable ICBM. There is great reluctance to spending billions on a new missile for an increasingly vulnerable basing mode. The Air Force is continuing studies of possible mobile basing schemes for the M–X missiles and DDR&E is examining some exotic options for protecting ICBM. But the prospect is that we will have to learn to live with ICBM vulnerability. We do not, however, have to accept an asymmetry on counterforce. There is a way to increase our counterforce capabilities without the instabilities of developing M–X in silos: we could develop the Trident II (D–5) missile as a survivable hard-­target weapon. This program is still in early conceptual studies, but it seems clear that a highly effective hard-­ target kill capability can be achieved with an SLBM. However, at present the Trident II missile program has very modest funding. The Navy has put off the start of a serious Trident II development program because it sees the total of $5–7 billion in required 2 On February 23, Carter participated in a meeting in the White House Situation Room to discuss SALT with Mondale, Nunn, Secretary of Defense Brown, Brzezinski, Aaron, and Donald Rice, President of the RAND Corporation. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No minutes of the meeting were found.
