342  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Page 25 of the NIE lists five goals of Soviet policy.6 I assume they 
are still applicable today.
Brzezinski: The goal of movement into the Third World has higher 
priority for the Soviet Union today.
The Vice President: The Soviets wish they had never signed Helsinki 
but they are stuck with it. It is now a major factor in relations between 
the Soviets and Eastern Europe as well as the West. We have to stand on 
our position on the Helsinki accords. But some of the things we have to 
say do strengthen the hard liners. It is a tricky road to walk. We have to 
stand behind our position.
Warnke: This is partly the price the Soviets had to pay to get the 
recognition of the European status quo at Helsinki.
Brzezinski: It is a mistake to punish the Soviets for their actions 
on human rights and not for their actions in the Third World. Unfor-
tunately, this is the impression that was conveyed by the efforts sur-
rounding Shcharanskiy, etc.7 The prevailing impression is that we are 
penalizing the Soviets for how they conducted their internal affairs 
rather than for their international behavior where we are on much 
stronger ground.
The President: I don’t disagree. But both are part of the successful 
arousing of world public opinion against the Soviets, both speaking out 
on human rights and my statements on Africa. I feel that as a result the 
Soviets have lost esteem in the non-­aligned movement and in the West-
ern world. I remember when we used to be on the defensive on human 
rights. We were the target and the Soviets were the great protector of 
human rights. We were seen as aggressors because of Vietnam. Now 
the Soviets have the onus of being intruders, especially in Africa with 
the Cubans. We have done part of the job and have had a net gain on 
this.
I sense in this meeting a special concern with the rate of the Soviet 
military buildup and our response. But we stand well everywhere else.
We need an objective analysis of the proportion of the Soviet mil-
itary budget which is not comparable to our own needs. After all, we 
don’t have to maintain a million men on the Canadian border.
6 The five goals listed were: détente diplomacy toward the United States; détente 
diplomacy toward Western Europe; defense of the East European status quo; contain-
ment of China; and movement into the Third World.
7 Reference is to Soviet dissident Anatoly Shcharanskiy, who was convicted of trea-
son in a Soviet court on July 14, 1978, and sentenced to 13 years imprisonment and hard 
labor. For documentation on the Carter administration’s objections to the treatment of 
Shcharanskiy and fellow dissidents such as Aleksandr Ginzburg, who was convicted of 
“anti–Soviet agitation and propaganda” on July 13, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. 
VI, Soviet Union.
