1098
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
2. Whether to go forward with an undesirable agreement on proce-
dures and with the best deal we can reach on the agenda (which is
likely itself to prove troublesome) and to fight out our disagreements
with the G–77 on substance next year, if necessary, as it almost certainly
will be in many areas, failing to reach agreement at that time;
3. Indicate now that we cannot accept these procedural terms be-
cause they threaten the integrity of such important international insti-
tutions as the IMF, GATT and the World Bank.
It is an unpleasant choice. While we have the moral substantive
support of the key European countries, the onus for a breakdown
would fall mainly on the U.S. I believe that the domestic impact of such
a breakdown could be managed successfully and even turned into a
plus. (“We ought to help developing countries, but not when it goes
against our own fundamental interests and threatens valuable institu-
tions . . .” etc.) Moreover, some of the more advanced developing coun-
tries, such as Brazil, and most Arab OPEC countries would privately
welcome a breakdown with some relief. But it would be unquestion-
ably portrayed around the world as a set back in North-South relations
and an attempt would be made to blame the U.S. We could shift some
but not all of this onus by insisting now on discussing the agenda even
before reaching agreement on procedures, and letting the G–77 bear the
burden of declining to discuss the agenda.
On balance, I believe we are better off taking the onus for a break-
down now rather than later and under the circumstances that would be
more difficult because of the text that we are asked to agree to—and
after thousands of man hours of negotiating actively which, on the ex-
perience of the last two weeks, is bound to be not only frustrating but is
likely to be fruitless. Bill Miller agrees. Don McHenry, with whom I
spoke again this morning, is on the other side of this judgment. He feels
it will be difficult to explain a breakdown on procedural issues and that
we are bound to experience the pressures and frustrations in the
UNGA and elsewhere if the global negotiations do not provide such a
forum.
A final consideration in my mind is that there are ways in which
we can improve conditions for developing countries, and the lives of
real people. We ought to proceed with those in any case. With regard to
those, the global negotiations should be a sideshow. If it is made into
the main act, under the circumstances (as it now seems) that are ex-
tremely inauspicious, it runs the risk of sidetracking or delaying those
useful improvements.
We need to get word back to McHenry as soon as possible on
whether the proposed text is acceptable. I told him you would have to
focus on it personally and might well want to bring the President into
this. I would be happy to talk about it whenever you are available.
