398  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
91.	
Presidential Directive/NSC-411
Washington, September 29, 1978
TO:
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO:
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Administrator, General Services Administration
SUBJECT
U.S. Civil Defense Policy (U)
I have reviewed the recommendations of the Policy Review Com-
mittee meeting on PRM–32. Based on them, I direct that the U.S. Civil 
Defense program seek to:
—Enhance deterrence and stability in conjunction with our strate-
gic offensive and other strategic defensive forces. Civil defense, as an 
element of the strategic balance, should assist in maintaining percep-
tions of that balance favorable to the U.S.
—Reduce the possibility that the U.S. could be coerced in time of 
crisis.
—Provide some increase in the number of surviving population 
and for greater continuity of government, should deterrence and esca-
lation control fail, in order to provide an improved basis for dealing 
with the crisis and carrying out eventual national recovery.
This policy does not suggest any change in continuing U.S. reli-
ance on strategic offensive nuclear forces as the preponderant factor in 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General 
Odom File, Box 14, Civil Defense: Policy Review Committee: 8/14/78–9/78. Secret. 
Based on the conclusions reached by the PRC on PRM–32 (see Document 73), Brzez-
inski submitted two versions of PD–41 to Carter under a September 19 covering memo-
randum. One version referred to a consensus among State, Defense, CJS, and OMB that 
“makes no special claims for civil defense but explicitly ties it to crisis stability and the 
strategic balance,” a connection that had been made “clear to the Soviets in SALT.” Brzez-
inski advised Carter to sign the consensus version. ACDA submitted the other version 
as a dissent. Referring to the consensus PD favored by Brzezinski, Carter wrote in the 
upper right corner of Brzezinski’s memorandum: “Zbig—It says nothing. J.” The Presi-
dent also noted in the bottom right corner: “Incorporate specifics of ACDA proposal at 
least.” At the bottom left, Brzezinski wrote to Odom: “WO revise, adding #’s marked by 
me. We will resubmit. ZB.” The PD printed here reflects those amendments. (Ibid.) In an 
October 12 memorandum to Mondale, Vance, and Brown, as well as Jones, Turner, and 
GSA Administrator Jay Solomon, Dodson noted that the ACDA Director had been “inad-
vertently omitted from the address list of PD/NSC–41,” and asked that recipients change 
their records “as necessary.”
