Yugoslavia
989
300.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
Belgrade, December 3, 1980, 1430Z
9712. Department for Under Secretary Newsom and Assistant Sec-
retary Vest. OSD/ISA for Assistant Secretary McGiffert. Subj: Contin-
gency Planning for Yugoslavia in the Event of Soviet Intervention
in Poland.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. In the event of Soviet military intervention in Poland and the
inevitable European security crisis this would generate, the Yugoslav
leadership—although seeking to avoid “provoking” Moscow—will
nevertheless welcome assurances of Western, specifically US, support.
They may also seek concrete assistance in the economic and/or military
area. This message outlines, in the event of Soviet intervention in
Poland, what our objectives should be in dealing with the Yugoslavs;
and what we may anticipate the GOY may ask of us. Circumstances
will of course govern what they and we say and do, but these initial
thoughts are provided as a basis for Department planning.
3. U.S. objectives: Our actions should reassure the Yugoslav leaders
that we are prepared to support them—within reason—should they
wish it; and provide early warning to the Soviets, lest in the turmoil and
fear generated by intervention in Poland they be tempted—unlikely
as that may be—to regard post-Tito Yugoslavia as equally beyond the
reach of Western assistance.
4. Where we could relatively easily predict how Tito would react
to a Polish invasion, we are less certain about the new leadership. They
will be wholeheartedly opposed to the Soviet move, but they will also
be scared and, initially at least, very cautious. A firm indication of
support from the US, early on, could have an immediate steadying
effect, and over the longer run, could influence GOY attitudes toward
the US. In any event, how they react will influence what we do. We
may find some actions on our part advisable before we have a chance
to consult with them. But consultations should take place promptly.
If 1968 is any guide, even if we do not make the first approach the
GOY may. In our opinion, making the first move ourselves would be
smart—letting the pace thereafter be partly set by the Yugoslavs but
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800576–1044.
Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to DOD/OSD/ISA, USNATO,
USDOCOSOUTH Naples, USCINCEUR, USCINUSAFE, and USNMRSHAPE. The tele-
gram was sent at a time when the domestic situation in Poland was deteriorating fast
and a Soviet invasion of Poland seemed imminent. See Document 42.
