Mr. de Warzee and Count de Martel gave their consent to the imposition of the 2½ per cent surtax as early as possible, but they both voiced disapproval of the plan to consider Yin 70 which named the specific sum of $90,000,000 or $100,000,000 as being the amount which it would be necessary to raise. Count de Martel then laid before the Conference a resolution designed to put into force the 2½ and 5 per cent surtaxes (see page 14 of Minutes of February 18, 1926). Mr. de Kauffmann expressed approval of the remarks made by members of the American and British Delegations with reference to the 2½ and 5 per cent surtaxes but objected to the consideration of the resolution concerning the sum of $90,000,000, which resolution he considered premature. He said that, on the whole, the work of the Conference had been proceeding satisfactorily and that nothing should be done to interrupt this orderly procedure. He referred to the fact that when the American Delegation, near the beginning of the Conference, had expressed a desire to effectuate the Washington Treaty at once, the Danish Delegation had supported the suggestion and it now renewed that assurance. Mr. Oudendijk confirmed Mr. Strawn’s statement that when an offer was made by the American Delegation to put in force the Washington Treaty surtaxes immediately the only dissenting voice was the Chinese. He reiterated the willingness of the Netherlands Delegation to proceed at once to the implementing of the Washington Treaty surtaxes and to that end it seemed to him that Count de Martel’s proposal covered the same ground as the original American proposal. Like other foreign Delegates who had previously spoken, Mr. Oudendijk voiced objection to Yin 70 which named the $90,000,000 or $100,000,000 as the amount required to meet China’s needs. Mr. Bianchi also objected to any action looking to the formal passing of Yin 70 but was quite prepared to approve the 2½ and 5 per cent surtax resolution, as he had been all along prepared to do. Mr. Garrido agreed with Mr. Oudendijk’s views and Mr. Cerruti agreed with the views of the American and British Delegations and said that, like the American Delegation, the Italian Delegation had from the beginning been willing to give the 2½ per cent authorized by the Washington Treaty. Mr. Hioki acquiesced in the views expressed by the other foreign Delegates concerning Yin 70 and Yin 71,4 and suggested that, since there were some technical matters connected with Yin 71 it would be advisable to refer the matter to a small sub-committee for consideration. Mr. Michelet agreed with his colleagues concerning Yin 70, and especially with the views
