1980  881
unknown. There are 552 circuit boards in the 427M which are gener-
ally similar in design and fabrication (commercial rather than military 
quality) to the one that failed on June 3 and 6. These boards, used as 
interfaces throughout the 427M system, remain the primary vulnera-
bility of the 427M today. Since these boards cannot be quickly rede-
signed and replaced, it is imperative that we take a very conservative 
approach to error detection and correction in the system’s computer 
programs. (S)
Error Detection (U)
When the spurious signals were transmitted to NORAD’s custom-
ers on June 3 and 6, error checking throughout the missile warning sys-
tem was totally inadequate. Relatively simple error checks in the data 
stream which would detect random errors were removed and restored 
by the computer system as data messages were routed through various 
elements of the system. Although (as a result of changes made since 
the incidents) such simple error checks are now carried consistently 
through the 427M system and through the computers at the receiv-
ing command centers, these checks are inadequate to prevent bursts 
of errors from producing false data messages as occurred on June 3 
and 6. That is, if the 427M were on-­line today and the same failure that 
occurred on June 3 and 6 were to recur, it is highly likely that some 
erroneous messages would again be transmitted and appear on the dis-
plays of NORAD’s customer command centers. (S)
The solution to this problem is the incorporation of a very power-
ful error-­detection technique known as cyclic redundancy codes (CRC) 
into the computer programs of the missile warning system. Installation 
of CRC will delay the return to full operation of the more capable 427M 
for another three months, but I believe it is essential that we do so in 
order to provide acceptable assurance that bursts of errors caused by 
circuit failures will not cause false data messages to be sent. (C)
Quality Control (U)
It is the responsibility of the people on duty in the NORAD Chey-
enne Mountain Complex (NCMC) to provide valid, accurate warn-
ing information to the other command centers as well as to provide a 
NORAD assessment. Yet prior to June 6 the crew on duty in the NCMC 
had no way of inspecting the data they were transmitting to their cus-
tomers; they had to assume that the data they were seeing displayed 
were the same as those which were being transmitted to the other 
command centers. This, we are now well aware, was an erroneous 
assumption, but the fact that the people most qualified to analyze the 
data discrepancy on June 3 and 6—­the people in the NORAD Chey-
enne Mountain Complex—­were isolated from observation of the false
