Human Rights
445
respect for” human rights and fundamental freedoms. This, he com-
mented, could help ensure that issues such as preventive detention in
the Federal Republic of Germany, race relations in the U.K. and mi-
grant labor problems in Europe be given adequate attention.
2) Alan Schwartz proposed that all members of the Board of Di-
rectors should not be appointed by the President; some should be ap-
pointed by Congress. This would ensure that the body which created
the Institute would have a continuing voice in its composition.
3) Alan Schwartz further proposed that the Executive Director’s
term of office be limited to 4 years with the right to have his term re-
newed. (The current Bill places no limit on the term.)
4) It was pointed out that the Board should not get locked into
trying to give equal attention to all NGOs. Careful criteria should be
developed for making grants. Emphasis should be on funding projects
that would increase the protection of human rights and not on funding
“pet” NGOs.
Corruption of NGOs
Congressman Fraser raised the problem of whether furnishing
Government funds to NGOs would “corrupt” them. The general re-
sponse was no. Some organizations (e.g., the ICJ) already accepted U.S.
Government funds and this had not prejudiced their policies, programs
or effectiveness. In Alan Schwartz’s view, Government financing
would give greater “leverage” to private groups in their dealings with
foreign governments. It was noted that in some cases, this problem
would not arise because certain NGOs as a matter of principle would
reject Government funds. If corruption took place, it would not be on
the part of the NGOs but on the part of the Board of the Institute for
trying to control the NGOs.
Relationship of the Institute to the Clearinghouse Proposal
Alan Schwartz in his statement seemed to feel that the clearing-
house was in essence created by the establishment of the Institute, since
the Institute would coordinate human rights information.
Jan Nowak questioned whether the clearinghouse would have
more credibility “if taken over by the Institute assisted in this task by
information resources of the State Department” or if it were directly
“carried on by the U.S. Government.”
