Afghanistan
713
I have a question. They must get out. We cannot be starry-eyed
about this. It may take a long time, but they have to get out. We feel
local and regional factors will determine whether or not they do so.
Why aren’t the Afghan rebels more effective? Why aren’t they shooting
down Soviet helicopters?
Aaron: They have shot down about a dozen. They are obtaining
SA–7s from defecting Afghan troops. The problem of supply is the
narrow Pakistani funnel. The Pakistanis are cautious. A much more
promising route would be Iran, but of course we know the problems
there.
Francois-Poncet: Our feeling is that the weapons they have are
very limited.
Vice President: Our objective is to get the Soviets out.
Prime Minister Barre: It is important that Russians die in Afghani-
stan. A friend of mine, a businessman, recently visited Kiev, and public
opinion there is afraid of the consequences in Afghanistan. They are
aware of casualties. They are reading newspapers.
Francois-Poncet: We are making a mistake about how we treat the
rebels. They should be treated as a nationalist movement.
Prime Minister Barre: We had an excellent newsreel film on the
rebels on fighting in Afghanistan shown just two or three weeks ago.
It is worth seeing.
Francois-Poncet: On Islamabad II, our feeling is that it would be
rougher than Islamabad I.3
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Vice President: We view the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as a
very dangerous development. We are afraid that if the leaders of the
industrialized world meet and no mention of Afghanistan is made, it
will be taken as a signal that the heat is off.4
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
3 A likely reference to the Islamic Foreign Ministers Conferences. In a weekly report
to Carter, May 9, Aaron noted: “We have found that we have a surprising amount in
common with the French in their analysis of the Afghanistan situation and in their
position that the Soviet approach is totally unacceptable.” (Carter Library, Donated
Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezinski’s Subject Files, Box 41, Weekly
Reports (to the President), 136–150 (4/80–8/80))
4 Reference is to the upcoming G–7 Economic Summit in Venice June 22–23. See
footnote 2, Document 281.
