1955  283
were satisfied that the public commitment to free all Americans desiring 
to come home was being implemented in good faith. Otherwise, their 
release might be long delayed and conceivably jeopardized altogether. 
Senator George agreed. He said we were entirely correct, in our long six 
weeks of negotiations, to accept nothing less than a public agreement to 
free all Americans and, further, that in his opinion we should not now 
proceed with other discussions until we were certain that the 19 impris­
oned Americans had been notified of their rights under the agreement 
and that the British Chargé had been given access to the prisoners.
I then referred to the Red Chinese proposal that plans for negoti­
ations at a higher level be a subject for discussion under Item 2 of the 
agenda. This presented a good opening to refer to the Gonzales (United 
Press) story in the “Washington Post” of September 12 in which Senator 
George was quoted as renewing “his call for a Foreign Ministers meet­
ing between the United States and Red China later this year.” Upon 
reading the clipping I handed him, Senator George remarked that as 
usual the reporter had reported only part of what he had said. I also 
informed him of Wang’s statement (at the September 20 meeting) jus­
tifying his request for a high-­level meeting on the ground that such 
meeting was also desired by “some high American officials.” We both 
agreed Wang was probably referring to the Gonzales story.
I explained our position that as Wang’s request for talks at a 
higher level was procedural, not substantive, we could not consider 
it “a practical matter at issue” falling within the agreement for the 
Geneva talks represented by our mutually agreed communique of 
July 25, that we are not prepared to nullify the agreement we now 
have to discuss “practical matters at issue” at the ambassadorial level, 
by substituting another forum for this one, and further that maximum 
effort should now be made to settle “practical matters at issue” at 
the ambassadorial level without prior commitment as to what would 
happen when the current talks are concluded.
I informed Senator George of the two subjects we would push for 
discussion. He did not recall that military personnel were still unac­
counted for and agreed that we should press for an accounting.
I reviewed the Red Chinese armistice violations in North Korea, 
their covert activities in Indochina, and the war-­like preparations on the 
mainland of China opposite Formosa, as reasons why it seemed to us 
that “Renunciation of Force” was a sine qua non for present discussions 
in Geneva.
Senator George heartily agreed that we should press for a renunci­
ation of force at the Ambassadorial level and stated further that, unless 
the Communists would agree to renounce force in the settlement of the 
Formosa problem, we should not consider a conference at the foreign 
ministers level.
