336 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II need, where appropriate, for public or discreet official U.S. expressions of concern over the abuse of human rights clearly attributable to foreign governments’ policies or decisions whether tendered publicly by spokespersons for this government, by representatives in multilateral international organizations, or by diplomatic officials in the course of normal discussions with representatives of particular countries. It shall be the responsibility of all diplomatic representatives of the United States to set forth clearly to their foreign counterparts the commitment of the United States Government to seek greater respect by all governments for the human rights of their respective populations. Where such exist, the legal, legislative, or other recognized obligations upon the United States Government to evaluate and convey its human rights concerns to other governments will be reaffirmed to representatives of foreign governments whenever matters under consideration relate to these obligations. 99. Editorial Note On December 9, 1977, President Jimmy Carter issued Proclamation 4542, designating December 10 Human Rights Day and December 15 Bill of Rights Day and encouraging Americans to observe international Human Rights Week, December 10–17. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pages 2086–2087) The President began his December 15 news conference by highlighting the significance of Human Rights Week. He referenced his personal attempts to “make sure that a concern for human rights is woven through everything our Government does, both at home and abroad.” He continued: “This policy has produced some controversy, but it’s very much in keeping with the character and the history of our own country. We became an independent nation in a struggle for human rights. And there have been many such struggles since then, for the abolition of slavery, for universal suffrage, for racial equality, for the rights of workers, for women’s rights. “Not all of these struggles have yet been won. But the freedom and the vigor of our own national public life is evidence of the rights and the liberties that we have achieved. I believe that public life everywhere, in all nations, should have that same freedom and vigor. “We have no wish to tell other nations what political or social systems they should have, but we want our own worldwide influence to reduce human suffering and not to increase it. This is equally true
