National Security Policy  3
various forms of the Russian threat, especially economic warfare. Yet he 
believed the resourcefulness of a free society would always overcome 
the rigidity of a bureaucracy.
At the President’s request, Mr. McElroy read the current draft of 
the section on Defense Reorganization in which the President would 
outline the governing principles without yet stating specific changes. 
This led the President to recall his long interest in the matter. In reply 
to a comment on the apparent absence of administration activity in this 
field, the President quickly cited the earlier effort which had produced 
only a “useless thing”. He emphasized the control now possessed by 
the three services by virtue of direct appropriations to them, and he 
commented that the handling of missiles programs had been hurt by 
self-­styled experts at Congressional hearings. He felt that interpreta­
tions like Rep. Vinson’s (‘this is just long range artillery’) consisted of 
taking something that is wrong to start with and trying to build on it. 
He explained his feeling that it would be best for the study to be made 
by others than himself since he had had such positive convictions for 
so long a time.
The Vice President hoped the message would contain at least a sen­
tence on the great increase in Russian economic efforts.
Sec. Mitchell felt that the message ought to be more explicit as to 
the purpose of our mission and he asked if it were not mainly to fight 
Communism. The President commented that he know of no great prob­
lem today but what it is tied to the Communist threat.
In discussing the Education Section of the State of the Union 
message, the President noted Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s apprehensions 
especially as to singling out the pay of science teachers for improve­
ment. The President felt that the Administration program should stay 
away from salaries.
Regarding the section on sacrifices, the President said that some­
how the United States had to put on hair shirt and sackcloth yet avoid 
scaring people.
Defense Department Program—For the benefit of Cabinet members 
who could remain and who had not heard this at the NSC meeting, Asst. 
Sec. McNeil gave an extensive briefing on the FY 1959 Defense bud­
get. He reviewed the procedure used in developing the budget which 
now reached slightly over $39 billion in NOA and nearly $40 billion 
in expenditures. He pointed out that provision had been made over 
and beyond the original $38 billion concept for (1) Cordiner imple­
mentation, (2) SAC Alert and Dispersal, (3) Ballistic Missile Detection, 
(4) Ballistic Missile Acceleration, (5) Satellite and Outer Space 
Programs, (6) Anti-­sub Warfare Capabilities, (7) Increased Research 
and Development, (8) Modernization of Pentomic Divisions, and (9) 
Force Levels.
