Venezuela  1313
due and that will come due on past purchases, and to extend the credit 
terms to a ten-year period in lieu of three.
Sincerely yours,
Wymberley D.R. Coerr
VE–53.	
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for 
Political Affairs (Merchant) to the Secretary of State and 
the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1
 
Washington, December 9, 1960.
SUBJECT
Meeting on Proposed Oil Proclamation
In accordance with instructions I attended a meeting at 8:30 this 
morning in the White House under Gerry Morgan’s2 chairmanship on 
the proclamation proposed by Secretary Seaton of Interior relative to 
oil imports. Essentially the draft would modify the President’s procla-
mation 3279 of March 10, 1959 and introduce substantial administrative 
flexibility into the procedures established thereunder.3
The meeting was also-­attended by Judge Walsh,4 General Persons,5 
Secretary Seaton, Under Secretary Bennett,6 Secretary Anderson, Don 
Pasriberg7 and Phil Areeda.8 Mr. Bramble9 accompanied me.
I argued strongly for delay in a decision on this matter on the 
grounds that there had not been adequate inter-Departmental consid-
eration of the matter and, further, that there, had been a substantial 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/EST Files, Lot 62 D 8, “Oil Imports Program.” 
Confidential.
2 Deputy Assistant to the President.
3 The proposed amendment would require the Secretary of the Interior to make 
corrective adjustments in the mandatory oil import program in order to prevent over-­
estimates and under-­estimates of total demand from having an unintended impact on 
levels of importation of oil into the United States.
4 Lawrence E. Walsh, Deputy Attorney General.
5 Wilton B. Persons, Assistant to the President.
6 Elmer F. Bennett, Under Secretary of the Department of the Interior.
7 Special Assistant to the President.
8 Assistant Special Council to the President.
9 Harlan P. Bramble, Deputy Director of the Office of International Resources of the 
Department of State.
