Afghanistan 789 298. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordinating Committee (Intelligence) Meeting1 Washington, July 7, 1980, 10–10:30 a.m. SUBJECT Summary of Conclusions: SCC (I) Meeting on Pakistan (C) PARTICIPANTS STATE JCS David Newsom, Under Secretary Lt. Gen. John Pustay, Ass’t. to the for Political Affairs Chairman Ronald Spiers, Director, Bureau of DCI Intelligence and Research Adm. Stansfield Turner, Director Peter Constable, Deputy Assistant Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director Secretary for Near Eastern- Charles Cogan, Chief, Near South Asian Affairs Eastern Division DEFENSE OMB Robert W. Komer, Under John White, Deputy Director Secretary for Policy Affairs WHITE HOUSE Daniel Murphy, Deputy Under Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski Secretary for Policy Matters David Aaron JUSTICE NSC Judge Charles Renfrew, Deputy Thomas Thornton Attorney General The SCC (I) met to discuss three CIA proposals regarding Pakistan and Afghanistan. (S) The first proposal was unanimously recommended. It provides for an increase from [less than 1 line not declassified] to [less than 1 line not declassified] in covert support for the Afghan insurgency.2 We and the Saudis would split the costs. The earlier bottlenecks in Pakistan have been overcome and both the Pakistanis and Saudis are anxious to increase the level of support. Admiral Turner noted that this may be needed quickly if the Soviets undertake an expansion of their military activities in Afghanistan after the Olympics are over. (S) 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–020, SCC Minutes and S/C, 1980. Secret; Sensitive. In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “Zbig, J.” The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. The full text of the Summary of Conclusions is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia. 2 The proposal originated in a memorandum from Turner to Brzezinski, June 30, reporting on Prince Fahd’s “unequivocal endorsement” of ongoing Saudi participation in the Afghan program. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For President or Brzezinski Only File, Box 88, PA—Very Sensitive: 10–12/80) See Document 297.
