268
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
—What are U.S. plans for removing the six?2
—What should Canadians do if there is an uprising in Tehran and
the Canadian premises are threatened by a mob? What steps should
be taken if the story breaks in the press? The Ambassador wants guid-
ance as to whether he should turn the six into the Foreign Ministry,
the compound, or a third embassy.
On the first question, the CIA continues to examine feasible alterna-
tives as to the best plan for extracting the six. Although these details
have not been worked out, new American passports have been pre-
pared for them in false names. These can be dispatched by Canadian
or other special courier once a decision is reached on a specific cover
story which will enable the last details to be added to the passports.
We can then send instructions by cable providing details on identities
and plans for movement out of Tehran.
The chief problem at CIA is that none of the alternatives is without
serious risks. CIA has devoted most of its efforts to a plan [1½ lines
not declassified] and they are examining implementation arrangements
in great detail. [3 lines not declassified] CIA has been unwilling to use
a journalistic cover because of prohibitions in that regard on the agency.
However, we think that the same prohibitions need not apply to Ameri-
can diplomats requiring exfiltration in these circumstances and we
believe this means should be considered. At any rate, we will work
closely with CIA to resolve these issues within the next few days.
In the meantime, we suggest that we tell the Canadians that we
are urgently addressing the question of exfiltration, and we would
welcome any specific recommendations that Ambassador Taylor might
have. We could also send him a few questions that we need to have
answered.
On Taylor’s second concern, we propose that we advise him in the
event of danger to the six or a press story that his first preference be
to move them to the Foreign Ministry. If that is not possible, he should
surrender them to the Swiss Ambassador on behalf of the Red Cross.
If you agree with these alternatives, we should brief the Swiss Ambassa-
dor here, advising him that we consider this step unlikely, but request-
ing his assistance in arranging for emergency care.
We would like to discuss these issues with you to receive your
guidance.
2 See Document 64.
