906
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
344.
Message From Secretary of State Muskie to
Prime Minister Rajai1
Washington, August 20, 1980
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
I write to you as one who in my position as Secretary of State has
only newly been confronted with the problems which currently beset
relations between our two countries. I know that these problems will
be but one aspect of the heavy new responsibilities you will be assuming
as Iran’s first Prime Minister under the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic. It is my earnest hope that we, together with the Foreign
Minister you will appoint, will be able to work towards constructive
solutions to the difficulties between our nations.
With the death of the former Shah, a chapter of Iran’s history is
now definitely closed. With the establishment of your Government, a
new chapter is opened. I believe this is the moment to take a fresh
look at the problems between Iran and the United States.
The United States recognizes the reality of the Iranian Revolution
and the legitimacy of the Islamic Republic. In a series of successive
steps, the Iranian people have had the opportunity to participate in
the process of creating new institutions. I assure you that the United
States has had no wish to interfere in that process. We believe that no
outside power should interfere with the right of the Iranian people to
make their own political decisions.
Fifty-two of my fellow Americans remain held in Iran after nine
months of captivity. I have met with their families. I cannot express
to you adequately the deep and desperate suffering these innocent
people have experienced. Americans of all political persuasions and
strata of society are united in concern for their early release. I hope
that you will agree with me that it is time now to bring an honorable
end to their ordeal and to send the hostages home to their families.
I recognize that Iranians have suffered, too. The continuance of the
impasse can only lead to further bitterness and suffering on both sides.
The cups of anguish are now full. Let us empty them and begin anew.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 38, Subject File, Iran Hostage Negotiations 8/80. Secret. Sent as a telegram from the
Department of State to Swiss Chargé Kaiser in Tehran. According to a September 1
report attached to a September 2 briefing memorandum from Saunders to Muskie,
Christopher, and Newsom, Kaiser delivered Muskie’s letter to Rajai on the evening of
August 31. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 38, Subject File, Iran Hostage Negotiations 8/80) Muskie’s letter is also published
in Department of State Bulletin, November 1980, pp. 54–55.
