358 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement out detailed plans for agrarian reform. Perhaps a high priority project would be the preparation of farm sites and the settlement of landless peasants on selected areas, including the construction of roads and the provision of credits to facilitate crop cultivation. At this time Colombia needs assistance in the preparation of such plans and it is proposed that the U.S. Government offer to provide through increased technical assistance about $100,000 to help undertake the studies and develop the plans needed. It should be recognized that such studies will probably result in requests for financial aid to assist in implementing projects which might be proposed. The U.S. Government should indicate to President Lleras Camargo that a sound projects so proposed could be considered for financial assistance either by U.S. Government financing agencies or by international institutions provided such projects met appropriate criteria of these agencies or institutions. The President should also be informed that external aid can only supplement internal efforts in a small way in successful programs of agrarian reform. The bulk of the resources required must be provided from internal sources, in order not to burden unduly the debt-carrying capacity of the country to the prejudice of other forms of economic development which will require the import of Equipment. Recommendation: That President Lleras, when he comes here, be informed that the United States, (1) is keenly aware of the urgency of Colombia’s need for improving the lot of Colombia’s rural population, (2) views with great sympathy and interest the efforts he is making in that direction, (3) would be prepared to consider a request to participate with the Government of Colombia in carrying out studies which might develop specific and constructive projects to that end, (4) would be prepared subsequently to have sound projects considered for financial assistance either by U.S. Government financing agencies or by international institutions, provided such projects met appropriate criteria of these agencies or institutions, (5) to the extent that the national currency of Colombia might be accumulated through PL 480 programs or in other ways, the United States would be prepared to consider requests from Colombia that this national currency be used in connection with the agrarian reform program. Where the requirement is for foreign currency, loan requests would be considered on their merits.4 Approved: __________5 Disapproved: __________ 4 A position paper concerning President Lleras’ interest in obtaining assistance for Colombia’s agrarian reform program, drafted by Coerr, is filed under 821.16/3–2560. 5 Dillon initialed his approval on March 26, 1960.
