3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
312
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
therefore be one of mutual restraint. In this connection, specific refer-
ence should be made to the Brezhnev/Nixon Communique2 in which
the joint rules of restraint by the U.S. and Soviet Union were explicitly
defined. The Soviet Union should understand that we would have no
choice but to compete in all areas of our relationship if these rules are
not observed.
In this connection, you should seek Soviet clarification as to their
objectives in Africa, in particular Southern Africa. You should empha-
size that this is required in order to provide a positive political frame-
work for pursuing other issues of importance to both our countries.
You should caution the Soviets against being drawn into an effort
to resolve the Eritrean issue by violence. You should make clear that
continued Soviet/Cuban combat presence in the Horn of Africa will
provoke a reaction from Ethiopia’s neighbors—our friends—that can
only lead to further tension and possible conflict. You should explain to
the Soviets that their military intervention in Africa is becoming intol-
erable, and ask when Soviet/Cuban forces will be withdrawn from
Ethiopia.
You should indicate that, while we have no objection to Soviet co-
operation with the Patriotic Front and Frontline countries in Southern
Africa, Soviet/Cuban military intrusion into Southern Africa will jeop-
ardize detente as a whole and the U.S. will react strongly. This should
be stated at the highest levels directly, unambiguously, and forcefully.
You can make clear my personal view that the depth of our feeling
concerning developments in Africa derives not only from our national
interests but from our entire national experience. Efforts to fan the
flames of a major racial war in Southern Africa can only provoke the
most profound and adverse reaction on the part of the American
people.
For this reason you should explain to the Soviets that we believe
our relationship is now at a watershed. We are willing, anxious and
ready to try to improve it, to widen the scope of cooperation to other
areas, and to work together on the widest possible range of issues; but
we cannot accept a selective detente. Decisions made in the near future
on SALT as well as other issues such as Africa will affect our relation-
ship for many years to come.
On SALT you will receive separate instructions. You should make
clear we are willing to negotiate SALT on its own terms but that it
cannot of course be pursued in isolation from the rest of our relation-
2 Reference is presumably to the “Basic Principles of Relations Between the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.” See footnote 3, Docu-
ment 4.
