Colombia 365 views. The President thought that another experiment in Utopia might be worthwhile carrying out, under controlled conditions, of course. President Lleras mentioned that Colombian Cabinet Ministers could go to the floor of Congress and engage in debates. The President said that he had come to the conclusion that the U.S. House of Representatives should be elected for the same term of office as the President, four years. He also said that the President should have the item veto. President Lleras said that he had that power which could be overruled only by two-­thirds votes of the Congress. To the President’s query about the size of the Colombian budget. President Lleras said that it was approximately two billion pesos ($300 million). Again responding to the President’s question, he said that defense items consumed about 20 percent of the above amount, but this included countrywide police. With respect to the loyalty of the senior military officers, President Lleras expressed no concern, adding that he felt that military coup d’etats were usually the fault of political leaders seeking intervention by the military rather than the ambition of the latter. He recalled that General Rojas Pinilla, who became the bane of Colombia, had been openly welcomed by most Colombians when he seized power in 1953. President Lleras said that the United States, quite different from the Latin American countries, had had long experience in self-­government prior to its revolution and that this had been a tremendous advantage. The President inquired about Colombia’s program of social and economic reform. President Lleras said that he had instituted a good program and that it was of tremendous importance in view of the wide public appeal of the Castro-­type program. The President declared that agrarian reform had to be carried out with proper land utilization and sound planning, rather than by mere seizure of lands already under cultivation. President Lleras agreed. He said that Colombia had state lands where effective re-­settlement could be carried out. Their principal problem is that of dealing with the many tiny, inefficient parcels of land (minifundia) as well as how to provide the necessary credit for the small farmer. They have a good agrarian credit bank, already thirty years old, but they need additional resources. He estimated that 80 percent of the motive power in Colombian agriculture was provided by animals. The President referred to the need to train personnel to use modern tractors and farm machinery. Responding to the President’s question about Colombia’s financial reserves, President Lleras said that they now totaled about $220 ­million but they could not use this money freely yet. All bankers say that Colombia is “sound” from an economic standpoint but her problems are still “grave”, said President Lleras. Ambassador McIntosh referred to the good financial record of Colombia and to the excellent borrowing record which Colombia has with all of the financial institutions; he said that most of the exporter credit loans with the Export-Import
