Human Rights
81
torture, or detention; weighing those cases where US action on human
rights per se could endanger other objectives (such as disarmament)
which, in fact, serve or complement the cause of human rights; or
seeking out like-minded democracies for positive initiatives in the
United Nations.
Given this range of considerations, we need to augment material
now available to help identify upcoming opportunities to advance
human rights; deal with specific countries which, for a variety of
reasons, may pose more immediate problems for the United States; and
avoid overloading the human rights circuit by appearing to single out
one country or doing too much at one time. Further, we should pay
particular attention to finding positive ways to foster human rights
(such as using public statements by the Administration and the
Congress, bilateral and multilateral loans, etc.). And, although it is hard
to know in advance all the costs of advocating human rights, we
must try to identify possible short-term problems and monitor the
consequences.
Actions Being Taken
—The Deputy Secretary is asking regional assistant secretaries to
follow up on previous strategy papers with specific courses of action
for all individual countries.19
—The Deputy Secretary is planning to convene the Human Rights
Coordinating Group (HRCG), by April 15, to review action for several
illustrative countries needing prompt attention.20
3. Executive Branch Coordination
Measures to strengthen coordinated direction of US policy on
human rights should include:
—Expediting confirmation of the Coordinator for Human Rights. Patt
Derian remains a “closet” Coordinator.21
—Enlarging the D/HA Staff. Although five new positions have been
approved for the Office for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs
(D/HA), no assignments22 have been made and expansion of that staff
is vital if the Department is to monitor our overall human rights policy.
—Providing training. The Foreign Service Institute should expand
efforts to stress human rights as a factor in US foreign policy.
19 Christopher bracketed this point and wrote in the margin: “Please prepare
memo.”
20 Christopher bracketed this point and wrote in the margin: “Early April.”
21 On March 5, the President announced Derian’s nomination as Coordinator for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, p. 327)
22 Christopher underlined the phrase “no assignments” and wrote in the margin:
“This is in process—PD [Patt Derian] has Deputy [illegible].”
