Eastern Europe Region 105 —a measure of accommodation with the Roman Catholic and Protestant churches; and —a relatively relaxed political-cultural atmosphere, including the cultivation of ties with Hungarians living abroad. 29. While remaining a loyal Soviet ally, Kadar has for the past two years used the CSCE umbrella to pursue a deliberate but low-keyed foreign policy aimed at improving relations with the West. To this end, Kadar has: —visited four West European countries in less than four years (Austria, Italy, West Germany and France); —taken a moderate attitude toward West Europe’s Eurocommunist and socialist parties; and —promoted ties with the U.S. Hungary’s relatively liberal internal and emigration policies have facilitated the U.S. granting of MFN status and the return of the Crown of St. Stephen, the symbol of Hungarian national independence. 30. Unlike most other Warsaw Pact countries, Hungary has eschewed criticism of Romania and Yugoslavia for receiving Hua or for Ceausescu’s refusal to sign several documents submitted at the recent Warsaw Pact summit in Moscow. In such international organizations as the UN and in other public fora, Budapest has increasingly pursued matters of vital or major significance to Hungarian national interest, while not antagonizing the Soviet Union. GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 31. East Germany is of course a special case in East Central Europe. The GDR’s communist political system and highly cautious political leadership reflect the continued, anomalous position of the East German state. The GDR remains wholly dependent on an occupying force of twenty Soviet divisions. The Berlin Wall remains a grim reminder of the regime’s unpopularity. Despite widespread diplomatic recognition from the international community, the Four Powers (U.S., UK, France and USSR) retain their post-war rights and responsibilities for Germany and Berlin. While quiescent since the 1971 quadripartite agreement, Berlin, located at the center of Europe, remains a potential East-West flashpoint. 32. In the absence of a meaningful separate East German nationalism, the Honecker regime has sought to bridge the gap between party and population through policies aimed at boosting the standard of living. East Germans, for example, are permitted to use Western currency to purchase Western goods in GDR specialty shops. “Consumerism” has helped generally to meet some of the population’s rising expectations—generated in part by West German TV broadcasts which
