Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 337. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant (Schlesinger) to President Carter1 Washington, April 7, 1977 SUBJECT BREEDER REVIEW REPORT In late February, I directed the Acting Administrator of the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA)2 to establish a Steering Committee to review the Liquid Metal Fast Breeder Reactor (LMFBR) program with particular emphasis on the role of the Clinch River Breeder Reactor Project (CRBR) in the program. The Steering Committee was made up of knowledgeable opponents and proponents of the breeder reactor program. The work of the Committee has been completed and the Acting Administrator has provided me with his judgements, conclusions and recommended courses of action. The Committee reached a consensus conclusion3 that the U.S. should: —Preserve the fission option for the long term; —Research reactor technologies consistent with our nonproliferation objectives; —Recognize there is no totally proliferation-proof fission option. I regard these conclusions as sound foundations of our policy on advanced nuclear technologies and they reinforce the role of nuclear power in providing portions of our future energy needs. The Committee’s disagreements centered around the balancing of energy risks and proliferation benefits of pursuing alternative systems. The balancing of these risks and benefits is at the heart of national policy on the breeder program, and the Committee’s disagreements illuminated the central issues. The role of the CRBR is primarily a function of the larger risk-benefit issue of the breeder. 1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, James Schlesinger Papers, Box 1, Chronological File, 1977 Apr. No classification marking. The Committee’s Report is available on the National Resources Defense Council’s website. (http://docs.nrdc.org/ nuclear/files/nuc_77060801a_23.pdf) 2 Not found. 3 After the word “conclusion,” Schlesinger wrote “*” and at the bottom of the page wrote “* a delightful surprise since Committee included such [illegible] as Thomas Cochran and Russell Train.”
