Yugoslavia 268. Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, September 18, 1979 SUBJECT Military Sales to Yugoslavia (U) Attached is a blistering cable from Larry Eagleburger, our Ambassador in Belgrade, regarding our inept handling of our Yugoslav military relationship and its serious political implications.2 I feel it deserves your attention. Even allowing for Eagleburger’s non-diplomatic style, the message is unmistakably clear and well-documented: we have seriously mismanaged military sales to Yugoslavia to the point where we risk damage not only to the ties to the Yugoslav military, which we have so carefully sought to nurture over the past two years, but to our broader bilateral interests as well. Indeed, Eagleburger feels that the point has been reached where we have to get our act together or withdraw from the relationship entirely. (C) While slightly, but only slightly, overdramatized, Eagleburger’s analysis is basically valid. Much of the problem lies in cost overruns, some of which could (and should) have been avoided, others of which could not have been. Be that as it may, the fundamental point is that we have given the appearance of incompetence and ineptitude, which has seriously undermined Yugoslav confidence in our ability to respond to their needs in a timely and effective manner. As Eagleburger rightly points out, this is bound to have important consequences not only for our carefully nurtured attempts to develop a relationship with the Yugoslav military, but for our broader political relationship as The next meeting of the joint military working group is in mid- October. This is an important—perhaps the last—chance to show the Yugoslavs that we are serious about our commitments, and we simply have got to get our act together. I have talked to George Vest about this. He feels we should give Jim Siena at ISA a chance to get DOD into shape (Siena is away and returns tomorrow). However, time is running out, and DOD is so hopelessly mired down in bureaucratic 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR,
