276
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
President of the United States of America,
Washington, D.C.
Mr. President,
Dear Jimmy,
The development on the foreign exchange markets during the past
few months fills me with growing concern. From the public statement
you made yesterday, 21 December 1977,2 I take it that you have similar
worries. I therefore hurry to give you directly and without delay my as-
sessment of the situation.
From my discussions with my colleagues in the European Council
I know that they, too, share this concern. In my view, this development
is not just a transitory disturbance but possibly the beginning of a crisis
of considerable dimensions.
If this development continues it may lead to a renewed recession
and grave structural distortions, initially in the countries mainly af-
fected, but ultimately with an adverse effect on the whole world eco-
nomic system. This gives the problem a crucial political significance
over and above its economic repercussions.
As regards the economic problems, I quite appreciate that it will
not be possible for the United States Government to predict an early re-
duction of its current account deficit. A decisive factor in this respect is
your energy programme, which I hope will soon be adopted by the leg-
islative bodies. Otherwise, I see a danger of capital flows from the
OPEC countries slowing down as well, money which, up to now, has
financed part of the US deficit.
As you know, a considerable proportion of the US current account
deficit has been financed not by the reflow of capital to the United
States by the private financial markets but by central banks, principally
in Europe. To support the exchange rate they have bought in 1977 more
than 30 billion dollars and channelled them back to the United States.
Should the central banks stop absorbing these dollars then there would
be a great danger of liquidity in the Asian and European dollar market
being further inflated, which would mean an alarming growth of the
present world-wide inflation potential.
Further pressure on the dollar could, moreover, ruin our joint ef-
forts to exhort the OPEC countries to pursue a moderate price policy
for the sake of the world economy which appear to be successful at the
present time.
The overvaluation of some currencies as a consequence of dollar
undervaluation raises the danger of recessive world economic tend-
2 See footnote 2, Document 86.
