64  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
additional observations which are summarized below. I hope you find 
them helpful.
Political Factors
There are at least two major political considerations bearing on this 
decision. First, as difficult as it might be to halt production now, halt-
ing now has got to be a far easier decision than trying to halt the pro-
gram later if events unfold in such a way as to make you want to stop. 
Currently, we have about 35,000 people working on the B–1 and three 
aircraft behind us. Two years from now, if we continue, we will have 
more than 50,000 people working on the program and 15 to 20 aircraft 
behind us.
Second, a decision to halt the B–1 production program will be a 
tough one to sell to the Congress and the public given the current slow 
rate of progress in SALT and the enormous publicity that has been given 
to the Soviets’ efforts to build up their strategic capabilities. Thus, it 
might be much easier to halt the B–1 production program if such a halt 
were accompanied by other actions designed to offset public concerns.
One package of actions that might have the desired effect was 
recently suggested by an OMB staffer. It consists of three elements: (1) 
Return the B–1 to an R&D program pending further test and evalua-
tion; (2) Begin deployment of ALCM’s on older B–52’s; and (3) Begin an 
R&D program on a follow-­on cruise missile carrier.
This package would suggest that we are responding to Soviet 
improvements in their overall capabilities by not only arming the 
B–52’s with cruise missiles, but also by starting immediately on a com-
pletely new bomber system based on the ALCM. The R&D program for 
the new aircraft could be pursued at a relatively low and inexpensive 
level for several years, which might help to balance the 81 budget. This 
program could look at aircraft that are smaller than the 747 and would 
thus spread the eggs across more baskets. It could also examine the 
applicability to a cruise missile carrier of some of the more recent ideas 
for reducing radar cross section and IR signature. Finally, a more imme-
diate prospect for a large aircraft contract in place of the B–1 might win 
some extra support from states with large aerospace concerns.
The Basis for the OSD Study of the B–1
In evaluating the large backup study sent over by Harold Brown,3 
you should keep in mind the basis of some portions of that study. Spe-
cifically, while Harold’s study is a very honest effort, it is nonetheless 
likely to be somewhat biased. This is because the relatively short time 
3 Reference is to the “Staff Study for the Secretary of Defense: Modernization of the 
Strategic Bomber Force.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, 
Subject File, Box 6, B–1: 2–5/77)
