January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1345
2. The parties recognize that the negotiations must rest on a foun-
dation of mutual trust and friendship.
3. The parties agree to resume the autonomy negotiations and to
consult on a summit meeting, with times and places to be determined.
The President said that this result made Ambassador Linowitz’ trip
worthwhile.
Ambassador Linowitz agreed and said he had gotten much more
than he had expected. They had intentionally left open the dates for re-
sumption of the autonomy talks and the summit. Sadat wants the talks
to resume in mid-October, with the summit to take place in November
after the elections. He said Begin had been tough as hell on the first
day,4 and there had been a real fight. Perhaps for that reason, or his
subsequent meetings with a number of Members of the Knesset, Begin
was Mr. Nice Guy on the second day of the talks.5 Originally, Begin had
wanted an agreement to go back to the table immediately. Linowitz
had said that was impossible and he would not agree. Begin had also
rejected the idea of a summit initially, then went along on the second
day. Linowitz said he had talked very tough to Begin on the questions
of moving his office to Jerusalem and on annexation of the Golan
Heights.6 He felt he had received pretty good assurances on the Golan.
The President interjected that that was the best news he had had.
4 Of this first meeting with Begin on September 1, Linowitz reported “Begin was not
prepared to do anything now to help restart the negotiations. During our three-hour
meeting, he seemed resigned and ready to accept, if necessary, the need to stand against
the outside world. He was determined in his insistence that he will not pay ‘any price’—
public or private—to Sadat for a resumption of negotiations.” Linowitz’s summary of
their conversation was conveyed to Carter and Muskie in telegram 19407 from Cairo,
September 3. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East,
Trips/Visits File, Box 119, 8/29/80–9/5/80 Linowitz Trip to Middle East: 8–9/80)
5 Summarizing their September 2 meeting, Linowitz stated that while Begin
“clearly had been moved—at least in his attitude—by the tough line I took with him the
day before,” there “appears to have been a great deal of political ferment in Israel these
past two days, and the combined impact of seriousness of the situation, active efforts at
persuasion by some of his Cabinet colleagues, and my own long talks with him the day
before, led Begin to try to be helpful.” Linowitz continued: “Begin did not go very far on
the issues of greatest concern to Sadat”—the move of the Prime Minister’s office to East
Jerusalem and settlements—but agreed to a statement to restart the talks that Linowitz
could take to Sadat. (Telegram 19408, from Cairo, September 3; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Trips/Visits File, Box 119, 8/29/80–9/5/80
Linowitz Trip to Middle East: 8–9/80) During his visit to Israel, Linowitz also met with
Shamir on September 1. A summary of their conversation is in telegram 238780 to Tel
Aviv and Cairo, September 9. (Ibid.) Linowitz also met with a group of Israeli Cabinet
Ministers, including Burg, Shamir, and Sharon, on September 2, to discuss the state of
U.S.-Israeli relations. A summary is in telegram 238741 to Cairo, Jerusalem, and Tel Aviv,
September 9. (Ibid.)
6 Although a formal bill calling for the annexation of the Golan Heights, occupied
by Israel since the June 1967 war, was not to be brought to the Knesset until October, re-
ports indicated that support for annexation was growing. (Dial Torgerson, “Israelis
Working to Annex Golan Heights,” Los Angeles Times, August 27, 1980, p. B14) The bill
was ultimately defeated in a Knesset vote on December 22.
