September 18–December 16, 1978 217 the legitimate representative of the Palestinians. Hussein seems also to be under pressure from the other Arabs not to break ranks and join Sadat. Syrian President Assad called him late yesterday, and Hussein spoke with Saudi Prince Fahd as well. 5. Following a special meeting chaired by King Khalid, the Saudi Cabinet also issued an official statement on Camp David. We believe it is likely that the Saudi and Jordanian statements on Camp David may have been partially coordinated. The Saudi statement called the documents an “unacceptable formula for a definitive peace” because “it did not make absolutely clear Israel’s intention to withdraw from all Arab territories it occupied, including Jerusalem.” The statement also noted that the Agreements failed to record the Palestinian right to selfdetermination and ignored the role of the PLO as recognized by Arab summits. 6. The Saudi statement goes on to say that, in spite of its reservations, the Saudi Government “does not consider that it has a right to interfere in the internal affairs of any Arab country or to oppose such a country’s right to regain its lost territories by way of armed struggle or peaceful means as long as these do not contradict the higher Arab interests.” The statement praised President Carter for his efforts but said Saudi Arabia’s decision was based on its deep commitment to its Islamic and Arab principles and to the decisions of Arab conferences. It called for a collective Arab stance which would lead to victory. We believe, however, that the Saudis are indicating that they do not object to Egypt’s negotiating the recovery of the Sinai but they oppose any agreement with Israel which fails to meet the fundamental demands of the other Arabs. (Confidential) 7. Israel. Embassy Tel Aviv reports2 that several dozen Gush Emunim members established an unauthorized settlement a short distance south of Nablus on September 18. Gush leaders claim this is the site of the biblical Elon Moreh and the action was termed the “proper answer by the land of Israel faithful to the Camp David Agreement.” The settlers have been joined by Knesset member Geula Cohen. Deputy Defense Minister Tzipori told the Embassy that he wanted to prevent the settlers from getting to the site but was overruled by a high authority, probably, the Embassy reports, Acting Prime Minister Yadin. The site was surrounded yesterday by the IDF. Yadin told the Embassy that the settlers would be removed forcibly if they did not leave voluntarily but he postponed resolution of the problem until conferring with Weizman 2 Telegram 12710 from Tel Aviv, September 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780381–0538)
