942  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
3. The PDs are loosely drafted. When public, they would irritate 
our relations with, among others, our Allies (especially in the Pacific) 
and the Saudis. For example:
—We should not single out East Asia as an area where all is well 
and which can now be made a third priority. This would harm our rela-
tions with Japan, China, and other East Asian friends.
—Public reference to Turkey as a potential “threat-­in-­being” on the 
flank of Soviet aggression would eliminate what chance there now is of 
getting the Turks to be more cooperative.
—The formulation “comprehensive, regionwide use of Saudi 
wealth” would cause us nothing but grief if the Saudis learned of it.
—We would only damage the security framework if it became 
known that the DCI was organizing a “regional integrated intelligence 
program.”
I have supplied Zbig with further specific comments on the drafts.
222.	 Presidential Directive/NSC–621
Washington, January 15, 1981
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of The Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Office of Management & Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Modifications in U.S. National Strategy (U)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 24, PD/
NSC–62. Secret. Carter signed the top of the directive. Brzezinski sent the final version 
of the directive to Carter for his signature under cover of a January 14 memorandum in 
which he described two slight changes that Brown recommended (changing “maintain-
ing improved” to “continued improvement of” relations with the People’s Republic of 
China; and adding Australia to the United Kingdom and France as countries to contrib-
ute forces to the Persian Gulf security framework) and of which Brzezinski approved. 
Brzezinski went on to say that “Ed Muskie chooses not to comment on the wording of 
the directives. He maintains his previous position recommending that the directives not 
be issued.” (Ibid.)
