1110 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement consider it is entitled to use force in respect our dispute Taiwan area? Does it still reject unqualified renunciation use force? D. To state question in terms concrete content our discussions over last half year, was December 1 draft your side really intended as gen­ eral statement of principle fully accepted by your side? If so, how can your government insist on withholding application of principle from very area where need for it is greatest? Or how can your government haggle and bargain over its application to that area, establishing pre­ conditions and setting time limits? E. If your governments principle which appears be stated in draft December 1, how can it object to clarification this statement on princi­ ple? Surely it obvious my country could not accept declaration which prejudiced its right self-­defense. Surely your own government would not want prejudice its own right this regard. What possible objection can there be to making this clear in declaration itself. F. I wish to record my most earnest hope your government will accept principle of renunciation force without qualification, and it will be possible for two us, on basis of area of agreement already reached, to go on to issuance of declaration clearly and unequivocally embodying that principle. 2. Wang, speaking from prepared statement, said would soon be one year since began talks. Most urgent, important task talk his achievement relaxation and eliminations tension Taiwan area, whereby fundamental adjustment abnormal relations existing between China and U.S. might be brought about and cause peace in Far East and world may be benefited. It in this spirit their side been conducting negotiations with our side on making renunciation force declaration. 3. Continuing from notes taken during my statement Wang said at outset these discussions their side hoped we be able resolve ques­ tion relaxing and eliminating tension Taiwan area by peaceful means. However, such peaceful settlement must be in conformity generally accepted international principles and also in conformity fundamen­ tal interests of sovereign states. Central issue between two countries which requires resolution is that of Taiwan area dispute. Taiwan is territory of China. Chinese people can in no circumstances renounce right sovereignty over Taiwan. Taiwan within framework Chinese territory therefore Chinese people never permit any foreign country interfere in this question. Exercise of sovereign rights over Taiwan by Chinese Government is exactly in conformity with generally accepted principle international conduct. 4. Wang said I had stated in discussing question dispute Taiwan area, US would not prejudice right self-­defense that area. He could only say these remarks aggressive. This US position precisely what their
