500.A15c/5: Telegram
[Document 189]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, November 8, 1927—6 p.m.
54. Your 76, October 27, 1 p.m. By resolution of the Assembly and of the
Council of the League of Nations, the Preparatory Commission is requested
to create a subcommittee or commission composed of representatives of all
the states participating in the Conference. Consideration of the subjects of
security and arbitration is the declared object. It appears from a reading of
the resolutions both of the Assembly and of the Council together that scope
of inquiry is broad one; that it includes mutual covenants and guarantees of
security, treaties of arbitration both bilateral and multilateral, and also
question of sanctions for enforcement of covenants and guarantees.
Evidently whole subject of Geneva protocol of 1924 is in this way sought to
be opened again, with a view as well, perhaps, to wider application of
Locarno formula.51 Conclusion is difficult to avoid that this proposal is
wide departure from (at least, striking enlargement of) purposes of
Preparatory Commission as these were originally laid down. If proposal be
adopted, it would virtually establish a parallel organization to Preparatory
Commission. Assembly’s resolution clearly expresses opinion that work of
Preparatory Commission is practically in suspense and that further progress
cannot be made until problem of security is worked out. It appears that
League, instead of taking up problem of security as strictly a League matter
as has been its practice heretofore, is adopting rather peculiar expedient of
attempting to work problem out through and under Preparatory
Commission. Whether or not this procedure is merely device to bring this
Government into that discussion, it is certain that the United States cannot,
in any event, enter into mutual covenants that guarantee security or
undertake to use either its military or naval forces in the application of
sanctions or sign arbitration treaties such as European nations seem to
regard as essential to their particular needs. We are inclined to believe,
