432
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
eral years and is now my deputy on the CTB Delegation, gave Mo-
rokhov an oral rundown of our PNE experience.
With the Brezhnev initiative of November 2,3 we decided to hold
off on delivery of our paper while waiting for a clearer picture of the
implications of the new Soviet PNE moratorium proposal. Subse-
quently, Morokhov has taken the view that the Soviet Government con-
tinues to see great importance in PNEs. I therefore believe we should
now send a copy of our report to Gromyko. In addition to getting our
views on the very limited economic value of PNEs to the Soviet leader-
ship, it would demonstrate our willingness to engage them in a contin-
uing and serious dialogue on the PNE issue.
With your concurrence, I will give Dobrynin a copy of the attached
package, which contains our PNE report and a cover note from Cy
Vance to Gromyko.4 DOE, DOD, JCS, and State concur in forwarding
the report. The cover note has been worked out with State.
Paul C. Warnke
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency5
Washington, undated
Summary: US Perspectives on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions
The US opposition to permitting PNEs under a CTB reflects our
conclusion that the potential economic benefits of PNEs are not suffi-
cient to override serious verification and non-proliferation problems
that would be associated with their use. Our PNE verification and
non-proliferation concerns have been made clear in the CTB negotia-
tions; this paper presents a review of the economic utility of PNEs
based on experience gained in the US PNE program.
PNE applications were studied by the US over a period of twenty
years, and in selected areas field tests were conducted using nuclear ex-
plosives. US industry was directly involved, and was relied upon to
identify promising applications of PNEs. The ultimate determination of
the economic value of PNEs was made largely by industry. PNEs were
3 See footnote 2, Document 176.
4 The cover note from Vance is not attached.
5 No classification marking.
