Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 289 of highly MIRV’d land-­based ballistic missiles. Eventually the SS-18 would become obsolete. Both sides could prevent or restrict the additional deployment of the SS-24 and the MX to replace silo-­based MIRV missiles. Marshal Akhromeyev: We’ll think about it. Admiral Crowe: This addresses what we’re concerned with. Lt Gen Scowcroft: It’s important if we can take steps in the right direction to expand confidence. Marshal Akhromeyev: That is absolutely correct. The answers to these questions should be found in a future treaty. Lt Gen Scowcroft: We will think very carefully to understand your personal reflections. We will not be held to anything on our side. Marshal Akhromeyev: Remember what happened to the “walk in the woods.” Let this stay quiet. Lt Gen Scowcroft: This is not a bad idea. We’ll keep this discussion between ourselves and will include Dobrynin. Marshal Akhromeyev: There is one question left to pose: what of the necessity to negotiate naval forces? This is quite a political problem to the USSR. It bears personally on the political leaders of our country. When the Cold War began you deployed large naval forces and bases around the world. These bases were not only directed against the USSR. But the bases actually surrounded the USSR. I don’t know who to blame, but the Soviet Union deployed powerful ground forces in Europe. Those two threats balanced each other. Nuclear weapons came into existence. We’re now negotiating on START and CFE. We made a radical decision that we should be prepared for radical reductions in Europe to make NATO and the Warsaw Pact even. We will cut ½ million men, to include 300,000 members of the ground forces. With the U.S. Vienna proposal we would further reduce our forces by ½ million men. Our 1,600,000 man ground force component would be down to 800,000 men, so all the threat talk about the Soviet Union would disappear. Once we have a radical solution to CFE, we still have to find a solution to the naval force question. Gorbachev is concerned about a security regime which would reduce forces in Europe but would keep naval forces at their present level. We have no credible answer to this. The answer is to begin naval talks. We will not use the naval talks to disarm you. If the talks are not started, a radical solution to CFE is in doubt. When we reach an agreement on CFE and the treaty is ready for signing, but the naval forces situation is the same as today, no one in the USSR will be ready to sign. Lt Gen Scowcroft: The are two elements: CFE and naval forces. Our naval problem is the requirement to reinforce Europe. As requirements decline, we may assume that some reductions will be translated to the
