3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
303
92.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 16, 1978
SUBJECT
Middle East, Horn of Africa, SALT, Other Multilateral Matters
PARTICIPANTS
US
USSR
The Secretary
Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin
Marshall Shulman, S/MS
Gerard Smith, S/AS (Portions)
SUMMARY: During a tour d’horizon at a luncheon prior to Do-
brynin’s return to Moscow on consultations, the Secretary handed Do-
brynin oral notes2 responding to previous Soviet inquiries about South
African nuclear test plans and Israeli possession of nuclear weapons.3
Dobrynin presented an oral note4 deploring the Israeli military action
in southern Lebanon and urging the US to use its influence to induce
Israeli withdrawal. The Secretary said we would call for Israeli with-
drawal and the establishment of a UN peacekeeping force. On the Horn
of Africa, the Secretary expressed satisfaction that the Ethiopians had
not crossed the border into Somalia but indicated concern about re-
ports of reprisals in the Ogaden. Dobrynin said the Ethiopians had
been told that the Soviets and Cubans “did not intend to and preferred
not to” become involved in Eritrea.
MIDDLE EAST: Dobrynin handed over an oral note on the Israel-
Lebanon situation. The note asserted that Israel’s military action is dan-
gerous and that the risk of involvement by other Middle East states
cannot be ruled out. It said Israeli military intervention in Lebanon
could set back by many years the possibility of a Middle East settle-
ment and urged the US to exert influence on Israel to halt the interven-
tion and withdraw.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 3, CV–Dobrynin, 3/16/78. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Shulman. The meeting took
place at the Department of State. An unknown hand struck through the typed date of
March 21 on the original and wrote March 16 above it. The March 11 memorandum of
conversation (Document 90), indicates that Dobrynin was scheduled to meet with Vance
on March 16.
2 Not found attached.
3 For earlier Soviet inquiries about South African and Israeli nuclear capabilities,
see Documents 83, 87, and 90.
4 Attached but not printed.
