682 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I creasingly ready to respond to a call for a more active American role in the world to protect our vital interests, as the President defines them. There are, however, two sharp differences between the present Soviet challenge in South Asia and the threat in 1947. The Soviet intervention in the present case is both more blatant and more brutal than in 1947, and the Gulf is unquestionably more vital to Western interests today than were Greece and Turkey 30 years ago. (C) 135. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, January 3, 1980 SUBJECT Strategic Reaction to the Afghanistan Problem The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan is the first time since 1945 that the Soviet Union used its military forces directly to expand its power. This took place even though we warned the Soviet Union of adverse consequences. Moreover, Afghanistan is the seventh2 state since 1975 in which communist parties have come to power with Soviet guns and tanks, with Soviet military power and assistance (Vietnam, Angola, Laos, South Yemen, Cambodia, Ethiopia, and now probably Afghanistan). Four of these takeovers occurred since January 1977. I think it is clear that the Soviets have discounted our likely reaction and that they have concluded that our previous expressions of concern need not be heeded. In effect, because we did not overreact to their previous acts of assertiveness, they have discounted the likelihood of a genuinely punitive reaction on our part to this extraordinary application of Soviet military power. In the light of the foregoing, I would like to urge you to consider altering our formula on arms for China from “we will not sell arms to 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Historical Material, Geographic File, Box 17, Southwest Asia/Persian Gulf Afghanistan: (12/26/79–1/4/80). Secret. The President initialed the top right-hand corner of the memorandum. To the right of the subject line, Brzezinski added the following: “(This was drafted before your very eloquent statement this afternoon. But the recommends. still stand).” Regarding the White House statement of January 3, see footnote 4, Document 136. 2 Brzezinski underlined this word.
