504
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
self-government is established after the elections. Begin did not re-
spond. He said that he was not qualified to respond to that. I told him
that this was not an official suggestion, but just an idea. As you know,
this is what you outlined Sunday before last when I talked to you.4
President Sadat: Right, Mr. President.
President Carter: If we can conclude the negotiations on the treaty
and accept it as it is and then concentrate on the letter which would tie
the West Bank/Gaza self-government to the Sinai withdrawal or to a
date to be concluded at the end of next year, that would put you in a
very favorable position, and would open an opportunity for success.
President Sadat: Hermann told [me] about this.5 I get your point,
Mr. President.
President Carter: Good. I just don’t want the world to think that we
and Israel agree, and that you are the obstacle to peace, because obvi-
ously that has never been the case.
President Sadat: For that I am really intending to make this reassess-
ment and I can contact you in two days.
President Carter: I will be looking forward to that.
President Sadat: Very good.
President Carter: How are you personally? Are you getting along
okay?
President Sadat: Very good. How are Rosalynn and the children?
President Carter: They are fine and all of us are going to Camp
David for our Thanksgiving late tonight. We have invited our family
and Rosalynn’s family to join us there.
President Sadat: Marvelous, marvelous. I wish you all happiness
and success, Mr. President.
President Carter: Thank you very much. I really appreciate a chance
to talk to you. The other point that I want to make with you, Mr. Presi-
dent, is that whatever you can do improve the communication with the
Saudi Arabians would be very helpful to us.
President Sadat: Fahd sent me the ambassador today.
President Carter: That is very fine.
President Sadat: Yes. But we shall be doing it discreetly.
President Carter: That’s understandable and I approve of that, of
course. Well, good luck to you, Mr. President.
President Sadat: Never worry about this question.
President Carter: All right.
4 See Document 132.
5 See Document 142.
