1402ŌĆā Foreign Relations, 1955ŌĆō1957, Volume III, Supplement
7. Wang continued. Insofar as implementation of the agreement 
on the first item of the agenda is concerned, if anyone is dissatisfied 
it is his side. As is generally known, since the opening of the talks all 
Americans who desire to return have done so except criminal offenders 
serving prison terms, whereas on the U.S. side the Chinese who are 
imprisoned in jails there still remain in these jails without any change 
in their situation.
8. Wang continued. Our side consistently obstructs the return of the 
Chinese nationals who wish to return. Those persons who returned all 
spoke of the unreasonable obstruction by our authorities. Our authori┬Ł
ties have employed many means of obstructing their return. One of the 
familiar patterns is when one of their citizens lets it be known that he 
wants to go, threats are made, political questions are asked, and he is 
even threatened with being sent to Taiwan or resort is made to induce┬Ł
ments by offering him what is known as permanent residence. When 
the above threats failed, the next step is rough handling. The individual 
is detained for immediate deportation and is not allowed a reasonable 
time to prepare for deportation, including persons who are sick.
9. Wang continued. Hu Teh-┬Łyun, who was deported from New 
York in March of this year has experienced this suffering. Mr. Hu nearly 
lost his life as his serious stomach ailment was not properly cared for 
during his detention.
10. Wang continued. As to the practice of our authorities in put┬Ł
ting Chinese students who want to go home in mental hospitals, 
Mr.┬ĀTseng Kuang-┬Łchih has provided a solid example. He must refute 
my explanation made at our last meeting on this case. Mr. Tseng 
Kuang-┬Łchih always desired to return. For this reason Wang gave me 
his name at last meeting. Yet instead of taking measures in accordance 
with the agreed announcement our authorities had to put him in hos┬Ł
pital for fourteen months despite the fact that his studies and work 
were normal. Confining him for mental illness was evidently an act of 
reprisal. It also was to frighten other Chinese students who wanted to 
return. When our authorities failed to stop his leaving they retarded 
his departure.
11. Wang continued. In the case of Dr. Lin Lan-┬Łying and 
Mr.┬ĀHsiao Chi-┬Łmei they also reported similar incidents.
12. Wang continued. He must point out this obstruction is the pol┬Ł
icy of our side and also violates our agreement and all humanitarian 
principles. He demanded an accounting 42 and 47 persons who still 
have not yet returned.
13. I replied that I regretted that I could not find in anything he 
had said here this morning the slightest indication that his government 
is willing to renounce its threat to use force if it could not otherwise 
obtain its policy objectives in the Taiwan area. This is the difficulty we
