February 1951–February 1952
41
approval on March 21, provides broad latitude for United States meas-
ures along these lines.3
Recommendations
(1) That NEA pursue discussions with CIA along the foregoing
lines and urge that agency to proceed with appropriate aspects of its ac-
tion program, pointing out that the success of the program depends in
very large measure upon the caliber of the CIA personnel assigned to
the task.
(2) That instructions agreed to by the Department and CIA be com-
municated to Tehran, authorizing the implementation of such elements
of the program as are fully approved by the Ambassador.4
3 An apparent reference to NSC 107, Document 6.
4 In the left margin next to these two recommendations, Matthews wrote: “I agree.”
In Kermit Roosevelt’s account of the same meeting, dated March 17, he wrote that “Mr.
Berry informed CNE that Deputy Under-Secretary Matthews had read and approved in
substance the reference memorandum. He said that this approval was qualified in terms
that had been understood fully by CIA and State Department representatives from the
very beginning—namely, that the paper was taken as an indication of general lines to be
followed in an accelerated OPC program, that the specific illustrations included in the
paper would require careful evaluation in the field, and that the whole program would
be subject to coordination with and approval of the ambassador.” Roosevelt also dis-
cussed with Berry the need to place additional personnel and funding at the disposal of
the OPC in Tehran to “assist the Ambassador for the purposes of this program.” Roose-
velt concluded by noting that “It was agreed that a further meeting of State and CIA rep-
resentatives on this program should be held as soon as possible, preferably on 19 March
. . . CNE strongly recommends that ADPC and, if possible, DD/P should attend this
meeting and should urge again the point that the CIA program can be effective to any sig-
nificant extent only as part of a vigorous national program. It is feared that so far we have
made this point to little avail.” (Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A,
Box 11, Folder 14, Iran 1951–1953)
