772  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
62. I said in reading paragraph I had referred to this morning, 
I had not left out clause on self defense. I was simply trying to read it 
in context so as to make exactly clear meaning and interpretation that 
appears there.
63. I said what I was saying was that in making declaration each of 
us was saying on own behalf simply that we were doing this and saying 
this without prejudice to what each of us considered to be our inherent 
rights of individual and collective self defense. By that means I was 
attempting to make just as clear as I could what this in fact says, at least 
insofar as English is concerned.
64. I said I was doing this in order try clear up apparent confusion 
that still existed as to exact meaning and our intention in including it. 
I hoped that Wang would reconsider it in this light, because I felt Wang 
might not have fully understood it.
65. Wang said (after consultation with Lai) I had stated that I did 
not consider their December 1 draft meaningful declaration. However, 
I would recall that on December 1, when he put forth that draft, I had 
stated that I welcomed their action in putting that draft forward, and 
said that it represented progress in talks. My remarks on that occasion 
served to prove that December 1 draft of their side was meaningful 
declaration.
66. Wang said if I did consider their December 1 draft a consider­
able advance in our discussion on issuance of announcement, he did 
not see why we could not continue our progress along that line.
67. Wang said with regard January 12 draft of US side, he had 
made it clear at previous meetings that as regards self defense clause 
included in that draft, it not question of what sort of words to use to 
express that idea. He had said that it was substantive question with 
which we must deal.
68. Wang said if I genuinely hoped that we should make further 
progress in talks, then he would hope I would be able set forth more 
concrete opinions on basis their December 1 draft at next meeting.
69. Wang said if it my intention to insist on this clause regarding 
self defense in Taiwan area, and keep heckling about this clause in our 
discussions, he just didn’t see how we could make any progress in our 
discussions.
70. I replied that I had only two brief things. First, I did say that 
I welcomed their draft of December 1 and did consider it advance over 
position Wang had previously been maintaining.
71. I said I not only said this, but I had shown that I thought this 
was case by my taking his draft as basis for negotiation and by agree­
ing accept it as declaration with two small amendments that we had
