National Security Policy  555
question affecting Soviet economic policy over the next five years is 
whether these multiple priorities, all of which bear on the competi­
tive struggle with the West in which the Soviet leaders see themselves 
involved, can be met simultaneously. On the whole, we believe that 
the Seven-Year Plan production goals are feasible, except in agricul­
ture, but that their achievement will impose considerable strains on 
the economy, and that some programs may have to be modified as the 
plan period proceeds.
Prospects for Economic Growth
54. The Soviet economy will grow less rapidly during the next 
seven years than it did during the last seven. Soviet gross national prod­
uct (GNP) increased at an average annual rate close to 7 percent from 
1950 to 1955, and at about 6.5 percent from 1955 to 1957. This slight 
slackening in the rate of growth obscures a decline in the growth of 
industrial production from an annual rate of about 11 percent to about 
9 percent, and a nearly offsetting acceleration in the growth of agricul­
ture. Because of favorable weather and a large agricultural output the 
rate of growth of GNP in 1958 has apparently again risen somewhat. 
Over the period 1958–1965 we believe that GNP will probably grow 
at an average annual rate of about 6 percent. At this figure, assuming 
that the US achieves an average annual rate of 3.5 percent,5 Soviet GNP 
in 1965 will be, in dollar terms, about half that of the US, as compared 
with about 40 percent of US GNP at present.
55. As Soviet GNP continues to gain in size relative to US GNP, the 
differences between Soviet and US use of national product will con­
tinue to be marked. With a GNP only about two-­fifths the size of US 
GNP, the dollar value of Soviet defense expenditure is approximately 
equal to that of the US.6 Soviet investment, in dollar values currently 
around two-­thirds as great as US investment, will grow more rap­
idly than Soviet GNP during the next seven years, and will approach 
still closer the absolute size of US investment. Investment in industry 
alone was about 90 percent of US investment in industry (manufac­
turing, mining, and utilities) in 1957. The dollar value of Soviet total 
consumption is less than one-­third that of the US. Soviet consumption, 
on the other hand, will increase at a slower rate than total GNP during 
the 1958–1965 period, thus becoming a smaller share of the latter. (See 
graph below.)
5 This projected rate of the US is approximately midway between the postwar rate 
and the long run trend. [Footnote is in the original.]
6 The dollar value referred to here was derived by valuing manpower at appropriate 
US pay rates and other items of military significance at comparable US costs. [Footnote 
is in the original.]
