666  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
145.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, August 1, 1979
It has become evident that we have won the debate on SALT II in 
the Senate hearings and with the media (and probably the public). But 
we have not yet won the Senate vote. There will be difficult bargaining, 
in the process of achieving a two-­thirds vote of approval in the Senate, 
over the issue of defense programs and budgets. Sam Nunn speaks for 
a group without whose votes we probably can’t get Senate approval of 
SALT. He clearly believes that the present five-­year defense program 
is inadequate, and that the financial plan won’t fund even the pres-
ent five-­year program. He will demand a commitment, whose exact 
nature he can’t yet specify, to an annual growth in the defense budget 
of at least three percent (perhaps more) after actual inflation. At the 
same time, others such as George McGovern could well be brought to 
vote against SALT II by such a commitment. And whether the Con-
gress would actually be willing to put money where some of its mem-
bers’ mouths are is questionable. John Stennis wants to support SALT 
II and is for a stronger defense program, but is more influenced than 
Nunn by fiscal conservatism; his views may provide a good vehicle for 
compromise.
My present thought is that one way to meet the Nunn position 
may be to revise the fiscal guidance for the Five Year Defense Plan 
(1981–5) to assure a genuine after-­inflation annual budget growth rate 
of three percent. The Congress has those figures, and it is on the basis 
of the claimed growth rate and assumed inflation rates contained in it, 
along with the past effects of underestimated inflation rates, that Nunn 
has taken his position. Another (and they are not mutually exclusive) 
way would be to submit a FY 1980 supplemental. This could cover the 
amount of Congressional cuts (which I anticipate could well be 1B$ 
or more—­the House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee will rec-
ommend a 2B$ cut) and/or the unprogrammed increases in fuel costs 
(which will amount to 0.9B$ for FY 1980).
In this situation, I believe it would be useful for you to consider the 
findings of a DOD examination of the military balance, specifically the 
military investment balance.2 I described these findings at the June 4 
NSC meeting which updated the Comprehensive Net Assessment 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski 
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 60, Miscellaneous: 6–10/79. Top Secret; Eyes Only. 
Alpha Channel.
2 See Document 144. The July 5 memorandum from Brown to Carter and the full 
report of the Military Investment Balance were not found.
