868 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV going to have to make some very hard choices in finalizing this budget in December. You clearly cannot make these choices now, but having a sense of what they are will be important in the months ahead. (U) The basic problem is that the required force readiness and RDF capabilities that appear necessary in this new era of Soviet aggressiveness (combined with unforeseen cost increases in some defense programs and in military compensation) cost more than your current fiscal guidance for 82 can hope to support. (C) OMB’s memo suggests too strongly that budget scrubs, particularly in non-­major hardware and support equipment area, can go a long way toward solving the funding problem. I doubt it—­the requirements are too large, readiness is too strongly related to many of the kinds of non-­major hardware and support items OMB refers to, and the long standing funding pressures that have been felt in these accounts have been too high to leave much juice to be squeezed out now. Thus, some combination of the three alternatives given below must be adopted this fall. (S) The real alternatives are 1) to increase the budget guidance by about $5B for 1982, and $50–75B for the 82–86 period, 2) broadly slow the rate of longer term improvements by cutting RDT&E and slowing some major procurement programs and 3) selectively slow down improvements planned for some specific mission areas or theaters, with the most obvious candidate being NATO. (S) All three alternatives involve changes in our basic defense plans—­ changes that must be informed and justified with even better intelligence, analyses, and assessments than you have had for making defense budget decisions in the past: —If we are going to cut back on our previously planned improvements for NATO, we should have identified, at least for ourselves, specific feasible adjustments our Allies can make to take up the slack. We should also carry out a careful analysis of the political effects on Europe of such cutbacks. Cutbacks that are large enough to satisfy our other defense funding requirements could sharply undercut our efforts to lead the alliance toward an improved western military posture. —We must establish some benchmarks that will allow us to judge whether we have struck the proper balance between readiness-­related short term improvements and the longer term improvements that flow from RDT&E and major procurement programs. Cutting longer term procurement in favor of higher readiness, as the services propose to do, may be a reasonable strategy. However, if we do not carefully justify this move, OMB’s fears that Congress will simply add back any procurements we cut will be realized. —We need to reassess the assumptions OMB describes as underlying our defense plans—­particularly those justifying improvement
