Chapter 6, June–December 1990 911 171. Memorandum From Richard Davis of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)1 Washington, December 4, 1990 SUBJECT Principals’ Meeting on ALCMs and PPCM in START, December 4, 1990, 1:00 P.M. This is the first2 of two meetings to prepare START issues for Secretary Baker’s December 10–12 meetings with Shevardnadze in Houston. This meeting should be devoted to ALCMs and PPCM; a separate meeting on Thursday3 will address Data Denial. Any issues that remain unresolved should go to the President for decision before the Soviets arrive on Friday. If the discussion reveals the potential for U.S. movement on PPCM, it could give us useful negotiating leverage to protect B–2 from inspection and ensure that B–1s are not counted as ALCM carriers. For this reason, you may want to address ALCMs first, to give the JCS an opportunity to air their concerns. That discussion may help reveal our relative stakes in the ALCM and PPCM issues. ALCMs The primary question is how far can we go in permitting Soviet inspections of heavy bomber bases, in order to gain Soviet agreement on other issues, including no B–2 inspections and not counting the B–1 as an ALCM carrier. In addition, the JCS will likely seek agreement that the dozen or so second order ALCM issues be presented to the Soviets and resolved as a package. Their proposal makes tactical sense as a way to complicate repeated Soviet attempts to reopen ALCM/heavy bomber issues, but these second-­order issues do not need to be discussed in your meeting. B–1 ALCM-­carrier. All agree that we have no flexibility in our current position that the B–1 not be counted as an ALCM carrier. To count 95 B–1s as carrying 10 ALCMs each would put us way over the 6000 limit. All agree this is a treaty stopper. B–2 Inspection. The issue of B–2 inspections also could be a treaty stopper. The JCS are adamant in their opposition to any inspection of 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01033–030, START—November 1990. Secret. Sent for information. Sent through Kanter. 2 No minutes were found. 3 December 6.
