1956 671 fact that US had failed submit list of Chinese in US, Indian Embassy had no means inform these people. 70. Wang said in addition many Chinese students in US have writ­ ten home their families complaining of many difficulties and obstacles they encountering. 71. Wang said most conspicuous case is that of Liu Yung-­ming. Liu innocent person who never committed any offenses against US yet he had been confined in mental hospital long time. Even after agreed announcement Sept 10 US Govt failed take any measures regarding him. It only after Wang had written letter to me that Liu allowed return. 72. Wang said as he stated at last meeting although he welcomed measures taken effect Liu’s return, he entirely dissatisfied with treat­ ment Liu subjected to for such long time. 73. Wang said furthermore I had failed give them precise informa­ tion concerning any Chinese in US prisons. They had seen no measures taken by US Govt to remove requirement for Chinese in US secure entry permits for Taiwan. All these things indicated hindrances in way of return of Chinese in US. 74. Wang said he hoped I would make investigation into situation these people whose names he gave me in his letters as well as lists he gave me at last meeting and at today’s meeting. He hoped measures would be taken assisting them return. 75. Wang said he would like point out names these people were not included in list I gave them of Chinese who desire return. He wished express his dissatisfaction over this fact. 76. I replied that with regard Liu, I simply wanted point out no action ever taken by US Govt prevent his departure. Liu was and still is sick man. He hospitalized many years at public expense in US. Only member of family who apparently ever took trouble correspond with hospital was Liu’s father. 77. I said if Wang would refer to full record correspondence between father and hospital he would note that father asked that Liu’s treatment be continued. 78. I said soon as word received that Liu’s wife did not desire have treatment continued but wanted him return, and that he was willing return, although Liu not fully recovered arrangements made for him depart. There certainly no legitimate grounds for complaint regarding his treatment. In fact it would seem to me quite opposite. 79. Wang said superintendent of hospital in which Liu kept wrote letter which fully proved that Liu could have left hospital long ago. Liu also wanted return. His family always wanted him return. However, he not able do so for long time. Question of Liu and his situation quite clear.
