200
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
months of the Administration have produced several areas of friction;
to some extent this reflects Soviet difficulty in adjusting to the new style
and emphasis of your Administration. There are also genuine areas of
new contention—particularly on the theme of human rights. But the
basic interests of both the US and USSR in avoiding crisis and tension
remain unaltered.
—Arms Control. SALT is the centerpiece of the process. We have
found a framework for agreement and now must establish enough con-
fidence between the US and USSR to achieve agreements that reduce, not
merely limit, our strategic arsenals. Achieving such agreements is a major
goal, as is a comprehensive test ban. We will also work on other detente
and disarmament related issues, including an MBFR agreement, in-
creasing East-West trade and all the issues involved in the Helsinki Final
Act.
We would also hope, over the next four years, to reach better im-
plicit understandings with Moscow of “rules of the game” governing
Soviet and US activities in third areas. Explicit agreement might be
found on the Indian Ocean.
A halt to the pace of nuclear proliferation and agreements on the re-
duction in conventional arms transfers by the major developed country
suppliers are key complementary processes, as well as ends in them-
selves. We can legitimately hope to freeze the number of nuclear
weapons-capable states at six, at least for the coming four years. Energy
issues complicate our negotiations with our OECD colleagues on nu-
clear non-proliferation, and long-term progress will be slow and uncer-
tain. We can hope to stabilize and possibly reduce the total volume of
arms sales through strong negotiating efforts. Since Saudi Arabia, Iran
and Israel are the big three of the arms sales, peace in the Middle East
will be the key to any longer-term substantial reductions.
In addition to curtailing the weaponry of war and US-Soviet con-
flict, we must work to contain regional, local, or civil wars which
threaten to involve the great powers, or which could seriously weaken
our friends. This means meeting security commitments and main-
taining military strength, as well as exploring initiatives in various
trouble spots as they arise. Hence a policy keyed to the following cen-
tral points:
—Middle East. Your talks with Arab and Israeli leaders have
cleared the air for constructive discussion. Even recognizing the
sudden complications of a new Israeli government, we have to build on
that basis to explore mutually advantageous solutions, and launch ne-
gotiations for a lasting Middle East settlement. It is hard to be sanguine
about a lasting settlement, but we must try to achieve one within the
next year or so. At minimum, we must continue to try to avert another
war.
