192  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
—The threat to Minuteman is not so imminent or certain that com-
mitment to an alternative system must be made in FY 1979.
—Minuteman will remain a significant survivable component of 
the US deterrent throughout most of the 1980s until the Soviets succeed 
in developing and deploying warheads of greatly improved accuracy.
—Due to its complexity, small area of deployment, and technical 
aspects of the trench design, the M–X trench system has potential vul-
nerabilities which require further assessment and considerable uncer-
tainty remains in assessments of its survivability.
—In addition to novel basing systems, other less costly options 
for enhancing survivability of Minuteman including relatively simple 
defensive measures should be more fully explored.
On the basis of these conclusions, commitment to full-­scale devel-
opment of the M–X trench mobile system as proposed in the FY 1979 
defense budget request ($260 M) appears premature. I recognize that 
there may be overriding political considerations, such as the impact on 
the domestic SALT debate and international perceptions of US resolve, 
which in your judgment could necessitate support for the Defense pro-
posal. However, on the technical merits of the issue, I would recom-
mend that you defer full-­scale development and substantially reduce 
funding for M–X in the FY 1979 budget, at least down to the level of 
effort provided in FY 1978 (about $150 M).
The Panel also noted that a decision to develop a new missile can 
and should be made on considerations that are separable from those 
of maintaining ICBM survivability. These include the impact on cri-
sis stability, concerns about aging of the Minuteman force, targeting 
requirements and political perceptions. The panel confined itself to 
vulnerability analysis for its initial effort, but if you think it would be 
useful, we will examine this broader issue as well.
	
Attachment
	
Executive Summary of a Report Prepared by the Vulnerability 
Panel of the Office of Science and Technology Policy2
Washington, undated
I. The proposed M–X weapons system includes a missile which is 
larger, more accurate and carries more warheads than Minuteman III, 
and a mobile basing system to make the missile more survivable.
The proposed M–X funding plan for FY 79 allocates about $200 M 
to missile development. This can be viewed as a commitment to the 
2 Secret.
