86
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1000–11009
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Kamel
Dr. Brzezinski
Minister of State
U.S. Delegation
Boutros Ghali
Egyptian Delegation
Subject: Preliminary exchange of views with Egyptian Delegation
on Egyptian position with respect to the peace negotiations, Somalia,
Libya, Chad, etc.
Memcon-Tab 3
1455–163710
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: President Carter informed Mr. Begin that President Sadat
would be submitting a new Egyptian paper.
Memcon-Tab
1500–163011
President Carter
President Sadat
Prime Minister Begin
9 See Document 30. For Brzezinski’s account of the meeting, see Power and Principle,
p. 255. Brzezinski noted that following this meeting, “we [Brzezinski, Vance, Mondale]
then had a rather useful discussion with the Israelis. I was struck by how relatively
open-minded Dayan and Weizman were.” Brzezinski continued: “Dayan discussed in
some detail his conversations with moderate Palestinians, and both he and Weizman in-
dicated a willingness to discuss seriously the question of terminating additional settle-
ments and of finding some formula that would give the Palestinians genuine self-
government.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp. 255–256) Although no memorandum
of conversation of a September 6 meeting among Mondale, Vance, Brzezinski, and the Is-
raelis has been found, Brzezinski may possibly be referring to the September 7 meeting
printed as Document 33.
10 Reference is presumably to a brief private exchange between Carter and Begin
before Sadat arrived for the afternoon meeting. (See footnote 11 below) In his personal
diary, Carter wrote: “I met earlier with Begin to tell him two things: I had sent Assad a
personal message calling for peace in Lebanon; and for Begin to expect a very tough pro-
posal from Sadat and not to overreact to it. (Carter, White House Diary, pp. 220–221) Carter
added that “Sadat was not yet ready for a three-three-three meeting, but that we would
try to schedule one for the next morning.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 342)
11 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Sadat and Begin on the
patio of Aspen Lodge from 2:55 p.m. to 4:37 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
For Carter’s accounts of this meeting, see White House Diary, pp. 220–222, and Keeping
Faith, pp. 343–345. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the President met with Mrs.
Carter, Vance, Atherton, Saunders, Eilts, Lewis, Brzezinski, and Quandt, at Holly Cabin
from 10:14 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. on September 6. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) Of
the meeting, Carter wrote: “I brought the entire American group together in my cottage
to discuss the apparent damage Sadat’s proposal had done. Begin was treating it as an in-
surmountable obstacle, and the other members of the Israeli delegation were also deeply
troubled. We knew that Sadat was ready to make immediate modifications, but it seemed
advisable for me to meet with all the Israelis before Begin and Sadat met again with each
other, so that I could ease their concern. I asked Cy to arrange such a session.” (Carter,
Keeping Faith, p. 346)
