152  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
	
Tab A
	
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter4
Washington, August 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Choosing a Single ALCM Development Program
Your memorandum of August 5, 1977, raised questions about our 
plans for parallel development of the cruise missiles for the B–52. As 
I indicated in our conversation last week, I do not believe that we are 
ready to select with confidence one design (and contractor) for the air-­
launched cruise missile mission. Nor could we defend adequately a 
selection of either missile and contractor at this stage. The ALCM mis-
sile has yet to be modified to its long range (ALCM–B) version. The 
modification is relatively straightforward, (basically “stretching” it by 
adding two sections). But a successful flight test of the modified mis-
sile is indicated before this missile could appropriately be selected. The 
TOMAHAWK (TALCM) missile has had sufficient flight tests to tell us 
about its flight characteristics, but has never been mated to or launched 
from the B–52. Again, we believe the mating is a straightforward engi-
neering task. But until it is demonstrated, we cannot convincingly 
argue that TALCM is the preferred missile. To arrive at the point where 
we could select either missile with the required confidence will take a 
minimum of 6 to 9 months of testing to conduct the necessary flight 
tests and evaluation of each. Based on such preliminary test results, a 
selection could be arrived at by a year from now, in mid-1978. How-
ever, with this much additional effort required for parallel programs, 
I believe it will probably make good management sense to carry the 
programs in parallel all the way through as a carefully conducted com-
petitive flyoff, with selection by October 1979. The savings that could 
be achieved by not carrying the parallel program through a flyoff is 
about $200M to $300M, depending on how soon the parallel program 
is terminated, and which missile is selected. The benefits to be expected 
from maintaining the parallel program through the flyoff are as follows:
(1) The competition can be fairly determined on an objective basis 
from the operational tests conducted by SAC crews on B–52s.
(2) The technical characteristics of the successful missile will prob-
ably be superior because each contractor will be working hard to max-
imize his “score” on the indicated performance parameters, including 
4 Secret.
