776
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
One of the seeming paradoxes so frequent in Iranian politics has
been the public’s inclination to begin weaving a favorable myth around
the Mosadeq Government only a few days after demonstrating an over-
whelming desire that Mosadeq be ousted. Even among those who had
opposed Mosadeq most bitterly during the final months of his incum-
bency there are partisans of the belief that the old National Front move-
ment had been a noble if unsuccessful experiment. The Government
has begun an information campaign seeking to nullify this impression
with limited success to date.
Some Iranians offer the unilateral explanation that the lingering
favor for the former Government represents the hold on the public of
Mosadeq’s personality. Representatives of all shades of opinion stub-
bornly cling to the belief that Mosadeq was a patriot sincere in purpose.
Most of his strongest critics grant him this much, but condemn him for
disqualifying traits of character such as stubborness, inflexibility, and
hunger for power. His defenders attempt to blame all the former Gov-
ernment’s shortcomings on Mosadeq’s advisers. This analysis serves to
exalt Mosadeq even further: he becomes a sort of demi-god who is too
good to live among ordinary Iranians, who frequently seem to take a
perverse pride in themselves as a nation of unprincipled Haji Babas.
A somewhat broader explanation of Mosadeq’s continuing reputa-
tion proceeds from the nature of the “national movement” which he
epitomized. Some anti-Mosadeq observers now admit that the Na-
tional Front initially had the sympathies, at least in principle, of as
many as ninety percent of politically conscious Iranians. It seems evi-
dent that nationalism, defined to mean freedom from foreign political
influence and economic exploitation, is still an attractive ideal to most
Iranians, even those who reject it as impractical or as incompatible with
their personal interests. Under these circumstances, at a time when
many Iranians feel obliged to compromise on the matter of foreign in-
fluences, Mosadeq to some extent symbolizes the nationalist ideal.
However, most Iranian observers are inclined to think that Mosadeq’s
term as the active leader of the forces of nationalism has ended.
Mosadeq’s Advisers
Public attitudes toward Mosadeq’s advisers are sharply different
from those expressed toward the former Prime Minister. Ex-Foreign
Minister Hosein Fatemi is probably the best-hated man in modern Ira-
nian history. Anti-Mosadeq elements are hardly less bitter toward Fa-
temi than are Mosadeq’s most devoted partisans, who put Fatemi in
first place among the “unworthy” advisers whom they blame for Mo-
sadeq’s failures. When Fatemi was reported to have been torn to pieces
by the mob on August 19, the Iranian public, usually repelled by the
idea of physical violence, seemed to welcome the report without a
qualm. Efforts to capture him still hold a high place in public interest.
