Yugoslavia
775
While not destined to be an international best seller (the Yugoslavs
have announced their intention to publish it in “world languages”) or
anywhere as controversial as Santiago Carrillo’s recent work,6 Kardelj’s
“study” is noteworthy for a number of reasons. It is an extension of a
major speech he made June 13th to the 30th Session of the Presidium
of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY), in which he coined
the term “self-managing pluralism” to define the Yugoslav system.
The speech and the resultant book were endorsed by the Presidium
“as the basis for the activity of the LCY in preparation for the 11th
Party Congress,” which is scheduled for spring of 1978. The study
presents a sort of master plan for the future development of the Yugo-
slav political system as it approaches the level of democracy that they
feel the economic system has already achieved. Kardelj’s “study” does
not provide for a Tito-like role and thus his approach can be seen as
an attempt to provide a stable and mature system that will not be
shaken by the passing of Tito. However, although the upcoming Party
Congress is widely regarded as being the main event which will estab-
lish, at least, the immediate succession to Tito, the official problem to
be solved by the Congress and the main problem addressed by Kardelj
is the achievement of a higher degree of political democracy.
Kardelj is typically philosophic in his comments and does not
attempt to define the exact form of a future, trying “to indicate only
some points of departure for determining our practical tasks concerning
the harmonization of the political system with the system of production
and social-economic relationships, and the further development of self-
management-democratic forms.” He does address a number of topics
of interest, i.e. human rights, Eurocommunism, and other political
systems, both East and West, finding them all wanting in comparison
to “self-managing pluralism.” There are not, however, the racy critical
references to the Chinese or Soviet systems rumored to be present in
early drafts of the book.
I have included a copy of President Tito’s speech this Tuesday in
the briefing book.7
6 Santiago Carillo, Secretary General of the Spanish Communist Party, together
with French Communist leader Georges Marchais and Italian Communist leader Enrico
Berlinguer, launched the Eurocommunist movement on March 2, 1977, at a meeting in
Madrid. His book, Eurocommunism and the State, was published in 1977 and repudiated
Marxist-Leninist revolutionary dogma in favor of participation by Communist parties
in the democratic electoral process.
7 An English translation of Tito’s September 27 speech to the Central Committee
of the League of Communists of Croatia, is in the Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 15, Yugoslavia: Presidency Member
Edvard Kardelj, 9/28/77–10/5/77: Briefing Book.
