936 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX At the same time the group agreed that we should try to accelerate the release of the AN/TPS–63 radars. The problem is that the Yugoslavs have requested a custom-made radar, and the manufacture of such a radar takes time. However, Siena is looking into the possibility of arranging for the leasing of a similar radar on a stop-gap basis. (S) We are also going back to Larry to get his views on whether a delay of several weeks will create problems with the Yugoslavs.3 (C) In light of the fact that moving through the NDPC channel may take couple of weeks, there are two options: 1. Hold a mini-SCC only on State’s political-military paper. 2. Postpone the mini-SCC until the request for an exception for the HARPOON and MK–46 has gone through the NDPC channel and we have a clearer view of the attitude of the services. (S) Under the circumstances I think it would be better to hold a mini- SCC on State’s Political-Military paper, and then hold a second mini- SCC on the bilateral/QUAD issues after the NDPC has had a chance to meet. In the meantime Kimmitt and I will have Komer, who has jurisdiction over the NDPC process, push the process as much as possible, and have Siena do what he can to accelerate release of the AN/ TPS–63 radars. (S) RECOMMENDATION: That we hold a mini-SCC on State’s paper only early next week and a second mini-SCC after the NDPC has met. Kimmitt and Brement concur. _____ Mini-SCC on State Paper only. _____ Mini-SCC on Bilateral/QUAD issues and State paper after NDPC process has been concluded.4 3 On April 2, the Department informed the Embassy that the Department of Defense was not interested in holding an SCC meeting until the MK–46 and Harpoon issues had been decided. (Telegram 87420 to Belgrade, April 2; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800168–1123) On April 14, the Department informed Eagleburger that the two systems were being considered through the National Disclosure Policy Committee process. (Telegram 98480 to Belgrade, April 14; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800187–0739) 4 Dodson wrote on the memorandum: “David—Let’s wait; do them together. Save yourself a meeting.” Aaron approved the second option. Dodson noted on the document: “OK to do together but push for fast resolution. Per DA”
