It seems clear that it is the reduction of armies rather than of navies that is of the first
importance to the world at the present time. We shall look with great satisfaction upon
that effort and give it our approbation and encouragement. If that can be settled, we
may more easily consider further reduction and limitation of naval armaments. For that
purpose our country has constantly through its Executive, and through repeated acts of
Congress, indicated its willingness to call such a conference. Under congressional
sanction it would seem to be wise to participate in any conference of the great powers
for naval limitation of armament proposed upon such conditions that it would hold a
fair promise of being effective. The general policy of our country is for disarmament,
and it ought not to hesitate to adopt any practical plan that might reasonably be
expected to succeed. But it would not care to attend a conference which from its
location on constituency would in all probability prove futile.
In the further pursuit of strengthening the bonds of peace and good will we have joined
with other nations in an international conference held at Geneva and signed an
agreement which will be laid before the Senate for ratification providing suitable
measures for control and for publicity in international trade in arms, ammunition, and
implements of war, and also executed a protocol providing for a prohibition of the use
of poison gas in war, in accordance with the principals of Article 5 of the treaty relating
thereto signed at the Washington Conference. We are supporting the Pan American
efforts that are being made toward the codification of international law, and looking
with sympathy on the investigations being conducted under philanthropic auspices of
the proposal to make agreements outlawing war. In accordance with promises made at
the Washington Conference, we have urged the calling of and are now represented at
the Chinese Customs Conference and on the Commission on Extraterritoriality, where
it will be our policy so far as possible to meet the aspirations of China in all ways
consistent with the interests of the countries involved.
COURT OF INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
Pending before the Senate for nearly three years is the proposal to adhere to the
protocol establishing the Permanent Court of International Justice. A well-established
line of precedents mark America’s effort to effect the establishment of a court of this
nature. We took a leading part in laying the foundation on which it rests in the
establishment of The Hague Court of Arbitration. It is that tribunal which nominates
the judges who are elected by the Council and Assembly of the League of Nations.
The proposal submitted to the Senate was made dependent upon four conditions, the
first of which is that by supporting the court we do not assume any obligations under
the league; second, that we may participate upon an equality with other States in the
election of judges; third, that the Congress shall determine what part of the expenses
we shall bear; fourth, that the statute creating the court shall not be amended without
