1977  71
assume that events unfold in such a way as to make the B–1 clearly 
undesirable. Thus this variant assumes a shift toward a pure standoff 
bomber force starting in 1981. This shift is accomplished by equipping 
the B–52Gs and some B–52Hs with cruise missiles, starting in 1981 and 
proceeding at a fairly high rate. Under this variant, the new cruise mis-
sile carrier is procured at a relatively slow rate which builds up the 
overall capability of our bomber force and allows eventual replacement 
of our oldest B–52s.
—Option 3 (Variant B). This is the other half of Option 3 and is iden-
tical to 3 (Variant A) through 1980. However, this variant assumes that 
events unfold in such a way as to make the B–1 clearly desirable. Thus, 
in 1980 it begins a buildup to a high production rate of four B–1s per 
month. In addition, given the high rate of procurement for the B–1, it 
equips B–52Gs with cruise missiles at the same slow rate assumed for 
Option 1.
—Option 4. This option terminates the B–1 program completely. As 
an offset, it equips the B–52Gs and some B–52Hs with cruise missiles 
at the same relatively high rate assumed under Option 3 (Variant A).
The numbers of forces procured or equipped with cruise missiles 
each year under each of these options are given in Table I. All four 
options retain most of the current B–52 force over the 10-­year period 
considered. Thus, Options 1 through 3 increase the overall size of 
our strategic bomber force. In fact, in order to stay within the strate-
gic nuclear delivery vehicle limit of 2400 specified in the Vladivostok 
agreement, Options 1 and 3 (Variant B) must destroy about 175 off-­line 
B–52s (we currently have a total inventory of about 525 B–52s) or an 
equivalent number of missiles.
Given the prospects for reductions below 2400 in SALT II, even 
greater numbers of older strategic systems might have to be destroyed 
during the next 10 years. We did not delve into the details of what 
might have to be eliminated; however, such reductions do not appear 
to impact significantly on the relative advantage of any of the four 
options we consider here; we carry out all the calculations given below 
in terms of the Vladivostok agreement.
Budgetary Implications
The investment costs for each of these options are given in Table 
II. These costs are reported in budget (inflated) dollars in the first four 
columns. The last column gives the investment costs for each option 
over the next 10 years, in constant dollars. These last figures reflect the 
real resource costs to our economy of each option.
In my view, Options 2 and 3A/B are the most practical choices. 
Both have considerably lower near-­term costs than Option 1.
