Peru 1039 military aid also needed to maintain armed forces as strong stabilizing and anti-Communist element. (4) Pain of favorable reaction diminished by wide criticism here, and reprinting of criticism in U.S. press, over sending U.S. troops to Caribbean. (5) Events here and at Caracas dramatically revealed ability of Communists in LA to arouse mob support and cause trouble. This demonstration of Communist strength has obviously caused jubilation in Moscow and presumably impressed uncommitted peoples everywhere. (6) Immediate effect in Peru has been in some respects strongly favorable to U.S., in other unfavorable. Long-­term effect here and elsewhere will depend upon whether (1) Communists are emboldened to stir up even stronger anti-U.S. feeling and obtain wider support in doing so, or (2) public opinion in the Americas is sufficiently alerted to Communist threat to their own freedom to check further Communist proselyting and assure effective government action. This presents real challenge to all of us, particularly in field. (7) More fundamental problem is how U.S. can overcome latent antipathy aroused by its power and periodic resentment over its policies or action, from which Communists get wider support, or preferably transform these feelings into friendly ones. We occasionally get credit for our unselfish and altruistic use of our mighty position but only occasionally. This requires good presentation abroad but, more fundamentally, avoidance of any moral basis whatever for criticism. (I recall Secretary’s simile of “spot of coal dust on face of movie actress far more conspicuous than same amount on face of miner”). It means not repeat not preaching but making obviously clear in deeds as well as words our devotion to our basic ideals. Among other things it means finding better answer than we have in past, and VP in statements here, Caracas and elsewhere has made much progress toward it, to problem of making clear our antipathy to dictatorships without slipping into intervention. It means, without in any way impairing our policies of developing individual and collective strength, de-­emphasizing as far as possibly military aspects of our policy. This involves maximizing civilian, and controlling military, influence on foreign policy. It means making our economic policies and actions conform to those we profess, those we know to be in real national interest, and avoiding insofar as possible damage to friendly countries. This involves obtaining frequent majorities in Congress along lines of national rather than local or sectional interest. This presents even greater challenge to us all, particularly to those at home.
