Argentina had always advocated and upheld, and pointed out that it was not in accordance with her dignity or interest to be one of the last nations to signify its adhesion to the Treaty. He laid considerable stress on Article 27 of the Argentine Constitution on the necessity of maintaining relations of peace and commerce with foreign Powers by means of treaties, and drew attention to the liberality, clearness and superiority of the Argentine Constitution as compared with those of other Republics, even those established since the World War. The motion of Señor Ruzo was opposed by Dr. Molinari, Senator for the Federal District, who has proved himself in this, his first, session the most militant member of the Senate,—sometimes referred to as “L’enfant térrible du Sénat”. Nevertheless, importance must be given to the opinions expressed by Dr. Molinari on this occasion when he opened his remarks by saying that he spoke in the name of the Unión Cívica Radical, “in the name of the Government which was chosen at the elections of April 1,” and for the man who is about to assume the presidency. It cannot be conceived that Dr. Molinari would make such a statement without the authorization of Señor Irigoyen, and the Senator’s opposition to the Pact and his reasons may, therefore, be a fairly definite indication of President Irigoyen’s attitude towards the Multilateral Treaty. Whether the dislike of the United States which this speech reflects is only personal or whether it reflects the feelings of the new President, I am not at present prepared to say. Dr. Molinari based his opposition on the necessity of a careful study of the reservations made in the preliminary negotiations of the Multilateral Treaty, on the Monroe Doctrine and the intervention of the United States in Nicaragua. He devotes much attention also to the failure of the United States to ratify the Treaty of Versailles, a point to which he attaches importance as indicating that Mr. Kellogg’s main object in proposing and securing the signing of the Treaty was a purely internal political affair and was lacking in any form of sincerity. And he contends that there is no need for Argentina to sign any treaty to assure peace, for peace is understood by Argentina, war in itself is illegal and the only international conflicts in which Argentina has found itself in the past have been the result “of a generous sentiment, a noble and lofty cause, the cause of America, the cause of humanity!”
