down the west coast of South America as far as Concepcion, Chile, and
with the French air mail at Paramaribo running down the eastern coast of
South America. The air service already spans our continent, with laterals
running to Mexico and Canada, and covering a daily flight of over 28,000
miles, with an average cargo of 15,000 pounds.
WATERWAYS
Our river and harbor improvements are proceeding with vigor. In the past
few years we have increased the appropriation for this regular work
$28,000,000, besides what is to be expended on flood control. The total
appropriation for this year was over $91,000,000. The Ohio River is almost
ready for opening; work on the Missouri and other rivers is under way. In
accordance with the Mississippi flood law Army engineers are making
investigations and surveys on other streams throughout the country with a
view to flood control, navigation, waterpower, and irrigation. Our barge
lines are being operated under generous appropriations, and negotiations are
developing relative to the St. Lawrence waterway. To secure the largest
benefits from all these waterways joint rates must be established with the
railroads, preferably by agreement, but otherwise as a result of
congressional action.
We have recently passed several river and harbor bills. The work ordered by
the Congress, not yet completed, will cost about $243,000,000, besides the
hundreds of millions to be spent on the Mississippi flood way. Until we can
see our way out of this expense no further river and harbor legislation
should be passed, as expenditures to put it into effect would be four or five
years away.
IRRIGATION OF ARID LANDS
For many years the Federal Government has been committed to the wise
policy of reclamation and irrigation. While it has met with some failures
due to unwise selection of projects and lack of thorough soil surveys, so
that they could not be placed on a sound business basis, on the whole the
service has been of such incalculable benefit in so many States that no one
would advocate its abandonment. The program to which we are already
committed, providing for the construction of new projects authorized by
