3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
323
102.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Moscow, April 21, 1978, 6:30–8 p.m.
SUBJECT
Vance-Gromyko Meeting
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
U.S.S.R.
Secretary of State Vance
Foreign Minister Gromyko
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
First Deputy Foreign Minister
Ambassador Paul C. Warnke
Korniyenko
Ambassador Ralph Earle, II
Dep. Foreign Minister Semenov
Mr. Leslie H. Gelb
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Ambassador Marshall D. Shulman
Marshal N.V. Ogarkov
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
Col.-Gen. M.M. Kozlov
Lt. Gen. Edward L. Rowny
Mr. V.G. Makarov
DAS of Def. Walter B. Slocomb
Mr. N. Detinov
Mr. Mark Garrison
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
Mr. William D. Krimer
Mr. A.A. Obukhov, Note Taker
(Interpreter)
Mr. V.F. Isakov, Note Taker
Before proceeding to substantive matters, Minister Gromyko in-
formed Secretary Vance that Brezhnev would like to see him tomorrow
at noon.
Middle East
The Secretary said he wanted to discuss the Middle East situation
and asked Gromyko how they should proceed.
Gromyko agreed that this question required discussion, but sug-
gested they be economical in words since they had a number of other
questions to discuss as well.
The Secretary said that insofar as the current situation in the Middle
East was concerned, the positions today were stalemated. Discussions
between Israel and Egypt continued on a sporadic basis but no
progress was being made. The last visit of Defense Minister Weizmann
to Cairo had produced no new results. On his way back from Africa to
London, the Secretary had stopped and met with Foreign Minister
Kamel for 45 minutes. The Foreign Minister’s impression was the same
as the Secretary had just described. As Gromyko knew, several weeks
ago Prime Minister Begin had come to the United States for a set of
meetings that lasted two days. As a result of these meetings, sharp dif-
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 8, Vance to Moscow, 4/20–22/78. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. Drafted by Krimer. The
meeting took place in the Kremlin.
