142  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
There is nothing but admiration for the ingenuity, resolution and 
patience you are showing in holding Wang to the basic issue through 
these seemingly interminable exchanges.
I hope you were not disappointed when no telephone call came 
through last Sunday. You will understand it was not as a result of any 
lack of desire to talk, but solely because we are apprehensive about 
possible monitoring and the difficulty of having a meaningful conver­
sation which does not skirt on sensitive matters.
All the best and sincere regards,
Sincerely
113.	 Telegram 560 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 20, 1955, 1 p.m.
560. From Johnson.
One hour and half meeting this morning again with no visible 
progress. I opened with statement to effect our agreed purpose was 
settle matter return civilians, I had told him exactly what we had done 
with respect Chinese and were prepared to do representation, was 
still waiting know settlement his government proposed make Amer­
icans. When this information available could readily agree exact lan­
guage public announcement but futile further discussion form words 
until both clear as to substance of what we are announcing. He replied 
reiterating previous positions but during course give and take I asked 
him series questions to which his replies made clear all repeat all cases 
being qte reviewed unqte, qte completion review unqte means persons 
can promptly depart for US, review all cases not qte completed unqte, 
qte he could not forecast time required complete remaining cases unqte 
which was dependent on qte nature case, conduct individual, improve­
ment relations between two countries unqte. Talks were one indication 
improvement and agreement on putting third party representation into 
operation would be additional improvement. All this would qte make 
settlement of cases easier than in the past unqte.
Had made their qte best effort unqte. All argument that he would 
reciprocate frankness with which I had made detailed explanation 
action taken respect Chinese in US was evaded or brushed aside. My 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2055. Confidential; Niact.
