1978  241
a near-­term start [less than 1 line not declassified] would end up being 
wasted effort.
—“Deep silos” means perhaps 1000–2000 ft. below the surface. 
DOD hasn’t yet identified a good method by which the deep-­based 
missiles might dig themselves out after an attack. Given the delays that 
might be encountered in digging out, such a scheme might still be use-
ful in providing a long-­term reserve force of ICBMs.
—There are a number of “Garwinian” defense schemes for protect-
ing individual silos.3 [2 lines not declassified] The RVs would presumably 
be destroyed, or caused to detonate at altitudes at which the silo-­based 
missiles would still survive.
	
Tab A
	
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Research and Engineering (Perry) to Secretary of Defense 
Brown and the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Duncan)4
Washington, March 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Strategic Deterrence
This is a brief status report on an ongoing analysis we are conduct-
ing on alternative ways of maintaining our strategic deterrence in the 
face of the growing Soviet counterforce capability.
The data available to date on the new guidance systems being 
tested on the SS–18 and SS–19 suggest that these systems have as 
their objective significant improvements in accuracy, probably reduc-
ing CEP to the dangerous area of 200m to 250m. If they are successful 
in this area, and if they retrofit this system on deployed SS–18s and 
SS–19s, they could pose a serious counterforce threat as early as 1983. 
This is two or three years earlier than we would have estimated if the 
improved guidance capability had to wait for the next generation of 
missiles to be deployed. [8 lines not declassified] The latter assumption I 
think is unrealistic.
Thus our land-­based ICBM force not only becomes susceptible to 
being taken out, it could almost be considered as an invitation to attack. 
3 Reference is to Dr. Richard L. Garwin, physicist and IBM Fellow at the Thomas J. 
Watson Research Center in New York. Garwin was a member of the Council on Foreign 
Relations and an expert on nuclear weapons technology. He was also a member of the 
Office of Science and Technology Policy panel conducting the Vulnerability Study of the 
M–X missile. See the attachment to Document 43.
4 Top Secret; Eyes Only. Outside the System. A stamped notation reads: “SecDef has 
seen.”
