North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 921 leadership role that the United States can play in moving the world toward a more just and more fully employed world economy. The elements of this approach could include: • a statement that the US faces hard choices that constrain our ability to meet the demands of the developing countries coupled with a serious effort to move toward mutually beneficial policy initiatives wherever possible; • constructive criticism of the current approach of the Group of 77; • a commitment to work with developing and other developed countries to end the current impasse. US actions in the United Nations, functional organizations (the IMF, IBRD, GATT, UNCTAD, etc.), and bilateral contacts would all be part of the implementation of that commitment;11 • a strong defense of the foundations on which new economic relationships can be built, the Bretton Woods institutions and an open trade policy; • announcement of the President’s decision to reach poor people effectively with our foreign assistance; • an enumeration of the specifics of possible cooperative actions with developing countries on food and energy development, and on science and technology. Choice and implementation of this final option would provide the guidance on specific North-South negotiations that US Government officials now need. At best, this option could break the deadlock in which the OECD countries and Group of 77 now find themselves. Short of that outcome, this option could clear the air and allow more fruitful US relationships with individual or groups of developing countries. Firm implementation of this option would entail some bureaucratic upheavals but without a commitment to take that risk I see little prospect that our North-South policies will be any different in 1980 than they are now. RECOMMENDATION: That you approve the third option. Approve (Prepare draft of Caracas speech and policy guidelines in specific sectors, such as trade, debt, commodities, foreign assistance-basic human needs, etc.)12 Disapprove (Other action?) 11 Brzezinski highlighted this option up to the end of this point. 12 Brzezinski checked this option and wrote “Speak to me.” According to the NSC Correspondence Profile attached to this memorandum, Brzezinski met with Owen, Thornton, Pastor, and Erb to discuss Carter’s speech in Caracas and Pastor and Erb were directed to prepare an outline. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25, PRM–8 (1 of 3)) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.
