Afghanistan casualties have been high, many insurgents have been able to escape over the border into Pakistan or to fade into the rugged, mountainous terrain. From there, they have mounted successful guerrilla operations aimed at isolated Soviet or Afghan units, lines of communications, and districts not heavily defended by Soviet or Afghan Army forces. In other parts of the country, insurgent activity continues at a high level, and little of the countryside is under government control. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) The nationalists’ ability to sustain such operations will depend on the continued availability of weapons and ammunition. Needs for equipment vary widely throughout the country, often depending on the Soviets’ ability to disrupt supply links across the Afghan border and on the strength of the Afghan or Soviet forces in the area. Nationalists in the southwestern provinces, who for the most part face undermanned Afghan army and police units, are said to have enough weapons but are short of ammunition. In contrast, in Konarha Province, where insurgents have faced a Soviet assault, they reportedly do not have enough weapons, and those that they do have often have proved ineffective against tanks and assault helicopters. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) So far, the insurgents have obtained the bulk of their weapons— mostly rifles, mortars, machine guns, and occasionally tanks and armored personnel carriers—from retreating or deserting Afghan troops and by ambushing supply convoys. They also obtain weapons through the local arms market in western Pakistan, where they purchase locally manufactured or imported weapons and arms stolen from the Afghan or Pakistani armies. ([classification marking not declassified]) Afghan soldiers still with their units have been a continuing source of material, particularly ammunition. Soldiers regularly cache part of their allotment of ammunition and sell it to the insurgents for cash; the Afghan Army has long had difficulty paying its soldiers on time. Local government officials have struck bargains with nationalist groups, providing food, medicine, and other supplies as well as freedom of movement through government checkpoints in exchange for protection for their families. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The insurgents also receive small amounts of arms from a variety of outside sources, but so far this aid has had a minimal impact on the capabilities of the nationalist forces. ([classification marking not declassified]) —Pakistan has probably provided the most aid so far, although we have little information on the types or amount of equipment it has given the insurgents. Most of the equipment delivered to date apparently has been ammunition, mines, rifles, machine guns, and hand grenades.
