World Hunger and Food Policy 901 6. We do not contemplate launching any food security initiatives at the upcoming session of the FAO Committee on World Food Security. By that time, we expect the release of the final report of the President’s Commission on World Hunger and the possibility of high level US statements relating to international food matters. The US delegation to the FAO Food Security meeting will be apprised of the status of various food initiatives for the Venice Summit and global negotiations. Vance 270. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated Food and Agriculture Events of the past year have heightened international awareness of the precarious food situation faced by some of the poorest countries. Growing food shortages and attendant malnutrition will threaten many of these countries in the 1980s unless actions are taken to enhance their capacity to supply and distribute adequate food. In Tokyo,2 the Summit countries called for increased emphasis on measures to overcome hunger and malnutrition in the developing countries. Summit participants at Venice should reiterate their concern about the continued existence of hunger in the world and pledge their support for concrete initiatives to realize the objectives of the Tokyo Summit. Initiatives LDC Food Storage and Distribution The problem of providing continuous and adequate nutrition within developing countries is affected more by seasonal and annual variations in national food production than by fluctuations in international food prices. Adequate storage is essential to provide an uninterrupted flow of food to consumers. Storage facilities enable farmers to 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects— Hazel Denton, Box 56, Food: 5/78–3/80. No classification marking. Drafted by Kolar on March 3; cleared by Dane Smith and in draft by Hart. Kolar initialed for Hart. 2 Reference is to the 1979 Tokyo G–7 Summit; see footnote 2, Document 257.
