76
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
21.
Progress Report Prepared for the National Security Council1
Washington, May 2, 1951.
SUBJECT
First Progress Report on NSC 107, “The Position of the United States with
Respect to Iran”2
NSC 1073 was approved as Governmental policy on March 14. It is
requested that this Progress Report, as of April 24 be circulated to the
members of the Council for their information.
I. The General Situation
Since the preparation of NSC 107 the situation in Iran has progres-
sively deteriorated. The assassination of Prime Minister Razmara by a
religious fanatic was followed immediately by the vote of the Parlia-
ment in favor of nationalization of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, the
assassination of one of Razmara’s cabinet ministers, widespread dem-
onstrations and disorders, and by a serious and crippling strike in the
southern oil fields and the Abadan refinery. The Communist (Tudeh)
Party is exploiting the situation, particularly the oil strikes, to the ut-
most. While much of what has appeared in the American press has
been exaggerated, the situation in Iran is very serious.
The Iranian Government, headed by Prime Minister Hossein Ala,
appointed to succeed Razmara, has acted throughout the crisis with
commendable firmness. At the time of his appointment, Prime Minister
Ala was looked upon both in Iran and abroad as an honest and patriotic
man but weak. In the six weeks he has been in office, however, he has
demonstrated considerable strength and is presently giving Iran admi-
rable leadership. He has recently obtained an almost unanimous vote
of confidence from Parliament.
The Shah, while giving his Prime Minister full support, has not ex-
ercised all of the leadership and guidance which would be desirable at
present. This, however, is due at least partially to ill health. He is suf-
fering from chronic appendicitis and is considering leaving the country
for an operation for this and possibly other ailments.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, Offi-
cial Minutes 1947–1961, Box 13, 91st Meeting. Top Secret. The report was sent by memo-
randum from Webb to Lay.
2 Pursuant to NSC Action No. 454e. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 Document 6.
