March 27–December 31, 1979 837 and citizens. They will recall our shared efforts to safeguard Israeli personnel in Tehran, when our concerns paralleled one another. They will recall that our Embassy in Beirut had contacts with Fatah on security matters in 1976. We have authorized our Embassy in Beirut—up to and including our Ambassador—to maintain, as required, contacts with a representative of PLO/Fatah or person associated with that organization for the purpose of assuring a reasonable degree of safety for the Ambassador, Mission staff and property, and American citizens in Lebanon. This contact, therefore, will relate to security and security-related issues within Lebanon. This contact will be limited to only a single person associated with PLO/Fatah. Christopher 251. Telegram From the United States Liaison Office in Riyadh to the Department of State1 Riyadh, May 7, 1979, 1055Z 718. From Charge Daniels. Subj: (S) Saudi Arabia Withdraws Offer of Funding of F–5s for Egypt. 1. (S)-entire text. 2. Summary: In meeting just before his departure for Fez, Prince Saud told me SAG saw no alternative but to withdraw offer of funding for F–5s for Egypt. He added that Islamic Conference preparation committee had decided to propose “suspension” of Egypt at Fez.2 3. Foreign Minister Prince Saud summoned me to meeting with him at Riyadh airport just prior to his departure on May 7 for Islamic Conference in Morocco. Meeting was also attended by Deputy Foreign Minister Abd al-Rahman Mansuri and Abdallah Alireza, Embassy Political Counselor, and Chief USLO. 4. Prince Saud referred to Secretary’s letter to him,3 asking for Saudi assistance in preventing expulsion of Egypt from Islamic Conference and other international bodies. He said he would of course be 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840133–1745. Secret; Immediate; Exdis Handle as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Rabat, Cairo, and Jidda. 2 See footnote 3, Document 248. 3 See Document 248.
