1957 1443 840. Despatch unnumbered from Geneva1 Geneva, November 14, 1957 SUBJECT China Talks—72nd Meeting 1. Wang Opened. It had been more than two years since the two of us reached agree­ ment on return of civilians but a majority of Chinese nationals are still prevented from returning to China. This raises a question of good faith. There are tens of thousands of Chinese nationals still in the U.S. Among these, students alone number more than 5000. These students left China many years ago and are now anxious to return to their homeland. Before we reached agreement our authorities were apparently detain­ ing them. After we reached agreement our authorities are still trying to delay them by all sorts of obstructive tactics. At our meetings here he had given us 56 names. 50 of these have not yet returned. The U.S. has submitted 103 names of which 21 are yet to return. With regard to these 21 specific persons who have not returned the American side has failed to give an accounting. They have been continuously receiving letters from relatives of these unfortunate persons appealing for assistance to bring their sons home. He also takes note of the fact that of the 34 per­ sons listed by the U.S. authorities, except in the case of one person, all the rest have not been returned. A sharp contrast arises between the failure of my authorities to carry out the Agreement and its implemen­ tation by his side. As the result of his side’s faithful implementation of the Agreement, all those Americans who wanted to return have done so including among those, a majority of the criminal offenders who have been returned at the expiration or prior to the expiration of their sen­ tences. He felt it incumbent upon himself to stress once again that since the Agreement was concluded between the two sides, both sides should honor the Agreement. It is hoped that the American Ambassador will impress upon his government that the Agreement must be carried out so that Chinese nationals can return to their country without further obstructions. 2. I replied. We agreed at the outset of our talks here insofar as the return of nationals of either side were concerned that what we were dis­ cussing was those who desired to return. In fact, that language is incor­ porated in our Agreed Announcement on that subject. As he himself 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–1457. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received on November 18.
