Yugoslavia
891
270.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, October 15, 1979, 11–11:15 a.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of David Aaron’s Meeting with Colonel General Vujatovic
PARTICIPANTS
Colonel General Laze Vujatovic, Yugoslav Assistant Federal Secretary of
National Defense for Military Economy
Vladimir Sindjelic, Minister-Counselor Embassy of the Socialist Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Steve Larrabee, NSC Staff Member
James Siena, Deputy Assistant Secretary (European & NATO Affairs) (ISA)
After welcoming General Vujatovic, Mr. Aaron noted that the only
thing he had not been dealing with lately was military sales to Yugo-
slavia. However, he promised to pay close attention to this in the
future. (C)
General Vujatovic stated that he was here to sign the Memorandum
of Understanding to improve cooperation.2 (S)
Mr. Aaron underscored the importance that the Administration
attached to the signing of the Memorandum and to the institutionalized
arrangements created by it.3 (S)
Noting that there had been many attempts to improve cooperation
between Yugoslavia and the United States lately, General Vujatovic
remarked that the Yugoslavs were interested in strengthening coopera-
tion in the military field in order to maintain their independence. In
regard to military sales however, the two sides had not been able to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 33, Memcons: Aaron, David: 1–12/79. Secret. The meeting took place in the West
Wing of the White House.
2 In an October 3 memorandum, Larrabee recommended to Brzezinski that either
he or Aaron meet Vujatovic for 15–20 minutes while the latter was in Washington to
sign the Memorandum of Understanding on Bilateral Military Cooperation which had
been negotiated the previous December. Brzezinski approved a meeting with Aaron.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 9–12/79)
3 On October 12, Larrabee forwarded to Aaron the Department of State briefing
paper for his meeting with Vujatovic. In his covering memorandum, Larrabee recom-
mended that Aaron stress three basic points with the Yugoslav General: Emphasize the
importance of the MOU; reassure the GOY of the administration’s intention to pursue
development of closer U.S.-Yugoslav military cooperation; and stress that the Depart-
ments of State and Defense have taken steps to improve communication with Yugoslav
authorities. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and
East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68, Yugoslavia: Military: 1/79–1/80)
