204  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
BL–33.	
Despatch from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Strom) to the 
Department of State1
 
La Paz, August 16, 1960.
No. 70
SUBJECT
COMIBOL: Dilemma for the United States
It is accepted that basic to any solution of Bolivia’s economic mal-
aise is increased production of minerals, principally tin, at lower cost of 
production. Even should petroleum or natural gas be discovered in com-
mercial quantities, it is the consensus that this development, should it 
eventuate, will have no perceptible effect on the general economy for five 
or ten years. The Embassy has transmitted numerous reports concern-
ing the critical condition of Comibol, the State-­owned company which 
manages and operates all the former mines and holdings of PATIÑO, 
ARAMAYO and HOCHSCHILD, and which currently operates at a net 
loss of $500,000 per month. The Department and other interested agen-
cies are informed of the reasons for its losses. In essence, the reasons are: 
(1) serious de-capitalization; (2) worn out or obsolete machinery and 
equipment; (3) depletion of existing ore deposits and a lowering of the 
grade of ore; (4) the lack of an efficient exploration program; (5) an over-­
supply of workers (estimated at 6,000) who draw pay but produce noth-
ing and an excess of surface workers (65 percent of Comibol employees 
work above ground); (6) shortage of operating supplies such as dyna-
mite, drill bits, picks, and shovels; (7) the high cost of operating mine 
commissaries; (8) maladministration, both at the head office and at the 
individual Comibol mines; (9) the cost to the Corporation of excessive 
social benefits provided by the labor laws; and, finally, (10) the force of 
Bolivian politics which has impeded or blocked those reforms which are 
necessary if Comibol is to become a paying proposition.
I have already reported that Dr. Victor PAZ Estenssoro in his inau-
gural address on August 6 termed Comibol the major economic prob-
lem of Bolivia,2 a proposition which should be evident to anyone who 
cares to know. I think it possible that my many talks with him helped 
to make him alert to the problem. However that may be, there is no 
doubt that the Government is fully aware of the Comibol problem and 
prepared to make some decisions about it. If I did not credit the pos-
sibility that Dr. Paz intends seriously to address himself to Comibol 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 824/10/8–1660. Secret.
2 Telegram 65 from La Paz, August 7, 1960, reported the highlight of the speech, 
which was primarily a review of the achievement and difficulties of the previous admin-
istration and a defense of the stabilization plan. (964.11/8–460)
