Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
93
2. Khlestov said preliminary discussions of U.S. texts at last
meeting (see ASAT Two 016, Bern 678)2 had helped SovDel to under-
stand better U.S. ideas, however, they had more questions.
3. Khlestov said that in the Soviet text given to the U.S. (see ASAT
Two 005, Bern 528)3 there were the qualifying words “acts incompatible
with peaceful relations between states.” He recalled that Buchheim had
said some such qualifying words could be included in a preamble, but
U.S. text did not contain such language. He wanted to know if U.S. side
considered it possible and necessary to have a preamble, if so, what its
contents should be, and whether they could include some qualifying
words—either “acts incompatible with peaceful relations between
states” or some other. Buchheim said the U.S. side had no objection, in
principle, to a preamble and some such words could be in one.
4. Khlestov said that a second question concerned possible con-
cluding sections of an agreement, such as listing the official languages
of the agreement and the place of signing. They would also contain the
date that the agreement would come into force. The obligation not to
text could extend: (I) 12 months from date of signing; (II) 12 months
from the exchange of instruments of ratification. The difference be-
tween the two commencement dates could be three, four, five months.
He said he would like to know the U.S. point of view. Buchheim said
this was a question on which he would need instructions and that, if
Khlestov felt that the discussion was at a point where he should ask for
such instructions, he would do so. Khlestov said he wanted to better
understand the essence of the U.S. idea. Buchheim said he would ask
for instructions on that basis.
2 Telegram 678 from Bern, February 3, reported that the ASAT Delegation pre-
sented the Soviet Delegation with the text of a Non-Paper consisting of two “elements”
for discussion. The first proposed that the two sides pledge “not to destroy, damage, or
change the trajectory of an object which has been placed in orbit around the earth.” The
second proposed that the two sides issue a moratorium on the launching of “for test or
any other purpose, an interceptor missile for the destroying or damaging objects which
have been placed in orbit around the earth or any other trajectories into outer space” from
the date of the signing of an ASAT agreement. Khlestov questioned both elements, in-
cluding how such objects would be identified and what the U.S. meant by the phrase “not
to destroy, damage . . . any object.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790053–0273)
3 Telegram 528 from Bern, January 27, reported that Khlestov had submitted “tenta-
tive Soviet views on defining space objects, and listing of actions which would be prohi-
bited or inconsistent with peaceful relations between states.” Buchheim replied that the
United States “was not thinking of formal proposals but was presenting a possible alter-
native approach which does not use the term ‘space object’ and ‘hostile acts’ and which
therefore does not rely on definitions.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790055–0375)
