Guatemala 663 GT–8. Summary of Discussions in Guatemala during Milton Eisenhower’s Visit, July 30 to August 1, 19581 Undated. In Guatemala Dr. Eisenhower had discussions with the President, the Cabinet, government officials, bankers, leaders of commerce and industry, labor leaders, women of the market, etc. President Ydígoras expressed his gratitude for the extent of assistance which the United States had rendered to Guatemala since its liberation from Communist domination. He spoke of a sum of $70 million that had been given, but said that in view of the difficult situation which had been inherited from the Communist-­dominated regime things were not yet satisfactory. There were serious shortages in housing, welfare and education. He hoped that the U.S. aid would continue at present levels. The President brought up the subject of coffee and the detrimental effects on the Guatemalan economy of present low prices. He also explained that the Guatemalans had difficulty in establishing markets in Germany because of a still unresolved dispute with Germany concerning German coffee plantations nationalized as enemy alien property during World War II. He mentioned that when he had been in Washington in February 1958 he had spoken about possible establishment of quotas for the coffee-­producing nations, and it was with some satisfaction that he saw the Coffee Study Group leaning in this direction.2 The President then discussed the Communist situation in Guatemala and said he was reluctant to “squeeze” them any further as this would only drive them underground and make them more dangerous. The President said that following the Liberation of 1954 the working-­class Communists had been left leaderless by the flight of their leaders and no new ones had appeared. He spoke of divisions within the Railroad Workers’ Union (SAWP) indicating a weakening of the Communist position. He said that he feared Communist infiltration 1 Source: Department of State, ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot 60 D 513, “Eisenhower, Milton: Guatemala, 1958.” Confidential. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy. Between July 12 and August 1, President Milton S. Eisenhower of Johns Hopkins University made a three-­week factfinding trip, as Personal Representative of the President, to Panama, Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Guatemala. He was accompanied by Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs; Tom B. Coughran, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, Dempster McIntosh, Manager, Development Loan Fund; and Samuel C. Waugh, President, Export-Import Bank. For further documentation on the trip, see Document ES–2, footnote 1. Detailed reports and memoranda of conversations held by him and members of his group, were enclosed with despatch 85 from Guatemala City, August 18, 1958; 120.1520/8–1858. 2 For documentation on U.S. participation in the Coffee Study Group, see Document CO–30, footnote 2.
