434  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
66.	
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
Washington, January 4, 1990, 2–3 p.m.
SUBJECT
Panama and START
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
Director of the Office of Management and Budget
Chief of Staff to the President
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Director of Central Intelligence
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Assistant to the President and Deputy for National Security Affairs
[Omitted here is a discussion of Panama]
General Scowcroft: The purpose of this meeting is a discussion on 
fundamental decisions on START and CFE and how all of this fits into 
the budget. On START, the question is whether we should stick with 
the START proposal we have now, get it signed as fast as possible, or 
modify it and add other proposals and do something more that will 
make it more your agreement. The advantage of the first is that we can 
get it by June. If we add to it or change it significantly it will upset that 
time table. Any add-­ons will slow it down and potentially mess up the 
strategic programs in the budget. Moreover, the Russians may not like 
it and it could derail things. By the same token the package is nearly 
three years old and doesn’t reflect recent developments—­deployments, 
your election, and so forth. Nor does it take advantage of our current 
leverage. It doesn’t get at Soviet programs while they’re still in deploy-
ment. Jim, Dick and I are split on this.
Cheney: There’s not a big dollar savings involved as far as the bud-
get is concerned. In the strategic arena we’ve seen less change in the 
Soviet posture. They are continuing to modernize and improve their 
strategic forces. We should take what’s on the table and run. It defines 
the state of the relationship and there is a political dynamic involved 
in getting the agreement. It’s important to close the deal. We’ll have 
enough trouble to resolve the remaining issues—ALCMs, SLCMs and 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, Robert M. Gates Files, Chronological Files, OA/ID CF00948–020, Chron File 
(Official): 1990 [3 of 3]. Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office.
