3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
548
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
3. Dobrynin stated that he would transmit the approach to
Moscow.
4. There follows the full text of the talking points handed over to
Dobrynin. Begin text:
—Our consultations with Congress and Jewish leaders lead us to
conclude that an effort to delete or amend Jackson-Vanik would be
lengthy and not likely to succeed.
—There is a favorable attitude in Congress and the Jewish commu-
nity toward the recent increase in Jewish emigration and the improve-
ment in procedures and treatment of applicants for emigration.
—Taking advantage of this favorable climate, we believe the Presi-
dent could consider waiving the Jackson-Vanik limitations as provided
in existing legislation so that the 1972 Trade Agreement will come into
force. In doing so, he would simply report to Congress that he is as-
sured on the basis of information available to him and relevant discus-
sions that the emigration practices of the USSR will henceforth lead
substantially to the achievement of the objectives of Section 402 of the
Trade Act.2
—In our consultations here we have made it clear that neither the
President’s report on the waiver nor subsequent testimony would con-
tain any statement that we had “received assurances.”
—The USSR would not need to confirm nor deny that it had pro-
vided assurances to the US. It would be essential, however, that the So-
viet Government say nothing inconsistent with the President’s waiver
and report to Congress.
—We believe the course outlined would be generally well received
and would fulfill the requirements for granting MFN to the USSR.
—In deciding whether to adopt this approach, it is important for
the President to have confidence in his understanding of the present
situation and to know that there is a basis for maintaining the support
of those in the Congress and the public interested in this question. Ac-
cordingly, we wish to ask if the President is correct in his under-
standing of prevailing Soviet policies and practices on the matter of em-
igration, as follows:
A) Soviet policy has recently resulted in an upward trend in the
numbers of emigrants.
B) Soviet policy is to improve the efficiency of emigration pro-
cessing and the circumstances of persons who have applied for
emigration.
2 Reference is to the Jackson-Vanik amendment, which prohibits the U.S. Govern-
ment from providing export credit to any nonmarket country that does not allow for the
free emigration of its citizens.
