Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 145 pening in the developing world. Interdependence extends clearly into this dimension; and only by building upon the potential in relations with developing states can we provide for our own future. This means a better response to poor country needs: especially in the poorest countries of all. In greater justice, there is greater strength for us all. “European Unity: Genuine U.S. support for European unity—however tentative and faltering it may be at the tail end of a recession. This is no less than a basic respect for European integrity, and a recognition (based on the past three years in particular) of the vital need for a strong European Community to help us all meet economic difficulties. “U.S. Response: The United States is prepared to respond in a forthcoming way to Western European ideas and interests (as well as those of Japan). For all of them, U.S. receptivity is an incentive to develop and speak out on their own perspectives, their own contributions to common efforts. Already, there has been a virtually unprecedented series of consultations with the Allies—whether in working with the Japanese, in the Mondale trip, or in the many consultations held directly with the North Atlantic Council. “NATO: A renewed American commitment to the NATO Alliance, with the emphasis on the strength of alliance unity, the value of existing strategy and doctrine, and the added value that can be gained from making NATO work more effectively than ever. “Democracy and Human Rights: The added strength that all the Western nations draw from a renewed understanding of the democratic basis of common action—and of our internal political strength. For the first time the NATO Allies are all democracies, and—with developments in countries like Portugal and Greece (and Spain)—the basic vitality of democracy has been proved again. This has given an added impetus to the human dimensions of policy: not just human rights, but also the basic moral purpose of our nations which given them both legitimacy and strength. “East-West: Working with Allies also involves East-West relations; including their interests in U.S. negotiations on SALT; Alliance responsibility for MBFR; better understandings on East-West trade; coordinated policy for Belgrade (which will come up at NATO the day after you are there)—as a constructive, non-confrontational effort that will still stress our shared concern for human rights.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 50, Presidential Interviews: 1–4/77) The interview took place in the Oval Office at the White House at 2:30 p.m. on April 25. The journalists conducting the interview included Fred Emery of The Times, London, Henri Pierre of Le Monde, Horst-Alexander Siebert of Die Welt, and Vittorio Zucconi of La Stampa, Turin. During the interview, Pierre inquired as to the President’s gen-
