856
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
d) Represent the first step in the ultimate creation of an Iranian
Army capable of delaying action in the event of an invasion, and which
can possibly contribute to any regional defense arrangement which
may later be developed. It is not anticipated that the Iranian Army can
reach this degree of competence in the near future and it may be over-
sanguine to believe it can ever do so. However, by increasing the power
of the Shah and insuring internal security, an improved Iranian Army
will help to create a condition in which such aspirations will at least
come within the realm of possibility.
e) Have a profound psychological effect on the nation as a whole
by apparently demonstrating U.S. confidence in Iran’s ability to play an
active role similar to that of Turkey in military defense against Soviet
imperialism.
Should the USSR become aware of a revised U.S. attitude toward
the Iranian Army, it can be expected to exploit this to the fullest in its
propaganda efforts through Communist and anti-West elements. Fur-
thermore, it is possible that the Soviet Union would take this occasion
to threaten Iran on the basis of the 1921 Treaty. However, it is estimated
that the Soviet Union would not go beyond such threats; and the ben-
efits derived from a strengthened Iranian Army would more than com-
pensate for the propaganda opportunity given the Soviets.
Opposition to an expanded military program may be expected
from other segments of the Iranian population; i.e., those who believe
economic improvement should take priority over military expansion;
neutralists who reject alliance with either East or West, and tribal ele-
ments which traditionally oppose central authority and the Army. Such
opposition is not, however, considered of serious proportion.
3. Recommended CIA Position:
When Ambassador Henderson’s proposals per paragraph 1 above
come before the NSC, it is recommended that you support them and
that you concur in the reasoning put forth by Ambassador Henderson
in reference Embassy cables No. 1102 and 1103.
Kermit Roosevelt5
5 [name not declassified] signed for Roosevelt above Roosevelt’s typed signature.
