756 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 can begin. He thought such action now would be precipitous. We have not yet even reviewed the results of the census of claims. (C) Mr. Saunders argued that vesting assets at this stage would greatly complicate negotiations with the Iranians later, since they would demand that all the seized assets be returned as part of the hostage release. Once the President had taken this action, it would be difficult to back down and return the seized assets. Secretary Brown disagreed. He thought that would be a small price to pay for return of the hostages. (S) The SCC agreed that a decision was not required immediately. The legislation will be completed by next week, and the SCC will return to the question at that time. (U) 2. Status of Allied Sanctions and Commitments. The Department of State circulated a brief paper summarizing the status of the allies’ position on sanctions at this point. The SCC agreed it was very useful and that it should be forwarded to the President (attached at Tab A).3 (U) 3. Diplomatic Strategy. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the strategy paper prepared by the Department of State had been discussed at the Foreign Policy breakfast just prior to the SCC meeting.4 The President wishes to read the paper himself. The subject will be discussed at Camp David tomorrow, so the President asked that the SCC not present formal recommendations at this point. (C) Mr. Saunders reviewed the main points of the paper for the SCC, noting that the intent was to begin a process of reopening lines of communication with key individuals in Tehran. No proposals would be offered until we had a feeling for the Iranian response to our feelers. The problem in the past had been the division between the Beheshti faction and Bani-Sadr which had prevented a unified position by the Revolutionary Council. Our objective, recognizing the severe limitations, should be to promote a unity of views in Tehran that the release of the hostages is critical to Iran’s own interests. He noted that Archbishop Capucci might be very helpful to us. Dr. Brzezinski noted that he might be able to assist personally. He had just received a personal letter from the Pope in Polish. Mr. Saunders agreed that the Vatican was one channel of influence in Capucci. One of the French lawyers had also 3 Tab A, not attached, is “Allied Response on Iranian Sanctions,” a chart of sanctions and the response of U.S. allies in “Yes/No” format. It was submitted to Brzezinski under an April 30 covering memorandum from Tarnoff. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Economic Sanctions Against Iran) The paper had been requested at the April 29 SCC meeting. See Document 271. 4 See Document 273. No minutes were taken at the foreign policy breakfasts.
