Venezuela  1251
VE–22.	
Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela,  
March 10, 19591
 
Caracas, March 10, 1959.
PARTICIPANTS
President Rómulo Betancourt
Ambassador Edward J. Sparks
Minister-Counselor Charles R. Burrows
Economic Counselor Harlan P. Bramble
The conversation with the President began with the usual 
kind of light chit-­chat. The President remarked, in response to the 
Ambassador’s comments concerning redecoration in his office, that he 
wanted to change some of the portraits on the walls. He said he would 
prefer to have portraits of some civilians, in addition to the military 
portraits which are there now, but he can’t forget that the only civilian 
President Venezuela has had was overthrown.2 The President proceeded 
from here to a brief mention of how, since his days of exile, he always 
sits in a public place with his back to the wall and facing the door. He 
mentioned in this connection an assassination attempt against him in 
Havana in 1952.
Ambassador Sparks introduced the subject of the Bolívar statue 
dedication and commented that he thought the ceremony had gone off 
very well indeed. He then handed President Betancourt a letter from 
President Eisenhower expressing the President’s appreciation for the 
medal which Betancourt had sent to him by Dr. Uslar Pietri. President 
Betancourt referred to President Eisenhower’s speech and expressed 
great satisfaction with its content.3 He asked if we had received the text 
of this speech here and said that he would like to have a copy of it. He 
asked that it be sent to him through the Foreign Office. Ambassador 
Sparks said that this would be done and said that as a matter of fact 
the full text of the speech had been given to all of the Caracas newspa-
pers but that it was carried only in excerpt t by those papers. President 
Betancourt suggested that the Embassy develop closer relations with 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.11/3–1159. Confidential. Drafted by 
Burrows. Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took place at a 
luncheon. The memorandum was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of 
despatch 775 from Caracas, March 11, 1950, which noted that the enclosed memorandum 
was “somewhat in the nature of a basic document to which reference will be made by the 
Embassy on various occasions in the future.”
2 Reference is to Romulo Gallegos, President of Venezuela, 1948.
3 For text of the dedicatory speech, see Department of State Bulletin, March 16, 1959, 
p. 373.
