170 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 8. Gailani said Taraki regime would be toppled in two months. Most of Afghanistan area along border, from Torkham (near Peshawar) to Chaman (near Quetta), now under NFIRA dominance. Afghan Army brigade (two battalions), which according to press has surrendered to dissidents, actually defected to Front near Abu Kala (70.8 miles east of Kandahar). Urgun and Gardez virtually surrounded by Front (respectively 60 miles southeast and 50 miles east from Ghazni, main town on highway between Kandahar and Kabul). Pincer movement now planned against Ghazni itself, by Front from east, in coordination with Hazara Shias from mountainous area west of town. Combined forces may then move northward toward Kabul. 9. Government troops in area mostly new raw recruits. Officer corps dominated by Khalqi political commissars. Gailani estimates that at present there may not be more than 15 Soviet advisors to government military force in area. Latter however fight to bitter end; NFIRA has no Soviet prisoners—those captured alive are killed. Gailani said professional Afghan Army troops largely concentrated in Kabul area. He described Nooristan as “practically independent” and Paktia almost so. 10. ConGen informed Gailani that U.S. not disposed to provide any support, direct or indirect, to any parties in Afghan civil war. Gailani said he had spoken to American Ambassador in Jidda and might want to make contact with Embassy in Islamabad. Fuller 58. Intelligence Appraisal Prepared in the Department of Defense1 [appraisal number not declassified] Washington, August 21, 1979 [Omitted here is a cover page.] 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 15 Feb 1979–22 Aug 1979. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. The appraisal was attached at Tab E to an August 22 memorandum from Henze to Denend, not printed, that responded to Mondale’s request for information on Afghanistan. Henze did not specify when Mondale made the request.
