September 18–December 16, 1978
317
89.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, October 17, 1978, 3:50–5:10 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with the Egyptian Delegation, October 17,
1978, 3:50–5:10 p.m., Oval Office
1. Minister Hassan Ali indicated that agreement had been reached
on the main zones on Sinai. He noted that there was some disagree-
ment over including surface-to-air missiles that are integral parts of the
Egyptian division that will be in Sinai. He added that the Egyptians
should be allowed to have four battalions of frontier forces in the buffer
zone, and the President agreed that this had been decided at Camp
David.
2. Boutros Ghali stressed the importance of establishing some
correlation between the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the progress in the
West Bank-Gaza talks. In his discussions with Dayan, they had reached
agreement that reference could be made to the comprehensive agree-
ment in the preamble and that there could be an exchange of letters
which would be published. This would demonstrate to the Arab world
that Egypt is still involved in the Palestinian question. He had also dis-
cussed with the Israelis the question of establishing diplomatic rela-
tions in phases. Dayan had shown some flexibility at first, but had then
taken a more negative position. The Israelis insist on including the
word “immediate” after mentioning the establishment of diplomatic
relations, and in response, the Egyptians have suggested the word
“gradual.”
3. Al-Baz said that Egypt is thinking of establishing diplomatic re-
lations over a period of six months after the interim withdrawal. First
there would be an announcement of diplomatic recognition, then the
establishment of an embassy headed by a charge, and finally the ac-
creditation of an ambassador. The President said that he had discussed
this in detail with President Sadat at Camp David, and that he was dis-
appointed to see that the Egyptians now want to delay the exchange of
ambassadors. He had understood that this would take place at the time
of the completion of the interim withdrawal. The President expressed
some disappointment with the Egyptian attitude, stating they were
less forthcoming than was expected in the Camp David agreements,
whereas the Israelis had been more so.
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 36, Serial
Xs—(9/78–12/78). Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office.
