40 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement If the incorporation of the West Indies Federation into the OAS should be found impracticable, consideration might be given to the develop­ ment of a Caribbean security grouping. Planning Board Comment: The present organization (the Inter-­ American Defense Board operating within the framework of the OAS) is an adequate institutional framework. Any additional or more substan­ tial collective security framework within the OAS would not be desir­ able from a U.S. point of view and would probably not be acceptable to the Latin American states. There is no reason to hope that the Latin American states would concede to an international organization the right to establish military bases in their territories. Further, it is improb­ able that Brazil, Panama, or any of the others would provide facilities to the OAS which they were unwilling to provide to the United States. Almost all of the Latin American states are unwilling to enlarge in any respect the obligations they assumed under the Rio Treaty. With respect to the entry of the West Indies Federation into the OAS, any indepen­ dent American state may choose to join the organization. Planning Board Recommendation: Accordingly, the Planning Board recommends that the National Security Council agree that: Any additional or more substantial collective security framework for Latin America would, on balance, be infeasible and undesirable at this time. Consideration should be given to bringing the West Indies Federation into the OAS at an appropriate time. 8. Criminal Jurisdiction. Statement of the Issue (Report, pp. 53, 58–60, 63): Except as may be specifically determined to the contrary by the Secretaries of State and Defense, U.S. forces should not in the future be stationed in peacetime on any additional foreign territory unless satisfactory arrangements on criminal jurisdiction—­i.e., in substance the NATO Status of Forces Agreement as a minimum—have been made in advance. Where existing agreements fall below satisfactory standards in terms and practice, they should be renegotiated at the earliest practicable time. Where U.S. forces are now stationed on foreign territory without any status arrangements and host governments refuse to agree to such arrangements, U.S. forces should be withdrawn unless the Secretaries of State and Defense jointly determine that overriding national inter­ est demands their continued presence. The Executive Branch should undertake an urgent, intensive, and continuous effort to inform and explain to the American people and its representatives in Congress the nature and facts of U.S. policy in regard to criminal jurisdiction. The exercise of criminal jurisdiction over American servicemen abroad is a relatively new problem resulting from the peacetime station­ ing of large numbers of troops in friendly countries. The issued has not yet seriously affected U.S. military operations, Free World solidarity, or
