Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China and are on file at the American Legation in Peking. These outrages are a direct consequence of the condition of military anarchy which has developed in China since the country became a republic in 1911 which matter received the attention of the Washington Conference on February 1, 1922, when a resolution was adopted17 expressing the earnest hope that immediate and effective steps would be taken by China to reduce the military forces and expenditures. This resolution received the signature of the Chinese Delegates as well as those of the delegates representing other nations at the Conference. In spite of the foregoing action of the Washington Conference and the continued protests of foreign governments, the recruiting of troops into the various Chinese armies has steadily continued until the number of soldiers under arms in the country at the present time, according to the 1923 edition of the China Year Book, amounts to 1,335,835 [1,332,835] men, the largest standing army in the world. The inability of the Chinese Government to keep this army paid and under control is the chief cause of unsettled conditions existing in the country. As the authority of the Central Government has broken down through conspiracy and civil war, the army has broken up into provincial units under the control of Military Governors or Tuchuns. Sections of the army, unable to obtain pay, constantly rebel and become bandits. The bandit gangs in turn terrorize the country, pillaging villages, burning property or menacing the lives of foreigners until they become strong enough to force their way back into some provincial army. This situation of military anarchy which has developed in China constitutes a menace not only to the peace of the Far East, but to the entire world. It is a matter of special and vital interest on the part of the United States on account of our well known policies and trade relations with this part of the world, and especially because of our position of leadership in the calling and deliberations of the Washington Conference. The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China has always been of the opinion that nothing short of a definite stand on the part of the
