964 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI cepting these obligations, and isolate to a greater extent the problem countries.4 II We face major decisions in 1980 that were deferred for the period of INFCE. These involve requests for consent to reprocessing of U.S. origin fuel in France, the UK and Japan; the conditions of our consent to the use of the resulting plutonium; and the EURATOM renegotiation aimed at giving us such consent rights where we will have to specify how we would exercise them. We also face decisions on implementation of the statutory requirement that countries with which we cooperate have safeguards on all their nuclear activities (full-scope safeguards). And, we face an NPT Review Conference in August, where restraints on international nuclear cooperation will be a major issue. Following INFCE’s concluding Plenary February 25–27, we should demonstrate that its analysis is being taken into account in U.S. policy and that we are willing to become a more reliable supplier. This is essential if we are to limit the spread of sensitive facilities and stop the current move towards multilateral negotiations of criteria for nuclear trade which could result in U.S. isolation, North-South confrontation and setbacks for our nonproliferation policy.5 Beyond 1980, we should consider amendment of the NNPA to (i) eliminate its retroactive provisions, and (ii) if not already accomplished by reorganization plan, relieve the NRC of its role in export control (except possibly with respect to safety). These issues need not, however, now be resolved, and nothing proposed in this memorandum limits your freedom of action here. III Any strategy to reduce proliferation risks associated with the fuel cycle must begin with the other major suppliers. Without their support, U.S. nonproliferation policy can have only limited effect.6 4 Vance underlined the phrase “greater supply assurances to countries accepting these obligations, and isolate” and wrote in the left-hand margin “what is the example of countries where we have not given supply assurances when they have accepted safeguards.” An unknown hand wrote: “NPA enjoins us to do better but we don’t;” “none;” “case-by-case basis only and general policy;” “5 yr licensing recently. But most want link licensing to life of reactor;” and “For breeder reactors (INFCE agrees only with lgr countries) can have [illegible] for govts using spent fuel for reprocessing now have [illegible] consent (transfer or reprocess), Regularize. In return, defer thermal recycle. Breeders and adv reactors are most.” 5 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph an unknown hand bracketed the first sentence, drew a line toward the word “stop” and wrote “?” 6 An unknown hand bracketed this paragraph in the left-hand margin.
