292 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement one and agenda item two, and have also used the term in our routine communiques of meetings, that the vocabulary has been well estab­ lished and it seems to me now difficult to avoid the use of the term. With kindest regards to all, Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador 224. Telegram 767 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 23, 1955, 1 p.m. 767. From Johnson. 1. As expected today’s meeting became very acrid. I opened with long statement along lines my 758, closing with statement when PRC has “by its action, demonstrated that it is expeditiously carrying out terms of agreed announcement, way will be cleared for discussion issues each side wishes bring up under item two”. Hoped PRC will act promptly so can quickly proceed to those discussions. 2. Wang replied by “formally informing” me that on September 22 note was sent to UK Charge Peiping in reply to note received from him stating “UK had accepted US invitation” and way therefore cleared for UK act in PRC. 3. Ignored remainder my questions, general line being all these mat­ ters now for third power, agreed announcement disposed agenda item one, PRC will faithfully implement, and launched into strong attack on my mention of 19, no Americans detained, only criminals in jail, have admitted crimes of espionage and subversion, do aliens in US have free­ dom carry out subversive activities, etc., etc., and then at some length flatly accused US of raising these issues deliberately in order to stall on discussion item two, difficult understand since US had made original July 25 proposal, etc. 4. He then continued with statement replying to my statement last meeting on higher level meeting (text by separate tel). There was then much vigorous give and take during which I ignored his reply on higher level meeting and while acknowledging his statement UK now finally 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2355. Confidential; Niact; Limited Distribution.
