North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 Question 3: Should consultation with the Congress be undertaken on US objectives and proposals within the negotiations? As we determine the substance of possible changes in the US position, the Congress should be consulted on the evolving US position. In our consultations on Capitol Hill the objective of price stabilization (not price rigging, not more foreign aid) must be continually borne in mind. Tab A Discussion Paper Prepared for the Policy Review Committee7 Washington, undated THE COMMON FUND November 4, 1977 The Situation Room The Setting 1. The UNCTAD negotiations on a common fund have become a principal focal point in the North/South dialogue. The March 1977 negotiating conference made little progress in bridging the major differences seen at the Fourth UNCTAD in Nairobi in 1976. At CIEC the industrialized and developing countries agreed in principle to establish a common fund. It was clear on both sides, however, that the type of common fund the major industrialized countries were willing to consider was a much more limited and modest mechanism than that sought by the LDCs. 2. Since CIEC the US has led an effort in the OECD to develop a common fund proposal for the 4-week negotiating conference that begins November 7. The US has proposed a common fund that would facilitate the financing of commodity buffer stock operations by pooling the cash resources of International Commodity Agreements (ICAs) and borrowing in the market against commodity stock warrants and callable capital pledged by governments through the ICAs. The proposed fund would not receive direct contributions from governments and would not have financial resources independent of the participating ICAs. Latest indications are that this approach is acceptable to other OECD countries as an opening position. 3. The LDCs want the common fund to be a global commodity institution that would act as a central source of financing for ICAs with 7 Confidential.
