746  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
and urgently requested assignment of the Marine Training Mission can 
be used to offset charges of intervention. Prior agreement by Haiti to 
allay domestic political tensions and a prohibition against the mission’s 
training of the Haitian police at this time would lessen the danger of the 
mission’s becoming involved in internal matters.
The secret police were first organized about January of this year and 
have steadily increased in importance since that time. They probably 
deserve much credit for crushing the July 29 revolution and Duvalier 
may be convinced that they are his chief reliance in keeping control 
of the government. Emboldened by the July 29 incident, the secret 
police may now commit greater abuses than in the past; this could 
result in diminution of popular support for Duvalier at home and he 
himself might become a virtual prisoner of his own “palace police” if 
he permits their power to grow unchecked. This danger is the greater 
because the army has been weakened by successive “purges” of its 
officers. Duvalier may realize the dangers of this situation and may 
move to bring the secret police under control by incorporating them 
into the regular army. A decree reorganizing the Haitian army (issued 
August 4, 1958) refers to the need for a more adequate system of con-
trol and administration of the Army of Haiti considering the “increase 
in its effective forces and the number of Special Services.” The same 
decree makes the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces responsible for the 
direction of “all military and police operations.” If the secret police are 
brought into the army, they would presumably come within the pur-
view of the proposed Marine Corps Training Mission and be subject 
to our advice. Since this eventuality would expose us to strong criti-
cism, it should be explained to President Duvalier ahead of time that 
the training mission will not become involved in advising or training 
the police.
The over-riding need is a period of political stability in Haiti to give the 
government a chance to attack its other problems (economic, financial, 
social). Beginning in December 1956 when Magloire was ousted, Haiti 
was rocked by one political crisis after another as a succession of short-
lived governments tried and failed to wield power. Serious financial 
and economic deterioration accompanied the political upheavals and 
Haiti appeared to be on the verge of administrative chaos when the 
military council of government took power in June 1957. Using ille-
gal force when necessary, the Haitian army restored a semblance of 
political, administrative and financial order, permitted an election to 
be held and turned over power in October 1957 to a civilian govern-
ment headed by Dr. Duvalier. President Duvalier has also resorted to 
an illegal strong-arm methods to maintain order and seems to have 
an acute fear of opposition political activity. In these circumstances it 
appears probable that political stability in Haiti for the present will only
