1120 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI would require us to obtain such a provision if we were to make such a transfer, and we would not be asking Canada to do more than we would be required to do under our own legislation. The precedent involved would not affect future Canadian transfers of heavy water, only production technology. (C) Unless you perceive substantial objections to such an approach, I suggest that you carry out a demarche3 of this kind within the next week. The prospects for success may not be bright, but I believe we have an obligation to try. (C) Zbigniew Brzezinski 3 Brzezinski wrote “*” after the word “demarche” and wrote “With the Canadians wanting a visit from the President (who is concerned about this matter) it is a propitious” [the remainder of Brzezinski’s comment is missing in the original]. 453. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Ecuador, Argentina, and Nicaragua1 Washington, August 14, 1979, 2220Z 212082. Subject: The Secretary’s Meeting With Foreign Minister Pastor. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.] Treaty of Tlatelolco The Secretary said that he had understood from the Foreign Minister’s predecessor that Argentina would move on Tlatelolco, and he asked about the status of it. The Foreign Minister said he wanted to be frank. Argentina had various sources of energy, among them nuclear plants solely intended for peaceful ends, for the development of the country, and to complement the country’s hydroelectric capacity. Argentina had now reached the stage of being able fully to implement its energy plan. An obstacle to this is the strong pressure being applied with respect to safeguards. He believed the GOA’s point of view is a just one. If Argentina can 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, D790369–1171. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to all American Republic diplomatic posts. Drafted by Michael Adams (ARA/ERA); cleared by Pastor (NSC), L. Paul Bremer (S/S), and Robert Steven (S/S–O); and approved by Vaky (ARA).
