284
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
should understand that the United States will pursue this issue until a
satisfactory resolution can be achieved, either through bilateral consul-
tations or any other means which may be necessary to meet our respon-
sibilities, including those to the other parties to the Convention. The
United States Government prefers to pursue this matter through bilat-
eral consultations and cooperation. To this end, it has approached the
Soviet Government on this matter a number of times. If the possibility
of resolving this bilaterally is to be preserved, the United States and So-
viet Governments must begin consultations without further delay.
—A cooperative resolution of this problem would not only
strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention itself, but would be a
positive development for arms control and disarmament. The United
States Government looks forward to hearing the views of the Soviet
Government on how their two countries may best go about seeking a
mutually satisfactory resolution of this important matter. End text.
5. After he had read the statement (a copy of which we handed Do-
brynin), Ambassador Earle said he wished to stress several points: first,
this was not an issue which would go away. He noted that resolutions
had been passed in both houses of Congress which, while not legally
binding on the President, constituted a serious expression of congres-
sional concern. Ambassador Earle noted that the uncertainty regarding
what had really happened in Sverdlovsk would be a festering sore on
all arms control accords and negotiations until this problem was re-
solved. The situation was bad enough without having the additional
burden of the suspected BW violation.
6. Ambassador Earle stressed that we were open minded on the
form which discussions might take. We preferred that they be private
and on a bilateral basis. In any event, we were open to Soviet sugges-
tions. He noted the similarity between our proposal for consultations
on BW and the SCC established in the ABM Treaty and read the text of
Article 5 of the BW Convention as well as the article on the SCC in the
ABM Treaty to prove his point that they envisaged essentially the same
kind of arrangement. He noted that the work of the SCC had been effec-
tive and helpful. What we wanted was a dialogue along these lines. In
effect it would be an ad hoc consultative group. We were prepared to
begin meeting as early as the first week of August. The longer the pres-
ent ambiguous situation continued the greater would be the damage to
arms control and to our relations. Ambassador Earle concluded his
presentation by noting that if we were able to resolve the BW problem,
we could come out of the entire situation with a net plus for arms con-
trol in general. In any case our intention was positive. We certainly had
no desire to undermine arms control.
7. Dobrynin replied that the Soviets had explained their position
many times both here and in Moscow. He thought it was not necessary
