Chapter 7, January–May 1991 973 3. DoD proposal—Download up to two RVs per missile on three existing types of missile, except for the SS–N–18 which could be downloaded by four RVs per missile. Downloading of heavy ICBMs would be banned. In addition to the option of banning downloading all together, there are three other ideas that you might want to consider: A. DoD proposal with a 1000 RV aggregate limit on downloading. OSD could probably sign up to this option. However, JCS would have problems because the 1000 aggregate limit would not allow downloading in START I of both the MM III and the C–4/D–5 to the ultimate levels desired by the Services. The Soviets would balk at inclusion of the SS–N–18 in conjunction with the “low” aggregate limit. B. Grandfather SS–N–18 RV attribution at 3 RVs per missile (resulting in up to a 896 RV reduction in attribution) in exchange for grandfathering of MM III RV attribution at 1 RV per missile (resulting in up to a 1000 RV reduction in attribution). Ban downloading for all other types. OSD would probably accept the SS–N–18/MM III trade. JCS has already rejected this proposal because it would not allow for downloading SLBMs on Trident submarines in START I. The Soviets would probably also reject this approach now that they appear to have fully embraced the concept of downloading. C. Grandfather the SS–N–18 and MM III attribution, and allow downloading of one type of ICBM or SLBM, with an aggregate limit of (blank) downloaded RVs. OSD would object because the U.S. requires only the MM III “grandfather” provision in START I, and would not be able to use the downloading provisions until START II. JCS would object to permitting downloading on only one additional type, but might be able to accept this option if the aggregate limit was 800–1000 to accommodate the downloading of the SLBMs on Trident submarines. The Soviets might find this option an acceptable compromise since it would resolve the SS–N–18 issue outside of downloading and would also permit some further downloading. However, the total number of RVs downloaded (counting both the change in RVs for the SS–N–18 and the MM III, and subsequent downloading of another type of missile) could be significantly higher than 1000 RVs.
