IV Preface supplement are convinced that it meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing. Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This microfiche supplement is part of a subseries of the Foreign Rela­ tions series for the years 1958–1960. The subseries presents in 19 volumes and 2 microfiche supplements a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the final 3 years of the administration of President Dwight D. Eisenhower. This supplement to volume III, National Security Policy; Arms Control and Disarmament, is the last part of the subseries published covering the 1958–1960 triennium. Sources for the Foreign Relations Series The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government coop­ erate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and com­ plete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. The editors believe that in terms of access this supplement was prepared in accordance with the standards and mandates of the statute, although access to some records was restricted, as noted below. The editors have had complete access to all the retired records and papers in the Department of State. The Department’s collections of NSC papers and correspondence were of the highest value. Some of these documents are available in the central (decimal) files and lot (office) files deposited at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) at College Park, Maryland (Archives II). Over the last several years, all the Department’s indexed central files for these 3 years, as well as several of the lot files, have been permanently transferred to Archives II. The remaining Department lot files covering this triennium are scheduled to be transferred to Archives II in the near future. Records of the Central Intelligence Agency and certain intelligence-­ related files maintained in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research of the Department of State became available to the Department historians only after this supplement was compiled. Arrangements have been made for Department historians to have access to these records for future volumes. The major decisions on national security and arms control ques­ tions were made by President Eisenhower, usually after recommen­ dations from and discussion in the National Security Council (NSC) and his Committee of Principals, established in 1958 to advise him on disarmament matters. The most important Presidential records are the
