418 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI The START Agenda for Moscow There are four major issues: ALCMs: Now’s the time to settle this issue. Nothing’s changed other than the favorable budget decision which should make it easier to bring Cheney along. As you know, while the ALCM issue is complex, there are two key questions: Counting: The Soviets want a larger number to attribute to each ALCM-­equipped aircraft—­the maximum for which a bomber can be equipped. We want a smaller number—10—­to give us some “free” ALCMs as a hedge against Soviet air defenses. Range: Both sides agree that only ALCMs above a certain range will count in START—­the Soviets want 600 kilometers while we are holding out for 1500. — Obviously, the solution to ALCMs lies in finding an acceptable trade-­off between counting and range. On counting, you should explore higher discounts (12 or so) as well as a maximum ceiling on “free” ALCMs per bomber (20). In the end, I think (and, more importantly, the Chiefs agree) that we could live with the Soviet “as equipped.” On range, we could probably go down to 1,000 KM and maybe even 800. — If we do end up moving toward the Soviet “as equipped” ALCM position, then we should insist that Moscow concedes on all the secondary ALCM issues still in dispute, including ALCM conventional-­nuclear distinguishability. Non-Deployed Missiles: We’ve been grappling with this subject for years and there’s no reason to delay a solution. SALT II only limited deployed missiles, so original U.S. goal in START in limiting NDMs was designed to deal with three contingencies: (1) reconstitution (rapidly reloading missile silos with new missiles); (2) soft launch (firing missiles from quickly-­assembled, above-­ground launchers) and (3) breaking out from a treaty. — In recent years, however, two developments have led us to reconsider whether NDM numerical Limits are really worthwhile: First, we have now largely agreed with the Soviets on a comprehensive and effective set of procedures that deal with these contingencies without resorting to NDM numerical limits, i.e., geographic constraints on NDMs, a ban on rapid reload and limits on soft-­launchers. Second, years of negotiating experience have shown that numerical NDM limits would create our own military (unless the limits were so high as to be meaning less). Moreover, NDM limits would be enormously complex to verify and thus could be a focus for criticism during ratification debate. — The Soviets have come to accept the idea of NDM limits, but extend the concept to ALCMs and SLCMs, something we can’t buy. But in the last round, Nazarkin proposed dropping all NDM limits outside missile deployment areas. This is an interesting idea. But it would be politically too hard at this stage to drop the idea of numerical NDM limits altogether. Thus, the best solution to a difficult problem would be to only seek NDM limits on mobile ICBMs. Not only is this
