500.A 4 e/352b
[Document 694]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, September 9, 1925.
SIRS: I am transmitting to you herewith the following instructions for your guidance in
the performance of your duties as the American Delegates to the Special Conference
called by the Chinese Government to convene at Peking on October 26, 1925, in
accordance with the provisions of the Nine Power Treaty Relating to the Chinese
Customs Tariff, concluded at Washington on February 6, 1922. As you will observe,
these instructions are of a general character. The number of Powers participating in the
Conference, the complexity and technical character of the matters to be dealt with, and
the necessity of constant and careful consideration being given to the changing political
situation in China, render impracticable the framing of detailed instructions. It would,
moreover, in any event be my desire that you have a broad latitude of discretion in
dealing with the specific questions which will confront you. At the same time, it is
equally desirable that the Department should be kept fully informed upon all matters of
importance and its instructions sought when needed.
Until the last few months, it had been the belief of this Government, and presumably
that of the other foreign governments concerned, that the provisions of the Customs
Treaty would suffice for the present to meet the Chinese desires on the subject of tariff
revision. The events of the last few months have, however, made it evident that these
provisions will not satisfy those desires as a step in progress toward ultimate tariff
autonomy. Chinese aspirations toward freedom from what they consider to be
oppressive restrictions imposed upon them by the Powers are not confined to Customs
matters alone, but embrace other subjects upon which they are equally insistent that
radical changes be made. I am sympathetic with the aims of the Chinese, and desire to
bring about such modifications in our treaties with China as may be just and
practicable; but I do not desire to apply abstract principles in disregard of actual
conditions in China and of such practical courses of action as may be recommended by
a careful consideration of these conditions. I am of the opinion, however, that, with
respect to the Tariff, the Special Conference ought to go beyond the strict scope of its
activities as defined in the Customs Treaty and enter into a discussion of the entire
subject of the conventional tariff, even including proposals looking toward ultimate
tariff autonomy. I am also of the opinion that other subjects dealt with in our treaties
with China deserve reconsideration at an early date and that the Special Conference
may well serve as the first step toward a consideration of these matters. These views
have been already set forth in the course of instructions of the last few months to the
