Committee, which is scheduled to meet in London on October 11. Speedy
action seems also to be awaited from the Reparations Commission. It is
further my understanding, confirmed by the Chancellor, that the Relief
Credit states, save the United States, have established a Relief Credit
Committee composed in the main of their accredited ambassadors and
ministers in London,7 and it seems to be expected that this Committee will
act as a unit, and with a minimum of delay. These three organs just
mentioned are referred to on page two of my despatch under reference.
If the Secretary of the Treasury has ample authority to act under the Joint
Resolution of April 6, 1922, the Austrian Government will seek a twenty
year loan to bring it within the twenty-five year period mentioned in the
Congressional Joint Resolution. If further Congressional action be
necessary, the Austrian Government will seek a thirty year loan. It therefore
greatly desires to have its proposals definitely matured and ready for
submission first to the Austrian Control Committee around the middle of
October. In other words, its election for a twenty or thirty year bond term
will hinge upon the answer to the question as to whether or not the
Secretary of the Treasury may act under the Joint Resolution of April 6,
1922. It is recognized here that an application to Congress for a new
enabling act would inevitably involve a delay which it is desired to avoid if
possible. All this, of course, is predicated upon the theory that the other
interested creditor nations enumerated in the proviso of the before
mentioned Joint Resolution, in so far as their assent is now necessary, will
take early favorable action. I am told that no difficulties are anticipated and
that the way has been already prepared. In any event the attitude of the
other creditor states will presently be disclosed. There is a little anxiety
here, inasmuch as separate action must be taken by the United States, lest
delay in Washington may result in Austria not being able to float a loan at
the most propitious moment. It is represented to me that M. Dubois, the
Swiss Chairman of the Finance Committee of the League, has intimated to
Austrian experts that he has already broken ground with the firm of J. P.
Morgan & Co., and there is a feeling of optimism here that the Morgan firm
is disposed to take a large participation share in the flotation syndicate to be
formed. I am not in a position to express an opinion as to whether this
optimism is justified. I do know that the Austrian Minister at London,
Baron Georg Franckenstein, is about to go to the United States as a guest of
