560
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
187.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, December 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Fastener Import Relief
I have sent you a separate memorandum through regular channels
reporting the results of our interagency deliberations on the fastener es-
cape clause case.2
I believe this is a critical case for our trade policy. We intend to
submit to Congress for approval early next year the most ambitious
package of trade agreements ever negotiated. Before that package can
be considered, we will need Congressional approval of an extension of
our countervailing duty waiver authority (otherwise the EC cannot fi-
nalize the agreements). In my judgment, a recurrence of the kind of
override fight we had earlier this year3 would seriously undermine our
chances of getting an extension and thus of concluding our trade
negotiations.
Moreover, there is a growing feeling in the Congress that we are
rejecting relief in so many cases that the Trade Act is not working as
originally contemplated. Frankly, this feeling has little foundation—
but it is certainly prevalent.
I have talked to a number of your strongest free trade supporters
and they think relief in this case, at this time, is absolutely necessary to
manage our trade program in Congress in 1979.
All of the agencies which have worked on the case appreciate these
broader considerations, and reflect them in taking positions favoring
relief of some kind.
Of the two options we have presented to you in my other memo,
Option 2 represents the minimum we need to satisfy the domestic in-
dustry and the Congress. I have sounded out representatives of the
1 Source: National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Sub-
ject Files, 1977–1979, Box 4, Fasteners. Limited Official Use.
2 The memorandum was not found. In October, the ITC again ruled that imports
were harming the U.S. fastener industry. (“ITC Says Imports Aren’t Hurting AMF Sub-
sidiary,” The Wall Street Journal, October 27, 1978, p. 5)
3 In April, the Carter administration successfully convinced a majority of the
members of the House Ways and Means Committee not to vote to override Carter’s deci-
sion against providing import relief to the U.S. fastener industry. (Clyde H. Farnsworth,
“House Group Backs Carter Trade Move,” The New York Times, April 28, 1978, p. D1) For
Carter’s decision not to provide import relief, see Document 102.
