190 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 consider military options very seriously. Our approach should be to make it painful to Khomeini to hold the hostages (so far it hasn’t been painful—world public opinion doesn’t bother him much), and prospectively much more painful to him if they are harmed. Then he may be pushed toward a face-saving solution (e.g., expulsion with or without a quick trial). Though many suggest blockade, mining of harbors through which most Iranian imports flow is clearly, to my mind, less risky and less escalatory. With mining, we need not stop ships with our own ships; our forces are there to be shot at only briefly; and ships which might be sunk must themselves take the last move that has that result. Mining is the mildest military action I have found. We are seeking others, for example various acts to demonstrate how we could damage Iran, but I doubt that we will come up with any that are effective without being at the same time more escalatory. Mining, like blockade, is an act of war—though a bloodless act of war, like invading an embassy and taking hostages. There would be a real risk of upsetting our Allies, and a greater one of upsetting or even severely alienating other Muslim states in the Gulf region and elsewhere. It could derail the negotiating process, such as it is, although it might also revive that process. And it would certainly increase the risk to the hostages—probably severely, for a time, though not as likely fatally so as a rescue attempt would do. But it would show we are not to be trifled with and that we will not accept a status quo that has some of our people hostage without corresponding pain to those who hold them hostage. It would avoid a situation that might otherwise drag on, where the U.S. is hurting and Iran—or at least the Iranian leadership—is not. Mining would—over a couple of months—affect the Iranian economy significantly. It would, by the implicit threat of further escalation, get the attention of Iranian leaders, and convince them we are not bluffing, much faster than that. The question on which your advisers will probably divide is “when?” That judgment will turn on: our estimates of the likely course and outcome—both for the hostages and for perceived American standing in the region and elsewhere—of diplomatic negotiations that last for months; whether the hostages are put on trial; the outcome of UNSC and ICJ proceedings; the willingness of others to join us in non-military actions and the effect thereof on the Iranians; how well we think we can make our case to the moderate Muslim countries. My own judgment is that we can go for a period of ten to fifteen days along the diplomatic/economic route, if it appears to be moving in a promising way, and if there is not evidence or grave suspicion that any hostages have been harmed. If strong economic measures against Iran are taken by our key Allies acting with us, that might give
