510  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
draft which I believe fully takes into account views of both sides and 
clearly expresses this intent.
H. You will note from this draft that, although my original pro­
posal had in mind separate declarations, I have adopted your sugges­
tion of agreed announcement similar in form to that which we made on 
September 10.
I. You will also note from this draft that I have taken account of the 
principles of the United Nations Charter as well as our differing views 
on the situation in Taiwan area. With particular reference to your state­
ments this morning, you will note that this draft is carefully drawn so 
as not to require your government in making this statement to renounce 
or to prejudice its views in this regard. You will also note that draft spe­
cifically refers to right of individual and collective self-defense and that 
it provides for statements by the two governments to be identical. That 
is, it is not being suggested your government say anything but what my 
government is willing to say.
J. I would hope we could agree on this draft, issuance of which 
would mean so much not only for progress of our talks but for world 
longing for assurance of peace.
53. After reading draft in English original and having it interpreted 
Wang replied that he had some preliminary comments. We all recog­
nized existence contradictions in policies and disputes between our 
governments. These disputes must be settled conformity accepted and 
recognized standards international conduct. That why entirely neces­
sary as in his draft have specific quotations provisions United Nations 
Charter, indicating intent settle disputes accordance quoted provisions.
54. Wang said we were in agreement that public announcement 
should be made. However, he could not agree that issuance such 
announcement should be a prerequisite for discussion of other matters.
55. Wang said he noted that my draft omitted two paragraphs 
United Nations Charter he had quoted. My draft also omitted provision 
concerning holding of Foreign Ministers’ meeting. My draft contained 
reference to “national objectives”. As he had said this morning, such a 
catchall term as “national objectives” could solve nothing.
56. Wang said question arises what objectives are meant by term. 
In 1941 after Pearl Harbor United States joined in war against aggres­
sion on basis national objective which was self-defense. Use of force to 
achieve such national objective justified.
57. Wang said other national objectives concern domestic affairs of 
country. National objective of self-defense is quite just.
58. Wang said he noted that draft refers to United States self-­
defense in connection with Taiwan area. He could not see how United 
States has right to put up self-defense in Taiwan area.
