Chapter 2, January–June 1989 119 Future Work. Additional options for assuring U.S. testing rights during a specified period of non-­withdrawal (e.g. differentiated periods of testing restrictions during the non-­withdrawal period under restrictive, broad, or broader-­than-­broad interpretations of the ABM Treaty or pursuit of the Soviet “list” proposal) were considered, but not included in the paper because no agency believes that such options would be possible to analyze thoroughly before we return to the negotiations in Geneva. These options, plus a more detailed analysis of SDI testing requirements, will be embodied in the D&S work program. Moreover, additional consideration must be given to the issue of whether or not the U.S. should now establish policy on what systems are or are not based on other physical principles. (S) Sensor Proposal. The U.S. initiative on sensors is separable from the options and issues discussed above. Nonetheless, it would affect what activities occur during the non-­withdrawal period. All agencies support the current position on space-­based sensors because restrictions on testing and deployment of space-­based sensors are neither desirable nor verifiable. They argue that both the United States and the Soviet Union will be improving their space-­based early warning and attack assessment capabilities and that these improvements will make it increasingly difficult for the sides to verify compliance with the ABM Treaty. Finally they note that the Soviets expressed interest in discussing this proposal further in their last plenary statement, albeit in the context of their “list” proposal. (S) Tab A2 Paper4 Washington, May 26, 1989 DST 002 (U) Purpose. To review U.S. policy options with respect to rights of the parties after a period of non-­withdrawal from the ABM Treaty in the context of a Defense & Space Treaty. (S) Current Status. The sides have not resolved to U.S. satisfaction what happens at the end of the non-­withdrawal period. At the Washington Summit, President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev agreed that each side would have the right to choose its course of action. This was codified in the Washington Summit Joint Statement that, “intensive 4 Secret. Brackets are in the original.
