North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
811
On the Food Aid Convention,5 IFAD, general bilateral aid, multi-
lateral development efforts via the UN, trade, and technology, in con-
trast, it will be extraordinarily hard to move the Soviets into a pattern of
positive contribution. But it should be relatively easy to expose the
dismal Soviet performance to Third World criticism, without our ap-
pearing to conduct an anti-Soviet campaign.
The United States need not choose definitively, between the two
approaches. Rather, it can explore both options without foreclosing
either.
But there are limits to how much we can expect from this effort.
While some Soviet officials have recently been throwing out hints of
greater interest, Moscow’s official position is that it wants no part of the
“North-South” dialogue as such; that it is a false way of looking at the
world and that the real division—between capitalist and socialist coun-
tries—puts them squarely on the side of the developing states.
Beyond rhetoric and ideology, the Soviets have not wanted to di-
lute the political impact of their assistance by subsuming it within
broader efforts by the industrialized (read Western) nations. And they
focus more on arms and military equipment than on economic aid. This
gives them a short-run political impact disproportionate to their
outlays, and leaves Western countries shouldering the more important,
longer-term economic aid burden.
Finally, we should be under no illusion that LDC pressure on the
West springs from a notion that the Soviets wear white hats and we
black. It reflects, instead, a realistic assessment that we have most of
what the LDCs need, and are more likely to give at least some of it.
Thus, whether we get the Soviets to cooperate in the North-South
dialogue or merely score propaganda points off them, we should not
expect it to lessen LDC pressure on ourselves.
The Issues
1. Agriculture
(a) International Grain Agreement
This fall the United States wants to begin negotiations on a new In-
ternational Grain Agreement. The Soviets want an agreement that will
produce stable prices, but have been reluctant to sign an accord that re-
quires reserve stocks. To ensure food security for the Third World there
must be grain stocks. The Soviet Union must bear central responsi-
bility: variations in Soviet grain production currently account for about
80% of worldwide production variations. And if history is a guide, the
5 The Food Aid Convention, which was concluded in 1967, set guidelines for the
granting of food assistance.
