572
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
232.
Memorandum of Conversation1
London, May 22, 1979
PARTICIPANTS
US
The Secretary
Assistant Secretary Vest
Ambassador Brewster
Minister Streator
Peter Sommer (Embassy Notetaker)
UK
Francis Pym, Secretary of State for Defense
Sir Frank Cooper, Permanent Under Secretary, MOD
Michael Quinlan, Deputy Under Secretary, Policy and Programs, MOD
Roger Facer, Private Secretary to the Secretary
SUBJECTS
Conservative Commitment to Defense, NATO Issues, TNF, US Strategic Systems,
SALT, ABM, MBFR, UK’s Nuclear Deterrent, SALT III, CTB, Anti-Satellite
Negotiations, Arms Sales to China
Conservative Commitment to Defense
Pym said he was privileged the Secretary could visit the MOD and
he personally wanted to emphasize the Conservative Party’s anxieties
over the growing Soviet threat and Britain’s weakened defense posture.
The Conservatives are determined to do something positive. As a first
step, the Conservatives had increased military pay, which in some
ways was only a minor achievement, but it did underline the Conserva-
tives’ commitment to defense. He added that the Conservatives, how-
ever, would be hard-pressed to improve substantially current defense
programs because the UK economy is at zero growth. The Secretary re-
plied that he was pleased to be able to come to the MOD and the US is
pleased with the Conservatives’ strong commitment to defense.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
Comprehensive Test Ban
The Secretary said he and Lord Carrington had gotten hung up the
question of how many national seismic stations should be located in the
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 9, Vance Nodis Memcons 1979. Secret; Nodis.
Drafted by Peter Sommer (EUR). The meeting took place at the Ministry of Defence. The
conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII,
Western Europe.
