1130 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement know who did it and went on to indicate that those responsible should be appropriately disciplined. Attorney General Rogers stated that the Soviets are exploiting sex situations. Every time a tourist goes to the USSR who has something like this in his background, they try to entrap him. He felt that we should alert people in the Government to this problem. He also expressed his agreement with the principle that all doubts in such cases should be resolved in favor of the Government. The President agreed with this principle and went on to state that if the Supreme Court required the Government to re-­employ such individuals, they should be put to work in innocuous activities. Mr. Dulles pointed out that he had instituted a new system under which the superior of each group of men was responsible for the men under his supervision. If the supervisors had known the conditions under which Martin and Mitchell were living, we could have caught the situation. The President pointed out that someone had received a report in the Martin and Mitchell case and should have acted differently upon it. Mr. Dulles pointed out that the President was talking about the initial investigation whereas what he was thinking about was what happened after an individual came to work for the Government. The President expressed the view that there should be some way to place responsibility for decision and some system for follow-­up of responsi­ bility for decision. He then turned to Mr. Ash and asked whether the internal security status report contained recommendations. Mr. Ash noted that the report was simply a status report and did not contain recommendations. The Attorney General again expressed the view that there should be some way to sound the alert throughout the Government to be stricter in these matters. He stated that the Soviets seem to have a list of homosexuals. They had entrapped students and attempted to black­ mail them as a means of getting them to go to work as agents. What worried Attorney General Rogers about Martin and Mitchell was not these individuals alone but the possibility that there is an organized group of such people. Secretary Anderson inquired how good a list we had of homosexuals. Mr. Hoover indicated that we did have a list and that local authorities notified federal authorities when they obtained such information. He also pointed out that a person who had been an employee of a U.S. Government agency until April had been involved in homosexual activities with Mitchell. The President expressed the view that the Attorney General or the FBI should devise a program in the Government so that when a report was obtained on an employee, a full report by the agency back to the Attorney General would be required. This report should indicate the action that the agency had taken. Attorney General Rogers agreed that we needed to do something. He
