Guatemala 731 I have this morning discussed the foregoing with Secretary Gates and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and they are agreeable to the suggested procedure. General Lemnitzer has indicated that ships now available in the Florida area could arrive off the Guatemalan coast within 48 hours. The ships available include an aircraft carrier and a small amphibious force with a contingent of Marines. It is my own feeling that given the possibility of leaks, it would be just as well not to have Marines aboard any of the surveilliance ships. General Lemnitzer points out the Marines would be merely on what is a routine and normal training [illegible in the original] in that area and that, should it be necessary to use the Marines, several days would be saved by having them aboard. I nevertheless feel it would be better to risk a delay than to risk the serious reaction which would inevitably follow should the rumor spread that Marines are en route to Gautemala.5 Christian A. Herter 5 In a memorandum of conversation between the President, Secretary Herter, General Lemnitzer, and Press Secretary Hagerty at Augusta, Georgia, August 17, Brig. Gen. Goodpaster states that “one point of detail was as to whether a Marine battalion should be abroad the ships used in the surveillance operations. The President thought they should not be kept abroad, but should be left at the nearest suitable station. General Lemnitzer agreed that this could be done acceptably.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries) GT–43. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Guatemala1 Guatemala City, November 18, 1960, 11:24 p.m. 350. Ten million dollars approved by Under Secretary Dillon for imports from the U.S. with counterpart being granted to the GOG as accrued. Detailed information to follow. You may wish convey info President Ydígoras.2 Public announcement left to your and President’s 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 814.10/11–1860. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Carwell and signed by Higdon. 2 Muccio informed Ydígoras and Unda Murillo on November 19. (Telegram 260 from Guatemala City, November 23, 1960; 814.10/11–2360)
