728
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Secretary Bergland and Stu Eizenstat) should be expanded to include
direct representation from the relevant Departments and Agencies. The
resulting World Hunger Working Group (WG) chaired by me would be
in effect a subunit of Stu’s proposed Cabinet-level Interagency Group
on Food and Agricultural Policy of which I would also be a member.
The WG (subcommittee) would as rapidly as possible develop policy
options and subsequently a Presidential statement on world hunger.
The expanded membership of the WG may increase the difficulties of
coordination; however, we believe that the participation in the process
by the Agencies that would implement the initiative is indispensable.
A small task force of private consultants representing a variety of
interests and expertise as well as personnel temporarily detailed from
the Agencies will serve with my staff to support the Working Group.
Decision:
Approve
Disapprove
3. Preparation of Cabinet Memorandum (attached)
The World Hunger Working Group would prepare a memo-
randum for you to issue to Cabinet Departments and Agencies. The
memorandum would announce the establishment of the Working
Group and would direct Cabinet Secretaries and Agency heads to pro-
vide it with their views and recommendations.
Decision:
Approve (send attached memo)14
Disapprove
4. Involvement of the Private Sector
Private sector representatives—from agriculture, business, labor,
universities, foundations, and the religious community—should be in-
cluded in the above process. Informally this could be done through
contacts by the Working Group with private sector individuals and or-
ganizations. On a more formal basis, private sector input could be as-
sured by the establishment of a small but prestigious private sector
Consultative Group to serve as the visible public advisory body in the
development of the Administration’s world hunger initiative.
Informal consultation with the private sector could lay the basis
for eventual public support, avoiding the risks of public discussion
14 Attached but not printed. The original text “(Prepare a memo to Cabinet)” is
struck-through and “(send attached memo)” is typed below.
