800.51 W 89Greece/17
[Document 101]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Dulles)
[WASHINGTON,] November 12, 1925.
The Greek Minister called to see the Secretary this morning and, finding that he was at
the Treasury, came to the Near Eastern Division with the request that the Secretary be
advised that the Legation had been instructed by the Greek Government to
communicate to the Department that Mr. G. Cofinas, former Minister of Finance, and
M. Drosopoulos, Director of the Public Debt, of Greece, were shortly coming to the
United States to take up the funding of Greek indebtedness to this country.
In this connection the Minister referred to the recent conference he had had with the
Secretary, when the latter had inquired at what time the Greek Government intended to
take up the question of the funding of its debt, in view of the fact that our Legation at
Athens had been informed, some weeks ago, of the appointment of a Greek Debt
Funding Commission, composed of the Minister himself and Mr. Evlambios. Mr.
Simopoulos said that he hoped that the delay in taking up the negotiations which would
result from the sending of new negotiators from Greece would not inconvenience this
Government. He realized that the Debt Funding Commission was occupied at the
present time and had the Rumanian negotiations to take up when the Italian
negotiations were finished. In view of this, he trusted the slight delay in dealing with
Greece would be welcome rather than otherwise.
I told the Minister that I would pass on to the Secretary the information he had
communicated. The Minister then asked me (1) whether I would be able to let him
know personally whether the procedure contemplated by the Greek Government would
be agreeable to this Government and (2) whether formal notification of the designation
of Mr. Cofinas should be made.
I told the Minister that in my personal opinion any long delay on the part of the Greek
Government would be unfortunate and that I hoped that the newly appointed
representatives would proceed to this country at an early date. He said that he could
assure me that they would.
In reply to the Minister’s second inquiry, I stated that as we had been officially advised
of his own designation and that of Mr. Evlambios as negotiators with the Debt Funding
Commission I felt that it would be desirable to have a formal communication from the
Greek Legation indicating the change which the Greek Government was suggesting in
the personnel of its Mission and, also, as soon as possible, a definite statement as to the
