646 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI What can you do on those three issues—­on the range, nuclear/conventional and the range for SLCMs? Suppose you ended up getting most of what you want from those, what could we expect from you? On all these other issues we’d want to know that we are pretty much getting what we needed. And I can’t tell you that that would be enough for us, but I can tell you that if you came back to us with some kind of a proposal that took account of your getting a good chunk of what you want on the three issues, I’d be prepared in return for your giving up on these other eight, to put that to our group. But I can’t go back on issues we thought we had already closed. I am offering this only as a hypothetical suggestion as to what you might do. In fact, what I am saying is that if we can resolve these three issues and even assume for the moment that you get some of what you want—­maybe a lot of what you want on those three issues—­is that going to take care of everything else that’s now been raised? I can’t commit to considering anything you might do in this regard, other than to say that I would approach it in a good faith fashion. Akhromeyev: We can do this. I was reporting two packages—­one on SLCMs and one on ALCMs. That was an oral report. Maybe I should sit with Bartholomew and formulate a written report outlining what the tradeoffs are. He and I could initial it. These initials would not be binding, it would just be our thinking and would be something informal. Baker: Well, I am proposing just that kind of exercise. Akhromeyev: Well, so in a week’s time we can look at it in Moscow. You’re here, we can exchange views. Or maybe new positions will emerge. That will be our homework. We don’t need it for the bigger group, we’ll just get it done, we’ll just do it in an in-­house discussion. Baker: What I was trying to do this morning is pinpoint the areas of disagreement and the areas in which we are in agreement. The elements of common ground are a good place to start. We have two lists. We’ve got agreed, we’ve got disagreed. And I want to see if there is anyway out of this trap. Shevardnadze: I believe that’s the way to go. You should identify what we agree on, what we disagree on and then look at what the possible tradeoffs are. Baker: Well, I think we may have some problems with tradeoffs if it’s based upon your new proposals and not based upon where we were when we left Moscow. But let’s take a look, how do we follow up? Shevardnadze: We’ll deal internally on these papers and maybe we will come up with some variants. Bartholomew: We could digest the exchange we’ve had and think about how we both could identify and think about the packages and
