September 18–December 16, 1978 283 tions at the site of the 1944 negotiations for the UN Charter. If you agree, I would like to have the Department begin immediately to make the necessary arrangements with Harvard University, the owner of Dumbarton Oaks, for its possible use as site for the talks.4 I recommend that our negotiating team be headed by myself, with Roy Atherton as my Deputy. We have been considering whether to bring Ambassadors Eilts and Lewis back to Washington to participate in the talks. Sadat and Begin will remain in their respective capitals, and I believe it will be more important to have Eilts and Lewis stay at their posts to work with Sadat and Begin on problems that arise in the talks. Unless you have other views, I will instruct Eilts and Lewis accordingly.5 Recommendation: 1. That you approve the attached letters to Sadat and Begin.6 2. That you authorize the Department of State to explore the possibility of having Dumbarton Oaks as site for the Egyptian-Israeli talks. 4 In his memoirs, Vance wrote that “a number of possible sites for the talks” were considered, but ultimately, Blair House, the official guest residence of the President, located across the street from the White House, was chosen as the venue for the conference. “Although its physical facilities were not really suited to this use,” he noted, the “historic nature of the site added to the atmosphere of serious purpose, and it was assumed that the delegates would have other work space at the nearby Madison Hotel. Eventually, more and more of the working parties’ meetings shifted to the hotel, which became known among the delegates as ‘Camp Madison.’” (Hard Choices, pp. 232–233) 5 In telegram 250355 to Cairo and Tel Aviv, October 2, Saunders instructed Eilts and Lewis to remain at their posts during the talks since neither Sadat nor Begin would be attending. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840157–2069) 6 Carter indicated his approval of both recommendations and initialed “J” below them.
