708  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
a nuclear weapon. He noted, for example, that the weapon could be 
located in a false bottom constructed in the ship.
Mr. Scribner concurred with the President’s observation, noting 
that many people think that more safeguarding is being done in this 
area than is actually the case.
Secretary Quarles indicated the view of the Department of Defense 
that there was sufficient flexibility in the present Port Security Program; 
that there was no need for amending the existing policy in that regard. 
He said that the Department of Defense would defer to the Department 
of State as to the degree of relaxation which should be exercised with 
respect to the Polish vessels. While agreeing with the President and with 
Secretary Scribner that the searches made for clandestine nuclear weap­
ons in such vessels could only be partially effective, Secretary Quarles 
thought, nonetheless, that they served as a deterrent to attempted intro­
ductions through such means.
The Director of the FBI, when called on for comment by the 
President, indicated that the Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference 
concurred in the view that the present Port Security Policy and Program 
should not be modified until after the completion of the Geneva 
Conference. [text not declassified] Mr. Hoover said that the present pol­
icy and program served to some degree as a deterrent to the introduc­
tion of nuclear weapons and to the introduction of large numbers of 
intelligence agents. He emphasized that the present policy included 
an arrangement which permitted exceptions in particular cases and he 
concluded that from an internal security point of view, the present pol­
icy and program should not be modified at this time.
The Chairman of the Interdepartmental Committee on Internal 
Security, when called upon by Mr. Gray, concurred in the view that 
review of existing policy should be deferred until the fall. He added 
that while it was recognized that there may be over-­riding consider­
ations which suggested a liberalization of policy on Polish vessels, it 
was his view that the Poles, as well as the Soviets, constituted a threat 
to the U.S.
General LeMay, on behalf of the JCS, noted that no information has 
been brought to the attention of the JCS which would reflect that there 
has been a change in the threat since the present Port Security Policy 
was adopted. It was the JCS view that the Port Security Committee had 
been working satisfactorily and consequently the present policy should 
be left as is.
The President asked General LeMay if it was the view of the JCS 
that the policy as regards the Polish vessels should likewise remain 
unchanged and General LeMay replied in the affirmative.
Mr. Mueller of the Department of Commerce, directed the Council’s 
attention to the recent CIA report indicating that a number of vessels
