Chapter 2, January–June 1989 37 Chemical Weapons Arms Control. Preliminary decisions associated with the basic United States position concerning a global ban on chemical weapons production and stockpiling have been made incident to the resumption of multilateral negotiations on that subject in the Conference on Disarmament. Therefore, no further review of United States policy on such a global ban need be undertaken until the results of the defense strategy review are available. (C) The verification of chemical weapons arms control agreements, whether a global ban or any other formal limit, remains difficult. No later than June 10, 1989, the Arms Control PCC should complete a review of verification requirements for chemical weapons arms control, identifying those requirements specifically applicable to a global ban and establishing, if possible, a means of certifying the sufficiency of criteria for such a ban. (S) Nuclear Testing. Guidance for the review of issues concerning the Threshold Test Ban Treaty and Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty requiring resolution prior to resumption of the Nuclear Testing Talks has been promulgated separately. The question of future U.S. requirements for nuclear testing, whether the United States should reaffirm or modify its commitment to the “step-­by-step” approach to nuclear testing limitations, and what, if any, additional limitations on U.S. nuclear testing beyond those of the TTBT and PNET would promote U.S. defense strategy and objectives will be addressed in the on-­going defense strategy review. Additional tasking to the Arms Control PCC on the development of specific policy and positions for negotiations following TTBT and PNET ratification will await the completion of that review. (C) Nuclear Weapons Free Zones. By June 10, 1989, the Arms Control PCC should review U.S. policy with respect to nuclear weapons free zones. The review should result in reaffirmation of or suggested modifications to the policy principles the United States uses in evaluating proposals for nuclear weapons free zones and should recommend U.S. policy with regard to all existing or proposed zones. (C) Naval Arms Control. By August 1, 1989, the Arms Control PCC should review the United States position on naval arms control. The review should reaffirm or suggest modifications to existing U.S. policy rejecting naval arms control proposals as not in the United States interest. In addition, the review should explicitly consider the various proposals in this area made by the Soviet Union and its allies and provide recommendations on which, if any, (a) are in the U.S. and allied interest and should be pursued, (b) might be acceptable in return for Soviet concessions in other areas, or (c) are unacceptable. (C) George Bush
