Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX in Turkey, he conducts daily programming meetings in Turkish and has RL’s motley team of (mostly aging) Tatars, Uzbeks, Azerbaijanis, Kazakhs, Tadzhiks, Turkmen and Kirgiz motivated as they have never been before. John White of OMB has refused to return my calls since before Christmas. I finally got through to Ed Sanders, Deputy Associate Director for International Affairs, yesterday and told him I was preparing a report for you on implementation of the radio decisions and wanted to know what OMB’s problem was. He said White didn’t agree with the SCC decisions as I described them. White understood the SCC to have decided that the radios didn’t need any money until they secured new transmitters. I said he was wrong. I repeated for the umpteenth time that even without new transmitters they needed to beef up broadcasting by hiring new people, developing new news research and programming resources to be able to highlight Middle Eastern developments—and if they did get new transmitters, they needed to have all these other things done to make effective use of them. He said they thought they could reprogram, cut something else out. I said the SCC had not even considered that “option”. We wanted no cuts in Polish or Romanian to be able to broadcast to Azerbaijanis and Uzbeks. This was not in the national interest. Again, for the umpteenth time, I said the problem was that all radio broadcasting had been shortchanged for years and everything needed to be expanded. The truth is that OMB has not reversed the $2.2 million cut it made this fall, over our strong objections, in RFE/RL’s FY–81 budget; RFE/ RL is already running short this year and currently faces the necessity of firing 40 people! The Administration’s program for expanding radio broadcasting will soon be exposed as hollow rhetoric unless ample funds are assured. (VOA has been allocated some extra funds by OMB, but far less than is needed to accomplish what they are under orders to do.) Given the insignificant amount of money required (compared to defense outlays)—the entire SCC package of 11 December is well below $10 million—all of this penny-pinching agony is idiotic. There is no question about popular and congressional support for what we want to do.4 I continue to get letters and calls praising us for the decisions that were 4 In a January 23 letter to Carter, AFL/CIO President Lane Kirkland decried the insufficient funds made available to broadcasting to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board
