Human Rights
455
tries, the relationship between human rights objectives and other U.S.
national objectives, and the effectiveness of the various policy instru-
ments which can be used to further the human rights effort. Treasury
stresses the importance of making individual decisions on whether the
U.S. should support or oppose prospective IFI loans in the context of a
comprehensive strategy and believes this can produce more options for
influencing situations well in advance of a specific IFI vote. While
agreeing on the importance of strategies to guide particular decisions,
some other members of the Group, including the State Department, be-
lieve that human rights situations in other countries are so constantly in
flux that written studies quickly become outdated and are therefore not
as useful as the oral strategy presentation noted above.
To minimize seeming inconsistencies in our use of sanctions in the
IFI’s, Treasury notes the desirability of being more selective in op-
posing loans by establishing a clearer set of criteria (e.g., confined to
rights of the person) for invoking those sanctions and for excepting
loans that meet basic human needs, and by limiting the use of our op-
position to clear-cut situations of gross violations where the U.S. is
most likely to be supported by other member governments. In the State
Department’s view, the criteria governing decisions to abstain on or
vote against IFI loans on human rights grounds are those set forth in
the statute and they must be applied in a manner that takes into ac-
count the differing circumstances of, and our multiple interests with re-
spect to, individual countries. (It should be noted that in the case of
each abstention or no vote there were significant violations of the rights
of the person in the proposed recipient country.) As for the criteria for
defining loans that serve basic human needs, they are being evolved on
a case-by-case basis, in light of the legislative history of the relevant
statutory provision concerning basic human needs. With respect to lim-
iting the use of sanctions to certain countries, the State Department be-
lieves there can be little doubt that the governments of the countries
listed above (p. 2) are (or were at the time of the vote) engaged in se-
rious violations of human rights, some in greater degree than others.
Finally with respect to the Group’s process, it has become increas-
ingly clear that when a convincing case is made that a given loan or
project will directly benefit the needy by serving their basic needs,
assistance should be approved in all but the rarest instances. Since we
consider each loan and project on its merits, we see no need to exclude
the possibility that extraordinary circumstances might warrant the
delay or possible disapproval of a basic human needs loan, but this
would clearly be the exceptional case. At the same time, it is essential
that other countries understand (and we are so advising them) that our
approval of basic human needs loans is not an expression of approval
for the human rights practices of the recipient government.
