511.3 B 1/286½ [Document 25] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With the British Ambassador (Howard), January 5, 1925 January 5, 1925 Geneva Protocol.25 The Ambassador said that he had received a private letter from Mr. Austen Chamberlain26 requesting him to take up with the Secretary the question of the Geneva Protocol. Mr. Chamberlain desired to know the views of this Government. It would seem that the putting into effect of the Protocol without modifications might leave the way open for the development of situations which would be embarrassing with respect to the relations between Great Britain and the United States. It was a cardinal point in British policy to maintain friendly relations with the United States and to cooperate with this Government wherever possible, and there might be interference with this policy if contingencies should arise in which through the operation of the Protocol the British Government was brought into opposition to the interests of the United States. On the other hand, it seemed to the British Government that it would not be well to throw out the Protocol entirely, for if this were done there would most probably be a continuance of competitive armament in Europe which the countries concerned could not afford. The only alternative to such a competition in armament with all its possible consequences would seem to be the adoption in some form of such an arrangement as the Geneva Protocol proposed. The British Government were seeking for modifications which might suit the purpose and would be very glad to know the position of the United States. The Secretary said he should hardly care to make any answer for this Government to such a broad inquiry, involving important questions of future policies, without bringing the matter to the attention of the President, and this he would do at the first opportunity. He did not mind saying, however, as an informal expression of his personal views, that there were two aspects at least of the Geneva Protocol which might give concern to this Government. The Secretary said that if the Protocol were taken as having practical value and of actually portending what it set forth, there would appear to be a proposal of a concert against the United States, when the Powers joining in the Protocol considered that the United States had committed some act of aggression, although the United States might believe itself to be entirely justified in its action, and in fact be acting in accordance with its traditional policies. The Secretary said that he did not believe that such a concert would actually become effective but he supposed that the Protocol must be taken as it is written and in this view the United States would be compelled to view it with disfavor. The Secretary said there was another class of cases
