292
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
lasted about 25 minutes. Only Bill Quandt and David Aaron were
present.
Highlights: Brzezinski focused immediately on the essentiality of
using the Israel-Egypt treaty negotiation to make progress on elements
of the other framework, although he recognized this might carry us
only so far on the latter if Egypt wanted to wrap up its peace and didn’t
really worry about more than a fig leaf for the other. In this context,
Brzezinski said what is lacking is contact with Palestinians. If we are to
be talking about questions of interest to them as an adjunct of the
coming negotiation, we should/must be in touch with them, and
quickly. I said this is very much in our minds and a paper3 is being de-
veloped for the White House which sets out alternative levels of rela-
tionship ranging from what we have now at one end of the spectrum, to
direct discussion with the PLO at the other, but several in-betweens.
Brzezinski said he would like to see this paper soonest. I ventured our
thought about bringing Walid Khalidi to Washington and sketched out
how this might be done. (HHS: See attached4 which Mike and Morrie
already have). Brzezinski commented that he liked Khalidi and twice
said, “Fine, that is a good approach.” Comment: in the context of other
remarks by Brzezinski, I think we now have a green light on the Khalidi
idea which does not exclude other approaches as well as they will be
outlined in the paper we send forward. End Comment.
Brzezinski asked who would handle the side negotiation on the
West Bank framework with the Israelis (which he thought the President
should open as soon as Dayan comes to Washington), the Egyptians
and Palestinians. He emphasized twice that State should handle diplo-
matic relationships with the Palestinians as contacts by the White
House had a difficult domestic dimension. Quandt and I said you had
hoped to hold yourself available for the side of the coming negotiation
dealing with that Framework and Brzezinski said that was fine.
Quandt said that in discussions with Palestinians, such as Khalidi he
would like to share the responsibility with you. Brzezinski didn’t ex-
actly demur but emphasized that White House officials should in gen-
eral steer clear of Palestinian contacts; it “should be a diplomatic
responsibility.”
3 Not found.
4 Document not attached and not found.
