3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
464
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Middle East
The President believed that both our countries wanted to pursue
peace in that region. Each of us had close relations with the countries
involved in the Middle East dispute. We felt that the Camp David dis-
cussion2 had produced a viable mechanism for working out a peace
treaty between Egypt and Israel, the main combatants in that area. He
expressed the hope that the Soviet Union could help to move this
process along, and that within the bounds of its own foreign policy it
would support the Camp David agreements. We did not have any mili-
tary forces in that area and, in fact, our observers in the Sinai might be
removed once that peace treaty went into effect.
MBFR Negotiations in Vienna
The President said he was discouraged by the lack of progress at
the Vienna negotiations. The same was true of some of our allies; some
of them, in fact, wanted to end the talks. The main difference between
us concerned our present assessment of the Warsaw Pact forces, and
we would like to see this difference resolved. One possibility, which the
President had discussed with the leaders of Western countries when he
was at the Bonn economic meeting, was to work out an appropriate
definition of military forces to be counted. The present difference of
180,000 between our assessment and the number provided by the
Warsaw Pact countries was possibly caused by a different definition of
which troops were to be counted. The President repeated that he would
like to see it resolved.
US–PRC Relations
Another matter of concern which President Brezhnev had ex-
pressed to President Carter and to Senator Kennedy3 was our future re-
lations with the People’s Republic of China. We had nothing to conceal
in this respect, and the Shanghai communique4 showed that all we had
in mind was to establish peaceful relations with the PRC. It would be a
mistake for us to use our relations with the PRC against the Soviet
Union. We have no thought of doing that. We did want to have
peaceful relations with China, but would not permit anyone to drive a
wedge between us and the Soviet Union.
2 See Document 144.
3 Edward Kennedy (D-Massachusetts).
4 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XVII, China, 1969–1972, Document 203.
