Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1065
423.
Telegram From the Department of State to the United States
Interests Section in Cuba1
Washington, October 19, 1977, 2046Z
251232. Subject: Cuba and the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Ref: Havana
170.2
1. Principal reasons given by Cuba for not attending Treaty of Tla-
telolco negotiations and, subsequently, for not adhering were: (A) “ag-
gressive policies” of the US toward Cuba; (B) need to denuclearize US
military bases in Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, and Canal Zone; and
(C) “illegal detention” of Guantanamo. Officials of Mexican Govern-
ment and Organization for Proscription of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (OPANAL), the Treaty of Tlatelolco implementation organiza-
tion, have from time to time consulted Cuba on adherence to treaty.
Ambassador Gros Espiel, Secretary-General of OPANAL, recently told
Amd. Lucey that he considered present Cuban attitude toward treaty
to be very negative,3 and that he planned to postpone further efforts to
persuade Cuba to join until US had completed Protocol I ratification.
Mexican CCD Rep and principal author of Tlatelolco Treaty, Garcia
Robles, has expressed opinion that Cuba is likely to join only in context
of continuing improvement in US-Cuban relations.
2. Cuban adherence to Treaty of Tlatelolco is one of few remaining
requirements for bringing treaty regime fully into force throughout re-
gion, which would involve acceptance of full-scope IAEA safeguards
by all Latin American states and would be a major step forward
in global non-proliferation efforts. Remaining requirements under
Treaty’s entry into force provision are Argentine ratification (they have
already signed), Cuban signature and ratification, Soviet adherence to
Protocol II and French and US adherence to Protocol I (President Carter
signed Protocol I on behalf of US on May 26, 1977, and Protocol will
soon be sent to Senate for ratification). Brazil and Chile have already
ratified but (unlike the 22 other Latin American states that have done
so) have exercised their right under Treaty’s entry into force provision
not to waive conditions for bringing treaty into force for themselves.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Pastor Subject, Treaty of Tlatelolco, Box 66, Brazil, 3–12/77. Confidential; Priority. Sent
for information Priority to Mexico City, Moscow, Panama City, and London. Drafted by
Robert Einhorn (ACDA/NP) and Lorna Watson (ACDA/NP); cleared by Oplinger, Law-
rence Scheinman (T), Philip Farley (S/AS), Mark Garrison (EUR/SOV), Emery Smith
(ARA), and Luigi Einaudi (ARA/PCC); and approved by Charles Van Doren (ACDA).
2 See Document 421.
3 Gros Espiel’s remarks are reported in telegram 15579 from Mexico City, Sep-
tember 16. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770337–0740)
