1222
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
in talking about alternative ways to proceed—e.g. the Allon Plan;6 this
is no help with the Palestinians. Begin is upset. We should try to help
with Begin, but handle him differently from Israel, itself (in terms of the
way we present the issues), so that the country will not see us as anti-
Israel.
The President said that that is crucial. What about the ultimate ques-
tion? Should we try to bring all this to a head next month, or be a partic-
ipant in a willingness to find ways so that the talks can just go on?
Ambassador Linowitz said no (to the latter point), we should do this:
Once we have made our position clear on Begin’s four points, we
should first insist on an Israeli security presentation early in the talks,
so that the advisory groups can be set up. Weizman is going back to Is-
rael7 early so that he can join the talks and meet with General Ali.
Maybe we can make some headway on this. Second, there is water.
There is a need to get some agreement on principles, so that it can then
be put into the Continuing Committee.
The President asked when Weizman would be getting into the talks.
Mr. Hunter said that Weizman was leaving from here early, on
Tuesday8 night.
The President asked when he was seeing Weizman.
Mr. Hunter said Tuesday at 1:00 p.m.9
The President asked whether Weizman’s participation was Begin’s
decision or something that Weizman was doing on his own.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Weizman was all along a member
of the negotiating team. Ali will be there, and Weizman will show
up. This might be part of the internal struggle within the Israeli
Government.10
On the first two issues, we will surface papers, and therefore leave
the land issue. He doesn’t know yet when we should surface our ideas.
We will not hold back on our ideas.
The President asked what Ambassador Linowitz would surface on
the first two issues.
6 See footnote 10, Document 64.
7 Weizman was in the United States to receive an honorary degree and for defense
negotiations, having departed Israel on April 23. (Telegram 7444 from Tel Aviv, April 23;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800201-0894)
8 April 29.
9 Carter met with Weizman at the White House from 1:01 p.m. to 1:32 p.m. on April
29. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of
conversation of this meeting has been found.
10 See footnote 4 above.
