726  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Governments of Costa Rica and Nicaragua that they may wish to make 
similar request of U.S. for assistance within their national territories.4
3. In any such request for assistance should probably be followed 
promptly by formal request of Guatemalan Government for OAS action 
under Rio Treaty. We are giving this aspect of problem our urgent atten-
tion and you are requested obtain preliminary views Government of 
Guatemala on this subject. Whether Articles III or VI should be used 
would depend on available evidence.5
Please telegraph promptly any information concerning Cuban 
involvement which may come to Embassy’s attention.
4. Ability of Ydígoras’ regime to survive rebellion would seem 
to hinge largely on support of armed forces. Please cable urgently 
Embassy’s estimate of attitude armed forces and recommendations 
concerning action which may be taken in Washington or by Embassy to 
strengthen will of officer corps to defend regime.
5. Embassy’s estimates concerning probable strength of rebel forces 
their supplies equipment available and sources of same also urgently 
required.6
Herter
4 Instructions for the American Embassies to offer U.S. assistance were sent by 
telegram 134 to Managua, repeated to San José and, for information, to Guatemala City, 
November 14. (741B.5811/11–1460).
5 Article 3 deals with “an armed attack;” article 4, with “an aggression which is not 
an armed attack;” extra continental or intercontinental conflict; or “any other fact or situ-
ation that might endanger the peace of America.”
6 Telegram 227, [text not declassified] from Guatemala City, November 14, replied 
to paragraphs 4 and 5 above: Regarding paragraph 4, the majority of the Army and Air 
Force were behind the Government; [text not declassified] message had no suggestion to 
strengthen the will of the officer corps; Barall’s message (offer of $10 million in special 
assistance) was most helpful; news of U.S. surveillance of the coast was being given wid-
est word of mouth distribution within military circles. Regarding paragraph 5, [text not 
declassified] reported on the strength of Guatemalan forces and their supplies before the 
rebellion because the number of troops siding with the rebels and the amount of supplies 
they had taken was unknown. (714.00/11–1460).
GT–38.	
Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special 
Assistant (Krebs) to the Secretary of State1
November 14, 1960.
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers. 1 page not declassified.
