825.00/368: Telegram [Document 405] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State SANTIAGO, January 26, 1925—1 a.m. [Received January 27—4:38 a.m.] 12. Situation continues very grave with possibility of civil war or even of a soviet uprising. Navy continues firm in opposition to Alessandri’s return and in its demand for immediate release of Nef and Gomez. Many rumors during the day that large part of the Navy would join Army but information from Valparaiso consulate shows no foundation for these. The consul at Concepcion reports engineers in navy yard Talcahuano favor Army, one cavalry regiment Viña del Mar said to favor Navy and to be ready for embarkation on war vessels which have full steam up. Conditions fixed by Alessandri for his return as published by Associated Press are said to be unsatisfactory to Army. Certain diplomatic colleagues have been informed that arms have been given to the masses and that they are organizing Red companies. Movement in Army is absolutely controlled by young officers mostly captains and lieutenants. General Dartnell supposed to have no real power. Many of the young leaders are extremely radical in their sentiments. Altamirano, Nef, Gomez are considered by many as being held as hostages and very grave fear for their safety is still expressed, also that Dartnell has assured many diplomats that he can guarantee safety of detained and also protection of all foreign interests. Errazuriz, Unionist candidate for the Presidency, has been seized by Army and is a prisoner in barracks. Attempts have been made to arrest other very prominent Unionists. Morning and evening papers have stated that a North American squadron was on its way to Chile to protect American interests. [Paraphrase.] I have not been able to trace the origin of that rumor. In the present situation I do not think it necessary to send ships to Chile but highly desirable to send some very close to Chilean ports because complete breakdown of Army and Navy discipline and manifestation of mob violence justify fear of dangerous situation. [End paraphrase.] COLLIER
