Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1115
to show remarkable patience and good humor and perform in a highly 
professional manner. The problem is that they are saddled with a hope-
less U.S. position and must deal with hopeless Soviet counterparts. 
There is no reason to believe that this will change for the better if the 
negotiations continue in their present form as if nothing had happened.
10. You have the defense and space delegation’s request for guid-
ance (Geneva 7815, DST-XV-17)5 on the future of defense and space. 
Roslyakov has told me repeatedly that the Soviets’ agreement at the 
1990 summit to continue defense and space “without delay” after 
START signature was given almost no thought at the time by senior 
Soviet officials, and he has strongly implied that it does not represent 
current Soviet thinking. On the other hand, Nazarkin seems relaxed 
on the subject. For the Soviets to refuse to continue negotiations which 
they insisted upon starting and which deal with a U.S. program they 
find threatening is also not very credible. Thus, I believe they may want 
to continue to negotiate on ABM defenses, but with a different negotiat-
ing format and one that is tied more closely to negotiations on offensive 
systems. The question is does the USG actually want to reach some real-
istic agreement on this subject, or merely continue to be able to say that 
negotiations are going on to meet some alleged political requirement? 
If it is the former, people need to understand that a lot of bad feelings 
and lack of credibility have been generated by six years of non-serious 
negotiations here. What would be needed seems to me to be a reorga-
nization/recertification of the effort, not a mere continuation without 
delay.
11. I have been saying for some years that the Soviets will agree 
to amend the ABM treaty to allow a larger number of ground-based 
deployment sites with a larger number of ground-based interceptors. 
They may also agree to loosen the ABM treaty’s constraints on sensors 
in space. They would also probably be willing to meet us somewhere 
between the broad and narrow interpretations of the ABM treaty, if 
we were willing to negotiate on such matters. Of course, the U.S. side 
has never made any proposal along these lines. What the Soviets will 
demand in exchange for the above concessions is, I believe, a contin-
ued prohibition on kill mechanisms in space and a renewed long-term 
U.S. commitment to clear constraints on ABM systems and activities. 
Presumably, the U.S. will want to keep the door open for a cooperative 
transition to a greater reliance upon defense in the future than would 
be represented by the above set of provisions. Thus, I believe that the 
compromise available to both sides would be a loosening of the ABM 
treaty’s constraints, together with agreed prohibitions on other possible 
5 Reference is to telegram 7815 from NST Geneva, July 16 (Department of State, 
Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D910676–0752)
