846
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to him over the hot line.2 It received attention at high levels. It was only
after this that the Soviet media was allowed to portray the President
any way it chose. (C)
This was extremely shortsighted, I replied, and was not appropriate
behavior for a great power. I have been reading the Soviet press for
twenty years and I had never seen Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson,
Nixon, or Ford castigated in such terms as the Soviet press has adopted
toward the President. This was foolish not only because of the umbrage
which American officials feel when we read such distortions, but in
terms of the effect which such tendentious reporting can have within
the USSR itself. I find it really deplorable, I said. (C)
Bessmertnykh answered that he entirely agreed with me. Within
his memory he also had never seen anything like it. It was unnecessary
and gratuitous and he had personally complained about it to Moscow,
characterizing it as an unwise policy. But once Soviet journalists are
given their head in a matter like this, they can really go to extremes.
And the constant barbs and pricking points which have been directed
at the USSR since this administration took over have had their effect,
he added. (C)
I asked whether the Soviet Embassy keeps in touch with Reagan’s
foreign policy advisers. They had made no attempt to do so, Bessmert-
nykh replied, although a Soviet diplomat had attended Richard Allen’s
briefing for the diplomatic corps. The point of the briefing, according
to Bessmertnykh, was to reassure foreign diplomats that the Reagan
administration would adopt a responsible course of action in world
affairs. In any case, the Soviet embassy had been in contact with a
great many Republicans during previous administrations and was sure
that such acquaintanceships could be renewed in short order. US-Soviet
relations are the most important elements of international relations,
Bessmertnykh said, and the Soviets were confident that they could work
with any American administration, no matter who was President. (C)
Afghanistan. Turning to Afghanistan, Bessmertnykh stressed that
the image being conveyed in the United States of the Soviets being
“mired” in a hopeless Vietnam-like mess in Afghanistan was totally
incorrect and very unfortunate. It leads to a widespread hope that
Soviet forces would soon be withdrawn and all talk of a Soviet with-
2 For the exchange of hotline messages, see Documents 113 and 114. In his press
conference on April 13, Carter, noting several nations’ calls for Soviet troop withdrawal,
said: “We would support this effort. But the Soviets, contrary to the assurance given to
me by Brezhnev and given to, I know, at least, President Giscard by Brezhnev, have
not withdrawn their troops. In my judgement, they have no inclination to withdraw
their troops; they’ve shown no evidence of that.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book
I, p. 674)
