Guatemala 715 Eximbank, which is now studying both applications, asked Ambassador Alejos for more complete data on them about two weeks ago. On the personal orders of President Ydígoras, the Dirección de Caminos in Guatemala dropped virtually all other work to concentrate on furnishing the desired information, and Ambassador Alejos submitted it yesterday, July 25. The President obviously wants no responsibility for delays in action on these requests. The direct implication is that, if action is not taken promptly, the fault will be ours. A third application, which our Embassy considers to have great merit, will reportedly be submitted to DLF next week, and will involve roadbuilding to the Cobán area, aimed at opening up what is potentially one of Guatemala’s richest provinces, one capable of absorbing much of the teeming population of the Indian areas. We recommend that, if at all possible, the two applications now being processed be handled expeditiously, and an announcement of their approval be made on the earliest possible date. Time is definitely of the essence, as events are moving very fast and we must not be caught in the position of having supplied too little too late. With the aim of reversing the trend of nostalgia for Arbenz’ day, we suggest also investigation of the rumored intention of the United Fruit Company to dispose of its large holdings in the Tiquisate area. Reports speak of the possibility of selling these, under a United States Government guaranty for UFCO, to workers’ cooperatives. If it should be found that there is, in fact, disposition in UFCO to do this, it would be highly desirable that the Company be urged to announce its plans quickly, and to develop the impression that it is not only under extremist regimes that agricultural workers can aspire to acquiring ownership of these valuable lands. OAP, in making the recommendations below, feels it necessary to point out that, while the loan applications described above are not considered top priority projects by Eximbank or REA, the Rio Hondo project is given No. 1 priority by President Ydígoras. It would seem logical to give considerable weight to this fact, in view of the President’s now acknowledged political acumen. Our relations with him have not been made easier by our apparent unwillingness to accept his own programs, which are normally predicated on political and sociological as well as economic considerations. It should be remembered that Ydígoras has received only two $5 ­million bank loans since he has been in office,6 both on the basis of programs favored
