Special Session on Disarmament
1171
and the Delegation should draw on it in its private and public com-
ments. Our immediate objective at the second PrepCom meeting is to
work for an agenda which will reflect a realistic set of objectives for the
Session. It should be general in its phrasing, neither anticipating the ne-
gotiation of specific arms control measures nor prejudging the results
of the Special Session.
As at the first PrepCom meeting, we will want to strengthen the
cooperative atmosphere that has existed so far by making it clear that
Non-Aligned moderation facilitates our ability to be forthcoming.
III. Consultations and Coordination:
We will wish to continue to pursue actively consultations with all
major actors and to strengthen our interest in on-going processes of
open dialogue.
The Delegation should maintain especially close relations with our
allies on the PrepCom, as well as with the Western group in general.
Consultative group meetings consisting of NATO members, Japan,
Austria, as well as the special WEOG working group established dur-
ing the first PrepCom should be continued.
Consultations with the Soviets will also be important in view of
our common interests in such areas as SALT and the CCD; the Delega-
tion should make clear to the Soviets that we share important interests
which could be adversely affected by the Session and we hope to work
together throughout the preparatory processes to protect such in-
terests. We do not expect, however, to develop a fully coordinated ap-
proach with the Soviets in light of our different approaches to certain
elements of the Session; e.g., the World Disarmament Conference issue.
In consultations with key Non-Aligned, neutral and developing
countries, the Delegation should seek to encourage openness, modera-
tion, cooperation, and avoidance of block positions and atmosphere of
confrontation. We will seek to give concrete evidence of our willing-
ness to be flexible and to carefully consider reasonable Non-Aligned
concerns. As at the first Preparatory Committee meeting, the Delega-
tion should keep in close touch with leading Non-Aligned and neutral
Delegations, including those of Yugoslavia, Sweden, Argentina, Brazil,
Iran, and Egypt, as well as others that may emerge as major players.
IV. Issues:
(1.) Agenda of the Special Session: We have indicated in our sub-
mission to the SYG that the US will adopt a flexible attitude toward the
agenda. Although we would prefer an agenda that simply sets out an
organizational framework (e.g., general debate, adoption of final docu-
ments), we are prepared to go along with the general trend in favor of a
more thematic agenda along the lines proposed in the Non-Aligned in-
