March 27–December 31, 1979 949 Vice President Mubarak said that Sadat had said the U.S. should start convincing Begin now, and push the Powers and Responsibilities negotiations. By the end of the year, more pressure should be created. There should be increasing pressure and by the end of the year something precise, so that the Arab world (the Saudis and other moderates) would know something is being done. They wait for results by the end of the year. It is very important to start the convincing, and applying pressure after November 19. Sadat is therefore doing his best with Begin, building bridges, and preparing the ground for the President to go forward. The President said that he appreciated that Vice President Mubarak could see Vance, Vice President Mondale, Brown, Strauss, and Brzezinski. It has been a constructive visit. He hopes the Vice President has learned of some of the limits on what we can do in our aid programs to Egypt, Israel, and others. The Vice President and Sadat know of the enormous demands on us from Asia, NATO, as well as the Middle East and parts of this Hemisphere. We have to balance what we can do with the Congress versus what we want to do to honor requests from our friends. He committed himself to Sadat, when they first met, to make a substantial increase in food. We have honored our commitment, with mutual benefits in our friendly relations. He wants Egypt, Sadat, and the Vice President to see us as their friend. We treat Egypt as a special friend, despite our worldwide obligations on aid, with other countries being even poorer. One-third of our PL–480 goes to Egypt. All other countries get allotments in dollars. If the price goes up, the quantity goes down. Egypt is special; it gets no tonnage cuts. He approved an increase in the 1.5 million tons of wheat by 100,000 tons. He doesn’t know whether that can be increased. He will work with Vance, and consult with leaders in Congress to see if that can be modified in some degree. He doesn’t want to mislead the Vice President: we are approaching our limit with Congress in this next year. On the other items, Vance should consider them, and report7 back to him (the President). Secretary Vance said that some money is unspent. Only on rice would we have to go back to Congress. He thinks we can help, despite the limits, and work our way through. The President asked if this means a short-fall on wheat and rice. Secretary Vance said that rice can be handled. The President said that we will do the best we can. He thinks that we will not meet the full Sadat request, but he will see about modifying the 1.6 million tons in wheat. 7 Not further identified.
