1853 would be reciprocal, i. e., apply to nationals of Syria and the Lebanon in the United States as well as to American nationals in the mandate territory. This is not the correct view. The same principles apply to the Consular Convention as in the case of the Extradition Treaty. (See Department’s telegram 13, January 12, 3 p.m.) In the case of the Consular Convention it is even clearer that its provisions cannot be made applicable to nationals of Syria and the Lebanon in the United States, since there is no provision in the Mandate extending the application of Consular Conventions between France and other countries such as is found in Article 7 of the Mandate with respect to extradition conventions. The extension of treaty rights enjoyed by French nationals under the Consular Convention to nationals of Syria and the Lebanon in the United States could only be effected by Treaty. An appropriate Article in the proposed Convention was accordingly suggested by this Government. If France, for reasons which she deems satisfactory, does not desire to have such an Article incorporated in the Convention, the Department will not press the matter, since the French Government states that it is prepared to extend to the United States and its nationals in Syria the benefits of the provisions of the Extradition Treaty and the Consular Convention. It is believed, however, in order that the record may be entirely clear, that the Department’s view in this matter should be communicated in writing to the French Government along the following lines, with appropriate reference to your previous written and oral representations. (3) “In previous communications and conversations (here make appropriate reference by date) I have had the honor to bring to Your Excellency’s attention the desire of my Government that the existing provisions of the Extradition Treaty of 1909 and Consular Convention of 1853 between the United States and France should be reciprocally extended to the United States and to Syria and the Lebanon by an appropriate provision to this
