September 18–December 16, 1978
457
council, is not in conformity with the Camp David agreements. We
never talked about a timetable of five or six months. We cannot say be-
cause there is the PLO.
The people, Mr. President, who met your friend, Mr. Atherton,8 are
threatened with their lives. We have to give them our protection. We
are prepared, although Jordan does not join, to negotiate with Egypt
alone the modalities, the responsibilities, and the powers. But we
cannot sign a document in which it is plainly said the elections will take
place in six months. They may take place in three months, and they not
take place in nine months. We cannot say. We don’t have candidates.
So, how can we sign such a document? I wrote a draft which was fair to
everybody, although Jordan does not join. Notwithstanding this fact,
we are prepared to negotiate within a month after the exchange of
letters of ratification, everything which is written at Camp David, but
do not ask us to sign a document that the elections will take place for
the administrative council between five or six months. That is abso-
lutely impossible. This I am going to explain to Secretary Vance.
Then, Mr. President, may I say a word about the financial issue. I
had the broad idea that we should not ask for a grant at this time, but
for a loan for twenty-five years. I was almost stoned in my country be-
cause of it. I do not make any exaggeration. Then there is the question
of the two air fields. I read the last draft sent by Secretary Vance—just
absolutely non-concrete. I don’t know what is the plan. Secretary Vance
said he would talk to you and then you will talk to Congressional
leaders. I also wanted to talk to Congress. They are my friends. Secre-
tary Vance advised me not to talk to the Senate. Until now we don’t ac-
tually know anything. What can we do? The evacuation of an army of
tens of thousands and installations which were built for eleven years is
connected with a very serious expenditure. I didn’t want to ask for a
grant, I asked for a loan. We shall repay it. But, we have no reply yet;
and we don’t know.
Mr. Atherton made a very grave remark to Dayan during their talk
that the question is being raised that we combine peace with money. I
take exception to such a remark. We don’t combine any money with
anything; but we put the facts before the Secretary. Without any an-
swers, we are walking through darkness. We are not beggars, Mr. Pres-
ident. I go into the city of Jerusalem and look at the walls and read
“Begin traitor”. I have a debate with my own friends all the time. We
have to care for the security and the future of our people. We have
made great sacrifices, Mr. President. You know very well that at Camp
David I did not promise to remove the settlements from Sinai. I did it
8 See Document 75.
