294 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I liberal2 approach; we can even gain some political support if, from time to time, we seem to be adopting a somewhat tougher conservative posture, especially on such matters as the Soviet role in the world, Cuban “neocolonialism”, or on human rights. V. THIS YEAR’S PRIORITIES A recent review with the Vice President has yielded the following priorities for the next year: Must Win Issues (Presidential) —Progress in Middle East negotiations —Ratification of Panama Canal Treaties —SALT/CTB High Priority (Presidential) —Defense Decisions during Congressional review of the Budget (e.g., M–X) and a Presidential Address on Defense Issues —International Economic and Trade Policy (including East-West Trade) —Trip to Latin America, Africa —NATO/Economic Summits and follow-on —Nuclear Non-Proliferation Legislation —Human Rights —Arms Sales In addition to supporting you on these Presidential Priority Agenda items, my staff will be bringing to your attention decisions on gray area systems initiatives, intelligence charters, and Indian Ocean arms limits. There are three other matters that are emergency or high priority issues requiring a national strategy and your attention. —International economic issues: in particular, a defense of the dollar, a continued freeze on oil prices, coordinated stimulation of the world economy, MTN agreement (this year), and commodity agreements. These issues may come to have a very important and difficult political dimension in our relations with West Germany and the oil producing countries. —China. We need to find ways to maintain momentum on that aspect of our relations where we have common concerns—global security issues deriving from Soviet efforts to expand their influence. I will be suggesting that in the spring, about the time of a SALT agreement, I should visit Peking.21 The Chinese have explicitly asked for such a visit 21 Brzezinski traveled to Beijing in late May 1978. For the memoranda of conversation of Brzezinski’s meetings with Chinese officials, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIII, China, Documents 108–111.
