64
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
not to seek mutual pledges that neither side will be the first to carry out
such acts. (Favored by Defense and JCS and acceptable to State and
ACDA.)
Approach 2: Same as Option 1, except propose that both sides
pledge not to be the first to carry out such acts. (Favored by ACDA, but
opposed by JCS. DOD wants to examine further whether this should
apply to peacetime only.)
Approach 3: Propose that the US and Soviets regard interference
(which includes intercepts, physical attacks [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] as a hostile act, but make a first-use pledge only for physical at-
tacks. (Favored by State.)
The Interagency Working Group (IAWG) was tasked on a priority
basis to study whether a hostile acts and no-first-use agreement ought
to apply in wartime as well as peacetime (like the wartime prohibition
on the use of poison gas), in particular to determine what such a prohi-
bition would mean operationally to the two sides.
Type of Agreement
With regard to the type of agreement to be reached with the So-
viets on Hostile Acts, there was consensus that we should aim toward
constructing a formal agreement in the long term.
However, there was disagreement as to the appropriate form of
any interim agreements we might reach. ACDA favored parallel state-
ments covering hostile acts and test cessation, believing this would not
require approval by Congress. DOD thought unilateral statements
would offer more flexibility.
The Interagency Working Group (IAWG) was tasked on a priority
basis to examine what must be avoided in constructing interim agree-
ments in order to ensure that the President can issue a parallel or uni-
lateral statement without having to obtain the consent of Congress.
The IAWG is to consult the legal counsels of various agencies as
appropriate.
Nature of a Testing Ban
Again, there was no consensus. Two possible approaches to the So-
viets resulted:
Approach 1: Informally propose an indefinite moratorium on ASAT
tests but with the proviso that either side could give the other six
months’ notice if it decided it was necessary to commence testing. (Fa-
vored by State, ACDA and OSTP.)
Approach 2: Informally propose a high-altitude testing ban with the
proviso that either side give the other a one-year notice if it is to com-
mence any high-altitude ASAT testing (e.g., above 3000 km). In addi-
tion, ask the Soviets to stop their low-altitude testing while ASAT ne-
