Human Rights
259
79.
Editorial Note
At United Nations headquarters in New York on October 5, 1977,
President Jimmy Carter signed the International Covenant on Eco-
nomic, Social, and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. Both covenants had been open for signature
at the United Nations since December 19, 1966, and Carter, in his March
17, 1977, address to the United Nations General Assembly, had as-
serted his intention to seek ratification of these and other covenants and
conventions:
“To demonstrate this commitment, I will seek congressional ap-
proval and sign the U.N. covenants on economic, social, and cultural
rights, and the covenants on civil and political rights. And I will work
closely with our own Congress in seeking to support the ratification not
only of these two instruments but the United Nations Genocide Con-
vention and the Treaty for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Dis-
crimination, as well. I have just removed all restrictions on American
travel abroad, and we are moving now to liberalize almost completely
travel opportunities to America.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I,
pages 444–451)
In remarks made at the October signing ceremony, held in the Eco-
nomic and Social Council Chamber at United Nations headquarters,
Carter explained the significance of the administration’s actions:
“By ratifying the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, a gov-
ernment pledges, as a matter of law, to refrain from subjecting its own
people to arbitrary imprisonment or execution or to cruel or degrading
treatment. It recognizes the right of every person to freedom of
thought, freedom of conscience, freedom of religion, freedom of
opinion, freedom of expression, freedom of association, and the rights
of peaceful assembly, and the right to emigrate from that country.
“A government entering this covenant states explicitly that there
are sharp limits on its own powers over the lives of its people. But as
Thomas Jefferson once wrote about the Bill of Rights, which became
part of our own American Republic, and I quote again from Thomas
Jefferson: ‘These are fetters against doing evil which no honest gov-
ernment should decline.’
“By ratifying the other Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cul-
tural Rights, a government commits itself to its best efforts to secure for
its citizens a basic standard of material existence, social justice, and cul-
tural opportunity.
“This covenant recognizes that governments are the instruments
and the servants of their people. Both of these covenants express values
in which the people of my country have believed for a long time.
