794  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
General Twining said he wished to raise the question whether the 
net evaluation subcommittee, which is carrying out a special study this 
summer, with its regular report deferred until next January, might skip 
making a full study in mid-­year 1960. The President suggested that he 
talk to Gordon Gray about this. The President commented on a study 
which he had suggested within recent days—to see what this country 
would really look like five days or so following nuclear attack. He had 
suggested that it ought to be conducted by a very small group—say 
five officers in the grade of Major or Lt. Colonel, plus a representative 
from OCDM. The task would be not to produce a long dissertation but 
to use imagination, and by pictures and figures try to convey just what 
the situation would be.
The President asked General Twining to what extent plans and 
operations in the Pentagon seemed to have been slowed down by the 
fire. General Twining said no slow down seems to be noticeable. The 
President reiterated what he has said on many previous occasions—that 
he feels there is a lot of unnecessary activity going on in the Pentagon, if 
one could only get at determining just what could be eliminated.
As the meeting ended the President asked General Twining how he 
is feeling from the standpoint of energy and personal comfort. General 
Twining said he is feeling quite good, but that it will be six to eight 
weeks, the doctors tell him, before he will be really recovered.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
185.	 Memorandum of Meeting Between Eisenhower and Gray1
Washington, July 27, 1959, 10:30 a.m.
1. Robert Gray, Secretary to the Cabinet, joined us to discuss 
the Cabinet paper “Removal of Papers by Retiring Department and 
Agency Heads” (CP 59–58/4). I pointed out to the President that the 
paper which he had approved did not specifically advert to classi­
fied documents of the National Security Council and that it seemed 
well to have the covering memorandum make some reference to these 
1 Source: Study of aftermath of nuclear war; Wheelus Air Force Base; basic national 
security policy; Senate consideration of NSC structure. Top Secret. 5 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Staff Memos.
