January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1125 quire pressing Sadat not to lock us into the May 25 date and to cooperate with our strategy of negotiating in detail. —The alternative strategy is to press the negotiations as far as they can be pursued seriously in order to complete the foundation but consciously pave the way for suspension of the negotiations in the most favorable way possible with an eye to significant action in 1981. —These two approaches are not mutually exclusive. The issue is exactly how to bring them together so that the second is a natural fallback from the first and so the issues are correctly positioned. 2. In making that choice, we need to consider carefully that a decision to try to conclude the negotiations this year will force a choice between: —Pressing Sadat to accept a deal that will have enough compromises in it to preclude selling it to the Palestinians and other Arabs. The temptation would be great if we set our sights on an agreement for agreement’s sake and have to fall back to get agreement. Such an outcome could have serious consequences for Sadat’s tenure and for our relationship with Egypt and the other moderate states in the area. —Pressing Israel to decisions that would put in suspense the current government’s policy of steadily tightening its grasp on the West Bank and Gaza. This could well provoke a government crisis in Israel where such a crisis may already be imminent for entirely separate economic and political reasons. Such a course would have serious repercussions in the U.S. —The unfortunate aspect of this choice is that while we would be pressing Sadat for concessions on negotiating strategy, we would seem mainly to be leaning on Israel to make concessions with nothing concrete on the Jordanian or Palestinian sides. 3. If we were going to press ahead and try to achieve agreement this year, we will have to take some specific steps to pave the way on the Jordanian/Palestinian/Saudi side. Parenthetically, we should note that the need for a serious effort on this front argues for not locking ourselves into a May 25 deadline. —The centerpiece of a serious effort on this front would be a dialogue with the Palestinians. Since there are strong arguments against taking on the burdens of a direct dialogue with the PLO this year, we need another approach. I see four complementary possibilities: (a) Set up a series of in-depth discussions with a group of non-PLO Palestinians or Americans close to the Palestinians. (b) Ask the British to hold in-depth talks with the PLO. (c) Ask Hussein when he is here to put certain questions to Arafat, implicitly on our behalf. (d) Sit down for a couple of days with one non-PLO Palestinian close to Arafat (a professor now in the U.S.) to brief him in detail on the autonomy talks and to ask whether there is any way the course we are on could intersect at some point with a course the PLO could endorse.7 7 Vance underlined this sentence.
