Covert and Overt Operations
931
A second major implication is found in the Report’s comments on
readiness and training evaluation. The only way we will get greater
“factor productivity” in Defense is to look at the “output” of the Depart-
ment more effectively. Exercises geared to real contingency planning
are the single promising instrument for such output measurement. The
JCS annual and five-year exercise program, already institutionalized,
is the embryo for a future testing system.
Finally, let me add a personal note. From the viewpoint of a military
officer who has seen commanders relieved, and who has sent soldiers
to jail, this Report is justification for forced resignations at a very high
level. Such a sweeping step, of course, may be of dubious wisdom at
present, but it is clear that the authors of the Report must have found
themselves feeling as I do. They have hedged their judgments to avoid
forcing the blame into the open, but the evidence encourages the
unpleasant inferences.
I feel that some of the blame should fall on me insofar as I encour-
aged you to have confidence in the operation. I rendered that judgment
on too little first-hand observation of the rehearsals and staff organiza-
tion. In the final stages, however, I was cut out of the briefings and
NSC meetings so that I had a very imperfect view of the details of
the operation.
If you want a memorandum for the President on the Report, I shall
prepare one, but you may want to reflect on this step for a time while
you digest the full import of the Report.9
9 Odom underlined the phrase “while you digest the full import of the Report,”
and wrote below it: “This report can be used for very large initiatives—if you desire—
but we need to think through timing and choice of initiatives. WO.”
354.
Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and South
Asia Division, Directorate of Operations, Central
Intelligence Agency (Cogan) to Director of Central
Intelligence Turner
Washington, September 3, 1980
[Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Cen-
tral Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 13, Folder 1:
C–372 Iran 01 Sep 80–30 Sep 80. Secret. 2 pages not declassified.]
