506
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We do not undertake this important step for transient tactical or
expedient reasons. In recognizing the People’s Republic of China, that
it is the single Government of China, we are recognizing simple reality.
But far more is involved in this decision than just the recognition of a
fact.
Before the estrangement of recent decades, the American and the
Chinese people had a long history of friendship. We’ve already begun
to rebuild some of those previous ties. Now our rapidly expanding re-
lationship requires the kind of structure that only full diplomatic rela-
tions will make possible.
The change that I’m announcing tonight will be of great long-term
benefit to the peoples of both our country and China—and, I believe, to
all the peoples of the world. Normalization—and the expanded com-
mercial and cultural relations that it will bring—will contribute to the
well-being of our own Nation, to our own national interest, and it will
also enhance the stability of Asia. These more positive relations with
China can beneficially affect the world in which we live and the world
in which our children will live.
We have already begun to inform our allies and other nations and
the Members of the Congress of the details of our intended action. But I
wish also tonight to convey a special message to the people of Tai-
wan—I have already communicated with the leaders in Taiwan—with
whom the American people have had and will have extensive, close,
and friendly relations. This is important between our two peoples.
As the United States asserted in the Shanghai Communique of
1972, issued on President Nixon’s historic visit, we will continue to
have an interest in the peaceful resolution of the Taiwan issue. I have
paid special attention to ensuring that normalization of relations be-
tween our country and the People’s Republic will not jeopardize the
well-being of the people of Taiwan. The people of our country will
maintain our current commercial, cultural, trade, and other relations
with Taiwan through nongovernmental means. Many other countries
in the world are already successfully doing this.
These decisions and these actions open a new and important
chapter in our country’s history and also in world affairs.
To strengthen and to expedite the benefits of this new relationship
between China and the United States, I am pleased to announce that
Vice Premier Teng has accepted my invitation and will visit Wash-
ington at the end of January.3 His visit will give our Governments the
opportunity to consult with each other on global issues and to begin
working together to enhance the cause of world peace.
3 For documentation on Deng’s visit, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIII,
China, Documents 201–210.
