464
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
162.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, February 26, 1953, 1 p.m.
3397. 1. I dislike remaining inactive at time when monarchical in-
stitution which we have in past regarded as stabilizing influence
country is in grave danger (Embassy telegram 3393, February 25 re-
peated London 1102, Baghdad 80, Madrid Unn).2 I realize that for
number years in view of peculiar situation Iran it has been one of our
policies to support Shah. During last two years it has become increas-
ingly clear that Shah is weak reed. His inability to take decisions cou-
pled with his tendency to interfere in political life has on occasions been
disruptive influence. Nevertheless Shah and court are basically
pro-West and their present opponents, which include not (repeat not)
only radical wing Iran party and other nationalist movement elements
but also Tudeh are in general either unfriendly to West or at best neu-
tral. It would be mistake for us to take position re dispute between Mo-
sadeq and court which would result in coalescence nationalist move-
ment and Tudeh. On other hand collapse of monarchy at this moment
leaves clear field to Mosadeq who surrounded by influences not (repeat
not) particularly friendly to West.
2. One of our problems is that those groups in Iran which are
anti-West or neutralist are in general inclined to be dynamic while
those which are inherently friendly toward West are for most part pas-
sive and seemingly incapable of organized action. Even Zahedi who
has been more dynamic than most political leaders fairly friendly to
West, has allowed himself meekly to be arrested. His arrest would
seem eliminate any action against Mosadeq by army.
[3.] I would not (repeat not) hesitate to take some action here to
stimulate defense of Shah if I could see any hope of success. For mo-
ment I see no (repeat no) hope; nevertheless members of Embassy and
other American agencies here endeavoring discreetly to ascertain
whether any political or other forces exist which might at least in name
of Shah oppose this latest Mosadeq move. Story of Shah’s imminent de-
parture may leak prior his departure. Unless it does it may be difficult
to assess attitude various groups re Shah since after his departure few
likely to indicate support for him.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/2–2653. Top Se-
cret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated NIACT to Madrid, London, and Baghdad.
Received at 9:24 a.m.
2 Document 161.
