foundations of the American system were impaired, Pan Americanism would lose its vitality and the Monroe Doctrine its accustomed and tangible meaning.” (J. B. Moore, Principles of American Diplomacy, 1918, X–XI.) This Government does not approve the creation with non-American States of relationships which are to be deemed hostile to the Monroe Doctrine and, it must also be recognized that there are the greatest difficulties in proposing a policy, which would be capable of safe expression in a Pan American agreement, touching matters which fall within the scope of the Monroe Doctrine. No arrangement should be entered into, or resolution agreed to, which could possibly be interpreted as curtailing in any way the application by the United States of the Monroe Doctrine. There should be no opening for the limitation of its action in that application through acquiescence in any arrangement whereby an American State could accept non-American control of its territory or political action. No opportunity should be given to a non-American State through any Pan American agreement to seek to impair the position which the United States has won through its assertion of its national policy. This Government has no objection to the adoption of resolutions, if this course is desired by the Latin American Republics, asserting their opposition to all attempts at aggression or invasion of their rights by non- American Powers. It is not deemed to be probable that proposals for a definite alliance would meet with the favor of the Conference. Such proposals should not be encouraged by the delegates from the United States. If it were proposed that if the rights of an American nation were threatened by the unjust and aggressive action of a non-American Power, the American Republics should communicate with one another fully and frankly in order to reach an understanding concerning the measures to be taken, jointly or separately, to meet the exigencies of the particular situation, there would be no objection on the part of this Government provided always that freedom of action on the part of the United States under the Monroe Doctrine were completely reserved. REPRESENTATION OF SPAIN (OR OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES) BY UNOFFICIAL OBSERVERS AT THE SIXTH CONFERENCE
