North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
1007
Tab A
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter4
Washington, October 13, 1978
SUBJECT
Common Fund
Last August you approved the recommendation in our memo-
randum of August 185 that we move forward to achieve a timely and
successful conclusion of the Common Fund negotiations, but that we
take a firm position on the issue of a direct U.S. contribution only after
consultations with the Congress.
We have now carried out a portion of those consultations and the
response we have gotten is essentially a yellow light. The following
points emerged:
—The Senators, Representatives and staffers we have spoken with
all emphasize that it is impossible to predict the mood of the Congress
18 months ahead when a specific proposal for a Common Fund in-
volving a direct contribution to finance buffer stocks (first window)
and a voluntary second window might come up for consideration.
—Four Senators—Church, Ribicoff, Stevenson, and Javits—were
agreed that a Common Fund on the scale envisaged—that is, with a US
contribution of $50–60 million—would not jeopardize or compete with
our other foreign assistance programs.
—A condition of Congressional support for a Common Fund
would be making its entry into force—though not its negotiation—sub-
ject to the existence of an adequate number of effective international
commodity agreements prepared to accede to the Fund. There are now
four commodity agreements—coffee, sugar, tin, and cocoa (the U.S. is
not a member of the latter), and one in prospect, rubber. For diverse
reasons, none are functioning effectively.
—It would be easier to secure Congressional approval for a $40–60
million US contribution than $100 million, which would be much more
visible, but even a $40–60 million contribution would have to be seen to
offer specific benefits to the United States; it could not be sold on “polit-
ical” grounds alone.
4 Confidential. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page.
5 See Document 314
