144 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX cise. The Secretary reiterated that the alternative “will have to be limited.” El-Araby observed that only the Palestinians can decide this. The Secretary noted that we cannot say this. El-Baz asked who else might come into the process. The Secretary said that King Hussein could come in. Hussein has not foregone the Jordanian claim to the West Bank. Nor has Israel foregone its claim. El-Baz said Sadat had told President Carter that Israel has no right to claim sovereignty in the West Bank and Gaza. The Secretary recalled that in recent years it has been the practice that the people on the land where conflicting claims exist have the right to determine their own future. El-Baz argued that if the issue is left vague, Israel has a privileged claim on sovereignty until the last minute. This is an unbalanced arrangement. It will reopen the whole issue at the end of the transitional period. There is no mechanism to ensure Israeli departure. The Secretary said we assume that in the transition period talks will take place between the Palestinians and Jordan on what happens afterwards. El-Baz argued that the Israeli objective is to keep the West Bank. Jordan, he insisted, does not claim it. Egypt could go to King Hussein to obtain his renunciation of the Jordanian claim, should this be required. Association between Jordan and the West Bank and Gaza should be left to the Palestinians. The Government of Egypt says it favors such a link in advance. Egypt will also push for this. But in the final analysis, the Palestinians should decide. If the issue is left floating, it will appear that the entire Palestinian problem is unresolved. We should agree that the question of sovereignty not be left to negotiation. Quandt said that sovereignty is the word that upsets everyone. The final status, he noted, should be decided at the end of five years. Why should we now try to get into the sovereignty question and create problems for ourselves. El-Baz responded that the reason is that the Israelis are mentioning the issue. El-Reedy said that the Israelis are introducing sovereignty in order to confuse their obligation to withdraw under UN Resolution 242. The introduction of the sovereignty issue was done to make the West Bank/ Gaza appear as disputed territory. Egypt never claimed sovereign rights in Gaza. It simply administered the area under an armistice agreement. Jordan was in the West Bank in the same manner. The late King Abdullah moved into the West Bank in 1950. His takeover was challenged by the Arab League and was not recognized. In 1967, after UN Resolution 242, everyone talked of the return of the West Bank to Jordan. At the same time a Palestinian national movement emerged. At the Rabat Summit9 a decision was reached that the party to which au- 9 Reference is to the October 1974 Arab Summit conference held at Rabat, Morocco. For documentation on this conference, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXVI, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1974–1976.
