368
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
75.
Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to
President Carter1
Washington, April 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Observations on Your Presidency
The Camp David discussions were very helpful in focusing our at-
tention on ways in which we can all better serve your goals.2 Below I
outline some observations which I hope will be of some value in deter-
mining how we should proceed from here:
Speeches
My most basic recommendation is that you should dramatically
increase the degree to which you emphasize the public education role
of your presidency. In retrospect, I believe that this function has been
seriously under-emphasized and that the Administration’s efforts have
suffered as a result.
Where you have given major speeches—such as those at Notre
Dame, Charleston, Wake Forest and ASNE—they have served as useful
basic charters which have provided the comprehensive factual and
philosophical framework of a particular policy to experts and editori-
alists, to our allies and adversaries, and especially to the public.3 Each
of these speeches has been enormously valuable.
I propose that you undertake a much heavier speaking schedule,
not only in Washington but around the country, on issues of greatest
1 Source: Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale Papers, Vice Presidential Papers,
Foreign Policy Material From the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Office of the Vice
President: June 2, 1977–December 3, 1978, Memoranda: Vice President to President,
January–June 1978. No classification marking. There is no indication that the President
saw the memorandum.
2 Reference is to the April 16–17 retreat at Camp David for Cabinet and White
House staff members. In White House Diary, Carter indicates that he took notes during the
retreat for subsequent dictation. (p. 185) During the discussions, Carter explained the
genesis of the retreat: “I wanted you here because I could see a deterioration of our es-
teem in the public eye, and I don’t disagree with the public. What has bothered me is a
lack of cohesion and team spirit, which is almost inevitable. We have a damn good ad-
ministration, a fine cabinet, a good staff. I wish you knew each other as well as I know
you.” (ibid., p. 188) Christopher’s talking points and handwritten notes of the meeting
are in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren
Christopher, 1977–1980: Lot 81D113, Box 1, Camp David Mtg.—4/16–17, 1978.
3 For the Notre Dame, Charleston, and Wake Forest speeches, see Documents 40, 52,
and 72. Mondale is also referring to the President’s April 11 remarks before the American
Society of Newspaper Editors, which were broadcast live on television and radio. For the
text of his remarks, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 721–727.
