532
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
have film (taped in advance) on the stories of Nureyev, the Panovs,
etc.?2 The same with music, science, etc.3
—What will be our policy if RFE/RL are denied press credentials?
What about other individual press? Should we quietly encourage the
media to send a few of their Soviet experts—perhaps including indi-
viduals who were earlier asked to leave the USSR? What about denials
of visas to individual spectators? In short, should we push the USSR to
the maximum extent to live up to the spirit in which the Games are sup-
posed to be held and to the promises they must have made to the Inter-
national Olympic Committee, or should we just accept the fact that
these Olympics will be different from those held in the West? I think we
should push.
—What will be our policy if the Israeli team or the South African
team is banned from the Games—especially if the Soviets announce the
decision at the last minute?
—What will we do during the Games if an American or other par-
ticipant gets into trouble of some kind that relates to human rights (e.g.,
press interview with a forbidden dissident) and gets deported? If we
can develop an answer should we inform the Soviets in advance so that
they will have no doubt as to how we would react?
—Should we do anything in the way of informing American par-
ticipants about this issue—perhaps briefings made available to those
who are interested? Or perhaps that is going too far.
—Finally, beyond the human rights issue, what about the intelli-
gence opportunity? With security and administrative forces strained to
the limit—or beyond—and so many people in Moscow, there are
bound to be opportunities that are not otherwise available. Are we pre-
pared to exploit this to the maximum?
2 Reference is to Soviet ballet dancers Rudolf Nureyev, Valey Panov, and Galina
Ragozina.
3 Brzezinski drew an arrow in the margin from this paragraph and wrote: “Con-
vene an inter-agency meeting to discuss—then let’s decide if a PRM needed or WG in-
stead. Good idea. ZB.” In August 1979, Bloomfield, who had inherited Tuchman Ma-
thews’ human rights portfolio upon her departure from the NSC Staff (see footnote 2,
Document 188), indicated that he planned to meet with Shulman and Brement regarding
the Moscow Olympics. Bloomfield intended to discuss the feasibility of using an existing
interagency committee on Soviet policy “to have an airing of the lists of opportunities
and hazards concerning the Olympics (you had asked Jessica last fall to convene an inter-
agency meeting to decide if a PRM was needed).” (NSC Global Issues Cluster August 15,
1979, evening report; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global
Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 37, Evening Reports: 4–8/79) No PRM on
the Olympics was issued.
