190  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
place to produce a mobile first stage motor or segment of a motor (these 
facilities would be subject to SSI).
Some believe that the current approach is insufficient for effec-
tive monitoring and that we should PPM all facilities that have casting 
and curing pits/chambers of sufficient width and depth to produce an 
accountable motor or segment (additional 3 U.S. and 3–6 Soviet facili-
ties). Those who hold this view also believe that, for facilities that have 
casting and curing pits/chambers of sufficient width and depth to pro-
duce an accountable motor or segment, safety considerations would 
preclude ascertaining whether the contents of any casting and curing 
pits/chambers in use during a 24 hour SSI was an accountable motor 
(normal curing times run 7–14 days). They are uncertain what ‘changed 
practices’ would be visible to NTM or SSI. They also believe that the 
question of what is required for an effective PPM system—­and its 
associated costs—­should be revisited in light of our INF experience.28 
Finally, in this view, if SSI is to be demonstrated a viable alternative, the 
concept must be developed and its impacts and costs evaluated, neither 
of which has been done.
Others believe that the current approach captures the facilities 
where covert production would be easiest to carry out and that such 
production at other facilities would require a change in practices that 
the Soviets could not be confident of hiding from U.S. NTM and short-­
notice SSI. In this view, the cost of establishing additional PPM sites 
and the intrusiveness of additional Soviet PPM sites in the U.S. are not 
justified if we are satisfied with the potential Soviet production facili-
ties included on the SSI list.
A second PPM issue concerns the current approach not to include 
a right to PPM mobile launcher production plants. Some believe that 
PPM of launcher production plants would reduce the potential for 
covert production and deployment. A PPM system would also be con-
sistent with the tagging of launchers, which may require a continuous 
presence at some Soviet facility. Others believe that the cost of addi-
tional PPM sites is not justified [5 lines not declassified]
Options—PPM. Three options exist:
— Option 1—Retain the existing position for PPM only at facilities 
that are producing an ICBM or SLBM stage and are also producing any 
type of motor that exceeds the size of the smallest mobile accountable 
stage.
28 OSD believes that the costs for PPM could vary widely, depending on assump-
tions and equipment requirements for the PPM system; the estimates below reflect two 
possible approaches, but have not been reviewed by the Services or OMB. The Joint Staff 
believes that these estimates are conservative; e.g., they do not include military salaries, 
R&D costs for Testbed On-Site Inspection, transportation costs, and FBI costs. [Footnote 
is in the original.]
