720 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI the amount of arms control progress which the summit could register. He praised the CW bilateral destruction agreement, referred to the non-­ proliferation statement as substantive (“Soderzhatel’niy”), and opined that the joint declaration on follow-­on negotiations could be wrapped up for the summit. 6. Asked about the composition of the Soviet experts group, Karpov named Yuriy Nazarkin, Lem Masterkov, Sergey Batsanov (now in New York), Nikolay Sokov (see paras 7–8, Ref B for bio), and Oleg Grinevskiy, if CFE were also to be covered. 7. Action: please provide response to the proposal by Karpov in para 3. Matlock 132. Telegram From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva (Burt) to Arnold Kanter of the National Security Council Staff1 Geneva, May 22, 1990, 1202Z SUBJECT: ALCMs—Dracula revisited? (S) 1. Arnie: No arms control issue took more of our time in Moscow than did the ALCM issue. Thanks to your hard work we were able to end the meeting on a high note, asserting that all ALCM issues have been solved. In fact, I’m worried that they have not been. There are some elements in our position which the Soviets may not have fully digested. Once they understand what we are after, I think we may see some significant reopening of things we thought were settled. (S) 2. I raise this now for both political and substantive reasons. Politically, we don’t want any further disagreements over ALCMs to cloud the summit. Substantively, I’m not sure that some of our positions are sustainable in the long run. (S) 3. The problems arise from the perfectly legitimate desire of the military to protect our options to exploit cruise missile technology in non-­nuclear roles. In essence, the military wants two things: it 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01657–030, Backchannel—May 1990. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent via privacy channels.
