600
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
245.
Paper Prepared by an Interagency Review Group1
Washington, January 30, 1980
NEW NSS ISSUES IN THE CTB NEGOTIATIONS
A basic issue relating to National Seismic Stations (NSS) which has
been under consideration on an interagency basis over the past several
weeks is:
—whether our willingness to provide US NSS equipment to the
USSR should be reconsidered, and in particular whether our offer to
lend an NSS unit to the USSR for joint testing should be changed, in
light of post-Afghanistan guidelines on scientific exchanges and tech-
nology transfer to the Soviet Union.2
If it is determined that we want to maintain our general approach
to NSS in the negotiations, and that we are still prepared to lend the So-
viets an NSS unit, then two NSS issues in relation to the UK are:
—whether we should offer to fund the equipment for three addi-
tional UK NSS in the Southern Hemisphere, in the context of the UK
shifting from a one-site to a four-site NSS position, and
—whether the US should offer to lend the UK an NSS unit for joint
US–UK–USSR testing at a UK site in the Southern Hemisphere.
This paper provides a brief review of the background on these
issues for decision, together with the principal factors bearing on each
of them. Negotiating tactics and timing are also discussed.
As background for considering the NSS issues outlined above, fol-
lowing is the projected timetable for production of prototype NSS
units. The first unit will be installed in Alaska in February 1980. An
older unit which has been tested in Tennessee will be upgraded to cur-
rent standards; this unit could then be available for loan to the USSR or
the UK (although it will differ in some respects from the other NSS
units). Another unit should be ready in March 1981, with additional
units expected in May and July 1981; these units are being produced for
use in a 5-station research network in the US, but they could be made
available for other uses if deemed appropriate.
I. Technology Transfer Issue
The immediate case at issue is whether our offer to lend an NSS
unit to the USSR for joint testing should be withdrawn in light of post-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 11, SCC
297, CTB, 4/3/80. Secret.
2 On January 4, Carter announced that he had “directed that no high technology or
other strategic items will be licensed for sale to the Soviet Union until further notice.”
(Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, pp. 21–24)
