1126  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
A weapon carrier which has delivered a weapon on an assigned 
target will be released to the commander concerned. Until the weapon 
assigned to an NSTL target is expended or lost the parent commander 
is obligated to apply that weapon to the assigned target unless the tar­
get has fallen out of the NSTL. (In accordance with the definitions pre­
viously established in paragraph 2E.) (S)
4. FORCE APPLICATION CONCEPT.
A. Weapon systems which can launch from a peacetime position under 
tactical warning to meet committed TOTs will be assigned targets for rollback, 
corridor development and targets of primary importance within range and 
penetration capabilities.
(1) Weapon systems which do not have an all weather capability 
will be assigned a probability factor reflecting their limitations and 
potential. All available alert forces will be applied against the target sys­
tem. Those forces which by virtue of delivery limitation in weather or 
darkness will be given a lesser probability of delivery than all weather 
capable systems. Actual probability of the day VFR weapon carriers 
will be developed. (S)
B. All forces will be applied in order of arrival at common timing line. A 
common timing line must be established for the purpose of resolving 
TOT conflicts and to time the ECM support. (S)
C. All forces which cannot launch under conditions of tactical warning 
will be given follow-­on assignments. These forces will be used to increase 
the reliability on targets struck by the alert force and to expand the tar­
get coverage to lesser priority targets. (S)
D. Follow-­on Force will be applied in order of force generation. Launch 
of non-­alert sorties will be based upon the time required to prepare for 
launch after receipt of a preparation of order (A-­Hour). (S)
E. Only sorties capable of strike launching within 48–72 hours under 
conditions of tactical warning will be included in the tactical warning option 
(actual cut off time to be determined during the planning process).
(1) Separate options will be provided to accommodate forces gen­
erated for various conditions of strategic warning. (S)
5. TACTICS.
A. Sorties will be planned to provide a fuel time pad to permit TOT 
adjustment. This is required so that a weapon carrier can speed up or 
delay at the common timing line to assure weapon separation required 
in the target area. (S)
