286
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
As I said then, we now have two options on the diplomatic front
in attempting to advance efforts for the release of our people in Tehran.
These assume continuing separate efforts on Chapter VII and military
preparations.
—The first option is to let the Iranians continue to grapple with
the problem of finding a mechanism for gaining a hearing of their
grievances and eventually expelling our people.
—The second option, recognizing that the Iranians may not be able
to develop a concrete approach, is to make a specific suggestion to
them on how the gap between their position and ours might be bridged.
The argument for the first option is that the Iranians themselves
do not know what they want and are not ready to consider serious
specific proposals. Any U.S. effort to put forward a compromise would
risk our looking as if we are weak or dissipate our effort.
The argument for the second approach is that the Iranians are
trying to devise a solution which includes parading Americans at a
tribunal, while our interest is to focus their thinking on a solution
which would get our people out first while simultaneously giving them
some assurance that their grievances can be heard.
If we are trying to develop the second option, we would need a
mechanism that brings together in the same exercise assurance of the
immediate release of our people and a beginning of establishing the
forum for airing Iran’s grievances. The precise mechanism could be a
delegation under UN auspices or a delegation which would prepare
for eventual Congressional hearings. Whatever the sponsorship, the
key point is that the delegation would go to Iran to prepare for later
hearings on the understanding that it would return to New York or
Washington with all of the hostages and continue preparations for
hearing Iran’s grievances.
Attached is a draft message to Ambassador Lang incorporating
the approach in the second option above, as we discussed it.
If this message to Lang were approved, a decision could then
be made whether to share this idea with Waldheim and whether to
communicate it to the PLO.
