1094  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Governor Hoegh described the steps that had been taken to imple­
ment the present fallout shelter policy. He noted that the information 
and training program had been accelerated and that $60 million worth 
of television and radio time had been provided at a cost of only $900,000 
to the Government. He briefly described the adult education program. 
He pointed out that sample surveys indicate that 25 per cent of the pop­
ulation can be adequately protected against fallout in existing buildings 
without structural modification. He noted that research had been accel­
erated. He stated that over 200 prototype dual-­use shelters are being 
constructed and that the FY 1961 budget provided funds to complete 
this prototype program. Governor Hoegh said that incorporation of 
fallout shelters in federal buildings was an essential aspect of federal 
leadership and example under existing policy but Congress has failed 
to support this aspect of the program. He noted that federal loan and 
grant programs, such as those of the Veterans Administration and the 
Federal Housing Administration (and a number of others), can now be 
used to assist shelter construction.
Governor Hoegh stated that a Gallup Poll had shown that 71 per 
cent of the American people favor fallout shelters and 38 per cent had 
indicated that they would be willing to construct fallout shelters at 
their own expense up to a cost of $500. Since fallout shelters can be 
built for $100–$300, this percentage could be increased to 50–60 per 
cent. Governor Hoegh stated that the construction materials industry 
had been helpful in promoting the shelter program.
Governor Hoegh emphasized that without federal leader­
ship and example, the national shelter policy would not succeed. 
Congressional support for the program has been less than expected 
at the time the policy was adopted; Congress had approved less than 
one-­third of the funds requested. However, Governor Hoegh believed 
that the policy will eventually produce the desired results. It might be 
necessary, however, to stimulate action by more funds for education 
and by more incentives.
Governor Hoegh pointed out that when an enemy attack is detected, 
we can today warn 376 critical points in the U.S. within fifteen seconds. 
This was being expanded to 460 points. Our goal in radiological defense 
is at least one federal monitoring station in each of the three thousand 
counties by the end of 1963. We now have more than 1500 such stations.
Turning next to support of the military logistics base, Governor 
Hoegh stated that while the goals of the military logistics program had 
not yet been translated into detailed industrial requirements, it was 
clear that overall industrial capacity was sufficient to meet military 
demands in all situations short of general nuclear war.
Governor Hoegh then briefly discussed the status of the stock­
pile and manpower programs and stated that he would deal with
