702
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
D. Rupture which had taken place between Mosadeq regime and
Tudeh on evening August 18 prevented effective cooperation on
morning August 19 between these two anti-Shah forces in facing
pro-Shah demonstrators. Tudeh was conspicuously absent all day. It
possible that Tudeh leaders were sure that during course of day they
would be called upon by Mosadeq regime come to its assistance. How-
ever, once demonstrations got underway Mosadeq regime not in posi-
tion ask for such help.
E. Most armed forces and great numbers Iranian civilians inher-
ently loyal to Shah whom they have been taught to believe is symbol of
national unity as well as of stability of country. Army in particular ex-
tremely friendly US partly as result fear of strong northern neighbor
and partly because of appreciation of US military aid during recent
years. TCI aid also has made many friends for US among Iranian ci-
vilians. Many military persons and civilians had become convinced
that Mosadeq’s policies prevented close American-Iranian cooperation
and that only under Shah’s leadership could that cooperation be
maintained.
8. As already pointed out crowds although intensely savage at
times were generally in holiday mood. No hostility manifested towards
foreigners with exception of minor demonstrations in front of Soviet
Embassy and reported destruction Soviet Information Bureau. No
shouts of “Yankee go home” no Americans stoned. Point Four Tehran
Regional Officer (not General Office) near Mosadeq’s house at which
he had taken temporary refuge during demonstrations February 28
damaged by crowd under mistaken impression he might again be
hiding there. So far as can be ascertained no Americans or other for-
eigners injured yesterday. Crowds insisted all autos turn on headlights
as symbol support for Shah and that they display picture Shah. Naval
Attache´’s car stopped by crowds which demanded he display Shah’s
picture. When he placed on windshield bank note containing Shah’s
picture crowds applauded and laughed.2
Henderson
2 In telegram 606 to Rome, August 20, the Department authorized the Embassy in
Rome to share the contents of telegram 419 from Tehran with the Shah. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Files, 1950–1954, 788.00/8–2053)
