North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 Treasury C. Fred Bergsten—Assistant Secretary for Monetary Affairs Robert Pelikan—Director of Development Nations Finance Agriculture Howard W. Hjort—Director for Economic Policy Analysis and Budget SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS The PRC met on February 22, 1978 to discuss U.S. policy toward the official debts of developing countries, and in particular (1) a forthcoming meeting at the ministerial level of the Trade and Development Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (March 6 through 10) that will discuss international debt issues; and (2) Section 208 of the International Development Cooperation Act of 1978 (Humphrey Bill), that would authorize the U.S. to adjust outstanding loans to the poorest countries, making them equivalent to the grants that the U.S. now provides to those countries. The US/EEC Proposal The PRC considered possible U.S. actions regarding the debt proposal that the United States and the EEC tabled at the Conference on International Economic Cooperation last year. The PRC agreed that the US/EEC proposal should be tabled at an appropriate moment during the UNCTAD Ministerial meeting. Retroactive Terms Adjustment The PRC also considered the possibility of a case-by-case retroactive adjustment of the terms of loans outstanding to least developed developing countries, or to those countries plus those eligible for credits from the International Development Association. The PRC agreed that the Administration, if asked, will support the Humphrey Bill provisions on least developed country debt.2 The U.S. delegation to the UNCTAD Ministerial will so state, in the context of discussions of retroactive terms adjustment, and will indicate that U.S. policy on this subject will depend on the outcome of the legislative process. Other Issues The PRC also agreed to request further study of (1) the possible role of aid consortia and creditor clubs in debt rescheduling operations; and (2) whether clauses that allow a debtor to skip a few payments of 2 In a March 6 memorandum to Owen and Erb, Brzezinski noted that Carter had “directed that in each case, we must assess the impact on the budget.” (Carter Library,
