1955  445
and the Secretary drafted on the plane on the way over replying to your 
981. I made no suggestions for any changes and they sent it off imme­
diately Niact at about 8 p.m. Geneva time, but I was sorry to see from 
your 1013 that it had apparently not arrived.
The Secretary asked to see me the same evening and I had some 
general discussion with him, primarily on the trade question. I gath­
ered that he had talked with Macmillan on the CHINCOM question 
and that he had come to the conclusion that some drop in the CHIN­
COM level, toward but not all the way to a COCOM level, is shortly 
inevitable. (I understand a telegram on the subject went from Paris to 
the Department but I have not seen it.) We had some general discussion 
on how this could be tied in with my talks here but came to no conclu­
sion, except that I gathered that it is the Secretary’s desire that if this 
development is in any event going to take place, I should attempt to 
capitalize on it here. I told him that, without expressing any opinion on 
whether or not the level should or should not be dropped, my strong 
feeling was that if we had come to the conclusion that it was going to 
be dropped, I thought it important solely from my standpoint here that 
it would appear we had agreed, or at least acquiesced, rather than that 
it had happened in spite of our opposition.
If I am going to make any capital out of it here, it would be import­
ant that Wang and I have had at least some discussion of the subject 
prior to any reduction becoming known to the Chinese Communists. 
Obviously I cannot and would not in any sense negotiate with him on 
the level of CHINCOM controls, but believe I could at the most inti­
mate a causal relationship. It seems to me that this would assist in the 
objective of keeping these talks going by giving the Chinese Commu­
nists a feeling that the talks were not entirely devoid of results for them. 
It just might also help somewhat in release of Americans.
Yesterday’s meeting went about as expected except for Wang’s 
introduction of his draft agreed statement. It is clearly a very clever 
piece of work, and if published, would have much public appeal. As 
I noted in my 970, I feel that it does represent some slight advance 
inasmuch as it relates some form of renunciation of force to a Foreign 
Ministers’ meeting rather them to the previous position on withdrawal 
of U.S. forces from the Taiwan area. Of course, this latter objective is 
merely deferred to the Foreign Ministers’ Conference.
I am very provoked at Wang’s attitude yesterday—sitting back 
and smugly telling me that he knew something I didn’t know with 
regard to implementation but would not tell me what. It was only 
after I got back to the hotel after the meeting that I learned that the 
press tickers reported the release of Harriet Mills and Father Proulx. I 
was put in a somewhat foolish position at the meeting by not know­
ing this. This was probably their intent. Technically I have no basis for
