542 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV facilities. The recent Chinese incursion into Vietnam may induce Hanoi to permit a Soviet military presence at least as long as the threat exists. Intervention Capabilities 19. The Soviets have significant forces capable of intervention in distant areas and have introduced forces into combat situations in distant areas in the past. We believe that Soviet leaders in the future would be willing under certain circumstances to use forces for this purpose. Elements of all Soviet conventional forces—­ground, air, and naval—­ are potential resources for use in situations that call for intervention. The deployment of a large segment of Soviet forces in distant areas is constrained not only by the practical difficulties of moving large forces over long distances but by the requirement, as Moscow sees it, to retain the bulk of these forces in the USSR and Eastern Europe in readiness for their primary mission of waging war with NATO or China. On the other hand, these factors would not restrict the deployment of smaller units. 20. Where Cuban or other friendly forces are not available for use in the Third World or are deemed unsuitable, Moscow would have the option of using its own ground forces. Although Soviet air, naval, and air defense forces have been involved in conflicts in the Middle East, Angola, and Ethiopia, Soviet ground combat forces have not. Growing Soviet self-­confidence in projecting power and in the USSR’s role as a global power will diminish whatever Soviet reluctance may have existed in the past to employ ground forces outside the Warsaw Pact. At the same time, there are limited situations in which allied forces would not be preferable from a Soviet point of view; Afghanistan is one where the provision of limited Soviet ground forces in a hurry might well be undertaken. Nevertheless, the Soviet leadership would probably view the use of ground combat units, even in modest numbers, as a significant escalation of Soviet involvement. The major constraints would be concern over the likelihood of Western or regional counteraction and the impact on Third World perceptions of Soviet policy. We believe, therefore, that Moscow would employ ground combat units only where, and to the degree, it considered such action essential to preserve vital Soviet interests in the region. 21. Over the next 10 years the Soviets will continue to make modest improvements in amphibious lift, logistic support ships, naval tactical air support, gunfire support, and airlift. Such improvements, when added to current naval, airborne, naval infantry, and command and control resources, will result in an increased ability to deploy forces in distant areas and to come to the assistance of any ally. For example, the Soviets might introduce an airborne or naval infantry unit at the invitation of a government, particularly if Moscow believed there was little danger of Western reaction and that the intensity of combat would be
