648 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV deployment of the Trident II missile. He said that he had actually been through a program to design a major piece of hardware for use by both the Air Force and the Navy, and that while such joint use programs were feasible, they were a great strain. (U) General Jones noted that he would prefer a survivable MX missile to an SS–18 based in a silo. Secretary Brown replied that Jones had combined several questions here, and asked him how he would feel about the two missiles if they were both based in silos. General Jones responded that this would be a wash in his view—­his point was that deployment of the large MX missile would defuse concerns about the Soviets’ large missile advantage. (C) George Seignious commented that he thought it was extremely important that we take full advantage of the single ICBM exception that was allowed under SALT II, by deploying the largest missile permitted. (C) Secretary Brown argued that many in the Congress want the largest allowable missile, and that he also prefers the 192,000 lb. MX, although he was not convinced of this several months ago. (C) The President asked if there were any contrary opinions. (U) Frank Press responded that he supports Secretary Brown’s preference for the larger missile, but he went on to note that we would have greater flexibility in going to alternative deployment modes if we deployed a somewhat smaller missile. (C) Stan Turner then raised a concern he had about the possibility that the Soviets might want to keep our land-­based missile force vulnerable and thus might try to stay ahead of our effort to deploy more aimpoints than they could attack. [3 lines not declassified] He noted that while we might be able to achieve our aims if the Soviets remain within the limits of SALT, if their desire to keep us vulnerable were strong enough, this might make them unwilling to agree to any future SALT limits. (S) The President asked Admiral Turner what sort of a solution he would suggest to such a problem. Admiral Turner responded that we should go to a more flexible missile, and place more emphasis on our SLBM and bomber forces. (C) Secretary Vance asked Admiral Turner if he would still want to go to a smaller missile if our SLBM force and our bomber force were already much stronger. Admiral Turner responded that he would still like to see more flexibility. Frank Press added that flexibility is particularly important if we run into obstacles in our pursuit of a survivable land basing system. (C) Secretary Brown noted that the large missile would be deployable in the small submergibles that had been suggested by Frank Press’ panel. He further noted that while the large MX missile would not go in the
