the bonds for that amount also held in escrow by the Fiscal Agent until the repairs are made. It is furthermore possible that the Dominican Government may have still another proposal to make and the Department understands that the Company would be glad, in that case, to have the Government make their proposal as soon as possible whereupon the Company will give it careful consideration. Your statements in paragraphs eleven and twelve imply that the Department is attempting to force the Dominican Government to accept one of the Power Company’s proposals by not authorizing the loan. This is not the Department’s policy. The Department is constantly solicitous that all matters should be dealt with on the fairest possible basis and with due consideration of the exigencies of the Dominican Government. You are referred to the note from the Minister of Foreign Affairs to Minister Russell dated November 23, 192344 (enclosed in the latter’s despatch No. 909 of November 2445 ) in paragraph 4 of which it is stated that “it is estimated that it will be necessary to issue bonds for the nominal amount of $2,000,000 of the balance of the total not issued but authorized under Executive Order No. 735 in order to continue the program of public works; to meet the obligations assumed by the Government in the contract celebrated between the Municipalities of Santiago and Puerto Plata and the Water and Light Company of these cities; and for other purposes.” This was the first request received by the Department for authorization to issue the loan and shows that the Dominican Government itself considered that the two questions of the bond issue and the settlement of the Power Company’s contract could not be wholly disassociated. The point is that if the Company is to be paid in bonds there certainly must be bonds to make the payments, and a reservation should be made sufficient for this purpose. The Department could not agree to any other course without depriving the Company of its fair opportunity to be reimbursed in the manner desired by the Dominican Government. The Department is entirely willing to authorize, and is instructing the Minister immediately to authorize the
