742
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
forces to help Afghanistan repel aggression and did so according to
the UN Charter and our treaty with the Government and leadership
of Afghanistan. We have not violated anything by that action and have
acted in accordance with international law. We categorically reject all
these distortions of the situation which are made by Washington. We
shall withdraw our forces after we are requested to do so from the
Afghan Government and, of course, if there is such a request. Also,
our withdrawal is dependent on whether or not interference and inter-
vention cease from Pakistan and Iran and they stop fighting against
the legitimate Government of Afghanistan. The withdrawal of our
forces will be accomplished also when an agreement is reached and it
is guaranteed. The question of a withdrawal of our forces before that
is beside the point. Those who raise such questions are wasting not
only their time but our time. We have expressed our position publicly
and Leonid Brezhnev has done so on more than one occasion. Our
position has been explained to the United States and I repeated it the
last time in my meeting with Secretary Muskie.5 Our position should
be clear to you. Why does the U.S. continue to take such an unrealistic
position on Afghanistan after all these explanations? We are aware of
what Washington and the West wish to see happen (in Afghanistan)
but are you prepared to take a realistic position? If the U.S. were
prepared to be more or less objective, a common language can be found
but, I repeat, only if you are prepared to look objectively at the situation
and take an objective position.
Concerning the Afghan proposal which was recently made and
which the U.S. has been critical of, it seems to us that the U.S. underesti-
mates the significance of that proposal. If you do wish to settle the
situation around Afghanistan, your attitude would be different. The
Afghan proposal is aimed at normalizing the situation around Afghani-
stan, including Pakistan. It is a good basis for normalizing the situation.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
14. Upon the completion of Gromyko’s remarks I told him that I
would, of course, communicate what he said to my government and
that it would be useless at this point to try to address each point he
had made, many of which I took strong objection to. I then singled
out some of his key statements for rebuttal and made the following
comments.
15. Since the beginning of our relationship with the Soviet Union
we think there has not been anything that parallels the Soviet Union’s
invasion of Afghanistan which was recognized as a non-aligned state.
I stressed the importance of the historical implications of the Soviet
5 See Document 272.
