1096  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Douglas noted that the President had on other occasions raised ques­
tions as to the effect of the U.S. adoption of a major shelter program on 
our allies. This, Secretary Douglas observed, was a difficult question 
to answer. The President stated that if the program were on a compul­
sory basis, the effects would be bad but that as long as it was on the 
basis of federal leadership and example, with the people taking respon­
sibility for shelter construction, the effects would not be adverse. He 
asked whether Sweden did not have a large shelter program. Governor 
Hoegh said that seven countries require that shelters be included in all 
multiple-­family dwellings.
Secretary Douglas asked whether we could really expect much 
progress in the shelter program without some federal assistance. 
Governor Hoegh expressed the view that we could. If Congress pro­
vided funds for fallout shelters in new federal buildings, it would be 
the signal to the American people to go to work. Many were building 
shelters already. As industry gets at this problem and gets its sales force 
out all over the country selling shelters, there would be a considerable 
increase in shelter construction.
Mr. McCone inquired whether there was not a Bureau of the Budget 
policy which prevented construction of shelters in federal buildings. 
Mr. Staats pointed out that the House Committee had written into leg­
islation a prohibition of shelter construction in federal buildings. Thus, 
even where the Government had funds available, it could not use them 
for this purpose. In response to an inquiry from Mr. McCone, Mr. Staats 
indicated that this prohibition applied not just to 1961 money but to 
all federal funds. The President observed that if we had a real scare, it 
would be interesting to see what these same Congressmen would say 
about shelters. Governor Hoegh observed that the Senate always went 
along with the Administration on these matters but that the House had 
been very arbitrary. Mr. Gray noted that Congress had not neglected to 
construct shelters in new Congressional buildings. Secretary Douglas 
stated that there was a wider acceptance of the idea of shelters in the 
military services today than one, two or three years ago. What worried 
the military was the credibility of our deterrent when the U.S. had done 
little to protect its own population.
There was some discussion of Governor Hoegh’s reference to the 
fact that surveys indicated that 25 per cent of the population could 
be protected from fallout in existing buildings. Mr. McCone asked 
if these buildings were properly sealed. Governor Hoegh said that 
they were adequate. In the course of this discussion, Governor Hoegh 
stated that if Congress would provide funds for surveys of existing 
structures, local governments would provide supplies to stock them. 
Governor Hoegh noted that General Mills had developed a processed 
food, a gallon can of which would cost $2.50 and would provide one 
person sufficient food for two weeks. He also noted that the best exam­
ples of fallout shelters were in Kansas and Oklahoma where people
