United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 23 considerable scope for regional groupings which would provide larger markets and would combine the special circumstances, talents and resources of two or more countries. An example is provided by Salvador and Honduras, where the excess population and capital of Salvador could be useful in developing the resources of Honduras. If a true common market or free trade area between these two countries could be achieved it might serve as an example and stimulant to others. The principal obstacles are Honduras’ fear of domination by Salvador and the adjustment that a few, small industries in both countries would have to make. These might be overcome, with some political risk to us, if the U.S. actively supported such an arrangement and helped them devise practicable solutions to specific economic problems; some financial assistance from us might also be necessary. We think the potentialities of such an experiment would justify an effort on our part. Soviet Bloc Trade Although Soviet bloc trade missions have been active in Latin America, there have as yet been no Soviet bloc approaches of the magnitude and nature of their approaches in other areas such as Syria, Egypt, Ceylon, India, and Indonesia. We shall, however, continue to watch this situation closely, and endeavor to evaluate the precise scale and objectives of the Soviet bloc economic offensive in Latin America. Meanwhile, the United States should not oppose the expansion of trade in non-­strategic commodities with the Soviet bloc. We should, however, try to make countries which engage or contemplate engaging in trade with the Soviet bloc aware of the political and economic pitfalls associated with certain aspects of such trade, with particular attention on the risks of economic dependence and political penetration. The unsatisfactory condition of certain primary commodity markets has increased the vulnerability of Latin America to Soviet bloc offers to take such commodities. If the Soviet economic offensive in Latin America is expanded significantly, particularly in [illegible in the original] fields such as petroleum development, we may wish to consider other countermeasures. Our policy against financial assistance for petroleum development because private capital is available if allowed to enter, gives the Soviet bloc a field which it may exploit. Failing such exploitation, the present does not appear a propitious time for changes in this policy. Should it be possible to make limited changes in the future without generating reactions in the U.S. which would endanger other important elements of U.S. foreign economic policy, we should be prepared to consider certain types of petroleum loans such as exporter credits and loans for transport, storage, refining and marketing facilities. However, should the Bloc show that it can enter this field in an effective manner or otherwise exploit this situation, we will wish to
