630 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Quite frankly, we doubt that we can both move closer to the Palestinians and exercise significant pressure on Israel to make progress in the autonomy negotiations or on Lebanon.9 If we have to choose—and we believe it necessary to do so, we favor the second objective over the first. If we fail, a year or so hence, to have gained progress on the10 West Bank/Gaza, then we might want to move on the U.S.-Palestinian front for the sake of our Saudi and other ties. We do not think that now is the time. B. US/USSR/China Relations: Given the differing conceptual views of the triangle, your own heavy involvement on such issues as MFN for the USSR and the PRC will remain important.11 If SALT II fails, of course, your primary task will be to salvage what we can with the Soviets, not to mention the Allies. With the likelihood of a succession before 1981, it is especially important for you to be closely involved in the handling of the post-Brezhnev period. C. Arms Control, Post-SALT: In terms of actual new agreements, we should be thinking about a push for CTB, since we will soon be entering the late 1979–1980 period of new non-proliferation activity you noted for the President.12 If a full agreement is not possible, a fallback to agreement on principles might be useful. An ASAT agreement might be reachable and, less likely, a RW agreement.13 Progress on CW is unlikely. More important than these specific agreements will be base laying: for SALT III; with the Allies for TNF negotiations (immensely complicated; actual negotiations unlikely to move quickly; but very important in Allied context); and for MBFR progress, perhaps in 1981. Reg should also proceed on laying a new base for CAT.14 9 Vance drew a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence and wrote “I want to talk about this.” The opening of the autonomy talks, the next phase in the Middle East peace negotiations following the signing of the peace treaty in March, took place in Beersheva, Israel, May 25. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Egypt and Israel Open Negotiations At Beersheba on Palestinian Areas,” The New York Times, May 26, 1979, p. 3) 10 An unknown hand placed brackets around this word. 11 Vance underlined the portion of this sentence beginning with “your” and added “I agree” in the left-hand margin next to it. 12 Vance underlined “we should be thinking about a push for CTB,” and wrote “ok” in left-hand margin next to this sentence. 13 Vance underlined most of this sentence and wrote “yes” in the left-hand margin next to it. 14 Vance underlined most of this paragraph. He placed a vertical line in the lefthand margin next to it and wrote “all of these are important & potentially [unclear].” The TNF negotiations were scheduled to take place in December. “Reg” is a reference to Bartholomew.
