1955 421 10. I said that press releases by official agencies of his government have done much to feed feeling that these Americans being held as hostages. These press releases and statements continued to speak of improvement in relatons as factor in release of these Americans. 11. I said that American press and public are putting same inter­ pretation on these statements that I had told him in earlier meetings I could not but place on similar statements he had made. I said that I am very disturbed about this situation. 12. I told him that I earnestly hoped this situation can be corrected and that atmosphere created by agreed announcement can be restored. I said I greatly feared consequences of continuation of present situation, and that I was saying this not to be provocative or to make threats, but simply in order to share frankly with him trend of opinion in my coun­ try with its inevitable consequences on the talks. 13. Wang replied that he shared my view that we should speak frankly in these talks. However, frank exchanges should facilitate rather than hinder progress of talks. Insofar as public opinion is concerned, there is also public opinion in his country. In his country “public opin­ ion is truly representative of opinion of Chinese people”, and this fact could not be distorted in any way. 14. He said that our positions in these discussions must be based on genuine facts. If our deliberations were based on inaccurate spec­ ulations, we could not possibly come to correct conclusions. In same manner he hoped that there would be conciliatory attitude in public opinion. This required efforts on both sides. 15. I replied that I agreed that discussion should be based on facts, and that I was trying to explain fact regarding situation in my country. I said I hoped he and his government would earnestly consider what I had said because it was said to facilitate talks. 16. I said I wished to stress the fact that people in my coun­ try expected agreed announcement to lead to expeditious return of detained Americans and that adverse reaction of disappointment was increasing with time. I said that as personal touch I had letter from lady in my own home town, Mrs. Houle, mother of Father Houle. I read excerpts from letter, expressing Mrs. Houle’s expectation at time of announcement her son would promptly return and increasing disap­ pointment at no word on his return. 17. I concluded that it was hard for me to answer letters like that, but that I would not pursue subject further this morning. 18. Wang replied that there are people who express same feelings in letters to him and that there have been various views concerning the advance release of Americans who have committed offenses. He said that questions have been raised why such people who have been
