146 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —The Soviets will be at great pains to avoid weakening the position they gained in post-1945 Europe, and they will not exclude the use of armed force as a means of preserving their “alliance” in extremis. 7. U.S. policy: It is clear, based on our assessment of the Eastern European reaction to events in Poland, that the principal implication for the United States in the future is to continue our policy of differentiation. With each Eastern European Government our policy actions must take into account that government’s policies toward us; at the same time we must tailor our policy initiatives to the peculiar situation found in each of these countries. We should be alert to the needs of the Eastern Europeans and prepared to respond to them rapidly and concretely, and with appropriate subtlety, in view of the sensitivity of the USSR. Christopher 42. Editorial Note The crisis in Poland reached a tipping point in December 1980. On December 2, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) issued an Alert Memorandum noting that the Soviets were increasing preparations for an invasion of Poland: “Recent military activities in and around Poland are highly unusual for this time of year. We are aware of preparations for an imminent unscheduled joint service exercise involving Soviet, East German, Polish, and possibly Czechoslovak forces” which “could also serve as cover for an intervention.” While cautioning that Soviet preparations did not denote an imminent invasion, the Agency concluded that intervention was increasingly likely. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 65, Poland: 11/80–1/81) The memorandum is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume VII, Poland, 1977–1981. The following day, President Jimmy Carter sent Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev a Hot Line message assuring the Soviet leader that the United States was not intent on taking advantage of the Polish crisis to change the balance of power in Europe. The White House also issued a public statement warning of “unprecedented building of Soviet forces along the Polish border” and Soviet statements of “alleged ‘anti- Socialist’ forces within Poland.” The White House warned: “We know from postwar history that such allegations have sometimes preceded military intervention.” They continued: “Foreign military intervention
