492 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV movement within countries having poorly developed ground transportation system (e.g., twice as fast in Iran). • Provisions for higher utilization rates of our existing strategic airlift aircraft (C–5s and C–141s), and prepositioning of another division’s equipment in Europe by FY 1981 instead of FY 1982. In Logistic Support and Readiness: • The enhanced level would permit a number of actions to improve logistic support and readiness. Their cumulative effect could be vital in terms of real combat capability. In my view, the program at the enhanced level would give us reasonable confidence of maintaining the relative position we hold today. C. Decremented Level In developing these alternative programs, we also investigated a decremented level, roughly 4% below the basic level program (e.g., roughly $133 billion) and growing thereafter at a slower rate (e.g., about 2%) than the basic program. Some of the important changes in dropping to that level would be: In Strategic and Theater Nuclear Forces: • Slip the initial deployment of M–X by a year, and that of Trident II, the ground-­launched cruise missile, and the antisatellite program by two years each. Eliminate the interim mobile MM III. • Cancel the wide-­bodied cruise missile carrier, airborne launch control for 200 Minuteman IIIs, 2 F–15 squadrons for continental air defense, Pershing II, and all R&D for a new manned bomber. • Cut the B–52G alert rate from [less than 1 line not declassified] (roughly [number not declassified] fewer aircraft with [number not declassified] weapons would escape a surprise Soviet attack.) In General Purpose Forces: • Close the M–60 tank production line before the XM–1 starts (leaving us no surge capability), and cut the eventual XM–1 rate by a third—­to 60/month, or about a quarter the Soviet T–72 rate. Delay start of IFV/CFV production until FY 81. • Eliminate 2 of the 9 new armored/mechanized battalions, 3000 NATO-­ deployed support spaces, 3000 more support spaces for non-NATO, contingencies, a third of our 155mm guns for early use in NATO, and all 16 of the new electronic warfare and intelligence battalions planned as part of the LTDP (the Soviets now use 15–20 times as many jammers as has the U.S. Army, and roughly 50 times as many intercept location systems).
