Afghanistan 12. On a government-to-government level, Zia said, he would continue to take “all the steps within his power” to see that “no hostile acts against the DRA originated in Pakistan.” He said, however, that the Taraki government in Kabul is becoming increasingly aggressive, and cited as examples the recent shelling of two villages in Pakistan, and the “three dozen” violations of Pakistani airspace by DRA planes. One violation occurred less than six weeks ago, when a DRA plane penetrated “thirty miles” into Pakistan. Zia said that he had “so far” ordered his forces not to shoot, and that he has contented himself with protests to Kabul, but he said that the next DRA aircraft to violate Pak airspace “would be shot down.” 13. Zia concluded by noting that he was affronted to be accused of complicity in the “half-hearted attempts by the Afghan dissidents” to overthrow the Kabul regime, and that, if the “GOP was really hostile to the DRA” it could make “life difficult” for the Taraki government. Zia decried the “substantial campaign of false allegations against the GOP” carried on by the Soviet media. The Soviet démarche, Zia said, “is stronger and more explicit” than anything the GOP has heard from the DRA, and that Moscow’s invocation of the USSR–DRA treaty will “only encourage Afghanistan to persist in its hostile attitude” toward Pakistan. 14. Shahi said that the GOP believes this démarche came from the “highest levels in Moscow” and that it “perhaps” reflects Soviet Premier Kosygin’s personal views. Shahi said that the GOP sees Kosygin’s hand behind the recent Pravda and Izvestia articles, and that the GOP has a report that Kosygin told Indian FonMin Vajpayee in Delhi that “Pakistan is behind all of the dissident activity in Afghanistan.” 15. Shahi told me that the GOP is taking the Soviet démarche “very seriously” and is not treating it as an “empty threat or bluff.” Shahi reasons that Moscow is “nursing its anger” over the GOP’s decision to ban Soviet overflights to Vietnam, and Pakistan’s subsequent refusal to succumb to Soviet pressure at the risk of harming its relations with China. Shahi noted that Moscow has suffered a “setback” in the Sino- Vietnam conflict and “could be expected” to seek an opportunity to “reestablish its credibility as a superpower.” 16. The Advisor said that the GOP labors with a set of contradictions in the matter. The “brutal oppression” of Afghans has caused “real unhappiness” in Pakistan and elsewhere. In fact, Shahi said, when he was in Tehran the Ayatollah Khomeini “asked me to convey a message to the DRA” about its repression of “religious people.” Shahi said that he told Khomeini that such a message might “drive the DRA to even more repression,” but the GOP delivered Khomeini’s message to the Afghan Ambassador in Islamabad anyway. Shahi said he also made a direct appeal to Afghan FonMin Amin to stop oppressing Muslims.
