3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
49
same manner. They had no illusions at all about the complexities and
problems which existed and would continue to exist in our relations.
But, in his view all this led to one conclusion—that we should set our-
selves specific and realistic objectives, and that we should not permit
any abatement in the effort to resolve problems that arise. Of course,
just as the United States, the Soviet Union would never submit to
duress and would never permit its interests to be harmed. However, to
the extent that the other side was prepared to do so, the Soviet Union
was prepared to seek and find mutually acceptable agreements. The
main thing was that there be a common positive attitude and a practical
willingness on both sides to arrive at mutually acceptable solutions. In
this connection Brezhnev wanted especially to address the current
status of detente, both in the relations between our two countries and
on an international scale. He believed that the turnabout toward de-
tente, which had occurred in recent years, was the most important
trend in the development of international relations. Deviating once
again, he wanted to say something very frankly. The Soviet leadership
could not fail to be concerned over the fact that in Western countries
opponents of detente had once again become very active. Those who
wanted to return the world to the time of the cold war had stepped up
their activities. The range of means they used was rather extensive:
there were statements to the effect that detente had been beneficial to
the Soviet Union only; there were fabrications to the effect that under
cover of detente the Soviet Union was getting ready to carry out a first
strike against the United States. This was not a joking matter. Here
Brezhnev saw an attempt to distort and make acceptable an under-
standing of detente, which could allegedly allow interference in the in-
ternal affairs of the Soviet Union and other socialist countries under the
false pretense, and he stressed “false pretense”, of concern for human
rights. Brezhnev noted that Secretary Vance, visiting here in Moscow,
(he expressed regret that the Secretary would not have a chance to visit
Leningrad), could travel throughout the entire country, since no restric-
tions applied to him in this respect, and he could see for himself what
rights were enjoyed by people in the Soviet Union. The Secretary
would see what might distress a Soviet citizen and whether or not
anyone was oppressing him, and yet, a hullabaloo had started in the
United States and a great deal of anti-Soviet agitation. He was saying
this quite openly and frankly, and would ask the Secretary to convey
his views to President Carter. Never before had such a ruckus over
human rights been raised in the United States. Of course, he could and
intended to provide an answer on the human rights question, and with
respect not only to the Soviet Union but to the whole world. He would
provide a response—let America first take a look at human rights in its
own country. He added that this was a topic he would return to later.
Meanwhile he would like to touch on the theoretical aspect of these
