view of the relations of the Latin American states, a satisfactory method of
selecting the judges of an American Permanent Court would be very great.
What would seem to be needed, in order to promote judicial settlement of
international controversies in this hemisphere, is an improved plan for
arbitral settlements. In this way controversies of which disposition could be
more advantageously made by an American tribunal could be referred to a
tribunal established for the purpose in accordance with the accepted
principles of arbitral procedure. It should be remembered in this connection
that the representatives of five of the Latin American Republics, to wit, the
Republics of Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador,
signed on February 7, 1923, a Convention for the establishment of a Central
American tribunal,1 with the provisions of which you are doubtless familiar.
It is believed that a similar arrangement would meet the requirements of
judicial settlement of controversies between all the Latin American States.
If, therefore, adequate measures are taken to add to the existing facilities an
appropriate plan for the arbitration of justiciable controversies, the proposal
of the Delegation of Costa Rica to the Fifth Pan American Conference,
providing for a Permanent Court of American Justice, would appear to be
suitably met.
[Here follows a paragraph relating to expenses to be allowed the delegates.]
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
94 An identical instruction was also addressed to the other American
delegate, Dr. Jesse S. Reeves (file No. 710.C2/211b). These instructions
were forwarded to the delegates through the American Embassy in Rio de
Janeiro.
95 Not printed.
96 The resolution is also printed in Report of the Delegates of the United
States of America to the Fifth International Conference of American States,
etc. (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1924), as appendix 14, p.
131.
97 For text of the convention establishing an International Commission of
Jurists, signed Aug. 23, 1906, see Foreign Relations , 1906, pt. 2, p. 1601.
