Comprehensive Test Ban
593
242.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, December 17, 1979, 10:30 a.m.–12:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
The President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Kingman Brewster
Ambassador at Large Henry Owen
George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State
Robert D. Blackwill, NSC Staff Member
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Margaret Thatcher
Lord Carrington, UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
Sir Nicholas Henderson, Ambassador to the U.S.
Sir Robert Armstrong, Secretary to the Cabinet
Sir Michael Palliser, Permanent Under Secretary of State, Foreign and
Commonwealth Office
Sir Frank Cooper, Ministry of Defense
Michael Alexander, Private Secretary to the PM
George Walden, Principal Secretary to the Secretary of State
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
As the meeting neared its end, Lord Carrington said that he and
Secretary Vance would talk about Belize in their meeting in the after-
noon. The President said he would discuss China and perhaps Namibia
at dinner with the Prime Minister. The CTB should also be addressed.
Mrs. Thatcher quickly replied that the UK could only afford one seis-
mic station and had offered to withdraw if that would help the negotia-
tions.2 The President said he had discussed this issue with Brezhnev at
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 37, Memcons: President: 10–12/79. Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet
Room at the White House. The conversation is scheduled to be printed in full in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
2 Brewster had briefed Vance about Thatcher’s misgivings about a CTB and particu-
larly the construction of more than one NSS in the United Kingdom. Given her “in-
grained” suspicions about the Soviet Union and her predisposition “to give greater
weight to defence preparedness and less to arms control,” Brewster contended that “it
would be useful for the President to review with Mrs. Thatcher the range of complexity
the U.S. and its allies face on the world scene by a frank statement of the U.S. approach to
East-West relations,” especially on the CTB issue. The recent “slight signs that the Soviets
are beginning to show greater flexibility” on the NSS, Brewster said, validated her gov-
ernment’s “firmness” on the issue. (Telegram 23716 from London, November 29; Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790550–0566)
