December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 701 the expectation of peace, will bring foreign investments. We used to depend on Arab countries for about $2 billion recently. Now we are in good shape. We pay our debts on time. The Arab sources won’t work so well in the future. They are talking of cutting back. How can we deal with this? We consider that peace is a joint venture. People need benefits. I hope that their situation will improve. President Carter: We helped Taiwan and South Korea. These are two of the best examples. Minister Sayeh: The Third Consultative Group will meet in June.8 The American side sends very high-quality people. This is very helpful. We have a club of friends and donors. But we need to move the IMF. We are talking about increasing prices. To summarize, there is the June meeting of the IMF and the link to the Consultative Group. We need more commodity credits. That is the only way to generate local currency without inflation. We need to get more aid for infrastructure. President Carter: The IMF you’ll have to handle. The American private sector looks at the IMF as putting a stamp of approval on a country. We’ll help, but the IMF is so respected, that if the IMF says that Egypt is okay, then you have an excellent basis for an investment. If temporary adjustments are needed to get IMF approval, that would be good. We don’t want too many consultative groups on new organizations. We’ll put Egypt as a top priority. It is better not to build up excessive expectations. If it looks as if we have everything settled here, Israel might raise their demands. We need to keep the emphasis on the problems that remain to be solved. And Egypt should be tough in her negotiating demands. We should be cautious because prospects for peace depend on whether Israel is forthcoming in meeting Egyptian demands. We should be cautious. The same applies to economic matters. We should not build up the expectation that everything will be working well one year after peace. There will be many difficulties. We want to avoid extreme disappointments. We will do all that we can. I’ll stay cautious in my public statements. And Egypt will be one of our top priorities. (The meeting ends at 8:00 p.m.) 8 Reference is to the third scheduled meeting of the Consultative Group established by the World Bank in 1977 to address Egyptian economic and financial problems.
