1166  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
it can be hoped that he will see the greater “opportunity” of adopting 
a “statesmanlike attitude” when he is a National Councillor. (A glos-
sary of his views on economic matters is contained in Emodes 436 of 
December 4, 1958.)4
The man who will be President of the Council during the third 
year, Señor Eduardo Victor HAEDO [text not declassified] has been ven-
omous at times in his criticism of the United States, and it can only be 
hoped that his attitude will change when he is no longer in opposition 
and in a position of public responsibility as a Councillor.
The man who will be President during the fourth year is Señor 
Faustino HARRISON. He has always appeared to be friendly toward 
the United States, and has a fairly good reputation in Montevideo as a 
competent escribano.
One of the other two Herrerista members of the Council will be 
Dr. Justo M. ALONSO, a respected physician who is a member of the 
Rotary Club of Montevideo where I have talked with him occasionally 
and have found him very cordial.
Given the unpredictable nature of Herrerista policies and mea-
sures, the Council system of government has certain safeguards—­in 
that the two Colorado List 15 Councillors and the one List 14 Councillor 
will have the same leavening effect that the Nationalist Councillors 
have had during the present Administration.
The Herrerista and UBD factions together will control a bare 
majority in both the Senate and the Chamber of Representation in the 
Legislative Branch of the Government. It is too early to surmise concern-
ing the extent of formal cooperation that may be developed between 
the two factions, but it is obvious that the Herrerista faction will not be 
able to pass any legislation unless it has the cooperation of some other 
segment of the legislative bodies which is as large as the UBD segment 
or the Colorado List 15 segment. Obviously the possibilities of cooper-
ation with the UBD are greater than with the List 15. Therefore, there 
may be considerable moderation of ideas and policies in the Herrerista 
leadership when they are in power, if for no other reason than because 
of the necessity of getting things done.
The only existing program of the United States Government in 
Uruguay (since we do not have a real ICA program in operation at 
present) concerning which the Herrerista Government might develop a 
negative attitude is the Air Force Mission. The principal interest of the 
Colorado Government in having the Air Force Mission in Uruguay was, 
first, to obtain the military assistance equipment which we have been 
giving to Uruguay for “Hemispheric defense”, and probably, second, to 
4 Not printed; 833.00/12–458.
