236 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Option 3. Retain current position, rescind contingency guidance, relax flight test ban in future for further reductions (perhaps by one-­half) in the 154 heavy ICBMs. (favored by ACDA as part of a move to permit mobile ICBMs) Option 4. Retain current contingency guidance, allow testing and modernization of heavy ICBMs in return for comparable rights for U.S.; do not table at this time. (favored by JCS and State) NSC staff believe that the U.S. should not formally alter our current position until we understand what kind of modernization restriction would replace it. That work has not been done. In addition, it may be desirable to explore further restrictions on SS-18s with the Soviets in the context of other new initiatives, but we are concerned that opening the SS-18 numerical issue in isolation would not be productive and may only unravel an agreement on 50% reductions that is in our interest. Nevertheless, a quiet probe by the negotiator should minimize this risk and may prove useful. NSC Staff Recommendation That you approve Option 2 and direct the development of a U.S. position on a modernization definition. The issue of seeking further reductions should be decided in the context of new initiatives, including authority for the negotiator to probe the Soviets quietly in Geneva.5 START—Nondeployed Missiles Missile Destruction. The issue is whether the U.S. should seek a requirement to eliminate (or convert to a space launch vehicle) an ICBM or SLBM whenever a launcher is destroyed. Discussion When the U.S. withdrew its position for comprehensive limits on nondeployed missiles, a political concern was raised that START might be criticized for failing to require missile destructions. (The number of missiles that would be destroyed is a function of both the types of nondeployed missiles constrained and how low the numerical limit, neither of which has been determined.) The disadvantage of this requirement is that the U.S. has a need for missiles removed from launchers for such uses as RDT&E boosters, space launch vehicles, operational spares, flight-­testing, or conversion to other ballistic missiles. Destroying an expensive missile inventory could compel us to open production lines for the same or similar missiles at additional cost. 5 Scowcroft initialed his approval.
