448
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
most important, in approximate order of their significance, are the
following:
—The Islamic Party (Hizbi-Islami). Probably the best organized of
the dissident organizations, the Islamic Party is led by Gul Buddin
Hekmatyar, also known simply as Gul Buddin. He commands a group
of about 600 guerrillas based in Pakistan that, with the support of
the Pakistan Government, carried out some paramilitary operations
in Afghanistan against the Daoud government. Gul Buddin’s group
probably has conducted a few raids in Afghanistan since the Marxists
took power in 1978 and it may pass some arms to insurgent groups
operating in Afghanistan. It reportedly continues to receive some sup-
port from Pakistan. The Islamic Party is somewhat more secular in
outlook than other exile groups and Gul Buddin’s rejection of the
monarchy as a possible alternative to the present regime has tended
to isolate him from other exile leaders. The Islamic Party was repre-
sented at the recent meeting at which the groups in attendance claimed
to have succeeded in their effort to unite their organizations. Gul Bud-
din’s group has roots in the area between Ghazni and Qandahar and
is most active there. ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
—The Afghan Islamic and National Revolutionary Council (Jab-
bah-Azadibakhsh Islami) also known as the National Front for Islamic
Revolution of Afghanistan. The Council is headed by Sayed Ahmad
Gailani (also known as Effendi Jan) who is an important pir or religious
leader who claims to have a following of 100,000 in the eastern prov-
inces. Described by a US Afghan specialist as the exile Muslim leader
with the most modern outlook, Gailani’s political strength is based on
his religious following. He is related to the Iraqi Ambassador to Paki-
stan of the same name but it is not known whether this personal
tie equates to a connection with the Iraqi Government. ([classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified])
—The Afghan Islamic League (Jamiat-Islami-Afghani). The League
is headed by Burhanuddin Rabbani, a former professor of Islamic Stud-
ies at Kabul University. The organization reportedly receives some
financial support from a small, conservative political party in Pakistan
and is affiliated with another Afghan dissident organization, the
Afghan National Liberation Front. Rabbani’s group reportedly has a
military arm but its mission and capability are unknown. ([classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified])
—The Afghan National Liberation Front (Jabhe-I-Negat-I-Melli).
The group’s leader, Sebqatullah Mojededi, is a member of an important
religious family that has a following in Kabul and other urban centers
of eastern Afghanistan. An Islamic scholar, Mojededi reportedly has
good contacts in Saudi Arabia and Libya. He claims to represent the
Front’s “real” leader Prince Abdul Wali, cousin and son-in-law to King
Zahir. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
