332
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
inars in which thoughtful Americans can directly express their human
rights concerns to people from similar walks of life in foreign countries.
Our human rights initiative has given recognition and a new
stimulus to the longstanding efforts of private nongovernmental orga-
nizations in this field. We applaud these endeavors and recognize that
over time they may well outdistance any governmental effort.
Appropriate Action. When our relationship with another gov-
ernment includes economic and military assistance, we are prepared to
take tangible steps to recognize good human rights performance or to
manifest our concern over human rights violations. When appropriate
or necessary, in other words, we will support our words with actions.
In taking such steps, we are guided and strengthened by important leg-
islative provisions enacted by a Congress overwhelmingly committed
to the cause of human rights.
Taking due account of the needs of the poorest, we have made a
fundamental decision gradually to channel a growing share of our eco-
nomic assistance to countries that respect the human rights of their
people.
On the other hand, when countries we assist consistently curtail
human rights, and where our preferred diplomatic efforts have been
unavailing, we must consider restrictions on the flow of our aid, both
overall levels and individual loans or grants. Thus, over the course of
the past year we have, for example:
• Deferred bilateral economic assistance to certain countries;
• Opposed loans by the World Bank and the other international fi-
nancial institutions to countries that engage in flagrant violations of
human rights; and
• Taken steps to insure that food aid provided to countries with se-
rious human rights problems will reach the needy.
We have also advised other departments of the government on
human rights conditions abroad that may affect their activities. For ex-
ample, a recently enacted statute calls for the Export-Import Bank to
take human rights considerations into account, and the Bank regularly
seeks advice on this issue.5
Human rights performance is also an important factor in our deci-
sions on military assistance and commercial arms sales subject to gov-
ernment licensing. We have reduced or declined to increase our mili-
5 Presumable reference to P.L. 95–143 (91 Stat. 1210), signed into law by the Presi-
dent on October 26, 1977. The law amended the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945 to re-
quire the Bank’s Board of Directors to take under consideration the observance of human
rights in determining the extension of loans and guarantees. It also amended the act in
order to extend the Bank’s operating authority to September 30, 1978, from June 30, 1978.
(Congress and the Nation, vol. V, 1977–1980, p. 48)
