540
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
217.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, September 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Future of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Negotiations
Our trilateral talks with the USSR and UK will resume a week from
Thursday, September 28. Progress in these talks requires the release of
your decision setting a three year fixed term as our objective.2
Harold Brown and Zbigniew Brzezinski, and probably Jim Schles-
inger, believe that release of this decision will cause a domestic debate
which could prejudice SALT’s chances. But the controversy is about
your intent that the treaty be a genuine comprehensive test ban and not
merely a lower threshold test ban. It won’t be heightened by a cut-back
from five to three years.
We have repeatedly affirmed to the Soviets and to the British that
our objective is a comprehensive test ban. The resumed talks would be
directed toward this end. But we cannot settle the verification issues,
particularly the number and types of seismic stations, without a firm
decision on duration.
Accordingly Cy Vance and I believe your decision on the three
year term should be released and trilateral negotiations continued, fol-
lowing the strategy for securing multilateral support set forth in our at-
tached memorandum.3
In our view, the only alternative would be now to approach the So-
viets and the British and to tell them we have decided to suspend the
CTB talks until after SALT ratification. We believe that to do so would
cause far more controversy and difficulty than going ahead as we
recommend.
The Soviets are already charging us privately with welching on a
CTB. If we suspend the talks, there is no question of the fact that they
will saddle us with the blame. The non-aligned countries, probably led
by India, will complain that they have been misled and our non-
proliferation efforts will suffer a severe setback. Domestically, there is
both a Congressional and private constituency that puts a comprehen-
sive test ban high on its priority list. These constituencies will be disap-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 6, Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB), 1–12/78. Secret; Nodis.
2 Not found.
3 See Document 214.
