Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
475
The unique element in Nicaragua is, of course, Somoza, but I be-
lieve that his presence meant only that violence and polarization would
occur in Nicaragua first; not that it won’t occur elsewhere. In a few
years, if we don’t address the underlying problems in Central America,
the Nicaraguan crisis of 1978 will seem easy in comparison. I would urge
you to place Central America relatively high on your list of priorities for
1978–1979.
I. Characteristics Common to the Region
The three Central American countries share (with Nicaragua) the
following tragic characteristics:
1. Political Alignment: Three Groups. (1) A strong, intransigent mili-
tary government with little or no popular support; (2) revolutionary
guerrilla groups which are predominantly indigenous but maintain ties
with the Cubans and with each other; and (3) a relatively weak but
hopeful middle, which includes political parties (Christian and Social
Democrats), the Church, and small business. Since the middle of the
political spectrum in Central America is considerably to the right of
that in the U.S., the political middle is generally quite conservative by
U.S. standards.
2. Severe Structural Problems. Economic inequality; rapid popula-
tion growth; inadequate bureaucratic capabilities; and slow economic
growth.
3. Continued Massive U.S. Presence. The U.S. influence and presence
in this region remains very formidable. The perception of U.S. influ-
ence often is greater than the reality but in Central America that is both
an asset and liability: it enables us to more easily achieve some of our
objectives, but it also stimulates a negative and reactive nationalism
among some and a “Fanonian” immaturity among others.3
The U.S. commitment to human rights and democratization is
clearly and widely understood. The military governments that once felt
they could serve the U.S. interest in stability in whatever way they
wanted now feel inhibited from using violence or torture to suppress
political opposition or to eliminate guerrilla movements. As Torrijos
likes to say, “After Carter, military dictators have to count to 10 before
killing someone.” Both the democratic opposition and the guerrillas
seem intent on taking advantage of this new situation.
4. Political Polarization. Government-sanctioned counter-terrorism
was the rule before the Carter Administration. Now, the military gov-
ernments—like Somoza’s—have begun harassing the middle. The left
has done this as well. Polarization has increased as the middle has been
3 Reference is to Frantz Fanon, an influential anti-colonial theorist and author.
