World Hunger and Food Policy 739 The remaining amount—$4 million in cash for WFP’s administrative expenses—will fall within the Foreign Assistance Act and represents a $1 million increase for the two-year period. WFP programs are aimed at the poorest segments of developing country populations. About 75 percent now goes to the poorest countries, compared with 50 percent in 1972. WFP activities are precisely those that we have in mind when we call for multilateral institutions to focus on the basic human needs of the developing world. Developing countries long have viewed WFP as one of the major programs for development assistance, and this role was further enhanced by the 1974 World Food Conference.4 We regard WFP, which consistently has had enthusiastic support in the Congress, as a prime vehicle for our multilateral development assistance efforts. At its October 24–November 4 meeting, the Program’s governing body must decide on a target for its calendar years 1979/1980 biennium. The Secretariat is repeating its proposal, first made last spring, that the target be $950 million (compared to $750 million for the 1977/ 1978 biennium). The United States (and several other major donors) objected to such a large increase at the time. We believe that a target of $950 million is too high, but that a target of $880 million can be attained realistically and used effectively. A decision to pledge $220 million: —would be consistent with the President’s desire to increase food aid and with Congressional intent that we utilize WFP as a major vehicle for food aid distribution; —would enable us to maintain an influential voice in the major multilateral forum discussing food aid policy; and —would in the short term, strengthen us tactically in our efforts to hold WFP operations to a sound, realistic level. At the October meeting we plan to indicate that, while we are prepared to raise significantly the U.S. contribution to WFP, we cannot support the $950 million for these reasons: —There is evidence from recent WFP project evaluations that a number of very poor developing countries have problems providing the management expertise and additional financial resources necessary to absorb significant increases in food aid. —Although we believe the Program should grow, we want to ensure that projects are selected on the basis of development or nutritional impact and not simply resource availability. 4 See Document 221.
