1014  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
We understand that Rick will attempt to convince Secretary Baker 
to propose a letter from the President to Gorbachev within the next 
few days that contains detailed proposals on the principal outstand-
ing issues. The letter would have three interrelated elements: it would 
(1) invite the Soviets to agree on the outstanding START issues, (2) tell 
them they must resolve the outstanding CFE disputes, and (3) make 
clear that these steps would clear the way to setting a summit date this 
summer. If the Soviets are prepared to accept the START positions out-
lined in the President’s letter,2 Secretary Baker would follow-­up during 
his Moscow visit next week. Once agreement is reached on these issues, 
Washington and Moscow would direct the Negotiators in Geneva to 
complete the final treaty text.
Rick will likely propose a deal along the following lines:
Downloading and SS–N–18. The U.S. would accept the Soviet pro-
posal for the equivalent of 2100 RVs downloaded on 3 types of mis-
siles, including the SS–N–18 (paralleling the JCS approach). The Soviets 
have convinced Rick that they have made force structure decisions that 
depend on this high level of downloading and any significant changes 
would come at a very high negotiating price, if they could be achieved 
at all.
New Types. The Soviets would drop their proposal for including 
throw-­weight in the list of changes that would qualify a modified mis-
sile as a “new type.” Dropping the throw-­weight criterion would make 
it more expensive to circumvent either the RV counting rules or numer-
ical limits on NDMs. If a throw-­weight criterion is included, it would be 
easier and less expensive to develop “look-­alike” new types that could 
be used in three ways:
—A modified SS–24 “look-­alike” new type could count at fewer 
than 10 RVs, resulting in de facto downloading without the constraints 
placed on downloading;
—A modified SS–25 “look-­alike” new type (MIRVed with 2–3 RVs) 
could be deployed in small numbers, and be available to replace exist-
ing SS–25s in a breakout;
—If modified SS–25 or SS–24 “look-­alike” new types were deployed 
only in fixed silos, their non-­deployed missiles would not count under 
the NDM limit. Unconstrained numbers of these missiles would be 
available for breakout or reload.
Rick may propose a fallback to accept a limited throw-­weight 
criterion that would address the SS–24 scenarios summarized above, 
but would not complicate Soviet deployment of a MIRVed SS–25 
“look-­alike.”
2 An unknown hand wrote in the left-­hand margin beside this sentence and the 
following: “Dave and Arnie will want to discuss the idea of a letter with you.”
