Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976 29 We must be strong in our internal resolve in order to be strong leaders abroad. This is not possible when Congress and the American people are kept in the dark. We simply must have an international policy of democratic leadership, and we must stop trying to play a lonely game of power politics. We must evolve and consummate our foreign policy openly and frankly. There must be bipartisan harmony and collaboration between the President and the Congress, and we must reestablish a spirit of common purpose among democratic nations. What we seek is for our nation to have a foreign policy that reflects the decency and generosity and common sense of our own people. We had such a policy more than a hundred years ago and, in our own lifetimes, in the years following the Second World War. The United Nations, The Marshall Plan, The Bretton Woods Agreement, NATO, Point Four, The OECD, The Japanese Peace Treaty— these were among the historic achievements of a foreign policy directed by courageous Presidents, endorsed by bipartisan majorities in Congress, and supported by the American people. The world since that time has become profoundly different, and the pace of change is accelerating. There are one hundred new nations and two billion more people. East-West tensions may be less acute, but the East-West rivalry has become global in scope. Problems between the developed and developing nations have grown more serious, and in some regions have come to intersect dangerously with the East-West rivalry. Economic nationalism complicates international relations, and unchecked inflation may again threaten our mutual well-being. Finally, such global dilemmas as food shortages, overpopulation and poverty call for a common response, in spite of national and philosophical differences. It is imperative, therefore, that the United States summon the leadership that can enable the democratic societies of the world once again to lead the way in creating a more just and more stable world order. In recent weeks, I have made speeches on the subject of nuclear proliferation and also on the Middle East.2 In the months ahead, I will speak out on other subjects of international concern. 2 Carter delivered an address entitled “Nuclear Energy and World Order” before the United Nations in New York on May 13 and gave a speech on Middle East policies in Elizabeth, New Jersey, on June 6. Both are printed in The Presidential Campaign 1976, volume I, part I: Jimmy Carter, pp. 183–194 and 215–221, respectively.
