Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
813
our planet. And with faith and common sense, that bright vision will
ultimately prevail.
Another major challenge, therefore, is to protect the quality of this
world within which we live. The shadows that fall across the future are
cast not only by the kinds of weapons we’ve built, but by the kind of
world we will either nourish or neglect. There are real and growing
dangers to our simple and our most precious possessions: the air we
breathe, the water we drink, and the land which sustains us. The rapid
depletion of irreplaceable minerals, the erosion of topsoil, the destruc-
tion of beauty, the blight of pollution, the demands of increasing bil-
lions of people, all combine to create problems which are easy to ob-
serve and predict, but difficult to resolve. If we do not act, the world of
the year 2000 will be much less able to sustain life than it is now.
But there is no reason for despair. Acknowledging the physical re-
alities of our planet does not mean a dismal future of endless sacrifice.
In fact, acknowledging these realities is the first step in dealing with
them. We can meet the resource problems of the world—water, food,
minerals, farmlands, forests, overpopulation, pollution—if we tackle
them with courage and foresight.
I’ve just been talking about forces of potential destruction that
mankind has developed and how we might control them. It’s equally
important that we remember the beneficial forces that we have evolved
over the ages and how to hold fast to them. One of those constructive
forces is the enhancement of individual human freedoms through the
strengthening of democracy and the fight against deprivation, torture,
terrorism, and the persecution of people through the world. The
struggle for human rights overrides all differences of color or nation or
language. Those who hunger for freedom, who thirst for human dig-
nity, and who suffer for the sake of justice, they are the patriots of this
cause.
I believe with all my heart that America must always stand for
these basic human rights at home and abroad. That is both our history
and our destiny.
America did not invent human rights. In a very real sense, it’s the
other way around. Human rights invented America. Ours was the first
nation in the history of the world to be founded explicitly on such an
idea. Our social and political progress has been based on one funda-
mental principle: the value and importance of the individual. The fun-
damental force that unites us is not kinship or place of origin or reli-
gious preference. The love of liberty is the common blood that flows in
our American veins.
The battle for human rights, at home and abroad, is far from over.
We should never be surprised nor discouraged, because the impact of
