944 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX withdraw from Afghanistan or seriously to seek a political solution there on terms which we would find acceptable; —The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has posed a major threat to peace and to a geographic region of vital importance. We consider it important that the international community impose a cost on the Soviets which will deter them from similar actions in the future and ultimately bring about their withdrawal from Afghanistan; —The measures we have taken are intended to respond to the seriousness of the Soviet action. We are determined to maintain our sanctions until the Soviets withdraw; —But our response has left intact the framework of U.S.-Soviet relations, and we recognize the need to manage the East-West relationship with dispassion and consistency. Specifically, we remain firmly committed to further progress in arms control; —We nonetheless believe it is impossible to divorce detente from deterrence. A firm response now to Soviet aggression in Afghanistan can only foster future progress in East-West relations; and —The success of this approach, of course, depends upon the cooperation of the entire world community. C. Soviet Foreign Policy 1. Suggested Points —The Soviets appear to have underestimated the intensity of the world response to Afghanistan, and we believe they are unlikely to undertake any major new initiatives of similar magnitude in the period ahead for fear of provoking further adverse reaction; —Given the continuing resistance to their troops in Afghanistan and their interest in allaying European concern, we think any overt moves in Europe particularly unlikely, but we continue to monitor Soviet military activities very closely; —The Soviets are aware that we would view any effort on their part to undermine Yugoslavia’s independence, territorial integrity and unity with grave concern; and —We have no reason to doubt, however, that the Soviets will continue to press their interests in the Third World, either directly or through such proxies as Cuba and Vietnam. D. Afghanistan 1. Essential Factors If Tito had lived we would have expected to see the Yugoslavs play an active role in efforts to launch a diplomatic initiative on Afghanistan. They may still play a constructive role but without Tito’s guiding
