Eastern Europe Region 81 Efforts after 1956 to suppress revisionism, and to tighten the allowable bounds of de-Stalinization, gave rise to the first readily identifiable dissidents, since many of the “revisionists” refused to abide by the new restrictions. In Poland, where revisionism had run the deepest and where many revisionists were for a time allowed to air their views in official publications, Gomulka—initially considered a reformer— gradually followed a more conservative course. By 1963 Gomulka’s retrenchment in the cultural and ideological spheres prompted writers and other intellectuals to react with what have become classic dissident tools. (U) In early 1964 well-known Polish intellectuals published the “Letter of 34,” in which they protested censorship and other controls on book publication. Jacek Kuron and Karol Modzelewski, two young Marxist scholars who had studied under Kolakowski, subsequently circulated a 90-page open letter criticizing Gomulka personally and calling for the creation of a “true socialist state.” In May 1965 the Warsaw branch of the Writers’ Association demanded that censorship be abolished. In October 1966 Kolakowski commemorated the 10th anniversary of Gomulka’s rise to power with a public condemnation of “repressions and lack of democracy in Poland.” In reprisal he was expelled from the party. Other writers who protested Kolakowksi’s expulsion were, in turn, also expelled. Gomulka’s increasing problems with the dissident intellectuals came to a head in early 1968, when a ban on staging a classic Polish drama with anti-Russian overtones led to a writers’ “revolt” and to student riots. Amidst an ensuing party factional crisis, Kolakowksi and others were forced to emigrate, and many student leaders, including Kuron and a newcomer to dissident activity, Adam Michnik, were jailed. (U) While Gomulka was tightening up in Poland, Czechoslovakia’s Stalinist leader Novotny, under the pressure of Khrushchev’s second round of de-Stalinization and the weight of a stagnating Czechoslovak economy, belatedly undertook the de-Stalinization that he had avoided in the mid-1950s. As in that earlier period, the general feeling that dogmatism was being rejected, albeit in a hesitant way, encouraged spontaneous talk of revisionist policy alternatives to prevailing neo- Stalinism. Much of the pressure on Novotny to go further than he wanted came from Slovak intellectuals and journalists, whose public criticisms and calls for reform came to be viewed as “dissidence.” More important, these dissident acts were probably encouraged by Slovak party leaders who wanted to force Novotny to redeem a Slovak nationalism that had been labeled bourgeois during the Stalinist purges. (U) Novotny, beginning in 1963, presided over a relatively widespread de-Stalinization that countenanced substantial revisionist discussion, startling freedoms in the arts, and permitted, at least for a time, consid-
