918 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 After 4 November Iranian options include a release of some hostages while requesting concessions from the new US administration (if there is a new administration), or the continued detention of most of the hostages and the initiation of a grand jury type trial heading to the indictment of the USG and several of the hostages. C. A major unknown in the projection equation is the health of Ayatollah Khomeini. He is currently a major stabilizing force; if he were to die of natural causes and his death acknowledged as such no significant change in the hostage situation is likely to occur as the hardline clerics now possess a far greater degree of control than they did prior to the election of the Parliament and naming of the Prime Minister. However, if Khomeini were to be assassinated or his death claimed to be the result of an American plot then chaos and confusion would result and within three–five days the lives of the hostages would be at serious risk. 2. (TS) In reviewing the threat, five entities warrant discussion. A. The conventional Iranian military continues to deteriorate due to internal purges of the professional leadership and difficulties in maintaining some of the more sophisticated weapons systems. However the air defense network and associated alert aircraft and point defense ADA systems together with the gendarmerie reporting structure provide a persistent potential for detecting and interdicting mission aircraft. B. The Revolutionary Guard structure is becoming more structured and is unquestionably a tool of the clerics. In the rural areas the Guard has attempted to replace the army but integration has not occurred. In the larger cities particularly Tehran reports now indicate Guard members have taken to bullying the population at the slightest opportunity and some have established a neighborhood protection payout mechanism. C. The composition of the militants seems to have changed somewhat with the hard core radicals, many with Marxist influenced backgrounds, continuing to control the fate of the hostages, although there is no question that they have received assistance from the Revolutionary Guard and hardline clerics such as Ayatollah Beheshti. D. The U.S. media and self proclaimed political moralists pose a significant danger to any prospects of a political solution and a tremendous threat to military planning with false leaks and compromises. Their real danger lies in their potential for creating a dangerous degree of instability in both hostage location and security. E. The fifth threat entity is the intelligence apparatus of the USSR and its allies. The Soviet intelligence services were embarrassed by the degree of their ignorance regarding the April attempt. They do not
