Chilean Constitution; brief examination indicates that Constitution
promulgated September 18, 1925, promises in substance that
judges will remain in office during good behavior, but that the
lower judges will carry on respective functions for such time as law
may determine. Elsewhere in Constitution provision is made for
their appointment by President of Chile. I make this suggestion for
your careful consideration.
(b) I also think wisdom doubtful of providing for a determination
with respect to “reputation,” such as is provided in paragraph 5 of
resolution. It seems to me that without putting matter on basis of
“reputation,” it should be put, with qualifications stated above
regarding officers having constitutional status, upon basis of such
persons using or having used position or powers they hold in
manner hostile to fair plebiscite. Commission would have to get at
facts in order to establish reputation and these facts would probably
serve purpose in demanding transfer or removal.
(c) In regard to paragraph 10 of resolution which provides for
“removal of censorship if any exists,” I wonder if it would not be
better for Commission to determine whether such censorship exists
or not and its effect. Commission could demand freedom from
censorship if it has reason to believe that censorship exists.
7. I send this to you personally because Arbitrator should not prejudge any
question which may come before him in future. The broad right of appeal
exists and Arbitrator may review any action of Commission. It is, of course,
obviously important that I should be advised as far as practicable of
contemplated proceedings of Commission so that I may advise with you or
aid and assist you by representations to the Governments of Chile and Peru if
you think that step advisable. There is, I think, a distinction between the
Arbitrator’s advising these Governments upon disputed questions which may
be presented to him on appeal which may embrace questions of fact, and my
recognition in course of diplomatic interchanges of the clear principles laid
down by him upon which award proceeds and advisability of these
Governments doing everything possible to carry but fair plebiscite.
I should, for these reasons, like to have your views on whether or not you think that the
time has come for me to acquaint Chilean Government, through diplomatic channels,
with view that while the Arbitrator will render his decisions upon questions that come
to him in due course, it is quite inadmissible that Chile, after having invoked the
authority of the President of the United States as Arbitrator and after having insisted
upon recognition of her administrative authority under Treaty of Ancon during
