810  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
—Renewed emphasis on C3I as a more and more critical element of 
an effective deterrent capability.
—A requirement for exercises to validate and improve our doc-
trine and capabilities. Your participation in IVORY ITEM exercises in 
1978 gave a much needed check of our plans. The new directive calls 
for two exercises annually. (TS)
In addition to the requirements for an integrating directive on 
employment policy within the military services and the intelligence 
community, there are two other compelling reasons for this docu-
ment. (S)
First, Harold can use references to it in public and private state-
ments which are intended to complicate Soviet planning and to con-
vince them, and our allies, that we will not be paralyzed in a crisis 
between cataclysmic options and capitulation. This is particularly criti-
cal for the next few years while a number of our strategic programs are 
not yet fully deployed. (S)
Second, it may help blunt sharp criticism that we are not dealing 
adequately with the changing requirements for deterrence in the face of 
growing Soviet forces and capabilities. (S)
As for interagency handling, Harold prefers no further discussion. 
(See his memo at Tab B). I agree and suggest that we treat it the same 
way we do the SIOP. It is, after all, sensitive military contingency plan-
ning. Furthermore, it contains references to [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] Cuba, SRV, and North Korea as well as the Soviet Union, and how 
they relate to the SIOP, information not known in such explicitness out-
side the DOD and the White House. Harold suggests that we discuss 
the PD with Ed Muskie and work out an approach for presenting the 
substance to the allies. (TS)
I propose two alternatives. First, that you sign the PD and instruct 
Harold to prepare a version for use with both Ed Muskie and Stan 
Turner. From that version we can develop the briefing approach to the 
allies. Second, you can hold a short NSC meeting on the sanitized ver-
sion and then sign the PD. The approach to briefing the allies would be 
the same. (TS)
RECOMMENDATION
Sign the directive at Tab A and instruct the Secretary of Defense to 
prepare a sanitized version for interagency use,
OR
Convene a NSC meeting5
5 Carter struck-­through “NSC” and wrote after “meeting:” “to brief me & VP on 
what is changed re targeting, flexibility, C3I, etc & proposals for briefing others & guide-
lines for public statements.”
