XLIX
Summaries of Compilations
United States Regional Economic and Technical 
Assistance Policy
Note. The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents 
in the text.
The concern of U.S. policymakers with political and economic devel-
opments in Latin America in 1958–1960 led to some shifts in U.S. economic 
policies toward the region, foreshadowing the Kennedy administration’s 
Alliance for Progress, although less extensive and dramatic.
Reexamination of U.S. Policies
Early in 1958, the Department of State undertook a reexamination 
of U.S. policies in the light of economic trends in the area. Secretary 
of State John Foster Dulles initiated the study. He was concerned by 
declining Latin American exports to the United States, falling prices of 
some important commodities produced in Latin America, and efforts 
by the Soviet Union to expand its trade and influence in the area. 
Dulles stated in a January 19 memorandum to Under Secretary of State 
Christian A. Herter and other officials that he thought U.S. economic 
policies in relation to Latin America were “too negative,” that U.S. pol-
icy concerning trade between Latin America and the Soviet bloc was 
too restrictive, and that there should be a reexamination of the U.S. pol-
icy of opposing quota arrangements on commodities. He continued: 
“I doubt that we are in a good position to withstand in that part of the 
world a Soviet economic offensive at a time when the demand for raw 
materials is down and prices are very low.” (ETA–1)
In response to Dulles’ request, an interbureau task force examined 
a range of problems and possible policy changes. (ETA–4) Assistant 
Secretary for Economic Affairs Thomas C. Mann and Assistant 
Secretary for Inter-American Affairs Roy R. Rubottom summarized 
the task force’s conclusions in an April 10 memorandum to Dulles. 
They called for policy adjustments but no major initiatives. Noting 
that trade was the cornerstone of U.S. economic relations with Latin 
America, they urged efforts to prevent restrictions on U.S. imports 
from the region and recommended U.S. participation in multilateral 
study groups on coffee and on lead and zinc, leaving open the ques-
tion of possible price stabilization agreements for these commodities. 
They did not think Soviet bloc efforts to expand trade with Latin
