February 1951–February 1952
99
31.
Progress Report Prepared for the National Security Council1
Washington, May 31, 1951.
SUBJECT
Second Progress Report on NSC 107, “The Position of the United States with
Respect to Iran”
NSC 107 was approved as Governmental policy on March 14, 1951.
It is requested that this Progress Report, as of May 24, be circulated to
the members of the Council for their information.
A—The General Situation
The situation in Iran has deteriorated further since the submission
of the First Progress Report on April 24.2
On April 28 the Government of the moderate Prime Minister, Ho-
sein Ala, was replaced by one headed by the extreme nationalist leader,
Dr. Mohamad Mosadeq. Immediately upon his appointment, the Ira-
nian Parliament unanimously voted for the immediate implementation
of nationalization of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, and the Iranian
Government has so far categorically rejected all attempts by the British
and United States Governments to settle the matter by negotiation. The
Iranian Government has made it clear that it regards nationalization of
the company as a fait accompli.
While disturbances have to some extent abated during the period
under review, the atmosphere in Iran remains explosive. The present
Iranian Government not only has done nothing to restore calm but has
shown every indication of desiring to keep the Iranian people at a high
emotional pitch on the oil question lest wiser counsel prevail with a
consequent settlement of the controversy and, in that event, the inevi-
table fall of the Government.
The British Government has informed the United States that it is
prepared to negotiate a settlement with the Iranians which, if other con-
ditions are met, will involve some form of nationalization. The Depart-
ment of State has been informed orally by British representatives that
this willingness to accept the principle of nationalization was conveyed
to the Iranian Foreign Minister by the British Ambassador in Tehran on
May 19.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, Offi-
cial Minutes 1947–1961, Box 13, 93rd Meeting. Top Secret. The report was sent by memo-
randum from Webb to Lay.
2 Document 21.
