3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 124 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI Drop Outs Alluding to their March 24 meeting, Gold mentioned the “drop-out” phenomenon (i.e., the high rate of Soviet Jews who leave the USSR with exit visas for Israel but settle in the US and other third countries instead of proceeding to Israel). Shulman interjected that he hoped the American Jewish organizations would not put emigrants in a straight-jacket which would compel them to go to Israel. It is important the emigrants be given a choice. So far the American people were responding very well to Soviet emigration and assisting and welcoming Soviet emigrants. For example, Mrs. Shulman works for the Council on Emigre´s in the Professions, trying to raise funds to assist and place Soviet emigrant professionals. Gold and Schindler asked what the Secretary thought was the potential impact of the drop-out phenomenon—what he sensed in Moscow was the Soviet reaction. The Secretary and Shulman indicated the drop-out phenomenon had not come up in any way during the Moscow trip. Schindler said all American Jews want to get as many Jews as possible out of the USSR, but there are signs the Soviets are manipulating the emigration flow to increase the drop-out rate, by increasing the proportion of urban Jews and professionals who tend to drop out. Schindler asked whether the Soviets discuss the drop-out rate in the CSCE context. Hartman answered that they sometimes cite it as a debating point. Belgrade Conference The Secretary noted that the Soviets are very sensitive about the approaching Belgrade CSCE Conference. They are very concerned, and fear a confrontation. During the Moscow visit the Secretary had discussed Belgrade in general terms with Gromyko. The Secretary had told Gromyko that we were not seeking a confrontation. Our position is that the Conference will be to review the progress or lack of progress in implementation of the Final Act, rather than to consider new proposals as the Soviets would prefer. Hartman commented that the Soviets would try to have only brief discussion of implementation, preferably outside the human rights area. The Secretary commented that the Soviets always ask why we emphasize Basket III.6 Gold asked whether the Secretary shared the concern of some observers, including some on the Hill, that if we take a strong position at Belgrade the Soviets might walk out. “Or downgrade the Conference”, Goodman suggested. The Secretary observed that the Soviets would like to downgrade the Conference if they could, but that would be hard to do. Hartman noted that the level of representation for the Belgrade 6 See footnote 9, Document 21.
