El Salvador 637 United States, and the vague promise of holding free elections two years hence, does not give an assuring picture of what future course of action the Junta will take. United States Government recognition at this time would discourage the hopes of non-Communist opposition to carry out a counter-­ coup against the Junta. Recognition would provide the Junta with the respectability they now desperately are searching for. This would allow the leftists the needed time to consolidate their gains and to seek outside support from other leftist oriented governments, such as Cuba. After they become well entrenched, El Salvador would probably serve as a base for similar movements in neighboring countries. This perhaps is the major risk involved to the political stability and future security of Central America. A leftist dominated El Salvador could serve as a vital wedge, resulting in an extension of Castro-­type Communism from Cuba to the Central American mainland. Castroism would then be provided with a West Coast opening—­a base for seaborne Communist access to Central America. The current unrest and instability of Guatemala and Honduras are such that even the presence of a leftist government in El Salvador would provide the necessary spark needed to topple these shaky governments. Nicaragua also would not long be able to resist the presence of leftist governments in three neighboring Central American countries. The effects of such developments on Panama and the security of the Canal Zone are self-­evident. A further problem would be posed to the U.S. Government in giving additional support to bolster countries thus threatened. As a final consideration, recognition of the present government of El Salvador by the U.S. would be widely interpreted throughout Latin America as well as inside the country, as approval of what could quite easily result in another Castro type regime. The foregoing has been jointly drafted by senior representatives of the intelligence community and the conclusions approved by all of them, including The Director of Central Intelligence. 2 2 In a memorandum to Herter, November 13, 1960, Mann took issue with Cumming’s memorandum and strongly urged that the United States “proceed forthwith to recognize the Junta Government.” (ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63 D 127, “El Salvador, 1960”)
