Chile 249 is a sine qua non of a new agreement with the Fund. They considered that a cut of 10 percent should be made in the budgeted government expenses, that priority attention should be given to making State enterprises completely self-­financing through economies of administration and increases in tariffs, and that the government’s investment program should be so limited as to provide only for completion of existing projects, the initiation of new projects which would be financed with foreign loans not being justified in the existing circumstances. They recommended a drastic revision downward in the amount of the arrastre to be paid off. Upon completion of the current Stand-By Arrangement on March 31, they did not consider any further credit expansion justified for the next year since prices already had reflected the currently proposed readjustments in wages and any expansion would therefore be inflationary. They recommended that the entire import deposit system be abolished, all goods made freely importable, and several groups of commodities established with tariffs varying according to essentiality and high enough to yield more revenue and to control imports. Vergara, Figueroa, and Muller made it clear that they were in accord with almost all of the foregoing measures which were advocated by the Fund representatives. They felt, however, that Chile was being likened too much with the case of Argentina, that the situation was quite different in Chile, and that therefore the means of achieving the desired goals would also have to be different. An important difference is the fact that Frondizi’s party has control of the Congress and the army is accustomed over the years to be used in the control of Argentina. These things make it easier for Frondizi to take strong action and back it up with military force where required. Chile, on the other hand, is a democratic country split up into numerous political parties, with an army not accustomed to participating in politics or control of the economy, and with the present government having minority support in Congress. One point that Figueroa stressed was based on two talks which he has had with President Alessandri since his return from Buenos Aires. This was the President’s feeling that he has to try to do something about the unemployment situation and that he simply cannot take any measures which would increase unemployment. Figueroa and Vergara believe that the policies advocated by Jones and Bertens would have this effect. Vergara emphasized this point at considerable length, pointing out that he could not see how technicians from the International Monetary Fund could be so wrapped up in their figures and so cold-­ blooded as to advocate policies which would increase unemployment and starvation. While stressing his agreement with cost of the measures advocated by the Fund officials, Vergara raised the question several times as to what would be the attitude in Washington of the Eximbank and
