634
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
236.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
Washington, March 18, 1980, 9–10 a.m.
SUBJECT
Iran/Afghanistan
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Warren Christopher
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Harold Saunders
David Aaron
Hedley Donovan
OSD
Joseph Onek
Secretary Harold Brown
W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
NSC
Gary Sick
JCS
Marshall Brement
General David Jones
Lt. General John Pustay
*Present only for Items 1–3
Justice
John Shenefield*
CIA
Frank Carlucci
Treasury
Robert Carswell*
Robert Mundheim*
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
6. Afghanistan. The SCC reviewed a State Department paper outlin-
ing seven elements of a possible policy directed at achieving the neutral-
ization of Afghanistan (attached).2 Dr. Brzezinski said that two addi-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council Institutional Files, 1977–1981,
Box 111, SCC–290, 3/18/80, Iran/Afghanistan. Secret. The meeting took place in the
White House Situation Room. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner.
2 Attached but not printed. The paper listed seven possible elements to achieve the
political neutralization of Afghanistan: “1) Withdrawal of all Soviet military forces from
Afghanistan; 2) An Afghan government acceptable to the Afghan people; 3) No interfer-
ence in the internal affairs of Afghanistan by its neighbors or any other state; 4) Non-
alignment in Afghanistan’s foreign policy and permanent neutrality for Afghanistan,
including the obligation to refrain from entering into any military alliance, and to refrain
from allowing any state to have military forces or facilities in its territory except by
agreement of the guarantors; 5) Guarantees by Afghanistan’s neighbors and other inter-
ested states of permanent neutrality for Afghanistan and of non-interference in its internal
affairs; 6) Agreement by the Afghan government and all guarantors on the definition
of Afghanistan’s borders; 7) Arrangements apply only to Afghanistan and not to affect
the sovereign rights of other countries.” Carter made three notations on the paper. He
inserted “prompt” before “withdrawal” in the first item; he bracketed items 6 and 7 and
wrote: “I see no reason to include these,” in the right margin; and at the bottom of
