Negotiating Channels 475 (b) The U.S. statement will: (1) accept the principle stated in 3 above (2) express understanding and regret for the grievances of the Iranian people, including the widespread perception of U.S. intervention in Iran’s internal affairs; (3) affirm the right of the Iranian people to make decisions governing their political future and the policy of the U.S. to respect that right; (4) affirm a desire for normal relations based on mutual respect, equality and the principles of international law. 6. Establishment of a Joint Commission to resolve all unresolved bilateral problems. (On a date to be determined by Iran and the U.S. within one month after day 1.) Vine 181. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, February 13, 1980 SUBJECT Our Options if the Soviets Intervene in Iran I want to provide you with some anticipatory thoughts on our options for reaction if the Soviets intervene in Iran.2 Soviet activity and capabilities. [1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified] (TS) Some capability factors are useful to hold in mind: Approaches. [3½ lines not declassified] (see Tab A for a map).3 (TS) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 64, Subject File, Iran Non-Meetings Hostage Crisis 1/80–3/80. Top Secret. Drafted by Odom. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 31, Iran 2/80) Printed from an uninitialed copy. 2 A February 5 DIA report, “USSR: A Military Option,” concluded that Soviet troop movements in the Transcaucasus region meant the Soviet elite “will move” into Iran if the decision is made. (Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–07– 0002, Records of J–3 DDSO, Box 2 Iranian Hostage Crisis 1979–1984, 163–165 Perception Consideration) 3 Not attached to this copy. A copy of the map, attached to an Odom draft, is printed here as Tab A. On Odom’s draft of this memorandum, after this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “How many days in the 3rd arrow?” As shown on the map, the third arrow refers to a potential Soviet advance from Herat southward. Odom responded that 14–21 days was reasonable. (Memorandum from Odom to Brzezinski, February 18; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 31, Iran 2/80)
