National Security Policy  219
was important to force the Soviets to first use of nuclear weapons. Mr. 
Douglas said that this would avoid having to meet conventional attack 
with strategic bombardment.
Secretary Dulles said that our allies’ concern is based on doubt that 
they can count on a nuclear response from the US. He mentioned think­
ing in the State Department about a NATO authority which might hold 
custody of nuclear weapons and suggested that this might be a useful 
project to explore.
General Taylor said that that was the objective of our program—­to 
spread nuclear weapons laterally and to our allies. We have no illusions 
that 175 divisions can be stopped without the use of large yield nuclear 
weapons. But we have to believe and act as if we believed that there is 
an intermediate response to a Soviet attack in Europe short of all-­out 
nuclear war.
Secretary McElroy asked if we had been too preoccupied and 
made too many statements in regard to our strategic bombing capabili­
ties. Have we deemphasized our tactical nuclear and carrier forces and 
Marine divisions? Perhaps not enough attention had been paid to the 
fact that somewhere between 25% and 40% of the defense budget was 
going to our limited war capabilities. Perhaps our allied visitors should 
see our limited war capabilities rather than concentrate on visits to SAC 
and Cape Canaveral.
General Pate pointed out that during the past two years the 
Marines and the Navy had had ten joint exercises involving seven dif­
ferent nations.
Mr. Sprague pointed out that George Brown (UK laborite), a recent 
visitor to the Pentagon, had told him that too few people knew about 
US limited war capabilities.
Secretary Dulles observed that from the briefing he had gathered 
that we do have plans for the use of small nuclear weapons—­that we 
are not gambling everything on high yield weapons. This means to him 
that there are some possibilities in regard to “area” defense. General 
Taylor said that this is what we are shooting for—­small, light weapons 
with little fall-­out.
Secretary Dulles said that there was time enough—­if our allies 
knew that we had more to our strategy than trans-polar strategic 
nuclear exchanges with megaton weapons.
Governor Herter asked if the number of our limited war effec­
tives would be reduced if there was a concurrent threat of general war. 
Admiral Burke said that in such a situation, which would be like the 
Suez situation, we would be increasing both our capabilities for limited 
and general war simultaneously. General Twining said in such a situa­
tion we would limit mobilization. Governor Herter asked if our limited
