that the entire road leading into Bolivia—a fact that could not be overlooked —remained in the territory to be ceded, according to the result of the plebiscite. If, by taking the Sama as the boundary line, Tarata remains under our control, let it be so. We are keeping our word. We did not speak of departments but of territories when we mentioned Tacna and Arica before, because we fixed a line such as the Sama, which might or might not be a boundary line in the Peruvian territorial divisions of those regions.”

Peru has had no opportunity to comment on this telegram. The inference to be drawn from these exchanges is that the question of including territory of the province of Tarata was in the minds of the Parties. If Chile sought to include Tarata, she did not succeed in securing a reference to the province of Tarata in the description. If it was thought that the mention of the river boundary would effect this purpose, the fact remains that the description of the territory as that “of the provinces of Tacna and Arica” was put in the treaty and the river line was deprived of a controlling significance by its inaccuracy. If it be assumed, as appears to be the fact, that the question of the inclusion of territory of the province of Tarata was presented, it is deemed to be decisive that the treaty does not set forth a river line exclusively, and that the words “the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica” were retained. There is no sufficient evidence of intention, and no provision of sufficient precision, as to justify the conclusion that any territory of the province of Tarata was included in Article 3. It does not militate against this view that the exact line of the Peruvian provincial boundary is not defined in the record, or that there may have been some uncertainty in relation thereto. The capital of the Province of Tarata was the town of Tarata, a town of considerable importance. This furnishes a test as, on the Chilean claim, the town of Tarata was to go to Chile. But it is plain that neither of the Parties supposed that the town of Tarata was in the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica. So, also, arguments based on the strategic or economic importance of Tarata must be dismissed. If Chile for any reason attached importance to the retention of Tarata, it is all the more significant that she did not include in the treaty any reference to the Province of Tarata, while making distinct reference to the provinces of Tacna and Arica. Not only the first paragraph, but also the second and third paragraphs, of Article 3 of the treaty refer to these provinces. The second paragraph states that the plebiscite will decide “whether the territories of the above mentioned provinces will remain under the dominion and sovereignty of Chile or continue to form part of Peru.” It is added that either of the two countries to which “the provinces of Tacna and Arica” may remain annexed shall make the described payment. The third paragraph provides that the special protocol will
