556
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Ambassador Aggrey is replacing Harry Barnes, who has been a
particularly effective envoy and has established excellent contacts with
Romanians at all levels. There have been intelligence reports that at
least some high level Romanian officials interpret Aggrey’s assignment
to Bucharest as a sign of declining American interest in Romania. Using
Aggrey as the channel to deliver a Presidential letter will both reaffirm
interest in Romania and underline your confidence in him.
At the present time, it is important that we make gestures to the
Romanians to reaffirm our interest in their foreign policy.3 Although
much could be done to improve its internal policy, Romania is still the
Warsaw Pact state which shows the greatest foreign policy autonomy
from the Soviet Union. We are in the process of reaffirming our interest
in Poland (through your visit) and Hungary (through returning the
Crown and then negotiating a trade agreement), but the only sign of
our interest in Romania is a visit to Washington by Ceausescu next
spring for which we are still not able to give the Romanians a date
despite their frequently expressed wishes to fix a firm time.
Shortly after your inauguration, President Ceausescu sent a special
envoy with a personal letter for you expressing the desire to maintain
good relations. It would be useful and appropriate for us to send him
a message on this occasion.
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the letter to President Ceausescu at Tab A.4
3 On October 17, King sent a memorandum to Brzezinski recommending a brief
meeting between Carter and Patan, who was to travel to Washington for the Joint U.S.-
Romanian Economic Commission November 1–3. King wrote: “A Presidential meeting
with Patan would be an important political gesture at present. Our latest actions have
probably raised doubts in suspicious Romanian minds about our interest and concern
with their affairs,” pointing to the upcoming visit by Carter to Poland and the return
of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary. Recommending disapproval, Aaron wrote
“ZB—I disagree. This is not worth the President’s time at this stage.” Disapproving the
recommendation, Brzezinski highlighted Patan’s position as Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Trade and wrote in the margin “The P. is not an Asst. Sec. of State!”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 66,
Romania: 1/77–5/78) On November 2, Patan met with Vice President Mondale for 15
minutes and was briefly received by the President. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 45, Roma-
nia: 1977)
4 Carter approved the recommendation and, after revising the text, signed the letter
on November 15. Several drafts, including one with Carter’s revisions, are attached but
not printed.
