Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 319 Throughout the negotiations, we were determined that our national security interests would be protected; that the canal would always be open and neutral and available to ships of all nations; that in time of need or emergency our warships would have the right to go to the head of the line for priority passage through the canal; and that our military forces would have the permanent right to defend the canal if it should ever be in danger. The new treaties meet all of these requirements. Let me outline the terms of the agreement. There are two treaties— one covering the rest of this century, and the other guaranteeing the safety, openness, and neutrality of the canal after the year 1999, when Panama will be in charge of its operation. For the rest of this century, we will operate the canal through a nine-person board of directors. Five members will be from the United States and four will be from Panama. Within the area of the present Canal Zone, we have the right to select whatever lands and waters our military and civilian forces need to maintain, to operate, and to defend the canal. About 75 percent of those who now maintain and operate the canal are Panamanians; over the next 22 years, as we manage the canal together, this percentage will increase. The Americans who work on the canal will continue to have their rights of employment, promotion, and retirement carefully protected. We will share with Panama some of the fees paid by shippers who use the canal. As in the past, the canal should continue to be selfsupporting. This is not a partisan issue. The treaties are strongly backed by President Gerald Ford and by Former Secretaries of State Dean Rusk and Henry Kissinger. They are endorsed by our business and professional leaders, especially those who recognize the benefits of good will and trade with other nations in this hemisphere. And they were endorsed overwhelmingly by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee which, this week, moved closer to ratification by approving the treaties, although with some recommended changes which we do not feel are needed.5 And the treaties are supported enthusiastically by every member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff—General George Brown, the Chairman, General Bernard Rogers, Chief of Staff of the Army, Admiral James 5 The Senate Foreign Relations Committee gave final approval to the treaties (Exec N, 95th Cong. 1st Sess—Exec Rept 95–12) on January 30. (Robert G. Kaiser, “Senate Unit Gives Strong Approval To Canal Treaties,” The Washington Post, January 31, 1978, pp. A–1, 10) The treaties then went to the floor of the Senate the first week of February. (Congress and the Nation, vol. V, 1977–1980, p. 54)
