Costa Rica  429
We do not know whether President Echandi’s claim for a 75–25 
ratio is or is not soundly based. We do understand, however, that there 
are special circumstances relating to the trade in bananas between Latin 
America and the United States, and that because of these circumstances 
the Costa Rican case for an improved ratio is valid. Accordingly, we 
believe it reasonable, under the circumstances, for Costa Rice and the 
other banana-­producing countries to expect a significant and favorable 
change in the present allocation formula.
We understand that the present 50–50 formula is based exclu-
sively on investment and sales. However we believe that, at the least, 
in any new allocation formula the factor of payroll should also be 
given weight because it reflects the economic activity of the banana 
companies and because, we understand, there is ample domestic 
precedent. We do not believe that an allocation based on sales and 
costs alone, without regard to the investment and its situs, would be 
equitable. Certainly the very substantial investment of the banana 
companies in the producing countries constitutes a major income pro-
ducing factor.
Should it be determined in Treasury that a 75–25 allocation formula 
is equitable and sound, it would represent a substantial contribution to 
good relations with Costa Rica and the other banana-­producing coun-
tries. If this is not fully consistent with Treasury’s judgment regarding an 
equitable formula, then we would hope that a formula of at least 70–30 
could be carefully considered. A decision to continue the 50–50 alloca-
tion, under the circumstances referred to above, would be most harm-
ful to good relations with Costa Rica and the other banana-­producing 
countries of Latin America and would not only lead to higher tax rates in 
these countries, but would likely result in other harmful measures.
It is, therefore, our hope that a new formula which is equitably and 
soundly based and which is favorable to the banana-­producing coun-
tries will be adopted. It is also our hope that this action can be taken 
promptly.
Sincerely yours,
DOUGLAS DILLON
Acting Secretary
