Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 2. The sensitivities of regional powers, particularly India, concerning Soviet involvement in Afghanistan, the constant drumbeat of PRC charges that the Soviet Union is attempting to spread its hegemony in the world, and the potential for instability in Afghanistan will influence some degree of caution in Soviet decision-making on tactics. The Soviets would prefer to see the Taraki regime’s support base broadening rather than (as seems to be the case) narrowing, and would not like to become over-committed as the only benefactor and protector of a leadership whose domestic political situation is worsening and not improving. 3. Nevertheless, barring a real turn for the worse in the Taraki regime’s domestic political position, the widening and deepening process in Soviet-Afghan relations will continue apace. It will presumably include exchanges of high-level delegations and an expansion of trade and aid, perhaps leading eventually to an umbrella agreement with CEMA similar to those concluded with Finland and Iraq.5 At some future stage, it is also conceivable that the DRA may sign a “declaration of principles,” followed by a peace and friendship treaty. This pattern was followed with Angola, for example.6 (We note, however, that the Afghan desk officer in the Soviet Foreign Ministry carefully avoided responding to questions from EmbOff last month on possible consideration of a Soviet-Afghan peace and friendship treaty. He observed merely that the 1921 Soviet-Afghan Friendship Treaty and 1931 Neutrality and Non-Aggression Treaty provided an ongoing foundation for Soviet-Afghan relations.) Meanwhile, we expect that the Soviet presence and advice in Afghanistan will also be directed toward institutionalizing and progressively strengthening the DRA and PDPA’s organs of administration and control in Afghanistan. 4. As Brezhnev did in his Baku speech, the Soviets will also seek to assure other regional powers, particularly India, that the growing Soviet involvement in Afghanistan will be beneficial rather than harmful to regional peace and security. At the same time the Soviets will overtly and covertly play up threats from external “reaction” (the U.S., China, Muslim interests based in Pakistan and Iran) in order further to buttress Soviet-Afghan ties. Soviet diplomacy toward Afghanistan’s South Asian neighbors will encompass: —stressing to the Indians the common aspects of New Delhi’s and Moscow’s policies toward Afghanistan; 5 The USSR created the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance in 1949, originally to oversee economic activities in Eastern Europe. 6 Angola signed a Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union in October 1976.
