504
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
169.
Memorandum From Timothy Deal of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 19, 1980
SUBJECT
SCC on March 20: Hungarian Grain
The SCC asked for an assessment of reports that Hungary is selling
grain to the USSR and might replace it with US grain. We have con-
firmed that the Soviets have asked Hungary for 800,000 tons of wheat.
The Hungarians told us they will meet this request from domestic
supplies. (C)
After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, we informed East Europe
Governments that diversion of US grain or controlled technology to
the USSR would adversely affect bilateral relations and jeopardize
additional purchases from the US. In the case of Hungary, we also said
we would take into account any significant change in the pattern of
Hungarian grain imports from the US and Hungarian exports to the
USSR which might indicate surrogate purchases for the USSR. (C)
State has prepared an options paper (attached)2 for SCC considera-
tion. The Implementation Group reviewed it at today’s meeting. The
paper sets forth three options: (1) continue present policy; (2) request
East European countries not to sell grain to the USSR from domestic
supplies above traditional export levels and avoid diversion of US
grain; (3) seek commitments from NATO allies and other Western grain
exporters on the establishment of quantitative limits on grain exports
to each Eastern European country. (C)
After extended debate, agencies recommended that the SCC
approve Option 1, as amended in the discussion. State will present this
position in the meeting. Under option 1, we would: (a) continue to
urge Eastern European countries to avoid diversion of US grain to the
USSR or use grain to replace exports to the USSR; (b) not object to
sales of grain to the USSR from domestic supplies; (c) monitor carefully
Hungarian and Eastern European grain trade with the US and other
cooperating countries; and (d) urge West European governments not
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 111, SCC
291, 3/20/80 Iran/Afghanistan. Confidential. A stamped notation at the top of the page
indicates that Brzezinski saw the memorandum.
2 The undated paper, entitled “East European Grain Sales to the Soviet Union,” is
attached but not printed.
