Chemical and Biological Weapons
293
135.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, July 31, 1980
SUBJECT
Mini-SCC Meeting—Sverdlovsk (C)
A Mini-SCC on the possible BW incident at Sverdlovsk, USSR, was
held from 1000–1130 on July 29, 1980.2 The purpose was to discuss pos-
sible options open to the U.S. in view of the recent Soviet rejection of
the third U.S. request for information on this matter.
D. Aaron (Chairman) opened by asking for a review of the ade-
quacy of the U.S. case, not from the perspective of what we believe hap-
pened but how well we could defend ourselves publicly on that case,
especially if we decided to react by taking public steps such as submit-
ting our case to the UN, withdrawing from participation in treaty, etc.
S. Keeny (ACDA) led response, pointing out that we do have some
problems with the case, especially regarding releasability of informa-
tion [less than 1 line not declassified]. A classified white paper is being
prepared in ACDA which will primarily consist of assertions without
evidence. Keeny pointed out that soft spots in our case include
[5 lines not declassified]
Aaron summed up this phase of the discussion by noting that we
do not have as much assurance as we would need that there was a BW
violation; the most we can say with assurance is that the Soviets have
failed to be forthcoming on a serious matter. Bartholomew (State)
added that we can at least say we have enough evidence for legitimate
concern; there was general agreement on this. W. Slocombe (OSD) ar-
gued that the focus of our case should be Soviet refusal to cooperate in
resolving the problem.
The discussion shifted to what actions the U.S. should take. Slo-
combe argued that we should continue to press the Soviets along the
line we have already, at least in the short term until the UNGA in Sep-
tember. The Soviets are resourceful enough to creatively change their
line if we put them on notice that this is a very serious matter to us, that
their stone-walling behavior jeopardizes further arms control agree-
1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82,
Brown Files—General #1, Biological Weapons. Secret. Copies were sent to Komer, McGif-
fert, Slocombe, Davis, and Buckley. Prepared by Weakley; and approved by Slocombe. A
hand-written note under the date reads “Walt—This is a good outcome. Well done—
Lynn.”
2 No minutes or summary of conclusions of this meeting were found.
