52
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
return to Iran for condemnation. He has been a U.S. puppet, through
whom America plundered Iran and destroyed its cultural and social
fabric. The American embassy was not a normal diplomatic mission,
but rather an espionage center, through which the U.S. exercised its
control over the Shah and Iran. Thus, the embassy and its staff have
lost all claim to traditional diplomatic immunity.
—The Iranian authorities have begun an international campaign
to present their position to the world. Their explanation of what is going
on coincides neatly with the thinking of many “establishmentarians”
in Third World countries. Some radical nations may soon state public
support of Iran. Others will probably accept Iran’s arguments privately.
In any case, Iran’s currently prejudiced standing in international eyes
is likely to be retrieved in the coming weeks among many Third World
governments, and Iran will gain prestige for having successfully humil-
iated Washington. The Soviets, by their reluctance to speak out in
behalf of established diplomatic principles, and by their support of the
justice of the Iranian students’ cause, are positioning themselves to
exploit the situation.
—We do not anticipate that the Iranian authorities have any present
intention of harming the hostages, but the situation is unstable and
could change, given the volatile nature of Iranian mass emotions. More-
over, if, as seems probable, economic conditions deteriorate further in
Iran over the next six months, and if this evolution generates new
political turmoil, it is impossible to foresee what might happen to our
hostages, should they then still be in captivity.
Only two contingencies offer a possible escape from the impasse:
The Shah’s death, or the Shah’s transfer to a third country. Although
the “students” in the embassy compound have insisted that the latter
event would not lead them to release the hostages, Iranian leaders have
not been so precise. Still, we cannot be at all certain that they would
not accept the students’ position and continue to hold the hostages to
induce the U.S. to bring pressure on Mexico (or the Shah’s other country
of asylum) to extradite him to Iran. On the other hand, Khomeini might
decide at some point after the Shah’s departure that he had gained
maximum advantage from the affair, that he could claim a great victory
over America, and that he should end the matter by expelling the
hostages (and, probably, by breaking diplomatic relations with the
U.S.).2
2 Vance wrote in the margin next to this last sentence: “good point.”
