Romania 607 istration push to U.S.-Romanian economic cooperation. We are constrained in what we can do in all these areas, and we are bound by law, as well as policy, to keep the mixed Romanian human rights record in mind. A full and candid review of major global issues, in a way that shows Ceausescu that his country’s positions and interests are important to us, will go a long way to substitute for our inability to meet his economic desires. As much as any other aspect of the visit, our treatment of the global agenda will determine the health of the U.S.-Romanian relationship in the months and perhaps years to come. Ceausescu sees his relations with us in a global perspective. The quality of U.S. foreign policy leadership is a vital component in his own struggle, hard on the Soviet border, to maintain Romanian independence. III. KEY ISSUES 1. Trade and Emigration U.S. Objectives: To encourage improved Romanian emigration performance while expanding U.S.-Romanian trade. Ceausescu’s Objectives: To obtain most-favored-nation tariff status on a long-term basis without annual Congressional hearings, and to obtain renewal of the three-year trade agreement. Essential Factors: Romania obtained most-favored-nation tariff status (MFN) and access to U.S. Government credits in 1975 under the terms of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment, which links them to emigration performance and provides for annual Congressional hearings. Although emigration to the U.S. has steadily improved, reaching about 1,250 last year, Romania discourages emigration and has erected cumbersome bureaucratic procedures to deter emigrants. A decline since 1976 in emigration to Israel has aroused concern here. Two-way trade totalled just under $500 million in 1977, slightly in our favor, and continues to grow. Both sides have generally endorsed a goal of $1 billion by 1980.3 Ceausescu will argue that to reach this goal, we need the stability provided by MFN on a long-term basis. He may also seek your commitment to renewal of the U.S.-Romanian Trade Agreement, which expires August 3. However, Congress wishes to hold hearings in May or June on both MFN extension and trade agreement renewal. For the latter, a formal Presidential determination is also required. There is no prospect in the immediate future of changing the Jackson-Vanik Amendment to grant Romania MFN on a long-term 3 Brzezinski highlighted the first two sentences of this paragraph and wrote in the margin “2X/3 yrs.”
