Costa Rica 425 This problem has been dragging along for more than a year and until recently Treasury officials, without definitely committing themselves, had given the impression such a change could probably be effected. I have learned informally that Treasury tax experts now have completed a review of the data presented by United Fruit and have concluded that the present 50–50 split represents a fair, even generous, allocation of the profits so far as Costa Rica is concerned. While the discussions of these findings are still in the preliminary stage, it appears they will form the basis of a final Treasury decision denying any favorable re-­allocation of United Fruit profits. In presenting its case, it is understood that the United Fruit Company contended that the allocation should be increased from the present 50% to at least 75%. An allocation of taxable profits in a proportion of 75% to the United Fruit subsidiary in Costa Rica and 25% to the United States is in keeping with the type of allocation Costa Rican President Echandi expects. Echandi’s reason for this belief is that he knows that Standard Fruit Company has been paying on the basis of 77% for some years without U.S. objection. The following factors have an important bearing on the need for favorable action by Treasury on this problem: (1) The fact that Treasury has established an enabling regulation permitting a change in allocation of taxable profits is considered by Costa Rica, and the other countries concerned, as tantamount to granting the requested increase of the allocation. In this respect we are faced with the Latin American way of jumping to conclusions and at this juncture not to increase the allocation to the expected 75 percent will be considered as an act of bad faith on our part. (2) In 1950, President Echandi, then serving as Costa Rican Minister in Washington, was successful in having the United Fruit Company obtain an increase in the allocation of profits from 35% to the present 50%. The United Fruit Company was able to convince the Internal Revenue Service that on the basis of its foreign investments, an increase in the percentage of taxable profit allocation to the Costa Rican subsidiary would be more equitable. Echandi believes the present allocation is still inequitable as 99% of the United Fruit Company’s Costa Rican investment, consisting of the land and all productive facilities, is actually in Costa Rica. He has expressed his intention of obtaining a greater tax return one way or another. Since he was successful in obtaining an increase in the allocation in 1950, it is difficult for him to understand why this can’t be readily done again. (3) Any re-­allocation of profits of United Fruit’s Costa Rican subsidiary will apply to the other banana producing subsidiaries in Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic and Colombia. This fact, admitted by Treasury, has been emphasized
