Chapter 4, February–April 1990  517
and production) in favor of tight limits on modernization (1–2 flight 
tests per year, production cutoff by an agreed future date).
• It would be overloading the circuits to ask the Soviets explicitly 
to lower the 154 ceiling on SS–18s, the backbone of their strategic force 
posture and the missile program most heavily favored by their military. 
If we decide to seek further cuts in START I, we should do so implicitly 
via the new sublimit on silo-­based MIRVs.
Likely Benefits of the Initiative
• Politically: Soviet acceptance of the package (including its 
emphasis on de-MIRVing and its commitment to bold, stability-­
enhancing START II goals) would increase the appeal of START to 
expert and layman alike, counteracting the perception that the Treaty 
lacks a coherent strategic rationale and is already OBE in today’s world.
• Congressional Support: Agreement on the package would guar-
antee strong support by Nunn and others for the eventual START 
Treaty. Indeed, even if the Soviets rejected the MIRVed mobile ban, our 
willingness to make the proposal and to consult with him in advance 
could make an ally out of Nunn on START and improve the prospects 
for funding rail MX.
• Strategically: Given the decreasing likelihood of funding for rail 
MX, this ICBM initiative, if accepted by the Soviets, could avoid a near-­
term, 2–0 asymmetry between us and the Soviets in mobile systems, 
while retaining our most capable missile (MX) in silos (a satisfactory 
solution for the Air Force) and keeping alive our future Midgetman 
option.
• Midgetman Prospects: Indeed, a MIRVed mobile ban could have 
the effect of increasing the priority/funding levels of Midgetman, thus 
enhancing the chances for eventual deployment of the mobile system 
best suited to playing a stabilizing role in a world of increasingly lower 
force levels.
Likely Soviet Reactions
Overall, the initiative would be unlikely to rock the boat with the 
Soviets. Indeed, they might well be quite receptive.
First, they would clearly welcome several elements of the package: 
dropping the 3300 limit, agreeing to START II, leaving the 154 ceiling in 
place, and relaxing constraints on heavy ICBM modernization.
Second, the Soviets would be likely to interpret our initiative as an 
effort to remove key remaining obstacles and to complete the Treaty on 
schedule.
Third, senior Soviet civilian and military officials, while noting 
their sunken investment in SS–24 rail mobility, have carefully avoided 
ruling out the possibility of a MIRVed mobile ban. Given the limited 
size of their MIRVed mobile program (we project about 45 rail SS–24s), 
its high operating costs, the success and large scale of their single-­
warhead SS–25 program, and the fact that we would be giving up rail 
MX, there is a reasonable chance the Soviets would accept a ban, espe-
cially if embedded in a package they considered worthwhile.
