588
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
market growth. In the next three years we would have an annual re-
view of this relationship and take it into account in our negotiations.
(3) Avoidance of surges which now can occur when a country substan-
tially underships its quota and then moves to full quota the next year. To
avoid some very significant surges, we would under normal circum-
stances, limit a country to an increase of half of its unfilled portion in
that product, but recovering fully in a relatively short period. This is
one of the key points of providing some certainty for business
planning.
The remainder of the significant elements of program fall within
policies already in effect, and in some instances includes promises
which have already been fulfilled.
200.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1
Washington, February 12, 1979
RE
Administration Textile Program
Pursuant to the instructions you gave Cooper, Eizenstat and me
with respect to textiles,2 this will advise as follows:
1. We have clearly established that Finley and Chaikin will not
only support the MTN as being good for their people and lobby for it,
but Chaikin advises he will, if necessary, not only contradict Meany but
so testify.
2. Detailed discussions with respect to ambiguities are in the
process of being completed. Notes in the respective files clearly reflect
the intentions of the parties. There are certain areas where specificity is
impossible and in these instances, we are making a record that clearly
indicates that where differences of opinion exist they will not be
charged to bad faith or failure to live up to commitments.
3. Any necessary language changes will be made.
4. Congressional support is assured.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Sub-
ject Files, 1977–1979, Box 8, Textiles Two. No classification marking. Carter initialed “C”
at the top of the page.
2 Not further identified.
