110
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Assad in a manner which would allow the Syrians to come in—not nec-
essarily at the beginning, but later. Brzezinski asked if the outcome of
Camp David is a compromise, will the Syrians attend? Kamel an-
swered affirmatively.
Quandt asked (a) is there likely to be another meeting after Camp
David if the latter has reasonable success and (b) will the Jordanians at-
tend such a meeting? Kamel responded affirmatively, noting that all
Egyptian ideas are based on the concept of Jordanian participation.
Quandt asked whether, in the event the Saudis support a Jordanian role
and the Syrians do not, the Jordanians will still attend? Kamel thought
they will, provided “Palestinian rights” are adequately safeguarded.
Boutros Ghali opined that two other countries might be interested
in participating—Morocco and the Sudan. Saunders observed that
during his post-Leeds Castle visit to Morocco,3 King Hassan had em-
phasized the need to obtain Arab support for Sadat’s initiative. Kamel
observed that the Egyptians have had similar signals from Hassan.
Egyptian priorities are to obtain Saudi support and Hussein’s partici-
pation. Hussein, Kamel noted, needs a clear and unambiguous commit-
ment on withdrawal from the West Bank.
Quandt inquired where an Arab Summit might be held. Kamel re-
sponded that this is an open question, but identified his preference for
somewhere in Saudi Arabia. Saunders asked who besides Morocco and
the Sudanese might attend? Kamel spoke of the confrontation states,4
the Saudis, Morocco (if she wishes) and perhaps the Gulf States. Kamel
observed, however, that the Moroccans are thinking of a full meeting.
The Secretary wondered whether there might be more problems than
benefits emerging from a full summit. Kamel agreed, noting that the
Libyans would create problems. The smaller the summit, the better.
Saunders asked about the Tunisians and the Algerians, and what
weight they carry? Kamel responded that they all carry some weight,
but did not think the two states would wish to participate. Boutros
Ghali commented that the Tunisians tend to be neutralists: neutralists
between Morocco and Algeria and neutralists between the moderates
3 Saunders met with King Hassan in Rabat, July 21, for a three-hour discussion of
the Arab-Israeli negotiations and bilateral U.S.-Moroccan relations. Saunders sent a
record of the discussion to Vance in Washington, as well as to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jidda
in telegram 4437 from Rabat, July 22. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P840139–2392)
4 The “confrontation states,” also known as the Pan-Arab Front for Steadfastness
and Confrontation, were comprised of Algeria, Libya, the People’s Democratic Republic
of Yemen (South Yemen), Syria, and the Palestine Liberation Organization. The group,
designed “to face the Zionist enemy and confront the imperialist conspiracy,” was
formed at the conclusion of a summit held in Tripoli, December 1–5, 1977, to protest
Sadat’s visit to Israel the month before. (Joe Alex Morris, Jr., “Arabs at Summit Agree on
Plan,” Los Angeles Times, December 6, 1977, p. A9)
