Yugoslavia
819
do not discriminate against Yugoslavia; to seek Tito’s support for our
non-proliferation objectives.
Yugoslav Objectives: To ensure that Yugoslavia’s access to nuclear
technology is not restricted by the nuclear “have” nations and to urge
prompt approval for the Krsko fuel export license.
Essential Factors: The IAEA Agreements under which the U.S.
agreed in 1974 to supply Yugoslavia with a reactor and fuel for the
Krsko Nuclear Power Station do not meet all the criteria contained in
the legislation on nuclear exports, specifically, US approval rights over
retransfer and reprocessing of US-supplied equipment, US supplied
fuel, and non-US fuel used in the Krsko reactor. We have therefore
been seeking these additional U.S. approval rights. The Yugoslavs, who
are adherents to the NPT and cooperating members of the IAEA, have
indicated their willingness to accept universally applicable safeguards
and controls which result from new international agreements, but they
have resisted what they regard as unilateral U.S. attempts to impose
discriminatory conditions on existing arrangements. They have also
said that they are unwilling to “tie their hands” with regard to a future
option to reprocess. (We are aware of no current Yugoslav plans to
recycle or reprocess.) In May 1977 we approved the export of the
Westinghouse reactor,2 in order not to delay the Krsko project, on
the basis of Yugoslav commitments not to retransfer U.S.-supplied
equipment and to negotiate the disposition of spent fuel. Following
two rounds of negotiations, we appear to be close to agreement on
additional assurances covering U.S.-supplied fuel and on a Yugoslav
commitment to continue to negotiate on any non-U.S. fuel used in
Krsko. (We believe that such an arrangement would result in NRC
approval of the pending fuel license.) Since Tito has been personally
involved in this issue, final Yugoslav agreement will depend on his
approval.
Points to be Made:
—Place Krsko in the broader context of U.S. international policies
on disarmament and non-proliferation, and note that U.S. and Yugoslav
objectives on non-proliferation are virtually identical.
—Note that our non-proliferation policies are not discriminatory
and that we are not asking more from Yugoslavia than from other
countries.
2 The Nuclear Regulatory Commission approved the export license application for
a Westinghouse reactor on May 20, 1977. (Telegram 116633 to Belgrade, May 20, 1977;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770180–0624)
