1010
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
with the Yemen operation and support for Morocco). The problem of
military presence would remain, however, and there will be greater
awareness of internal vulnerability. (S)
310.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Special Representative for
Middle East Peace Negotiations-Designate (Linowitz)1
Washington, November 14, 1979
SUBJECT
Middle East Negotiations (U)
You take over2 at a time of deep skepticism about the possibilities
for success of the talks:
—the Begin government is on the edge of paralysis and, even if it
survives, is unlikely to become much stronger; at the same time, the
election/government-forming process in Israel is measured in months,
not weeks;
—the Shaka affair3—if he is indeed expelled—threatens a collapse
of any local government on the West Bank, deep disillusionment, and
serious problems for the Egyptians at the Talks; and
—although the President is committed to the process, election de-
velopments here are leading to skepticism, heightened by the shift of
command in our delegation;
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 62, Middle East: 8–11/79. Secret; Sensitive.
2 On November 6, the White House announced that Linowitz would replace
Strauss, who had been appointed by Carter to serve as chairman of the President’s
re-election campaign, as Special Representative. Carter recalled in his memoirs that the
decision to reassign Strauss was made in late October when the administration acknowl-
edged that it would face “strong opposition in my own Democratic party and also from
the Republicans.” Strauss, Carter continued, “had been doing a good job in the Middle
East,” but he and his advisers “agreed that his skills could best be used in this political
campaign position.” The decision to appoint Linowitz was taken in consultation with
“Mondale, Vance and others,” in light of Linowitz’s demonstrated ability in negotiating
the Panama Canal treaties. (Carter, Keeping Faith, pp. 491–492) Linowitz recalled that
Carter offered him the position on October 30, following informal inquiries from Brzezin-
ski and Vance. (Linowitz, Making of a Public Man, pp. 213–215) The Senate Foreign Rela-
tions Committee approved Linowitz’s appointment on December 4. (“Negotiator Ap-
proved,” Los Angeles Times, December 5, 1979, p. E5)
3 See footnote 7, Document 309.
