Bolivia 211 BL–37. Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge of Bolivian Affairs (Weise)1 Washington, November 9, 1960. SUBJECT The Critical Economic and Political Position of Bolivia PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Victor Andrade Under Secretary Dillon ARA - Mr. Barall MA WST - Mr. Weise Ambassador Andrade said that he wished to describe briefly the critical and uncomfortable situation in which the Paz Government was finding itself as the result of the new Soviet drive in Bolivia. During the past month, following Khrushchev’s offer of a tin smelter and tin concentration facilities to Bolivia, pressures from Communist and pro-­ Castro elements have been mounting to the point where these forces are now threatening the political stability and very existence of the Paz Government. Ambassador Andrade emphasized that the Bolivian revolution is a national revolution and that, unlike the Castro revolution of Cuba which has sold out to Khrushchev, the Government of the MNR has resolutely defended itself against Communist domination. The Soviet offer of a tin smelter, Andrade said, has revived certain popular concepts regarding Bolivia’s dependence upon world marketing arrangements for the sale of tin, which although erroneous in some respects, were nevertheless widely spread. Considering that Bolivia is the largest producer of tin in this hemisphere and that the United States is the largest consumer of tin in the world, many Bolivians do not understand why their country must market its tin through Great Britain and be dependent upon British smelters. Many Bolivians also do not understand why the Texas City smelter was not built in or near Bolivia where its operation would have been more economical and advantageous to the Bolivian tin industry. Failure of the United States to give a satisfactory answer to these and other questions relating to the Bolivian tin problem has led many Bolivians to feel that the United States is not interested in helping Bolivia free itself from outside international controls over the world tin market. Bolivians also remember, Andrade claimed, that when the United States ceased to buy tin for its stockpile, world prices dropped, which
