National Security Policy  483
116. Accumulated evidence also indicates an active Soviet BW 
research and development program encompassing anti-­personnel, 
anti-­livestock, and possibly anti-­crop agents. Although relatively lit­
tle is known about the scope of the program, particularly its offensive 
aspects, the USSR has probably had a capability for small-­scale, clan­
destine BW operations for at least several years. We have no evidence 
of large-­scale production of BW agents and munitions, but the USSR 
has the facilities, personnel, and materials needed for such production.
117. In the field of defense against BW and CW, Soviet capabilities 
are at least comparable to those of the major Western nations, and in 
the case of CW may be superior. Soviet troops are well-­equipped with 
CW defense items, and the current issue gas mask appears to afford 
adequate protection against inhalation of known agents. Extensive pro­
grams are under way to indoctrinate both military personnel and civil­
ians in defensive techniques.
118. Electromagnetic Warfare. Soviet offensive and defensive pro­
grams in this field are likely to be pressed forward during 1958–62. We 
believe that at present the USSR is capable of jamming and seriously 
disrupting Western long-­range radio communications, and that it also 
has an appreciable capability for jamming Western bombing and navi­
gational radars. Its jamming capabilities now extend up to frequencies 
of at least 10,000 mc/s; by 1960 some Soviet jamming equipment could 
operate at frequencies of 30,000 mc/s or higher. The USSR could also 
develop devices to enable missiles to home on electronic emissions. 
Soviet forces are now training in the use of CHAFF, research is under­
way on anti-radar coating materials, and we believe the USSR is devel­
oping active airborne jamming equipment. Conversely, known types of 
Soviet radio and radar equipment are vulnerable to electronic counter­
measures, particularly Soviet blind-­bombing and air defense radars, all 
of which operate in a few narrow frequency bands. The USSR is capable 
of increasing its spread of frequencies and of developing anti-­jamming 
devices, but through 1962 Soviet defensive electronic systems will prob­
ably still be subject to disruption by properly employed techniques.
TRENDS IN SOVIET MILITARY STRENGTHS
Soviet Ground Forces
119. There has been an extensive program over the past several 
years to reorganize and modernize the Soviet ground forces to meet 
the requirements of modern warfare, both nuclear and non-­nuclear. 
More advanced designs of practically all types of equipment in Soviet 
line divisions have appeared. The fire power of individual units has 
been increased markedly, additional vehicles (including amphibious
