412 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII the presence of these latter-day Cossacks in Kabul, the ruthless determination with which they were deployed to topple a government, and the expectation that they will in fact fan out through the country, are a source of unease whose full impact has yet to be felt on Pakistan’s internal divisions and unresolved domestic pressures. It will haunt the leadership, and it will dominate public attention, forcing much of Pakistan’s international and policy focus through a one-issue prism. 18. (C) Sense of purpose: Pakistanis as a whole do not have much faith in their nation or in its rulers. They routinely assume that Pakistan has little control over its destiny as a nation, and there is wide-spread acceptance that everything that happens in Pakistan is the result of maneuvers by forces engaged in a larger game outside the country. They are prepared to credit or blame the United States for almost every development, from the rise of the Islamic Jamaat-i-Islami to the fall of Bhutto and the postponement of elections. Some of this is standard Third World fare, a legacy of anti-Western independence movements in which all flaws were blamed on the former ruling power; independence in this case simply removed the former ruler and replaced his pressures with diversified pressures associated with regional intrigue or super power politics. Some of it is simply a mirror of a South Asian Islamic sense of insecurity in a hostile Hindu world. Some of it is obviously a flight from responsibility, a “cop-out.” But a large part of it simply reflects Pakistan’s pre-occupation with the search for outside support and a tacit acknowledgement—correctly—that Pakistan cannot go it alone. 19. (C) U.S. response: In our response to the events in Afghanistan, we need to be aware of the limits of the Pakistan ability to stand up to the Soviet threat and even to accept our offers of support. The reserved Pakistani response to our public reaffirmation of the 1959 bilateral agreement and the public hints—unconfirmed by any official notifications or consultations—that we are prepared to do things in the arms aid area which would assist Pakistan is illustrative. Most editorials in the government and the independent press have come out against acceptance of “unreliable” U.S. military aid, counselling a cautious approach to any embrace of the USG, and principal reliance on multilateral organizations including the Non-Aligned Movement and the Islamic groupings. GOP response thus far has been cautious— and skeptical. Pakistan is not the same place it was in 1959, when it would have welcomed warmly such public posturing by the U.S. In 1980, such USG pronouncements, without the benefit of full consultations with the Pakistanis, mis-judge this Pakistani sensitivity as well as the new situation in the region. 20. (C) Pakistan is, of course, a useful channel through which to demonstrate our concern for the situation in the region and our
