350 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 2 remained as sharp as ever, he and his government apparently decided to make the best of it, for the issue has not been raised again. A possible explanation of the PRC’s decision to make an issue of the interpretation of Paragraph 2 is that both Wang and his government thought the U.S. was interested only in getting a satisfactory wording in the published Announcement and would tacitly accede in the execution of the Announcement to the position maintained by the PRC. Some sup­ port is lent this hypothesis by the following statement in Wang’s letter: “It must be pointed out that our side has taken into account the difficult position in diplomatic relations in which the U.S. Government finds [itself,] and has acceded to your proposed text on the entrusting of third powers in its present form in the Agreed Announcement. How­ ever, on the concrete content with regard to the Chinese Government’s entrusting the Indian Government and the U.S. Government entrusting the U.K. Government, both sides cannot have any other interpretation.” If Wang and his government did actually believe that the U.S. was interested primarily in words rather than substance, it would have been natural for the PRC to react with surprise and indignation when it discovered its belief ill-­founded. It is hard to believe that Wang himself, at least, held any such opinion. He had listened at length to our reasons for insisting that the U.S. Government authorize the GOI to act in the U.S. In agreeing on the somewhat ambiguous wording of Paragraph 2 using the word invited we were careful to give Wang no cause to infer that we had yielded to his view of what actually should be done with respect to the third countries. The most likely explanation of what happened, in my opinion, is that Wang, possibly not appreciating the clear implication of the English text, failed to inform his government accurately of the situ­ ation. The fact that he had retained in the Chinese text the word wei t’o (to entrust) as a translation of the verb to invite may have mis­ led Peiping into believing that we had, in substance, accepted their position. Wang may have failed to take sufficiently into account the fact that the Chinese text would be read only in China, while the rest of the world would interpret the Agreed Announcement according to the English text. In the meeting on September 20 Wang certainly gave every appearance of a man who had been caught off base and was trying desperately to retrieve his error. Possibly the key to the incident lies in the timing of the actions taken by the two sides. It happened that I was able to inform Wang on September 14 that we had invited the GOI to assume its functions in the U.S., but was unable to tell him at that time what we had done with respect to the U.K. The PRC Government may have assumed that we were attempting to force it to invite the U.K. for the purpose either of
