Peru  1065
and desperately needs for internal political reasons to be able to point 
its finger at some worth-­while project it has initiated. Despite some of 
its obvious weaknesses, the Prado Administration was democratically 
elected and is trying to give Peru democratic Government. I believe 
it would be in the United States’ interest to strengthen it by granting 
the loan.
3. Having embarked upon a stabilization program, the Government 
has expected that as a consequence it would be eligible for loans from 
the U.S. for economic development. It has complained that such 
loans have not materialized; the Aguaytía-Pucallpa loan application 
offers the opportunity to grant a sound loan and to overcome those 
complaints.
4. Although the Peruvian Government did not formally present the 
application to the DLF until May 19, 1959, it was long under the mis-
taken impression that it had done so as of late January 1959. Peruvian 
officials have been extremely displeased over the delay resulting from 
this unfortunate misunderstanding, especially since they understand 
that the IBRD had been prepared for some time to finance the foreign 
currency costs of the road, providing that Peru could arrange the local 
currency financing.
Request for Action:2
In view of the urgent political considerations in favor of this loan 
and of the difficulties which have so far beset the Peruvian applica-
tion, I would greatly appreciate anything which you may be able to do 
to assure favorable consideration of the Peruvian request by the DLF 
Board as soon as possible.
2 There is no indication on the source text of Under Secretary Dillon’s action on 
this request. The Development Loan Fund signed a $4.5 million loan agreement with the 
Government of Peru on December 19, 1960, for improvement of the Aguaytía-Pucallpa 
road; and a $1.8 million loan agreement on September 8, 1961, for penetration roads. For 
further information, see agency for International Developments, Status of Loan Agreements 
as of March 31, 1964 (Washington, 1964), p. 26.
