September 18–December 16, 1978
547
Camp David; now we should be prepared for it to take another month
or so to wrap up the treaty.
4. In accepting our approach on Article VI, Sadat said he would de-
fend the Egyptian position in his Parliament by saying he had asked me
to convey to Prime Minister Begin what in effect is the U.S.-Egyptian in-
terpretation of what this article means. I readily agreed to do this.
5. On the exchange of ambassadors letter, the Egyptians today ac-
cepted our proposal to link the exchange of resident ambassadors with
inauguration of the self-governing authority. Egyptians accepted
slightly revised wording to our proposed change to Article I of Annex
III.
6. At the very end of our meeting with Sadat, he also sliced rapidly
through two remaining minor unresolved problems in Annex I—con-
cerning whether Egyptian transports could land in Zone C and the
number of aircraft Egypt could station in Zone B. In both cases he over-
ruled General Ali, who was present, agreeing in effect to accept the Is-
raeli position on these points. This will not mean a great deal to the Is-
raelis in comparison with the other issues but it will be helpful in the
atmospherics of my presentation tomorrow.
7. This will be a difficult package to sell in Israel (as indeed any-
thing attainable would be), but I think we have done about as well as
could be expected here. Sadat has in effect agreed to our strategy by
being as flexible as possible on both the Article VI issue and in ac-
cepting a target date instead of a fixed timetable in the West Bank/
Gaza letter so that the full weight of our persuasive powers can be con-
centrated on getting the Israelis to accept our new proposition for a
linkage trade-off.
Vance
157.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State and the White House1
Jerusalem, December 14, 1978, 0030Z
Secto 14053. White House for Dr. Brzezinski. Department for
Christopher. Subject: Discussions With PM and Cabinet Members.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840158–1480.
Secret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Vance arrived in Israel from Egypt on Decem-
ber 13.
