3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
201
49.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, September 15, 1977, 5–6:40 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
US
USSR
The Secretary
Amb. Dobrynin
Marshall Shulman
Ambassador Dobrynin came in September 15 at his request to re-
port on replies received from Moscow to several points discussed with
him at previous meetings,2 related to the forthcoming discussions with
Foreign Minister Gromyko. The meeting lasted from 5 p.m. until 6:40
p.m.
He transmitted the text of the Soviet unilateral statement re-
garding the Soviet intention to take no actions inconsistent with the In-
terim Agreement after its expiration and while SALT negotiations are
proceeding, provided that the United States exercises similar restraints.
Statement would be issued during Gromyko visit. (Text of statement at
Tab 1, in Russian and English translation as provided by Dobrynin.)3
Dobrynin also transmitted language for a joint US-Soviet state-
ment expressing determination to conclude a new SALT agreement,
which could either be issued separately or as part of a communique at
the conclusion of the Gromyko visit to Washington. (Texts of Russian
and English translation as provided at Tab 2.)
Dobrynin then transmitted a non-paper indicating a negative
Moscow reaction to the proposal to limit Soviet MLBMs to 220, and to
limit the number of bombers carrying ALCMs to 250. The statement
also repeated the charge that the United States is striving for unilateral
advantages, and expressed the hope that the US would approach the
talks with Gromyko with “more realistic positions.” (Text of non-
paper, as supplied in English handwriting, at Tab C [3].) In transmit-
ting the message, Dobrynin observed: “This is something we will both
regret.”
In the discussion that followed, Dobrynin expressed the view that
further efforts to elicit counter-proposals to the points raised would not
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 38, SALT—
9/1/77–9/15/77. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Shulman on September 16. The meeting
took place in Vance’s office at the Department of State.
2 See Documents 45, 47, and 48
3 Three tabs were attached but not printed.
