On fifteen occasions between 1875 and 1918 the people of Pomerania cast their ballots for the election of a member to represent that district in the German Reichstag. These elections invariably resulted in the choice of a Pole to represent Pomerania. The Transit Convention of Paris, signed by Poland and Germany April 25, 1921, provides for free and unrestricted traffic between the German Province of East Prussia lying to the east of Pomerania and the main body of Germany lying to the west. For the settlement of complaints and grievances arising in connection with this transit traffic the contracting parties established a Mixed Transit Tribunal under neutral presidency with final jurisdiction. The first case which this Transit Tribunal was called upon to hear in the course of its three years of existence was a German protest in connection with the railway disaster occurring at Starogard on April 30, 1925. In this case the Tribunal exonerated the Polish Government of any responsibility for the disaster, the evidence pointing to a criminal attempt by parties unknown. Pomerania constitutes no barrier to communication between one part of Germany and another. Persons and goods are moved through the territory in question without being subject to any formality whatever. Neither passports nor visas are required, and freight and baggage are liable to no tariff nor inspection. This is true not only on the railroads but on the waterways. The first draft of the Treaty of Versailles provided that the Polish-inhabited districts of Upper Silesia should be given to Poland. Because of Germany’s protest and in deference to the opinion of the British representative who reversed his position the final Treaty provided for the taking of a plebiscite as a guide in the delimitation of the boundary line. Article 88 of the Treaty of Versailles provided as follows: “In …,37 Upper Silesia …,37 the inhabitants will be called upon to indicate by a vote whether they wish to be attached to Germany or to Poland: …37 Germany hereby renounces in favor of Poland all rights and title over the portion of Upper Silesia lying beyond the frontier line fixed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers as a result of the plebiscite. “Annex Paragraph 4. …37 The result of the vote will be determined by communes according to the majority of votes in each commune. “Paragraph 5. On the conclusion of the voting, the number of votes cast in each commune will be communicated by the Commission to the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, with a full report as to the taking of the vote and a recommendation as to the line which ought to be adopted as the frontier of Germany in Upper Silesia. In this recommendation regard will be paid to the wishes of the inhabitants as shown by the vote and to the geographical and economic conditions of the locality.”
