March 1952–February 1953
405
142.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, November 11, 1952.
1933. 1. I concluded my conversation with Kashani yesterday after-
noon (Embtel 1907 Nov 9).2 During our talk which lasted approx two
hours Kashani stated little that was new. He devoted considerable time
to expounding his religious views, quoting liberally from Koran; in
friendly but unvarnished language he again criticized US Govt for sup-
porting imperialism and colonialism; he insisted that unless US Govt
changed its Middle Eastern policies, come out for real economic and
political independence Middle Eastern peoples, enabled Iran to sell its
oil, and supported loan thru Int Bank or other financial institution
which would result in carrying out of projects calculated to increase
productivity of country and reduce unemployment, Iranian people
would be compelled turn toward Sov Union; he outlined in some detail
various [sic] his plans for future Iran as well as for Moslem world.
2. Kashani laid special emphasis on his antagonism to communism
which he labeled as aggressive atheism. He said that if imperialism and
colonialism could be eliminated in Moslem world and people would be
given real opportunity raise living standards there need be no fear of
communism among Moslems. I remarked he seemed to overlook possi-
bility that internatl communism against wishes of majority population
might by force or otherwise take over country like Iran. Kashani stated
that communists could not hold Iran against will Iranian people. I
asked if 20 million Iranians would be more effective in freeing them-
selves from internatl communism than some 40 million Moslems now
under oppression in Sov Union. I said despite intense religious feelings
of Moslems in Central Asia, communists during last thirty years had
made considerable progress in replacing Islam with atheism in that
area. It had been impossible for new religious leaders to be trained;
many of them had been eliminated and those who survived had be-
come mere puppets of Sov States; Moslem children were being edu-
cated in atheistic schools. Kashani said he could admit that if commu-
nists once in control Iranian educational system they could gradually
eliminate religion. This situation made it all more important that Chris-
tian US cooperate with Moslem Iran to prevent spread of militant
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 42. Secret; Security Information; Limited Distribution. Drafted by
Henderson. Repeated to London and pouched to Moscow. The telegram is the Embassy
copy as approved and has no time of transmission.
2 Document 140.
