Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks 679 The United States will give continued emphasis to formulating and conducting our security assistance programs in a manner which will promote and advance respect for human rights in recipient countries. Further, an assessment will henceforth be made of the economic impact of proposed transfers of major defense equipment to those less developed countries which receive US economic assistance. In recognition of our special treaty obligations with NATO countries, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, these countries will be exempted as appropriate from the dollar volume restraints and other controls established below. The United States will remain faithful to its treaty obligations, and will also honor its historic responsibilities regarding Israel’s security.3 In furtherance of this policy of restraint, and except in extraordinary circumstances personally approved by me or where I determine that countries friendly to the United States must depend on advanced weaponry to offset quantitative and other disadvantages in order to maintain a regional balance, I direct that: 1. The dollar volume (in constant 1976 dollars) of new commitments under the Foreign Military Sales and Military Assistance Programs for weapons and weapons-related items in FY 1978 will be reduced from the FY 1977 total. It will be our goal to continue to reduce total dollar volume in each subsequent year. 2. With regard to newly-developed advanced weapons systems: a. The United States will not be the first supplier to introduce into a region an advanced weapons system which creates a new or significantly higher combat capability. b. Commitment for sale or coproduction of newly-developed advanced weapons systems is prohibited until the systems are operationally deployed with US forces. c. The Secretary of State will establish more extensive guidelines for assessing requests for newly-developed advanced weapons systems, including requirements 1) that supplying the system would uniquely strengthen the requestor’s ability to perform military functions which serve US security interests, 2) that less-advanced, existing systems with roughly comparable capabilities are unavailable from the United States, and 3) that providing these systems will not require the presence in country of large numbers of Americans for long periods of time. 3 At a May 16 Cabinet meeting, Brzezinski noted that the PRM had been “revised in accordance with the President’s directive. It now recognizes the special status of Israel.” White House Counsel Robert “Lipshutz and others have reported that the policy is being favorably received in the Jewish community.” (Minutes of the Cabinet meeting, May 16; Carter Library, Cabinet Meeting Minutes, Box 7, 1/24/77–5/23/77)
