Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 679 have to keep it clandestine, even from people here in the White House. In the meantime, we can also use Christopher’s list and we could tell the Iranians that we are prepared to consider Khomeini’s demands in order to provide a cover for the rescue. We should also tell the allies we need more support and indicate that we may have no choice but to blockade. We need to move quickly—by the 24th if ready. (Cy prefers also the rescue option if we have to go the military route.) (12:48 p.m.) So we ought to go ahead with the rescue without delay. David Jones: (Outlines possible military deception designed to simulate the mining option.) Zbigniew Brzezinski: (Argues for a diplomatic initiative and a mining deadline to maximize deception.) The President: We need to plan for post-rescue actions in the event the rescue does not work. (1:19 p.m.) OK, let’s go.4 4 As Jordan later recalled, his support for the rescue mission had sounded “lukewarm.” He wrote to Carter that “once you are satisfied with the soundness of the rescue plan, I believe you should proceed with the mission.” (Jordan, Crisis, p. 251) 251. Memorandum From Robert D. Blackwill of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, April 11, 1980 SUBJECT Iran and the Allies (U) After listening to the President’s clear exposition to Stobbe this morning2 on the gravity of the Iranian situation, and in view of the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 6, Iran 4/1/80–4/18/80. Secret; Outside the System. Sent for information. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “Zbig—Discuss with Warren. C.” Below Carter’s handwritten note, an unknown hand wrote “done.” 2 Carter met with the Governing Mayor of Berlin, Dietrich Stobbe, from 9:13 until 9:20 a.m. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary)
