1104 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement UNITED STATES AND ALLIED CAPABILITIES FOR LIMITED ­MILITARY OPERATIONS TO 1 JULY 1962 I—INTRODUCTION A. AUTHORITY FOR STUDY 1. An interagency study of U.S. and allied capabilities for limited military operations was conducted in 1958 pursuant to NSC actions 1842g(4), 1844, 1881, and 1934. Subsequently, it was agreed between the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Director of Central Intelligence and the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs that this study should be periodically reviewed and evaluated. In con­ versations and exchanges of correspondence during 1959 among the principals concerned, it was agreed that a complete revision should be made, both to account for new developments and to adjust certain assumptions made in the first study, particularly as to the use or non-­ use of nuclear weapons by the opposing sides in limited military opera­ tions. Greater attention was given to logistic implications in the present study, and thus its scope was considerably broadened. 2. Of the 12 geographic areas considered in the 1958 study, the State and Defense Departments agreed on five (Korea, Quemoy/Matsu/ Taiwan, Iran, Berlin and Laos/Cambodia/Vietnam) as suitable for more extensive study. Draft terms of reference for the study were then drawn up by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and approved by the Secretaries of State and Defense. Later, the terms of reference were agreed to by the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and the Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology. The terms of reference, including the assumptions and scope of the study, are appended as Enclosure “A”. B. PROCEDURES OF STUDY 1. An interdepartmental study group, was established with representation from State, Defense (JCS, ISA and DR&E) and CIA. Although the principal from each participating agency drew upon the full resources of his agency, and although meetings were attended by experts on various functional topics and geographic areas, this report represents the views of the interdepartmental study group and does not constitute the official position of any of the participating agencies. 2. The following procedures were used in developing the scenar­ ios, or scripts, for each of the five geographic areas considered in the study: the study group met as a whole to develop general outlines from which the State Department drafted a script on the political situation giving rise to the limited military operations. This was then examined by the group as a whole and when approved in draft, formed the basis for the script on military actions prepared by the Joint Staff. Following
