200 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII (B). The amount of military equipment continues to arrive in impressive amounts. The large number of military tanks at Pol-i-Charki tank base appears to be well in excess of the number of Afghan troops able to operate them. (C). The number of Soviet military advisers seems to be always increasing and may now number about 3,000. (D). Perhaps just as important is the fact that the role of these military advisers seems to have been enhanced over the last some weeks. This may be connected with the 6-week-long visit of a contingent of 13 Soviet generals in country. The growing role of the Soviets is noticeable in two ways. One is the elevation of three Soviet generals to positions of, in effect, directing the counter-insurgency operations in the three most troubled Provinces: Paktia, Ghazni and Konar. The other is growing evidence of more sophisticated counter-insurgency tactics in at least the Ghazni area, pointing to a Soviet hand. 5. I think the expanded Soviet role in the country raises some fundamental political and policy questions for us. One is whether the Soviets are not now in such an influential position that they have a controlling influence over the regime and the country’s future. While I do not suggest that the country has totally lost its independence, I wonder whether the Soviet presence and influence here are not now such that Afghanistan should be classified as a Soviet satellite state akin to most of those in Eastern Europe and Mongolia. Certainly, Hafizullah Amin, or any other party successor, is very beholden to the Soviets to stay in power. The leverage and influence the Soviets can now exert is tremendous, and given the unpopularity of the Khalqis, no Khalqi regime could last a week here were the Soviets to withdraw their support. Hafizullah Amin and senior party officials must know this.2 6. I also see no likelihood that the Soviets intend to diminish their military presence or their special position in this country. Were Hafizullah Amin, or a successor, to desire to expel the Soviets, I doubt they could now do it. The Soviets would likely respond by putting forward 2 An October 7 CIA intelligence report, [text not declassified] listed numerous reasons for Amin’s unpopularity among Afghans. [text not declassified] asserted there was widespread belief that Amin killed the more popular Taraki; that he was “openly prejudiced in favor of Pashtuns;” that he was an “avowed Communist infidel;” and that Amin “has given considerable authority to the Soviets in return for their support, and is selling out Afghanistan to the Soviets.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, USSR in Afghanistan (October 79))
