600  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
be sent to Washington and to Secretary Herter (see our telegram 100 
of August 24).4
He then showed me the Manifesto of the Consejo of the University 
(see our telegram 93 of August 22)5 which was published in the Prensa 
Grafica and gave the President a time limit in which to answer. He 
laughed and gave me a thermofax copy of his telegram of reply (see 
Embdes [56], of August [30] ______)6 in which he said that the disorders 
were the work of the philocommunists in the student body and the 
CGTS whose activities, in flagrant violation of the Constitution, had 
been carried on as a result of the Rector’s tolerance and with his full 
knowledge. He therefore said that the Rector would have to carry the 
full responsibility in the public conscience for the current disturbances 
and any that were likely to occur in the future. The security forces were 
fully prepared to protect the peace and order.
He added that the Rector had not once raised his voice in the inter-
est of moderation, but had instigated and encouraged disorders, and 
if he thought he was giving any time limit within which to act, he was 
mistaken. Lemus was giving the Rector the same time limit within 
which to bring about order or he (Lemus) would act.
The President then referred to his previous requests for a modest 
amount of tear gas. He stated that he had no desire to meet mob vio-
lence with armed force, but noted that government supplies of gas were 
old and probably of little use due to deterioration, and also were in very 
limited supply. He asked what response I had received from his pre-
vious requests. I told him that thus far we had been unable to receive 
active assurances of immediate help. The President said that he needed 
the gas, and needed it right now and not tomorrow or next week. He 
asked me to request an emergency supply on an urgent basis, and said 
that if it could not be provided as a gift or sale, that perhaps it could be 
provided on a loan basis. I assured him that I would relay this urgent 
request on a priority basis.
- - - - - 
We then passed on to the question of the coast guard vessels and I 
reported that the request was under consideration in Washington. The 
outlook seemed good. He said he was pleased.
- - - - - 
4 Telegram 100 was repeated to the Secretary of State at San José. The referenced 
Salvadoran telegram instructed the Salvadoran Foreign Minister to inform the Foreign 
Ministers meeting at San José about the pro-Communist and pro-Castro agitation in El 
Salvador. (716.00/8–2460)
5 Not printed; 716.00/8–2260.
6 The lines after “Embdes” and “August” were left blank in the source text. Lemus’ 
reply is attached to the despatch under reference as enclosure 9. (716.00/8-3060)
