Arms Control and Disarmament  1287
longitude. Radiochemical laboratories would be located at Tokyo, Mel­
bourne, Montreal, Buenos Aires, Rome and Capetown. These laborato­
ries would be equipped with the latest devices for the detection of fresh 
nuclear debris.
e. Overall Detection Capability. It is estimated that this system of 
about 30 geophysical stations plus an air sampling network could 
detect and identify with 90–100 per cent certainty nuclear tests of 20 KT 
or larger conducted as shallow sub-­surface, surface or air bursts up to 
50,000 feet in remote areas of the world. Underground shots of 20 KT or 
larger in remote parts of the world would be detected with a certainty 
of 90–100 per cent but not identified as nuclear explosions. Identifica­
tion of such underground disturbances may be possible through the 
use of inspection teams investigating about 100 disturbances per year 
in these remote regions of the world.
The U.S. underwater test (WIGWAM), conducted at a depth of about 
2000 feet, produced a unique spectrum of seismic waves at distances of 
3000 miles. Ultra-­long period seismometers would probably extend this 
range at least by a factor of two. The existence of these waves suggests 
that any similar occurrence in remote parts of the world would attract 
immediate notice on the network of seismic stations described above. 
It is therefore believed that an underwater explosion of 20 KT or larger 
anywhere in the world would be reliably detected and probably identi­
fied as an explosion rather than an earthquake, because of the marked 
difference between such signatures and normal earthquake signatures.
D.L. Northrup
Technical Director, AFOAT–1
Office for Atomic Energy, DCS/O
List of Figures
1. AFOAT–1 Acoustic Net
2. AFOAT–1 Seismic Net
3. AFOAT–1 Electromagnetic Net
4. AFOAT–1 Flight Tracks
5. Air Sampling
6. Seismic Amplitude vs Distance
7. Seismic Detection Capability
8. Earthquake Frequency vs Yield
9. Seismicity of Parts of Europe and Asia
10. Proposed Seismic Stations
11. Proposed Acoustic Stations
12. Proposed Geophysical Stations (Southern Hemisphere)
13. Proposed Daily Surveillance Flight Tracks
