December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
563
would continue to occupy a substantial portion of the Sinai. Egypt has
now proposed to send the following letter to President Carter: “In re-
sponse to your request, I can confirm that within one month after the
self-governing authority is inaugurated, which may take place in Gaza
first as a step towards full implementation of the Camp David Frame-
work, Egypt will send a resident Ambassador to Israel and will receive
a resident Israeli Ambassador in Egypt.” Egypt regards the decision to
exchange ambassadors as the prerogative of the President of Egypt, not
an appropriate subject for inclusion in a peace Treaty. They regard the
exchange of ambassadors as an element in the normalization of rela-
tions between Egypt and Israel which will in part depend—in a polit-
ical though not in a legal sense—on the progress in the negotiations es-
tablishing peace between Israel and its other neighbors.
161.
Letter From Israeli Charge´ d’Affaires Bar-On to
President Carter1
Washington, December 25, 1978
My dear Mr. President:
I have been asked by Prime Minister Begin to transmit to you the
following message:
“Dear Mr. President,
I thank you wholeheartedly for your moving holiday message.2
We shall, indeed, continue praying for peace and spare no effort to
achieve it. You know best, Mr. President, how great were the sacrifices
we made and the risks we undertook for the sake of this blessed goal. I
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 9, Israel: Prime Minister Menachem
Begin, 7–12/78. No classification marking. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the letter, in-
dicating that he saw the document.
2 On December 22, Carter sent a brief holiday greeting to Begin in which he ob-
served that “the spirit of the season moves me to try to recapture the feelings that we
shared at Camp David. I am confident that the negotiations between Israel and Egypt will
continue. When they do, the United States will play its role as it did at Camp David with
patience and perseverance.” (Tosec 150037/322133 to Tel Aviv, December 22; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with
Foreign Leaders File, Box 9, Israel: Prime Minister Menachem Begin, 7–12/78) The same
day, Carter sent a similar message to Sadat. (Tosec 150038/322132 to Cairo, December 22;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspond-
ence with Foreign Leaders, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat, 1–12/79)
