You will of course understand that should this Government be obliged thus
to afford protection to its nationals abroad its action would, as in the past,
be limited to this object alone. When this object has been obtained and the
danger is removed, the forces of the United States would of course be
withdrawn. This has been the traditional policy of the United States.
DEFINITION OF THE MONROE DOCTRINE
It is not the desire of this Government that the Monroe Doctrine should be
discussed at the Conference. The views of the Department as set forth for
the instruction of the delegates to the Fifth Conference and repeated here
for your guidance, arenas follows:
In the view of this Government, that Doctrine has no place in the
discussions of the Conference as it is essentially a national policy of the
United States. It is not a part of international law nor is it a “regional
understanding”,—to refer to the inept phrase used in the Covenant of the
League of Nations. While conditions have changed, and the attitude of the
non-American Powers does not at this time give rise to apprehension with
respect to aggression on their part as against at least the stronger Latin
American Republics, still the Monroe Doctrine, however infrequent or
limited may be the necessity of its application, should be maintained in its
integrity and no action should be countenanced by this Government which
would in the slightest degree impair its efficacy.
Note may be taken of the content of this Doctrine. Properly understood, it is
opposed (a) to any non-American action encroaching upon the political
independence of American States under any guise, and (b) any acquisition
by any non-American Power of any territorial control over any American
soil by any process whatever. It may be observed that the United States is
uninfluenced even by the willingness or desire of any American State to
yield any transfer of its territory or to submit to any form of political control
or influence of a non-American State. In maintaining its position, the
United States has been governed primarily by its own interests, involving
its conception of what was essential to its security and its distinctive
position in this hemisphere. Its unselfish and friendly regard for its
American neighbors has had a potent influence and should never fail of
