1262  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
simply pointing out inconsistency with what he now seemed be saying 
with regard Chinese prisoners in US. Accepting his contention that they 
covered by agreement these two elements again arise. Did they desire 
return and were they able do so. In absence of his concurrence pro­
cedure we first suggested to determine their desires, we had adopted 
most incontrovertibly unprejudiced method we could find. That was 
agency of American Red Cross. That agency interviewed each prisoner 
to determine his desire. When that determined, prisoners who had 
expressed desire return his country enabled immediately and promptly 
do so.
14. Wang replied on question return civilians, I had spoken of 
two elements: whether persons desired return and whether able do 
so. Problem we now handling concerned transaction between two 
­countries and should therefore follow usual international practice. 
Greater part Americans in China including those imprisoned for 
offenses had been handled by his govt in accordance with measures 
taken his govt. As far as Chinese imprisoned my country concerned, 
they had ­repeatedly pointed out fact imprisoned persons not in posi­
tion indicate free will. That why he raised question with me as to 
whether my authorities could release them out of prison and when 
once released determine whether desired return my country. If US not 
in position do so, then easy understand why his govt could not act 
according to what I had demanded here.
15. I replied, had not asked him to release Americans in prison to 
remain in China and then decide whether or not they desire go. As had 
pointed out in past that had not even been his own practice in many 
these cases. Except where persons had served full term sentences, and 
therefore there no choice but release them, they appeared to have fol­
lowed practice deportation. As had told him that is entirely accept­
able to me and I did not believe it contrary to terms agreement. In fact 
I anticipated that he would probably carry out his obligations under 
agreement in that manner. However, this entirely matter for decision 
by his authorities. I had never attempted dictate manner in which they 
should carry out their obligations. Only asked international obligation 
assumed by his authorities be carried out.
16. Wang replied what I had spoken about exactly what his coun­
try doing now. As to what methods and ways employed, whether 
they be deported or whether be given early release, entirely matter 
decison by justice authorities his country. As had repeatedly stated 
here, if prisoners concerned showed good behavior, it would certainly 
help justice authorities take action to reach such decison.
17. I replied yet he asked justice authorities my country uncondi­
tionally release all Chinese prisoners my country, then let them decide 
if they desire return.
