200 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 80. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 3, 1979 SUBJECT NSC Agenda, December 4, 1979 Subject to your approval, I would propose to introduce the following agenda at the meeting: 1. Collective economic sanctions; 2. Additional political measures; 3. Escalating military/economic pressure; 4. Longer term political strategy; 5. Public posture; 6. Middle Eastern security. This is a rather full agenda, and yet all the items need to be covered—and only decisions by you are likely to generate the needed action. I will try below to summarize as concisely as possible the basic options so that the discussion can move expeditiously. (In the morning, I will try to guide the SCC through a preliminary run on the above topics.) However, before doing so, let me register one central and strategic issue with you: Is time working to our advantage or disadvantage? I am concerned over two trends: (a) the transformation of the conflict from Iran vs. the international community into America vs. Islam; (b) the erosion of support for us among friends and non-friends. Recent attacks on our embassies, as well as various Middle East press comments (encouraged probably by very subtle Soviet insinuations), point in the direction of transforming the conflict into a wider assault on “corrupt and impotent” America. This is a dangerous trend. It could make our friends in the region run for cover and our allies increasingly to cut their own deals. Perhaps I am wrong, but the issue is worth examining because whatever answer you give should drive our strategy. (Right now it is being driven by a diplomatic timetable.) My concern since a year ago 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H– Files), Box 57, NSC 023 Iran 12/4/79. Top Secret; Sensitive. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner of the memorandum. Saunders prepared a discussion strategy for Vance to use at the NSC meeting based on Brzezinski’s suggestions. (December 3; Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Briefing Book: The Shah December 1979, Vol. IV)
