Chapter 4, February–April 1990 589 Bartholomew asked Marshal Akhromeyev to clarify what Minister Shevardnadze and Secretary Baker had signed in Moscow on February 10, noting that it was difficult to reconcile with what had just been said. He then quoted from the Moscow agreed statement to the effect that on ALCMs substantial progress had been made, and that all issues had been resolved except range. Asserting that diplomats could be as blunt as soldiers, Barrtholomew questioned whether he and Akhromeyev had been in the same city, much less discussing the same subjects. Akhromeyev asked to respond, stating that Secretary Baker had, at the Moscow ministerial, privately noted to Akhromeyev that they had done all they could to reach agreement, and had made substantial [progress] on all issues except range. Akhromeyev reported that he had answered by saying that the two issues were related. He then noted that Baker had stated that it would be shame to say to the press that if everything were not agreed on, then nothing could be said to be agreed on. Bartholomew stated that the reported remarks had preceded the joint statement in time and had been private, but the Moscow agreed elements constituted the record agreed to by the two ministers. These had been revamped to include the right for the Soviet side to deploy 40% more bombers. On the issue of 115 former heavy bombers, Bartholomew continued, the Soviet side had raised the Wyoming discussion, but the Wyoming discussion did not count—Moscow counted. We invited the Soviet side’s discussion on the sentence in the MECG, and that sentence stated that 115 former heavy bombers would be left outside the agreement. Burt noted that the U.S. side wanted to be as accurate and fair as possible on the issue of former heavy bombers. Burt reported that he had discussed the issue with Ambassador Nazarkin and with the military members of the Soviet delegation, and that there were differences on numbers between the two sides—115 v. 100—­and differences on the question of a “continuing right” to deploy former heavy bombers: would it apply to existing types only, or also to future types? There was a further question, Burt continued, on the relationship of former heavy bombers to platforms used for communications, tanking, command and control, reconnaissance, etc. But the Soviet side had never given any indication that all conventional or former heavy bombers should be included in the 1600 limit. Nazarkin stated that he would like to clarify what had been discussed with Ambassador Burt in Geneva on the question of former
