World Hunger and Food Policy
825
“The legislative record is replete with references to extremely
broad public support for a war on hunger. It also includes tributes to
the roles of many non-governmental organizations in waging the
struggle here and abroad. Indeed, the committee hearings on the Reso-
lution calling for the establishment of a national commission heard tes-
timony from a number of Congressmen giving credit to outside organi-
zations for generating Congressional action in the first place.
“This part of the Commission’s assignment is a crisp call for social
innovation and creative institution-building in working out a more ex-
plicit division of labor between the public and private sectors according
to their respective responsibilities and capabilities.
“If the Commission can reach conclusions on how to unite our
policy objectives, integrate our operating programs and mobilize our
own public and private resources, it will be responding positively to
the most pressing needs of the Administration and Congress under the
question of what the U.S. can do to help turn back the rising tide of
world hunger. For if we are seen to be putting our own house in order,
we are in an incomparably better position to ask other governments to
take steps which may be painful to them. In the final analysis, it is the
range of actions that are taken on an international scale that will mount
the major assault on hunger.” (Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential
Commission on World Hunger, Linowitz’s Subject Files, Box 41,
Meetings)
252.
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to the Chairman of the
Presidential Commission on World Hunger (Linowitz)1
Washington, November 6, 1978
Dear Mr. Chairman:
Thank you for your October 24 letter2 which requested the desig-
nation of a contact person between the Presidential Commission on
World Hunger and the Department of State. The letter also asked for a
summary of issues which I believe most appropriate for the Commis-
sion’s attention.
1 Source: Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Sub-
ject File, 1978–1980, Box 10, Agency Liaison Contact Responses. No classification
marking.
2 Not found.
