First Responses
149
nians for a long time to come. We certainly have to be concerned about
Iran post-hostage and post-Khomeini, but we should be realistic about
what that means. I am sure that there are people in the middle class
in Iran and persons with Western educations that deplore what Kho-
meini has done and is doing, but those people will be outnumbered
by many times by the people whose religious zeal has resulted in a
strong anti-American feeling.
I believe that some time soon you should spend several hours with
the Iranian experts from State and CIA and talk about Iran post-hostage
crisis. We have been focused almost exclusively on the day-to-day
situation with the hostages and some of the decisions that you will
have to make soon as relates to the hostages will have implications for
us in terms of our long-term objectives in Iran.
Fourth, if possible and compatible with the best strategy for safely extract-
ing the hostages, the application of one of the military options resulting in
their release is much better than the application of the military options after
their release. The best scenario would be that we exercise one of the
military options and the hostages were then released. This would show
American will and ability to act and would respond to the pressure
for us to “punish” the Iranians for their actions. If we have to punish
the Iranians after the release of the hostages (which I would strongly
favor), world opinion might very well turn against us. At that point,
I would say to hell with world opinion.
You know, Mr. President, it is difficult to be the richest kid on the
block and also the most popular. As a people and as a nation, we desire
to be loved and respected. As a result, we are neither. Looking at the
great challenges which face our people in the future, it seems that at
this point in time in our history it is much more important that our
people have their self-respect and some respect from the international
community. If we are not respected around world and at home, there
is no chance for us to be loved.
