542  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
EC–11.	
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State (Dillon) 
to the President1
Washington, September 28, 1959.
SUBJECT
Confirmation of Determination and Determination under Section 451(a) of the 
Mutual Security Act of 1954 as amended, permitting the use of funds in order to 
­furnish military assistance to Ecuador.
Ecuador will be host to the 11th Inter-American Conference at 
Quito in early 1960 which will be attended by the Foreign Ministers of 
the 21 American States. Ecuador has also proposed that a meeting of 
chiefs of state of the American Republics be held in Guayaquil during 
the closing days of the Conference. The Ecuadoran Government, recall-
ing the serious disorders that occurred during the Inter-American 
Conference in Bogotá in 1948 and expressing its grave concern over 
known Communist plans to disrupt the forthcoming Conference 
in Quito and the proposed Presidential meeting in Guayaquil, has 
requested the United States grant assistance in developing appropriate 
security measures.2
Current indications are that the Communists will seek to disrupt the 
11th Inter-American Conference by employing their propaganda appa-
ratus, both in Ecuador and internationally, to portray the Conference 
as an instrumentality of United States imperialism in Latin America 
and, by using their penetration in Ecuadoran student and labor groups, 
as well as agitators planted in peaceful crowds, to foment demonstra-
tions against the Conference and United States Delegates with a view to 
discrediting and breaking up the Conference. The Ecuadoran security 
forces are not adequate in terms of training, organization, and equip-
ment to cope with this Communist threat. Nor is the Government of 
Ecuador able to finance the necessary equipment and training which 
will not be provided except through United States aid.
Because it is in the United States interest that the Inter-American 
Conference be held in a calm, democratic atmosphere unmarred by 
Communist agitation or by an extraordinary demonstration of force, 
and because of your possible participation in the proposed meeting of 
Presidents in Guayaquil, it is believed imperative that the necessary 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Central Files. Secret.
2 A memorandum of conversation of March 13, 1959, records Ecuadoran 
Ambassador Chiriboga’s request to Assistant Secretary Rubottom for technical assistance 
to the national police of Ecuador and for personnel to train Ecuadorans in intelligence 
work. (362/3–1359)
