governments may regulate and prohibit peddlers, and that as a matter of policy foreigners are not given concessions to peddle. For these reasons the Austrian negotiators desire to have the reference to peddlers omitted from paragraph (g) of the Article. They desire to avoid according by treaty favored nation treatment with respect to peddling, or to enter into any treaty obligation touching peddlers. It is not believed that the explanations offered justify the omission of the provisions which the Austrian experts desire to have omitted. Paragraph (c) does not give commercial travelers the right to sell their samples to persons other than merchants, industrials or tradesmen. If commercial travelers representing American concerns are permitted to sell their samples to merchants, industrials or tradesmen, the privilege granted by paragraph (c) would be fulfilled. The Austrian law referred to in your despatch does not, therefore, justify the omission of paragraph (c). You stated that it is not the policy of the provincial governments to permit foreigners to peddle, and that, therefore, Austrians cannot grant favored nation privileges with respect to peddling. If the nationals of other countries are not granted permission to peddle, a favored nation clause of a treaty between the United States and Austria could not be made the basis of a demand for that privilege on behalf of American citizens. There is not perceived in the explanation conveyed in your despatch a reason for making the modification in paragraph (g) proposed by the Austrian negotiators. However, as it is not believed that the business of peddling is of much consequence to American citizens, the Department is not indisposed to meet the viewpoint of the Austrian negotiators with respect to peddlers in the event that they adhere to that viewpoint after you have discussed the Department’s views as set forth above with them. It is suggested that if the view of the Austrians be adopted, with respect to peddlers, paragraph (g) be omitted and paragraph (c) be made to read as follows: “A commercial traveler may sell his samples without obtaining a special license as an importer. Salesmen who vend directly to the consumer shall not be considered commercial travelers.”
