506 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 is really difficult to see how his relationships with the Ministers of his future cabinet will work. He prefers to surround himself with very young people whom, according to V, he treats very harshly even in the case of very competent people like Nobari of the Markazi Bank or the Bank’s Vice Governor. Delegation of power is very poor as is the transmission of information and briefings in both directions. Bani-Sadr tends to entrust one question to Peter, another one to Paul, but Paul is not supposed to know what Peter is doing. This secrecy assumes incredible proportions. V found out very little and by accident that while dossiers were being prepared against the Shah by the Ministry of Justice or by the Markazi Bank, Bani-Sadr had organized a team which was secretly drawing up dossiers on the very same subject. Like Bazargan, Bani-Sadr allows himself to be overwhelmed by a mob of supplicants, a kind of populism which is a luxury which the country really cannot afford under present circumstances. Public opinion which did after all support Bani-Sadr rather massively did so without enthusiasm or fervor—you have to take into account abstentions and fall back votes which would have been given to a candidate like Radjavi. There are many members of the intelligentsia who consider that he won’t last long, whence this attitude of “reserve” on the part of people who should be committing themselves. This is one more reason why the country still hasn’t gotten off the ground. 9. Like ancient tragedy, the Imam is always playing the role of the deux ex machina, which means that so far a solution has always been found to the various impasses in which the country has found itself. The Imam is still the only one who can rally quasi general consent, since the opposition is still too weak to make its voice heard. But this will last only as long as the Imam lives and is mentally sound—the day he dies if power has not been sufficiently consolidated, which is now the case as we have seen, chaos will surely ensue. Chaos indeed, although parenthetically in the Iranian brand of chaos a certain normalcy comes about by the force of circumstances, a trait which can be observed at a higher stage of development in Italy. 10. Conclusion. As can be seen this situation is more unsettled than ever. The approaching elections as well as the climate surrounding the attempt to solve the hostage crisis both are increasing this tendency even more. So far the President has been able to maneuver adequately but the question is not whether he will continue to maneuver well but rather whether the parallel powers will let him.
