Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II any project for which it has approved such assistance due to a determination that the project either meets basic human needs or because the President has decided that approval is in the national security interest of the United States. —Institute for International Human Rights. Congressmen Dante Fascell and Donald Fraser have introduced legislation establishing an independent federal agency—the Institute for International Human Rights.7 The institute would primarily provide financial and other assistance to private individuals or groups working to promote human rights, including individuals or groups in foreign countries. Specifically, the institute would provide financial support for a number of non-governmental organizations and individuals for such purposes as conducting conferences, publishing books and articles, carrying out research and studies, and supporting legal defense for victims of political persecution. The bill is expected to receive wide support. The Administration has expressed the view that such an institute, if carefully structured, could make a valuable contribution to efforts on behalf of human rights but that certain questions must be seriously addressed in considering creation of such an entity. —Humphrey Bill. The bill to establish the International Development Cooperation Administration (or Humphrey Bill) as introduced by Senator Sparkman on January 30, 1978, includes with no significant changes the human rights provisions of Section 116 of the existing Foreign Assistance Act (i.e., no aid to gross and consistent violators unless it would benefit the needy).8 The human rights provisions in the bill are intended to apply to all forms of foreign assistance covered by the bill. While the Administration will be making a variety of proposals and suggestions related to the purposes of the Humphrey Bill, it does not presently appear that these will pertain to the bill’s human rights provisions. —The Tsongas Amendment to the Ex-Im Reauthorization Bill. On April 13, the International Trade Subcommittee of the House Banking Committee adopted the Tsongas Amendment to the Ex-Im Bank Reauthorization Bill. The operative language of the amendment reads: “In no event shall the bank guarantee, insure, or extend credit or participate in any extension of credit to the Republic of South Africa unless and until the President determines that significant progress toward majority rule has been made in the Republic of South Africa and transmits to the Congress a statement describing and explaining the determination.”
