460
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
any project for which it has approved such assistance due to a determi-
nation that the project either meets basic human needs or because the
President has decided that approval is in the national security interest
of the United States.
—Institute for International Human Rights. Congressmen Dante Fas-
cell and Donald Fraser have introduced legislation establishing an in-
dependent federal agency—the Institute for International Human
Rights.7 The institute would primarily provide financial and other
assistance to private individuals or groups working to promote human
rights, including individuals or groups in foreign countries. Specifi-
cally, the institute would provide financial support for a number of
non-governmental organizations and individuals for such purposes as
conducting conferences, publishing books and articles, carrying out re-
search and studies, and supporting legal defense for victims of political
persecution. The bill is expected to receive wide support. The Adminis-
tration has expressed the view that such an institute, if carefully struc-
tured, could make a valuable contribution to efforts on behalf of human
rights but that certain questions must be seriously addressed in consid-
ering creation of such an entity.
—Humphrey Bill. The bill to establish the International Develop-
ment Cooperation Administration (or Humphrey Bill) as introduced by
Senator Sparkman on January 30, 1978, includes with no significant
changes the human rights provisions of Section 116 of the existing For-
eign Assistance Act (i.e., no aid to gross and consistent violators unless
it would benefit the needy).8 The human rights provisions in the bill are
intended to apply to all forms of foreign assistance covered by the bill.
While the Administration will be making a variety of proposals and
suggestions related to the purposes of the Humphrey Bill, it does not
presently appear that these will pertain to the bill’s human rights
provisions.
—The Tsongas Amendment to the Ex-Im Reauthorization Bill. On April
13, the International Trade Subcommittee of the House Banking Com-
mittee adopted the Tsongas Amendment to the Ex-Im Bank Reauthori-
zation Bill. The operative language of the amendment reads:
“In no event shall the bank guarantee, insure, or extend credit or
participate in any extension of credit to the Republic of South Africa
unless and until the President determines that significant progress
toward majority rule has been made in the Republic of South Africa
and transmits to the Congress a statement describing and explaining
the determination.”
7 See footnote 2, Document 126.
8 See footnote 17, Document 245.
