200 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Option 3—Decide that restricting STOF SLBM testing should be pursued with the Soviets, but only as a confidence building measure (CBM) of voluntary constraints on STOF SLBM development and testing, separate from START, negotiated either; a) in the START forum, or b) in a separate forum. Those who support Option 3a hold that: • The enhancement of stability is worthwhile, but a ban on STOF SLBM testing is not a viable method of achieving it because of monitoring problems and circumvention possibilities. • Since SLBMs are strategic offensive systems, the negotiations should be conducted in coordination with the START negotiations. The best way to accomplish this is to use the START negotiating forum. • Over time, a CBM would provide an opportunity, without formal compliance concerns, to monitor the development of new ballistic missile technologies which could be used in STOF SLBM development. • The parameters used in designing the CBM regime would not have to be as precise as they would in a treaty, thus the possibility of revealing sensitive US warning and reaction times to the Soviets would be less. • Because of monitoring uncertainties and circumvention possibilities, a treaty ban on STOF SLBM testing would be little more than a CBM, so why not treat it as such. Those who support Option 3b hold the same basic views as with Option 3a, except they would hold that: • The quickest way to obtain evidence of a new initiative is to separate it from the details of the START negotiations and work it with a separate group of negotiators. • A separate negotiating forum would give added status to the initiative, giving it increased visibility in the political arena. Those who do not support Option 3 hold the same views that apply to Option 1 or Option 2 and also hold that: • There is no viable confidence building measure that approaches a STOF SLBM testing ban therefore a CBM would be merely words with no substance. • Practical implementation of a CBM would be as difficult to monitor as a ban, with even more room for development of a new STOF SLBM capability. • CBMs are not effective in restricting development of future systems, thus a CBM is not an appropriate substitute for a treaty ban. • The Ballistic Missile Launch Notification Agreement with the Soviets, in conjunction with current ballistic missile flight test monitoring, gives the US adequate indication of Soviet developments in STOF SLBMs without a new CBM. • As a practical matter, if the negotiated CBM is not legally binding on the sides, only the US would be constrained. [Omitted here is the body of the paper.]
