Negotiating Channels
447
the U.S. and Iran, including lifting the freeze on Iran’s assets and
resolving claims. The recommendation could stipulate a period within
which work should be completed.
—Khomeini would “pardon” and expel the hostages in connection
with Iran’s religious celebration.
—The U.S.-Iranian talks would not start until the hostages are
released.
While key Iranians would know the entire proposed scenario, we
would have to start not knowing that they could deliver in the end.
But each step has built into it a step that the Iranians would have to
take before that step is completed or the next step taken.
One other factor could figure into the above scenario. If it seemed
useful at some point, we could delay implementation of economic
sanctions.
Monitoring and Negotiating the Detailed Scenario
Implementing this scenario would require someone on the ground
in Tehran to reach an understanding on the scenario as an objective,
to keep it on the tracks, and to make necessary adjustments as it evolves.
The Chairperson of the Commission would have to be involved,
but someone else would also have to be involved. We would also need
rapid communication.
To begin with, I think we should send our French contacts back
to Tehran with the above scenario refined to reflect your views. If Bani
Sadr agrees to proceed, when the commission goes to Tehran we would
have to set up quick communication with the Frenchmen or, more
likely, station one of our own people—with Bani Sadr’s agreement—
in the Swiss Embassy in Tehran or in a place like Paris or Kuwait with
quick access to the Frenchmen.
Recommendation: That you approve our exploring the possibility of
reaching an understanding with the Iranian authorities on a scenario
along the lines of the above.6
6 A handwritten note on the first page reads: “Note: This approach approved in
principle by the President Jan 28.” As Saunders later recalled, once Carter approved, he
and Vance went to New York on January 28 to brief Waldheim. (Saunders, “Diplomacy
and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran, p. 122)
