370 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Public Perceptions of Your Presidential Leadership Your critics make many charges directed at your leadership, including the following: • You are allegedly weak, uncertain and indecisive. They point to the absence of vetoes and attempt to make your views appear to be uncertain, equivocal and subject to bending under pressure. There have been no public displays of anger. Your efforts to de-imperialize the Presidency have resulted in diminishing the awe of the office. • That you are preoccupied with foreign affairs; • That you live a cloistered and private life and that you don’t really enjoy the company of others in informal settings; • That you are a manager and not a leader; • That you become overwhelmed by minutiae; • That your staff tends to be limited, at least in terms of Washington experience, and that you are not getting sufficient advice from persons of stature and experience other than the original friends you brought from Georgia. I find very few people ever arguing that you’re not bright, honest, decent or hard-working; rather, they argue that you are ineffective. The great potential and exciting opportunity of this public perception is that, in most instances, it is inaccurate and can be quickly remedied by simply letting the public see more clearly what those of us who work with you see daily. This argues that you should undertake the much stronger public education role outlined above. It argues for some vetoes and/or strong rhetoric. It argues for strong discipline of disloyal persons to reverse the present complete lack of fear that anyone will pay a price—any prices—for unauthorized leaks or damaging statements. (As Strauss puts it, “There is no penalty for screwing up in this Administration.”) It argues for the political engagement of your cabinet officers in an effort to serve your broadest goals. It argues for other steps that demonstrate visibly the strength of your leadership. Finally, I think we should look for proper ways for you to perform that will enable people to “look up” to your office without returning to the Nixon imperial presidency. I believe the “indecisive” issue is due largely to leaks which purport to show uncertainty when, in fact, it is an essential part of the decision-making process to hear different views. If we can start plugging most of these leaks, I think we’ll be hearing much less of this criticism. I fear there is a good deal of validity to the argument that you spend too much time poring over staff memos in your office, and not enough time in public giving speeches and appearing with people. As someone said, when we elect a President, we don’t want a manager. We can hire them. We want a leader.
