September 18–December 16, 1978
211
59.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, September 19, 1978, 2:30–3 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
President Sadat
Substance of Discussion
1. The two presidents reviewed the purposes of the Vance mission
to Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Syria. President Carter summarized the
substance of the letters that the Secretary will take with him.2 He also
stressed the importance of discussing with the Saudis such issues as
Lebanon and Yemen. President Sadat both endorsed the mission and
agreed with the substantive points.
2. The President stressed the importance of restraint in public dis-
cussion of the Camp David accords. In this connection he strongly
praised the very positive as well as restrained posture taken by Presi-
dent Sadat, especially in President Sadat’s comments on some observa-
tions made in the last two days by Prime Minister Begin.
3. The two presidents discussed the forthcoming Egyptian-Israeli
negotiations. In this connection, President Sadat stated that he very
much hoped that the U.S. will take part in these talks through the pres-
ence of a representative of the President as well as the pertinent U.S.
Ambassadors. The President indicated that he expected that Roy Ath-
erton would be present, in addition to Ambassadors Eilts and Lewis.
Moreover, the two presidents agreed that talks should be held ei-
ther in Ismailia, or in Ismailia/Beersheba, or in El Arish if the arrange-
ments for an acceptable Egyptian enclave can be worked out. President
Sadat mentioned that Minister Weizman showed him a map for such
an enclave and the size of the enclave seemed acceptable.
President Carter stated that he would like Ambassador Lewis to
work with Minister Weizman and Ambassador Eilts to work with Min-
ister Gamasy regarding the details of the first phase of the withdrawals
as well as regarding all other matters connected with the subsequent
withdrawal and other arrangements. The two ambassadors are to use
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 14,
Middle East—Negotiations: (9/77–12/78). Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Of-
fice. Brzezinski summarized the conclusions of this conversation in a September 21 mem-
orandum to Vance. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East,
Subject File, Box 7, Camp David: 9/18–21/78)
2 For the text of Carter’s letters to Hussein and Assad, see Documents 61 and 62. The
text of Carter’s letter carried by Vance to the Saudis has not been found.
