January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1277
group—including Libya and Syria. Algeria has a decent president,9
who is honest and courageous, who will have an impact on his
country—though he is not yet totally in control. For a time, Algeria will
be part of this group. He hopes it will change.
He sees pressure on the PLO to encourage the radical elements and
extremist attitudes. He has tried to open the door to the PLO, and show
that they can come towards us; that they do not face only this pressure.
The PLO approached Jordan to talk with Jordan’s friends to see what
can be agreed on—for example, the future of Jordan and the Pales-
tinians together, as in the early 1970s, while preserving their separate
identities. He gets this from Arafat: the possibility is still there. And
Sadat broke relations with Jordan when he (His Majesty) proposed this
idea in 1972 (laughter)! So, something can be done there. Arafat said
that he wanted to remove U.S. fears and Israeli excuses against moving
to a just and durable peace. Arafat came to Jordan recently to see the
Mayor of Nablus, and again spoke of his difficulties and pressures. His
Majesty told Arafat of his coming here. The PLO is anxious to keep the
dialogue going with Jordan. It tends to be closer to Jordan. He (His Maj-
esty) promised to give what help he can in the interests of the Pales-
tinians. The PLO has sent an envoy to the UN in New York now, if he
(His Majesty) wants to convey anything.
Israel’s recognition of Palestinian rights, and Palestinians recogni-
tion of Israel’s right to exist have to come. But which should come first?
It should be simultaneous.
Jordan admires the Afghan people’s resistance. It is similar with
the Palestinians. If there is a lack of progress toward a solution, there
will be a movement towards violence. On the question of finding
someone to speak for the Palestinians, he was ready—if Israel would go
out of the territories and solve the Jerusalem question. If he can now get
support for doing so, he will go back and say that this is what Wash-
ington sees as an end result. If they do not know the end results, it will
be impossible to do anything, since it would serve no purpose. The
mayors were elected under occupation. They are deeply concerned
about the beginning of attempts to intimidate them into leaving. What
will happen? He does not know. The President sees this even without
Jordan’s daily contacts. The President is sincere; he has put in lots of
time on the problem. But Jordan lives with it every day. If this were
1967, maybe the experience would be different. He has tried every
door, without results.
The situation in Syria . . . Lebanon is a problem. It is unfortunate.
He does not even know the issues any more. Israel and Syria are there
9 Chad Bendjedid.
