3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
404
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
grounds why it was of a hundred times greater concern to the Soviet
Union than the Backfire to the United States.
Gromyko asked if the Secretary had something else to address
today. If so, he would ask him to tell Gromyko; if not, Gromyko would
propose to make a brief statement summing up the discussions. He
suggested a short recess.
The Secretary said he had nothing further at this moment.
(The discussion was recessed for a few minutes.)
After the recess Gromyko wanted to tell the Secretary very frankly
that the Soviet leadership had not at all been pleased by the fact that si-
multaneously with conducting negotiations with the Soviet Union the
U.S. side had set everything out in detail to the Chinese leadership.
This had made an exceptionally negative impression upon the Soviet
leadership. Had that been done simply to bring pressure on the Soviet
Union?
The Secretary said that we had provided general descriptions
rather
than
detailed
information
about
the
Soviet-American
negotiations.
Gromyko noted that the U.S. press had reported that China had
been given detailed information. In this connection he wanted to reg-
ister the vigorous objection of the Soviet Union against such a practice.
The Secretary said he had not seen anything about detailed
information.
Gromyko repeated that the Soviet side objected resolutely, and he
could say that quite officially.
Cyprus
Before presenting his concluding statement, Gromyko wanted to
address an entirely different subject “for the purpose of relaxation.” He
had a conversation with the President of Cyprus, and he understood
that the Secretary had also talked with him. He had told Gromyko that
his discussions with Turkey had apparently reached a dead end, and
that he would not object to the United States and the Soviet Union
taking matters into their own hands. Gromyko had replied that he did
not quite know how that could be done. He would ask the Secretary
what role the two of them could play in this respect. Should they act as
intermediaries? The Soviet Union had good relations with both sides
and would not be averse to rendering its assistance provided the
United States cooperated. He would like to learn the Secretary’s views
in this regard. He was fully prepared to consider the request of the
President of Cyprus, although he was not at all sure that this would
help matters.
The Secretary wanted to tell Gromyko what the President of
Cyprus had asked us to do. He had asked if we could arrange for him to
