National Security Policy 57 become increasingly inhibited from doing so because of the knowledge that the USSR could reply in kind. Thus, some of the nations now under US protection fear that the US will no longer be willing to threaten nuclear retaliation in order to deter Soviet pressure or Soviet action in matters of vital concern to them. They also fear that, even if the US did attempt to make such a threat clear to the Soviets, the latter would not necessarily believe it. One special and immediate stimulus for these fears is the belief, recently induced, that the US will not achieve an effective ICBM capability until a year and a half or more after the USSR has done so. This fear is not wholly offset by recognition of the deter­ rent effect of IRBMs on African and European bases. 10. This is not to say that US nuclear capabilities have ceased to have deterrent effect on the actions of the Sino-Soviet bloc. We think, and we believe that most of the free world also thinks, that Soviet respect for US nuclear power will continue and that the Soviet leaders will not pursue courses of action which in their judgment seriously risk general war. Indeed they appear to believe that much safer methods will yield sufficiently profitable results. Yet even com­ paratively “peaceful” methods of Communist aggrandizement lead from time to time to sharp international crises, in which the relation­ ships of military power are likely to be all-­important. As the USSR through the development of advanced weapons systems enlarges its capability to inflict major nuclear devastation upon the US, the Soviet leaders will judge that the US will risk such devastation only for the gravest reasons and that the scope of the actions which the USSR can take without serious risk of general war is somewhat expanded. 11. In this situation, many leaders of the free world are increas­ ingly concerned with the problem of deterring minor thrusts and local aggressions, and believe that it is necessary to develop a capacity to deal with them by means short of a full counteroffensive. This involves dif­ ficult decisions. No one can be certain about how to mix and to balance nuclear and non-­nuclear forces in order to gain the widest deterrent effect, or how best to prevent limited engagements and local quarrels from expanding into major war. In any case, implementing any new decisions regarding force structure, weapons, and deployment would be extremely costly, and no one could be reasonably satisfied that these decisions, once made and implemented, would not need comprehen­ sive and costly revision at an early date. In considering how to deal with this new situation, there is much confusion and hesitation throughout the free world—­as indeed there must be in the USSR. B. Soviet Progress and Policy 12. Even before their publicized successes in the scientific field, the Soviet leaders were pursuing a policy marked by greater flexibility
