Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission Mr. Aaron said the airlines are supposed to report departures to INS, but the Attorney General said they often fail to do so. The SCC agreed that the Attorney General should crack down on the airlines to insure that they fulfill their reporting obligations. With that data, we can determine what further steps might be effective. Revoke all Iranian visas and Revalidate only for those who have no residence or business connection with Iran. Mr. Newsom noted that we still may be receiving visas issued by the militants using the visa plates at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. Instructions had already been prepared to implement this order if the decision is taken, with special instructions to give preference to minority groups. Mr. Sick noted that this would impact heavily on many Iranians who are friends of the United States and who have legitimate business and personal interests here and in Iran. Mr. Aaron said that was a cost that would have to be accepted so long as the hostages are being held. The SCC agreed that this should be placed on the list of steps we would consider taking in the event we invoke sanctions.7 Explore legislation to prosecute individuals supporting the militants. The Attorney General said that there are very few actions Iranians in this country might take which would justify prosecution. If we want to get rid of the students, there are better ways to do it than restricting their freedom of speech. The SCC agreed that this should be rejected. (C) Prohibit Shipment of Food and Medicine. Treasury noted that the present level of shipments of food is very small. Henry Owen said he would look into the question and report back to the SCC.8 It was the general feeling of the SCC that food should be included in the sanctions, since we had imposed the grain embargo on the USSR. Medicine should continue to be excluded. (C) Prohibit all Transfers of Funds from Iran to Iranians in this Country. It was noted that a cutoff of funds for the Iranian students here would force them either to leave the country or to go on welfare. Mr. Aaron noted that this would be an option if and when we should decide to break diplomatic relations. We had decided not to take that step for the time being. 7 Carter approved the item with a checkmark and wrote in the right margin: “for NSC.” 8 In an April 4 memorandum, Tim Deal of the National Security Council Staff wrote to Aaron and Owen that a U.S. food embargo would work only in the long run if other grain exporting countries imposed a similar food embargo. Deal concluded that “the only effective way to use food to put pressure on Iran now would be a multilateral embargo combined with interdiction at sea to prevent grain ships from entering Iranian ports. The political costs of this option would obviously be extremely high.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 31, Iran
