December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 669 President Carter: We can’t guarantee that Egypt will be the source of your oil. Prime Minister Begin: We need a serious commitment. We get 1.6 million tons now from the Alma field. President Carter: You agreed at Camp David that you would give up those wells. Prime Minister Begin: But if there is no guarantee, that is a change. We gave that commitment on the assumption that we would get the oil. President Carter: I don’t remember that being raised at Camp David. (A pause during which each delegation talks within its own members.) President Carter: (To Ambassador Blum jokingly). Are you trying to help? Prime Minister Begin: I will talk to my colleagues. Vice President Mondale: As I understood the Prime Minister, he said he wanted to keep the first three lines of our proposal and then would want to make an addition. Prime Minister Begin: This is an idea. I am not sure. President Carter: I want to close our discussion by saying that we hope these are constructive ideas. After we get your reply, we will discuss with the Egyptians these questions, plus the question of ambassadors and of oil. We can’t force them to sell you oil. If that proves to be impossible, we will guarantee you that level of oil. We prefer that it come from the Sinai wells. We are faced with a deteriorating situation in the Middle East. We are not looking for a policeman of the Middle East, Israel or anyone else. Some Arabs fear Israel more than they fear anyone else. You have said that you don’t want any more weapons for the defense of Israel. In the context of an Egyptian-Israeli treaty, the treaty between our two closest friends, we could discuss increased security arrangements. I hope we can expedite the negotiations. We will contact Sadat. One other question is what we should say in public. We have no preference on what to say, or when to make a comment, but we should agree on a statement. Prime Minister Begin: We can say that the United States delegation under the President’s chairmanship made a proposal to the Israeli delegation under the Prime Minister’s chairmanship. The Israeli delegation undertook to study the proposals and to refer them to the government for discussions. We should say that they will study them. President Carter: Let’s have Jody Powell and Mr. Pattir work on a draft statement. Prime Minister Begin: We will give nothing to the press. Secretary Vance: If we mention proposals which have not been discussed with the Egyptians, they might object. Let’s use the word formulation.
