144
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Our large and growing surplus income from net investments
abroad and the sale of other services leads to a current account deficit of
about $12 billion for 1977, up from $8½ billion in 1976. This $12 billion
is the amount which must be financed by net lending to the United
States from foreigners.
The estimated U.S. current account deficit of $12 billion amounts to
about 30% of the total estimated OPEC current surplus of $40 billion in
1977. The key analytical point is that so long as OPEC has substantial
trade surpluses, the rest of the world must have substantial trade def-
icits. As the world’s largest economy and oil importing country, the
U.S. should share in these deficits, and indeed must do so if we are to
avoid putting unbearable pressure on other oil importing countries.
We have no problem financing our deficit, as many other countries
do. So far the financing has been readily supplied to the United States
by Arab members of OPEC, as well as by residents of a large number of
other countries. Both sources of funds are secure, as long as no radical
changes in United States economic policy are contemplated. The fact is
that they do not have many other places to go, since both Switzerland
and Germany discriminate against incoming funds in various ways.
Since we easily obtain more than 30% of OPEC’s funds placed in
Western financial markets, our objective is to permit the relending of
those excess funds to other deficit countries in OECD and the less de-
veloped world.
Serious domestic political and economic problems arise from
two sources: (1) continuing growing dependence on OPEC oil, and
(2) rising import competition for a substantial number of domestic
firms, particularly in manufacturing. Vigorous pursuit of the Presi-
dent’s Energy Program is an appropriate response to the first of these
problems. New proposals for expanded Trade Adjustment Assistance
will be a major part of the Administration response to the second
problem. In addition, we continue to put pressure on our Japanese and
German friends to do more for the cause of global economic expansion
to help provide alternative markets for the imports which have sought
out our buoyant markets.
A serious danger lies in the fact that if the United States deficit is
identified as a “problem”, Congress and the public will demand a “so-
lution”. The long run solution, as noted above, lies in our domestic en-
ergy policy as well as in the rising imports from OPEC countries. We
should avoid at all costs the kind of balance-of-payments programs
which we had in the 1960s, designed variously to stimulate exports, re-
strict imports, and discourage capital flows. They do not represent a so-
lution under the current circumstances (except for discouragement to
the importation of oil), and on the contrary would weaken the eco-
nomic condition of many other countries that are already too weak.
