244 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX recent years. She was certain that relations will continue to follow an ascending line, and stated that we have a duty as nations to compensate for what has been missed in bilateral relations thus far. The Acting Secretary assured her that the US would do what it could to improve relations. 4. The Acting Secretary broached East-West relations, noting that the US is actively working on detente with the USSR, which has importance for the atmosphere of US-Eastern European, and specifically US- Bulgarian, relations. He expressed hope for progress in relations with Moscow. Zhivkova agreed that a working relationship between the superpowers is the only reasonable alternative and will define the world’s future. She said she rejected the notion advanced by “some specialists” that by curbing arms and military technology we curb the development of science. She emphasized that human progress can be a reality only when all resources are focussed on the development of humanity in general and the “individual” in particular. 5. Ambassador Popov interjected a question about MFN.3 The Acting Secretary noted that he had no news to report on MFN front, but pointed out that overall developments, and improving relations, can facilitate progress in that field also. He added that the MFN issue is rooted in the administration’s relations with Congress. Zhivkova noted her belief that intensified cultural relations will lead to improved relations in other areas as well. 6. The Acting Secretary agreed that an exchange of peoples and ideas can influence commercial ties. In that regard, he noted that he may attend the main Belgrade Conference on CSCE follow-up. He explained that the US attaches great importance to implementation of the Final Act, and gives equal weight to each of the Baskets. The US has no intention of provoking a confrontation and does not wish to put any one “in the dock” in Belgrade, but seeks a careful review and assessment of progress under the Final Act. He hoped that the GOB would regard the approach as constructive. Zhivkova stated that the GOB would make a statement at Belgrade on the importance of examining all three Baskets. She noted that the Third Basket now seemed the most “popular”, but asserted that “Basket Three will remain empty if Basket One and Two are not filled.” 3 While Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia all enjoyed MFN status, Bulgaria’s prospects were dim. PD–21, which expanded the differentiation to include internal liberalization (thus allowing for the extension of MFN status to Hungary) placed Bulgaria, together with Czechoslovakia and the German Democratic Republic, among the countries where no favorable trade benefits would be extended until concrete steps toward a more independent foreign or domestic policy were undertaken. See Document 16.
