862 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —Colonel General Vujatovic, the Yugoslav chairman, recalled that the initiative for forming the Committee came from Ambassador Eagleburger speaking for the USG.3 He observed that in the exchanges of draft documents neither government had seen a need to change the essence (of what was to become the final draft MOU). Vujatovic commented on the roles of the Federal Secretariats for National Defense and Foreign Affairs (FSND & FSFA) in preparing the Yugoslav MOUrelated documents, but he stated (rather pointedly it seemed, considering the presence of the FSFA representative) that once the document was agreed upon, the work would be done by the FSND, and that the composition for the future of the Yugoslav side would depend on the nature of the work of the Committee and the matters to be discussed. —In further introductory remarks, General Vujatovic said that there was a great need for the Yugoslavs to update weapons and equipment. They have strived, he said, to develop resources to build for themselves as much as they can, starting with small arms and some light weapons. For the most sophisticated equipment they must rely on foreign suppliers, with an effort to obtain, “frankly, as much dispersion as possible,” even with the technical problems that diversity of origin produces. He recalled oscillation in the military supply relationship with the US and said that he had heard criticism of excessive Yugoslav reliance on the Soviets. However, those complaining had not offered alternatives. He said that his government understood that the US was ready to support and supply Yugoslavia, “as Yugoslavia is today.” One facet of that US support was readiness to discuss “trade in arms and equipment.” He hoped that complaints of too much from the Soviet Union could be overcome. He recalled that there were US fears that technology or weapons would be transferred to someone else, but that had happened only once, to Ethiopia—a transfer that was not harmful to the US, in the Yugoslav view. He alluded, without elaborating, to American “suspicions” that “would be overcome in the talks.” General Vujatovic said that to a large extent US and Yugoslav interests were common. “The US wishes,” he said, “for Yugoslavia to 3 Eagleburger proposed the creation of a Joint Military Working Group at the same time as the Joint Economic Working Group. (See Document 248 and footnotes 2–5 thereto.) In a June 14, 1978, memorandum, Hunter informed Brzezinski that “State, Defense, and Embassy Belgrade propose broaching with the Yugoslavs the idea of setting up a joint military working group—as we had suggested before the Tito visit.” Hunter, with Les Denend’s concurrence, recommended that State be allowed to approach the Yugoslavs with the idea, noting that “the group would not be primarily concerned with arms sales—though that might come up.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 4–12/78) The Department of State was notified of White House approval of the recommendation on June 16. (Ibid.)
