This proposal differs from that in Article IV, Topic 1, in that it depends upon the initiative of each country and not upon cooperation between different countries. In view of the fact that the material referred to in this item is either non-existent or very limited for most of the countries concerned it would seem advisable that such a recommendation should be supported by the American delegates and favorably acted upon by the Conference. Better maps of Latin American nations along the lines indicated should tend to promote a more intelligent understanding of those countries among themselves and in the United States. The Department of Agriculture of the United States is especially interested in the matter of soil mapping and a proposed soil map of the world which the Fifth Commission of the International Society of Soil Science has it in mind to undertake. Topic 4. Revision of the Convention on Intellectual Property signed at Buenos Aires (1910). According to the Department’s information, this Convention has been ratified by the United States, Brazil, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay. It was signed but not ratified by Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, Salvador and Venezuela. According to the Department’s information Peru ratified the Convention but did not communicate the act of ratification to the Argentine Government as contemplated by Article XVI of the Convention. Article II should be amended so as to include in the protected works such forms of property as motion picture films, musical records, and player piano rolls. Numerous instances have come to the Department’s attention of the pirating of property of this character of American producers. The unauthorized use of motion picture films is particularly prevalent. While it has been possible in some instances to procure protection of the American owners through the application of local police regulations, these measures have not in all instances proved successful. It is highly desirable that the protection procured by this Convention be extended to cover this class of property.
