Human Rights —Apprise the Secretary of items needing his approval/guidance and the range of activities underway. —Set the framework, substantively and bureaucratically, for follow-up action by the Department’s functional and regional bureaus (in most cases getting them to provide solid specific programs for review by the Human Rights Coordinating Group (HRCG) which you chair). —Provide a still-shot for all bureaus concerned with human rights of what’s being done and how their human rights efforts relate to the whole. The memo tells the Secretary that numerous efforts are in train, many of which require your action or review. The following is a checklist of those action items requiring your attention, which D/HA and S/P will help staff out:2 —Request regional assistant secretaries to follow-up on previous strategy papers with specific courses of action for all individual countries (page 5).3 —Meeting of the HRCG to decide follow-up on several nations for which the bureaus have already prepared illustrative Country Action Programs (page 5).4 —Establishment of HRCG core group (page 6).5 —Your chairmanship of interagency working group (page 6).6 —Help in expediting confirmation of Patt Derian as Human Rights Coordinator (page 6).7 —Request AID, together with other concerned bureaus, to devise more means for donor-nation cooperation on human rights (page 9). —Request status report and action plan to improve women’s rights (page 9). —Provision for assuring implementation of present human rights legislation and working effectively with the Congress and other agencies on use of international financial institutions (page 10).8 —Request IO to provide “Agenda for US Action on Human Rights at the United Nations” for HRCG review (page 15). 2 Christopher placed an asterisk next to this paragraph and noted at the bottom of the page: “*need to have comprehensive statement for testimony or speech, building on Tab 2.” 3 Christopher placed a check mark to the left of this point. 4 Christopher wrote in the margin to the left of this point: “Early April.” 5 Christopher bracketed this point and wrote: “OK informal” 6 Christopher placed a question mark next to this point. 7 Christopher placed a check mark next to this and the two subsequent points. 8 Christopher bracketed this point and wrote: “Ann Swift at work.”
