Chapter 4, February–April 1990 479 Foreign Minister Shevardnadze suggested that the Ministers hear the reports of the working groups to see what had been settled and what was still left to resolve. He asked Marshal Akhromeyev to report on the Nuclear and Space Talks. START: ALCMs Marshal Akhromeyev said that, on the basis of instructions issued by Gorbachev and the Secretary to review the ALCM issue, the working group had begun its work immediately after the Kremlin meetings.2 He had first met with Under Secretary Bartholomew and subsequently with Ambassador Burt. The essence of the Soviet side’s proposals were as follows. The Soviets were willing to proceed on the basis of the new U.S. proposal, but in such a case they had three wishes to express: 1) The sides could agree that the number of warheads on heavy bombers should be counted as 10 for the U.S. and 8 for the Soviet Union. The maximum possible number of ALCMs for which bombers could be equipped would be 20 for the U.S. and 12, rather than 16, for the Soviet Union. The reason for this change was that the Soviets did not have any heavy bombers which would accommodate more than 12 ALCMs; it would be technically impossible to carry more since all Soviet ALCMs were located inside the fuselage on rotating devices. 2) Because of the disparity in the number of ALCMs to be installed (20 vs. 12), the Soviets suggested that the situation be equalized on the following basis: within the number of strategic delivery vehicles (1600), both sides should determine the number of heavy bombers equipped for ALCMs (at present there was no limit of this kind); this number should be different for each side. For example, if the number of ALCMs on each heavy bomber for the U.S. exceeded the Soviet figure by 40%, then the number of heavy bombers should be 40% higher on the Soviet side. By way of illustration, if the U.S. had 100 heavy bombers equipped with long-­range ALCMs, the Soviet Union would be allowed 140 such bombers. 3) For missiles of the SRAM type, the range would be limited to 600 km or less; each missile of this type with a range greater than 600 km would be considered to be a long-­range ALCM and counted toward the 6000 warhead ceiling. If all these proposals were acceptable to the U.S. then we could agree on ALCM limits, Akhromeyev concluded. This was what he had told Ambassador Burt a short time ago. The Secretary asked whether U.S. proposals on distinguishability and other aspects of the ALCM issue were all part of the Soviet package. Akhromeyev replied that this was exactly correct. Some of the language might be in need of further elaboration, but in principle the Soviets agreed to these proposals. 2 See Document 73.
