280
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Due to the press of vacation plans, Dobrynin suggested that Am-
bassador Earle see Vasev instead and give him a paper, which Do-
brynin would then make certain is dealt with in Moscow. Dobrynin
stressed that he needed to take something back with him.
The Acting Secretary repeated that this was a serious political
matter, that Ambassador Earle had important things to say about this
question, and that Dobrynin should definitely try to see Earle before re-
turning to Moscow.
Dobrynin said that he understood the seriousness of this issue, but
suggested that it reflected domestic American election-year politics.
But he asked whether we really had something to say. If so, this would
be good. But he did not want to discuss just anything on this issue in a
general fashion. People in Moscow are critical of the way in which this
issue has been the subject of rumor, hearsay, and press reports.
The Acting Secretary said that this issue would be every bit as se-
rious to the USG if we were now in the first year of this Administration
instead of the fourth year. He suggested the possibility that the issue
might be addressed by distinguished scientists from each country.
Dobrynin repeated again that up to now there has been no proof,
and there have been indirect discussions in the scientific community
which have caused a chain reaction. There has not been a single addi-
tional fact but only hearsay.
The Acting Secretary concluded this portion of the conversation by
urging Dobrynin to see Ambassador Earle on the BW question.
131.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
Washington, July 12, 1980, 0037Z
182944.
Geneva
for
Ambassador
Flowerree.
Subject:
Earle-
Dobrynin Meeting on BW, July 11.
1. Secret—Entire text.
2. Summary: ACDA Director Earle called in Dobrynin to present
him with a paper expressing our dissatisfaction with Soviet responses
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 110,
SCM 137, Mini-SCC Sverdlovsk, 7/29/80. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Sent for information to
the Mission in Geneva, USNATO, London, Bonn, Paris, and the White House. Printed
from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
