724  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
Embassy been prevented making public announcement. US Govern­
ment has no way, even if it would, of preventing Indian Embassy stating 
anything publicly it desired state. He had talked about Chinese being 
intercepted by immigration authorities. What Chinese? When? Where? 
I positive there been and is no such case. He had certainly brought up 
no such case.
118. I said there were such cases of Chinese attempting evade pre­
ventive departure order, but that long in past. I had told him over and 
over again that preventive departure order—which only measure ever 
taken by my government to prevent departure any Chinese—long ago 
rescinded.
119. I said he continuing speak of Chinese presenting passports 
to INS for visas. I did not know how many times I had to tell him that 
­Chinese need obtain no visas from INS or anyone else for departure 
from US. He aware as well as I that Chinese continually departing freely 
from US. I had no way knowing whether or not they intend to or do 
proceed his country—as far as we know, they free do so. Press reports, 
including press reports his country, indicate some them going his coun­
try. With exception small group against whom preventive departure 
orders issued, that always been case. It now the case without exception.
120. I said if it intent his government to denounce our agreed 
announcement September 10, it should be clear to him that there were 
no facts with regard US performance under that announcement that 
could remotely justify such action. I satisfied that this would be recog­
nized by all honest and disinterested persons everywhere. That was all.
121. Wang said I trying hard defend US failure carry out agreed 
announcement relating return Chinese from US. No amount argument 
could achieve that purpose. What I said orally not necessarily rep­
resents what actually being carried out. Fact is their attention continu­
ally been called to cases Chinese, not having committed any offenses in 
US, yet unable return homeland. This is situation we now facing.
122. Wang said I had enquired as to what Chinese been intercepted 
by INS and which Chinese presented passports to INS. He might 
merely refer to case of Liao, who named in list he gave me. This Liao 
one of Chinese intercepted half way on way home mainland.
123. I asked was this in 1952? If so, probably correct.
124. Wang said I correct on interception 1952, but what took place in 
1952 also influenced things in 1955. Therefore, might remind me to inves­
tigate all these cases first before I asked questions as to which intercepted 
or which presented passports to INS.
125. Wang said if US authorities have in fact refrained from 
obstructing departure these Chinese, he did not see why their attention 
repeatedly been called to Chinese who desire return but unable do so.
