928
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
• the development of a solid factual base that identifies the causes
of the problem,4
• identify existing authorities and programs, public and private,
and national and international, and
• assess the programs to determine which are working, which are
not, and why.
These objectives are generally consistent with those in the Con-
gressional resolutions. Such data gathering and analysis has not been
done on a comprehensive basis. Until it is, there will be no clear view of
the problem nor will we know the magnitude of present world-wide ef-
forts and how the problem can be dealt with more effectively. Before
launching an aggressive effort, we must know where we are and how
we got here. Much of the analysis has already been done through the
World Hunger Working Group, and their report, a summary of which
is being sent to you separately today, can serve as a basis for their
work.5 This Commission provides a unique opportunity to assemble
free of institutional constraints, a comprehensive and in-depth review
in a thorough and integrated way.
Once the factual base is developed, we hope this could be accom-
plished during the first 6 to 9 months, the Commission would then pre-
pare an options paper on actions to be taken. Any initiatives requiring
legislation should be prepared in time for possible inclusion in the Ad-
ministration’s 1979 legislative package. At that point, we would see the
Commission turning to the promotion of improved public under-
standing and awareness of the issue and the role of the United States in
helping alleviate the problem.
The key decision then, as we see it, is the extent to which we rely
on the Commission to help develop hunger policies and design pro-
grams or whether the Commission is used primarily to promote public
awareness and generate support. The major argument in favor of using
the Commission as a principal means of fashioning policies and pro-
grams is that the assembly and assessment task requires concentrated
effort by a staff unencumbered by other duties. The central drawback
to using the Commission in this capacity is that given its independent
status vis-a-vis Presidential control, its conclusions and recommenda-
tions will not necessarily correspond with those of the Administration.
In fact, to the extent we succeed in obtaining a dynamic, well-balanced
membership, one can almost guarantee there will be strong differences
of opinion and dissension within the Commission. But this can be
4 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to each of these bulleted points.
5 The summary of the report of the World Hunger Working Group, established
under Bourne’s chairmanship in September 1977 (see footnote 4, Document 293), is
printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
Document 245.
