Chemical and Biological Weapons
225
consider assigning a senior political officer and several advisers solely
to chemical weapons-related work.
5. Soviet Del head (Amb. V.L. Israelyan) also presented a wrap-up
statement.
A. Overall assessment. Israelyan asserted that there had not been a
single major issue where the Soviet Del did not present new views and
proposals which took US views into account. He said that while the
major issues remained there had been an active and useful exchange on
verification.
B. Drafting group. Israelyan noted the promising beginning of ef-
forts to draft language for a joint initiative. He said that in this connec-
tion the exchange of position summaries during the last round had
been most useful.2 Enough time and attention should be devoted to
drafting in the next round. The drafting group should also give atten-
tion to clarifying positions and narrowing areas of disagreement.
C. Committee on Disarmament (CD) both Delegations received
verbal pat on the back from Israelyan for presenting the detailed joint
progress report to the CD in July. Israelyan expressed concern, how-
ever, about US-Soviet difference on how to deal with CW related work
of the CD. In his view, first priority should be given to the success of the
bilateral negotiations. For this reason an effort should be made to coor-
dinate positions concerning possible CD work on the outline of a CW
convention.
6. As at the previous plenary meeting, verification issues were dis-
cussed extemporaneously.
A. Fisher responded to Soviet question from previous meeting
about US suggestions for using verification procedures taken from the
IAEA safeguards system, the Bilateral Treaty on Peaceful Nuclear Ex-
plosions (PNET), and the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) negotiations.
He said that each treaty requires specially tailored verification provi-
sions. However, all three cases mentioned by Soviets had a common el-
ement; on-site inspections had been agreed on in advance and pro-
vided for in the convention. While the balance between challenge
inspection and systematic inspection for a CW convention had to be tai-
lored to its special situation, the other three cases could provide a
guide.
B. Israelyan agreed that every treaty required verification provi-
sions suited to the particular nature of the agreement; there can be no
general approach. He said that Soviet side is seeking the most effective
system for verification of chemical weapons prohibition. In the Soviet
2 The U.S. and Soviet position summaries are in Telegram 12183 from the Mission in
Geneva, July 18; ibid.
