X
Preface
tation on the 1976 transition period. Deputy Secretary of State Warren
Christopher’s files, also available at NARA, yield important documen-
tation on human rights, North–South issues, foreign assistance policy,
and the Department’s goals and objectives statements. The Department
of State’s Central Foreign Policy File, consisting of D, P, and N reels, re-
placed the pre-1973 paper subject-numeric file. The P (Paper) reels con-
sist of microfilmed versions of memoranda of conversation, letters,
briefing papers, airgrams, and memoranda to principals.
The Mondale Papers housed at the Minnesota Historical Society
include Walter F. Mondale’s Senatorial and Vice Presidential Papers.
The most useful collection in the Senatorial Papers is the Press Rela-
tions/Media Activities Records. Within the Vice Presidential Papers,
essential documentation is located within the Foreign Policy Material
From the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library files.
Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, Volume I
The purpose of this volume is to document the intellectual founda-
tions of the foreign policy of the Carter administration. This volume
explores the collective mindset of Carter administration officials on for-
eign policy issues rather than documenting significant foreign policy
decisions or diplomatic exchanges. The compilation takes as its canvas
the entire record of the Carter administration. Therefore, the docu-
ments selected are necessarily a sampling chosen to illustrate policy
perspectives and themes rather than a thorough record of a bilateral re-
lationship or of a major issue. Similar to Foreign Relations, 1969–1976,
Volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1969–1972 and Foreign Rela-
tions, 1969–1976, Volume XXXVIII, Part I, Foundations of Foreign
Policy, 1973–1976, this volume draws upon the published record of
speeches, press releases, press conferences and briefings, interviews,
and testimony before Congressional committees to document policy
positions and the assumptions of administration officials on the foreign
policy process. The documentation in this volume chronicles the per-
spectives of not only Carter but also Vice President Walter Mondale,
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezin-
ski, Secretaries of State Cyrus Vance and Edmund Muskie, Secretary of
Defense Harold Brown, Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher,
and others.
Acknowledgments
The
editor
wishes
to
acknowledge
the
assistance
of
Ceri
McCarron, Brittany Parris, and Keith Shuler of the Jimmy Carter Presi-
dential Library, David Langbart and Don McIlwain of the National Ar-
chives and Records Administration, and Deborah Miller of the Minne-
sota Historical Society. The editor would also like to express gratitude
