Afghanistan
853
request that the Soviet Union use its influence to compel the Afghan
Government to remove a blockade of the U.S. Embassy in Kabul, and
cease subjecting Embassy personnel entering and exiting the premises
to searches, in an apparent effort to ensure that Kruglov would not
leave surreptitiously. Dobrynin protested that this request should be
made directly to the Afghan Government. Newsom repeated his earlier
desire that this issue need not damage U.S.-Soviet relations, which in
his assessment were “already strained.” Newsom reported that once
a Russian-speaking U.S. officer arrived in Kabul it would be possible
to arrange a meeting between Kruglov and Soviet officials. (Telegram
248878 to Kabul, September 18; Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West, Brement, Subject
File, Box 46, Afghanistan: 7–12/80)
An item in the President’s Daily Brief, September 19, noted that [text
not declassified] either Soviet paratroopers or a Soviet-trained Afghan
counterterrorist group might attempt to shoot or capture Kruglov if
he was observed outside the U.S. Embassy. The CIA Station in Kabul
thought any military response would be limited to preventing Krug-
lov’s removal from Embassy grounds; Chargé Mills believed an assault
on the Embassy was unlikely because Kruglov was not “important
enough to warrant such a blatant violation of diplomatic immunity.”
(Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
gence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordi-
nator for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—September 1980,
PDBs)
In preparation for the meeting between Kruglov and Soviet offi-
cials, the Department of State instructed the Embassy in Kabul that it
should “not lead Kruglov in any direction” and should remind him
that any decision he made was his alone. The Department further
instructed that a meeting should not take place if it was possible that
Kruglov would attempt to bargain for his safety in exchange for his
pledge not to reveal Soviet military secrets. Such a bargain was
“extremely dangerous not only to him but also to the future of the
Mission” because such a bargain would only “increase Soviet determi-
nation to get him back at all costs.” Should a meeting occur, Kruglov
should be made aware of his options: he could remain in the Embassy,
leave with the Soviet officials, or delay until he made his decision.
Kruglov should be permitted to leave with the Soviets, the Department
instructed, only if Embassy officials were convinced he was doing so
on his own accord and was willing to provide a handwritten statement
attesting to this fact. (Telegram 250588 to Kabul, September 20; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0346)
On September 21, Kruglov met with Robert F. Ober, a senior Politi-
cal Counselor in the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, who had travelled to
