National Security Policy 49 missile-­launching range of the North American Continent; and should improve its defense against submarine-­launched missiles and its anti-­ submarine capability. PASSIVE DEFENSE OF RETALIATORY CAPABILITY 9. Passive measures, such as dispersal, reduction of reaction time, and protection of essential facilities, should be taken to minimize the vulnerability of U.S. retaliatory striking forces. IMPROVEMENT OF ALERT STATUS OF AIRCRAFT AND MISSILES OF AIR DEFENSE FORCES 10. The United States should continue to improve and maintain the alert status of its primary air defense forces, and cooperate in improvement of Canadian primary air defense forces, so as to provide an immediate reaction to warning of an enemy attack. Passive defense measures, such as dispersal and protection of essential facilities, should be taken to minimize the vulnerability of air defense forces. EMERGENCY EMPLOYMENT OF MILITARY RESOURCES IN CIVIL DEFENSE 11. In the event of attack on the United States, the active defense of the United States and the U.S. nuclear counter-­offensive will be the par­ amount and most immediate tasks of certain U.S. forces. Additionally, certain other forces will be immediately involved in support of these defense and counter-­offensive forces. Forces not required in the exe­ cution of essential military missions should be prepared to assist civil authorities, for a temporary period, in maintaining law and order and in other essential civilian tasks. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 12. A vigorous research and development program should be main­ tained in order to develop new weapons and needed improvements in the continental defense system and to counter improving Soviet tech­ nological capabilities for attack against the United States. Of particular importance are the following (without indication of priority): a. Early warning capability against enemy aircraft and non-­ballistic missiles, by radar and other techniques. b. Detection and defense against very highand very low-­level attacks. c. Reduction of vulnerability to electronic countermeasures. d. Submarine detection, identification, and defense against subma­ rines and submarine-­launched missiles. e. Early warning capability against ICBM’s, by radar and other techniques. f. Active defenses against ICBM’s. g. Defense against satellites and space vehicles.
