Costa Rica 421 CR–11. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart)1 Washington, September 30, 1958. SUBJECT Re-Allocation of Profits of United Fruit Company Subsidiaries for Taxation Purposes. PARTICIPANTS: Department of the Treasury: Mr. Dan Throop Smith, Deputy to the Secretary; Mr. Nathan N. Gordon, Chief International Tax Staff; Mr. David A. Lindsay, Head, Legal Advisory Staff; Department of State: Assistant Secretary Roy R. Rubottom, Jr.; Mr. C. Allan Stewart. Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. By previous appointment, Messrs. Smith, Gordon and Lindsay met in Mr. Rubottom’s office to discuss the allocation of profits for purposes of taxation to the Costa Rican subsidiary of the United Fruit Company. This problem arose as the result of a request by President Mario Echandi of Costa Rica for a greater participation by his country in the profits of the Cfa. Bananera de Costa Rica, a subsidiary of United Fruit Company. Mr. Smith opened the discussion by stating that the Department of the Treasury had decided that it would be possible to undertake a study of the allocation of profits, now made under the 50–50 formula. He said that this could be done in one of two ways, namely, by (1) a change in the regulations, in which event the Internal Revenue Service would study figures presented by the United Fruit Company and determine whether the net profits could be allocated more favorably to Costa Rica, or (2) a change in the regulations for a different allocation conditioned on an Executive Agreement. He said the change in regulations would be a more simple procedure. Mr. Rubottom replied that a change in the regulations would be the preferable procedure, particularly in view of the time element. Mr. Smith said that this then would be the procedure followed, and assured Mr. Rubottom that the change in regulations would be undertaken without delay. It might take between two weeks and a month to put through the amendment. He cautioned that following the
