454  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Future Leadership Problems
28. The same factors which led to the events of 1957 are likely to 
generate recurrent problems in Soviet politics over the next five years. 
Certain of these problems will arise from the Party leadership’s con­
tinuing efforts, while utilizing the professional skills of specialized 
groups, to suppress the accompanying tendency for these groups to 
expand their political influence. Others will be created if Khrushchev, 
as seems likely, attempts to place beyond challenge his own position as 
undisputed head of the Party, and thereby of the USSR.
29. We believe that, despite the decisive victories scored by 
Khrushchev and the Party during 1957, these closely-­related problems 
will provide continuing elements of instability in the Soviet leadership. 
As for Khrushchev’s own position, even some of his present supporters 
in the Presidium and Central Committee may in time come to doubt 
the wisdom of his bold foreign and domestic policies. Others may 
become alarmed as they see in his maneuvers a tendency to one-­man 
rule and perhaps a threat to themselves. The problem of succession to 
Khrushchev might add a further unsettling element; the usual intrigues 
within the Party are likely to be intensified by the maneuverings of his 
colleagues and subordinates to get into position for the struggle which 
they will anticipate following his death or incapacitation.
30. Furthermore, we do not regard the defeat of the economic 
bureaucrats and the military as necessarily final. So long as the Party 
refrains from a resort to widespread terror and continues to place a high 
premium upon professional competence, these groups will try again 
to influence policy in directions which accord with their professional 
interests and assessments. The economic bureaucrats are indispensable 
to the industrialized Soviet state, and this will tend to restore at least 
some of their political influence. The military impatience with Party 
controls which Zhukov represented is too widespread to be eradicated 
by his ouster and will probably find other spokesmen. A weakening of 
unity within the Party apparatus would improve the opportunities for 
such a development, since these groups probably will remain import­
ant enough to be regarded as desirable allies in intra-Party intrigues.
31. These elements of instability will subject the leadership to 
strain during the next several years as difficult policy problems arise. 
We think it probable, however, that only the most severe problems 
could threaten the present leadership arrangements. Khrushchev will 
almost certainly attempt further to consolidate his position, perhaps 
following up the Presidium purge with the elimination of opponents 
in the Central Committee as well. In view of his present strength and 
demonstrated political skill, only an issue grave enough to produce a 
general coalition against him appears likely to upset him or to force 
him into more than temporary compromises.
