Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX With regard to China, we are committed to moving forward on the basis of the Shanghai Communique. Secretary Vance will be in Peking shortly before you arrive, and will be exploring ways in which normalization of relations can proceed. I consider our approach to China to be central to our global policy. Both the United States and the People’s Republic share parallel interests: namely, to prevent third countries from establishing positions of dominance where we both have legitimate concerns. At the same time, our desire to improve relations with China is not intended to increase problems and difficulties for any other nation. Rather, I believe that normalization will enhance the prospects for an enduring peace and security in Asia and elsewhere, and will encourage Chinese participation in international arenas in a useful and constructive way. I am particularly concerned with stability in Northeast Asia, and with the peaceful resolution of problems which divide South and North Korea. We have decided to carry out a phased withdrawal of American ground combat forces from the Republic of Korea in a manner which will not endanger stability on the peninsula. We remain firmly committed to the security of the Republic of Korea and we are taking steps to ensure that no one mistakenly believes there has been any reduction in our resolution to uphold that commitment. At the same time, we seek ways to lessen tension and establish a framework for a durable peace on the Korean Peninsula. To that end, we are prepared to meet with all of the parties most immediately concerned to explore how best to resolve outstanding issues. Such a meeting would, of course, have to include the governments of both North and South Korea. I look forward to hearing from you, and know that I would benefit from your observations on these and other critical issues. I would also be deeply pleased if you could visit me in the United States early in 1978. This would give me a chance to meet and talk with you about world problems, and about ways we can continue to promote the close relations which exist between our two countries. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter
