1554 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement itself with the possible seismic effects of nuclear tests under different conditions or the possibilities of concealment by decoupling of other techniques.” “The PSI urges that sample detection networks be established without delay as representative systems to disclose operational and design problems and provide a firmer basis for the assessment of detec­ tion capabilities.” The Commission hopes that an experimental and testing program to prove or disprove the feasibility of the improvements suggested by the Panel could be conducted and evaluated in less than a year. Additional reports from further studies by the PSI will further develop the views of experts on the capabilities of the system as improved. However, there are several areas of uncertainty recognized by the PSI in its first report which only additional tests or firings can clear up. An example of great significance is the whole question of the effect of shots in differing geological formations and geographical areas. All tests to date have been in volcanic tuff in the Nevada test site and hence tests in other areas are clearly indicated. The Atomic Energy Commission has consistently held, as indeed have all Departments of the Government, that the keystone of any accept­ able international arrangement must be dependable assurances through effective detection, identification and inspection that all parties to the agreement will live up to its terms. The Commission believes that the technology of detection and identification of underground nuclear explo­ sions is not sufficiently proven at this time for us to enter into arrange­ ments with the Soviets now for the discontinuance of underground test explosions; and the same is true of nuclear test explosions in outer space. The Commission believes that: first, the U.S. position in the current negotiations in Geneva should be directed so as to prevent a breakdown in the negotiations on minor or purely technical issues and, second, avoidance of our being placed in a position of acceptance of an agree­ ment based upon a seriously inadequate detection system. To this end we urge your consideration of the following: First, we would propose that we seek agreement with the nuclear powers to discontinue atmospheric nuclear weapons tests forthwith and to establish promptly an adequate detection and identification system to insure compliance. To consider that such a system could be relatively simple, and acceptably dependable, and its adoption would involve fewer serious issues than are now under debate in Geneva. The discontinuance of atmospheric nuclear weapons tests would eliminate the fallout issue and thereby deprive the Soviets of one of their most effective propaganda themes. Second, we would propose that we would agree to collaborate in improving the capabilities of the Geneva control system looking toward the inclusion at a later date of underground and outer space tests in the Treaty. In the meantime, nuclear weapons testing in outer space and underground would be permitted without restrictions. Additionally, a
