760
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
It is the US view that a solution based on such principles would
facilitate the restoration of more cooperative relations between the
United States and the Soviet Union.
Sincerely,
Edmund S. Muskie
285.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, June 6, 1980, 1532Z
COUNTRY
Afghanistan/USSR
SUBJECT
Developing Situation Within Afghanistan [less than 1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
This is a field appraisal. It represents the views of this Agency’s senior officer on
the scene. It is an interpretation based on previously reported information. It is
disseminated in the belief that it may be useful to intelligence analysts in their
own assessment of the situation.
1. The security situation throughout Afghanistan continues to dete-
riorate. Main roads leading south and east out of Kabul city are being
interdicted by the Islamic nationalist insurgents (INI). The Afghan
military continues to experience desertions, and recruiting drives have
been unsuccessful. Kabul city has become the scene of repeated assassi-
nations and other terrorist acts. The population of the city appears to
be almost totally disaffected from the regime, and there is the potential
for serious civil disturbances. Kandahar, Jalalabad, and Herat are con-
tested cities with the government on the defensive. In these latter cities,
party workers continue to be attacked and killed. The Afghan military
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 2, Afghanistan: 5/80–1/81. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Printed
from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room. In a June 7 covering
memorandum to Brzezinski, attached but not printed, Thornton noted that the situation
report from the Station Chief in Kabul was “worth reading.” He continued: “It is particu-
larly interesting, incidentally, that the COS’s views have changed quite a bit over the
past several months. Previously, he was much more bearish about the near term prospects
for the insurgents standing off the Soviets. He is now more in the mainstream of analysis.”
