711.632/22
[Document 787]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, December 1, 1926.
No. 527
SIR: The following instructions in regard to the provisions of the Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights, which you are engaged in
negotiating with Austria, are in continuation of the Department’s instruction
No. 459 of May 12, 1926.
Article VII. With reference to the request of Austria that special advantages
with respect to customs duties which Austria might grant to Hungary or
Czechoslovakia pursuant to Article 222 of the Treaty of St. Germain should
be exempted from the most favored nation assurances given in Article VII
in the same way that the special treatment accorded by the United States to
Cuba is exempted, the Department notes that the duration of arrangements
contemplated by Article 222 was limited by the terms of the Article to five
years from the coming into force of the Treaty of St. Germain. The
Department understands that this period expired on July 16, 1925, five
years after the date of the deposit of the first proces-verbal of ratification on
July 16, 1920. It would appear therefore that such special advantages with
respect to customs duties as Austria may have extended or may extend to
Hungary or Czechoslovakia after July 16, 1925, are not within the scope of
Article 222. You are instructed to bring the Department’s understanding of
this situation to the attention of the Austrian Foreign Office for the purpose
of ascertaining whether Austria desires to abandon the request for such
exemptions. The Department does not desire that you suggest that an
exception in respect of advantages in regard to customs duties granted by
Austria to Czechoslovakia or Hungary beyond the period contemplated by
Article 222 of the Treaty of St. Germain would be acceptable to the United
States. If, however, it should develop in the course of the negotiations that
Austria desires such an exception to be made, you are authorized to agree to
