1.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, November 4, 1979

SUBJECT

Takeover of Embassy Tehran

1. According to reports from Embassy Tehran, an estimated 3,000

Iranian student demonstrators occupied the Embassy this morning.

Although they did not brandish any weapons and professed to be

engaged in a peaceful sit-in demonstration, the students penetrated

the security barricades within the Embassy and have apparently taken

the Embassy duty personnel hostage, tying their hands behind their

backs and moving them from the inner area of the Embassy. Chargé

2.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary

David Newsom, Under Secretary, Political Affairs

Harold Saunders, Asst. Sec., Bureau of Near East & So. Asian Affrs

OSD

Secretary Harold Brown

JCS

Admiral Thomas B. Hayward, Chief of Naval Operations

Stansfield Turner

White House

Zbigniew Brzezinski

NSC

Gary Sick

William Odom

First Responses

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The SCC met to review the present situation in Iran and next steps.

3.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 5, 1979

SUBJECT

Seizure of U.S. Embassy and Personnel

PARTICIPANTS

Ayatollah Seyed Mohammad Beheshti

Henry Precht, Country Director for Iran

First Responses

Mr. Precht telephoned Ayatollah Beheshti to request his assistance

in securing the release of Embassy personnel and evacuation of the

Embassy compound by Iranian students. The request was couched in

humanitarian terms and included statements of understanding for the

views of the Iranian people and the aims of their revolution.

The Ayatollah replied that the Iranian people should be expected

to become angry when a nation speaks of good relations but shelters

Iran’s principal enemy. The Shah could have gone elsewhere for treat-

ment. The presence of Bakhtiar and others in England has also angered

the Iranian people and has resulted in the occupation of the UK

Embassy as well. Iran will go its own way and although it wants equal

relations with all countries, will remain independent.

The students have emphasized that they will take care of the secu-

rity and safety of the hostages. We cannot oppose the zeal of the nation;

there can be no separation of the Iranian leadership from the desires

of the Iranian people. Meanwhile, Beheshti advised the U.S. to consider

carefully “the true causes of happenings which nobody likes.” The

Iranian authorities will do their best to control the situation but much

will depend upon the U.S. and UK reactions.

4.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, November 5, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran

Iranian internal politics are seriously complicating the hostage

negotiations. The division in the government between the religious

authorities on one hand—headed by Khomeini and his cohorts in Qom

acting through the religious komitehs and Revolutionary Guards—and

the secular, more moderate forces of Bazargan, Yazdi et al. on the other.

We have had a growing body of evidence for several months now that

Bazargan and co. were increasingly aware of their inability to influence

5.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, November 5, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran

You asked how our contingency plans held up when put to the

test. Obviously, the answer is: not at all. The extraordinary effort which

has been exerted over the past nine months to reinforce the Chancery

building proved futile when the mob managed to penetrate the base-

ment. Our security people believe that it was an inside job, but we

may never know.

6.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

CIA

State

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Secretary Cyrus Vance

David Newsom

First Responses

White House

Defense

The Vice President

Secretary Harold Brown

Zbigniew Brzezinski

W. Graham Claytor

Hamilton Jordan

JCS

Jody Powell

General David Jones

NSC

Energy

Colonel William Odom

Secretary Charles Duncan

Gary Sick

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The SCC met to review the situation in Iran. The following issues

were addressed:

1. Public statement. A statement was approved for immediate release

from the White House press office. (U)

2. Emissaries. A Presidential letter is being drafted. The two emissar-

ies (Ramsey Clark and William Miller) should be positioned as close

as possible to Tehran in order to be able to respond quickly if we get

an indication that they will be accepted by the authorities in Qom. (S)

3. Contacts with Foreign Governments. Secretary Vance briefed on

the efforts being made to mobilize support from Islamic nations who

may have influence with the Khomeini regime, our contacts with the

Turkish Government about possible refuge for our Chargé, and our

approach to the Red Crescent (through the ICRC) to visit the hostages

at the U.S. Embassy compound in Tehran. (C)

4. Energy. The Department of Energy, together with State and the

NSC, will examine the following: (1) the feasibility and desirability of

triggering IEA allocation mechanisms in the event of an embargo or

reduced production by Iran; (2) explore the possibility of arranging

compensatory oil supplies from other oil producers which would per-

mit us to reject any oil threats by Iran; and (3) Secretary Duncan and

Chairman Miller will consult with the leaders of U.S. oil companies

about steps they could take to minimize the effects of any oil cutoff

by Iran. It was estimated that the U.S. share of Iranian production

amounts to about 700,000 barrels per day. If Iran successfully shuts off

these supplies, it would take several months to be felt in this country,

but the effects would eventually be serious. (TS)

5. Contingencies. Before the meeting tomorrow, a very small group

will examine each of the following cases:

(1) Rescue. The SCC saw no way for us to intervene militarily to

rescue the hostages without seriously risking their lives. We would

expect the Iranian military to oppose any such intervention. The most

likely means would be to secure an airfield and conduct a helicopter

raid into the embassy compound.

(2) Retaliation, if some or all of the hostages were killed. A number

of economic responses are available, including seizure of Iranian assets,

cutoff of trade (including food), and cessation of supply of spare parts

for the military. Militarily, we could: blockade Iran’s oil shipments;

strike or seize a site such as the Bandar Abbas military base in the

south, Kharg Island oil loading terminal, or the three islands which

Iran occupies at the mouth of the Persian Gulf; we could attempt to

destroy the F–14s and/or other military assets by air strike; we would

consider renewing direct support to the Kurds; and we could poten-

tially kidnap a leading Iranian figure as a counter-hostage.

(3) Disintegration. Our previous plan to defend the oil fields was

predicated on the assistance of the Iranian military. This must now be

reconsidered. (TS)

6. Iranian Students. For tomorrow’s meeting, the Department of

Justice will provide a report on the numbers of Iranians in various

categories (including illegal aliens) in the United States, investigations

which may currently be under way, and the steps which might be

available to us. (TS)

7.

Letter From President Carter to Ayatollah Khomeini

Washington, November 6, 1979

Dear Ayatollah Khomeini:

Based on the willingness of the Revolutionary Council to receive

them, I am asking two distinguished Americans, Mr. Ramsey Clark

and Mr. William G. Miller, to carry this letter to you and to discuss

with you and your designees the situation in Tehran and the full range

of current issues between the U.S. and Iran.

In the name of the American people, I ask that you release

unharmed all Americans presently detained in Iran and those held

with them and allow them to leave your country safely and without

delay. I ask you to recognize the compelling humanitarian reasons,

firmly based in international law, for doing so.

I have asked both men to meet with you and to hear from you

your perspective on events in Iran and the problems which have arisen

between our two countries. The people of the United States desire to

have relations with Iran based upon equality, mutual respect, and

friendship.

They will report to me immediately upon their return.

Sincerely,

Jimmy Carter

marking. According to a November 6 memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, the letter

was approved by Vance and reviewed by Clark and Miller. (Carter Library, National

letter was never delivered, as the emissaries never reached Iran.

8.

Record of a National Security Council Meeting

NSC MEETING CHAIRED BY THE PRESIDENT

IN THE CABINET ROOM

ATTENDEES ARE

The President

Vice President

Secretary Vance

Secretary Brown

General Jones, Chairman of the JCS

Hamilton Jordan

Jody Powell

Gary Sick

The President opened the meeting by noting that the Iranian prob-

lem was one of the most difficult problems we have faced since he has

been in the White House. American people have been captured, there

was no government to work with and there appears to be no desire

to negotiate. We face the prospect of the hostages being killed one at

a time or perhaps all of them. The integrity of our nation demands

some form of punitive action if this occurs. However, first it is important

to do everything possible to save lives. If we succeed in getting everyone

out of Tehran then it would be his intention to break relations with

Iran. First we must consider how to get people out. Secondly, we need

to consider what to do if a punitive action is required. The President

thought seriously about this issue and was inclined not to take any

action which would get us bogged down or a situation where extrica-

tion was difficult and any pullback would be viewed as a defeat.

Dr. Brzezinski suggested an agenda for the meeting. First of all a

review of the negotiating situation with Iran and the international

actions which are available to us. Secondly, the military options which

fall into three categories. First of all a possible rescue operation for the

hostages; second of all a retaliatory or punitive action as required; and,

thirdly what might be required in the event of a fragmentation or

breakdown internally within Iran. He noted that he had talked to

Ambassador Sam Lewis during the day and was told that the Israelis

First Responses

were watching the situation with bated breath. It was a test of how

we would react.

The Vice President interjected that this was this week’s test.

Secretary Vance reviewed the situation briefly. We had succeeded

in reaching Ayatollah Beheshti in Tehran. He felt that the sending of

emissaries was a good idea and he promised to raise this idea with

the Revolutionary Council. We had a plane standing by to fly the

emissaries first of all to Athens where they could wait for a decision.

There was a short letter from the President which they would take

with them. The plane was large enough to bring back sixty hostages

if they are released.

The President wondered whether bringing the Americans out of

Iran would constitute breaking relations.

Secretary Vance said only if we say that we are breaking relations.

We may simply say that we are going to take everyone out. If the

Iranians ask for the Chargé to remain, Ramsey Clark has said that he

will remain with the Chargé in Tehran.

Hamilton Jordan asked whether it may be presumptuous for us to

send these emissaries off before we have an answer from the Iranians.

Secretary Vance said yes it was, however, we wanted to have them

close at hand in the event the answer was yes. If they flew directly

through, they could arrive in Tehran tomorrow morning and be in

Qom around 10: in the morning. It is extremely important that public

knowledge of this initiative remain quiet until we have their answer.

Hamilton Jordan noted that Frank Moore had told him that the word

was already out on the Hill. It was a secret that was not well kept.

The President said he saw no downside to having the emissaries in

Athens, if the answer is no they can simply come home.

Dr. Brzezinski recommended that the second phrase was really not

necessary since it was already implied in the first phrase. However,

the emissaries could be instructed to explain that the first phrase really

meant that the Shah would not remain permanently.

The President agreed and suggested that the emissaries could say

that the Mexican government had extended an invitation.

Secretary Vance noted that the Shah has expressed concern with the

problems which have arisen about his presence and he did not want

to be the cause of harm coming to the American citizens.

The President said that Ramsey Clark could tell that to Khomeini

and quote the rather effusive Mexican invitation for the Shah to return.

Dr. Brzezinski said that he thought it important that the Iranians

not interpret Ramsey Clark statement as a promise from the President

that the Shah will leave. Rather they should say there is every reason

to expect that the Shah will return. The less chance we give the Iranians

to boast about their prevailing over the United States the better off

we are.

The Vice President agreed. He felt that it was better to keep any

promise very fuzzy because it would be used against us.

Dr. Brzezinski noted that the less we give them the better.

Secretary Vance noted that we should not raise expectations that

the Shah will immediately leave although he might be willing to. At

the present time he has a tube implanted in him and also has cancer

of the neck and could not easily be moved.

First Responses

Secretary Brown noted that it was probably not impossible to evacu-

ate him physically; we did medical evacuation all the time. However,

it was a real political problem.

The President asked what the Shah had agreed to.

Secretary Vance said that the Shah had agreed to have his doctors

talk to Iranian doctors about his medical state but not to see him.

The President said that the instructions were all right with the

one deletion.

Secretary Vance went on to note that the Pakistanian Ambassador

went to Qom today to see Khomeini. The Algerians are probably willing

to weigh in as well. He also noted that there was a man named Hosan

ala Hosani in Lebanon who was reputed to be very close to Khomeini.

[1 line not declassified] Although they could also approach him

through Sarkis.

Stan Turner said it would be better to go through Sarkis and the

State connection since he would have to have a Presidential Determina-

tion to do it.

The President noted that he could have a Presidential Determination

in fifteen minutes.

Dr. Brzezinski noted he had just received a report that Mr. Valeriani

of NBC has a story about the emissaries going to Iran which he planned

to use this evening. Hodding Carter was trying to dissuade him of

using it.

Secretary Vance noted that Valeriani was a good man who would

listen to reason.

The President said that Hodding Carter and Jody Powell and Secre-

tary Vance if necessary should talk to him to try to stop the story. He

wondered if other networks had the story as well. Everyone agreed

that the indications were that they did not.

Secretary Vance went on to brief that the Pakistanis had been very

helpful and that their Ambassador would go to Qom to talk with

Khomeini. The Turks had chickened out. They were unwilling to offer

their Embassy as a refuge for our Chargé. The UN Secretary General

is calling in all the Islamic Ambassadors to indicate the seriousness of

the international implications of the Iranians’ actions.

Stan Turner gave a brief report on the group holding the hostages.

They are called the Tunidi Islami. They were originally Islamic fanatics

totally devoted to Khomeini. In more recent times they have been

infiltrated by the leftists to a considerable degree though they have

retained Khomeini support. Recently they got into the Radio Tehran

broadcast and criticized the talks that Brzezinski had in Algiers with

Bazargan and Yazdi. They are clever and well organized and their

objective seems to be to try to bring down the moderates in the govern-

ment. They have no history of violence that we are aware of. It does

appear that Khomeini gave permission for the occupation of the

Embassy. The chances of negotiating with them do not appear to be

good. He also noted the Kharg Island oil terminal had been shut down

this morning and that presently no oil exports were coming out of Iran.

The President inquired about the results of the students’ press con-

ference in Tehran.

Dr. Brzezinski said it was largely more of the same.

Stan Turner added that they had said that any action aimed at

freeing the prisoners would lead to killing the hostages.

Secretary Brown said that led to the discussion of a possible rescue

operation. They had examined this option and considered that the

chances of carrying it off successfully were very small.

General Jones noted that his Israeli counterpart Eitan was currently

visiting in Washington and the subject of a rescue operation had come

up naturally during lunch. Eitan considers the situation in Tehran far

more difficult than Entebbe6 because of the urban environment, the

distance from the airport, and other complications.

At this point General Jones displayed a number of pictures of the

Embassy compound in Tehran and its surroundings showing how

difficult it would be to come through the city on the ground. Such an

approach could be impossible and Khomeini could put millions of

people in the streets. In general they thought that helicopters was the

only way to come in. We are not sure exactly where the hostages are

located, though there are reports that they are being held in the base-

ment of the Embassy. It might be possible to bring three helicopters

down on the Embassy grounds at night in the open area. It would

[be] necessary to bring in at least 120 people, 30 of which would go

immediately to the residence area. There are high buildings around

the Embassy where people could shoot down into the compound.

Therefore, they recommend three additional helicopters coming in after

the initial three to help secure the compound. They had examined the

area around Tehran looking for isolated airfields which were unlikely

to be armed or manned. They had discovered one very slightly used

airfield about sixty miles south of town which had originally been

used as a C–130 base. They felt that aircraft could land there and the

helicopters could cycle in and out of town from that airfield. The

likelihood that this could be done without the Iranians knowing it in

pro-Palestinian hijackers at the Entebbe airport in Uganda. The rescue focused on rapid

air assault, extraction, withdrawal operations, and information from released non-Jewish

tan Netanyahu, leader of the assault force, were killed.

First Responses

advance was near zero even if they did not know where the operation

was going to be conducted. Tehran cannot easily be reached from the

sea. It would probably require staging from bases in either Saudi Arabia

or Turkey. Marine helicopters are not equipped to be refueled in the

air, therefore, it would be necessary to use Air Force helicopters. Six

of these are in Britain, others are in United States and Okinawa, which

would require a long movement in order to bring them into position.

This would effectively ruin any chance for a lengthy practice session.

They were currently examining ways in which helicopters could be

moved into position without in any way connecting it with this opera-

tion such as an exercise in the Mediterranean. If an operation were

conducted during daylight hours, they would probably have to con-

front the Iranian air force. It was estimated that fifty percent of the

Iranian air force could be airborne, if they discovered the helicopters

in the air or sighted the C–130s. The area is 500 miles from the Persian

Gulf so it would greatly stretch the ability of carrier based aircraft to

provide air cover. It might be possible to accomplish that from Turkey

or Dhahran.

Secretary Vance noted that the Turks would probably turn us down.

General Jones added that any advance tip-off would permit them

to get the hostages out of the area to unknown locations.

Secretary Vance said that he could not see how we could get in

without giving them time to kill the hostages.

The Vice President noted that they would probably see the helicop-

ters coming perhaps an hour before they arrived.

General Jones said that even under the very best of circumstances

the chances were great that there would be some casualties.

Dr. Brzezinski said that casualties are to be expected in this kind

of a situation. He noted that this group is not organized and communi-

cations are not good. Their warning system might not function. There

was a good chance of conducting the operation with surprise.

Secretary Brown said that they might very well have strategic warn-

ing if the planes landed in Saudi Arabia. It would mean many hours

to organize a staging operation from there. Moreover, it was a five

hour flight time from there to Tehran.

The President wondered whether an attack team could go in with

empty spaces in the helicopter to carry out some hostages.

Secretary Brown said that they needed to put a great number of

people in, in order to be able to hold the airfield.

General Jones noted that a helicopter holds twenty-five persons.

There is a 120 man team to go in and only 3 helicopters could land at

once. The operation was a very high risk. It would require up to one

to two hours on the ground inside the compound if everything worked

perfectly. It was also a question of how to assure that they would get

all the hostages back.

Dr. Brzezinski noted that there [were] some advantages since an

undisciplined mob might very well panic when faced with disciplined

troops. An operation of this nature should be undertaken only if the

hostages were being killed.

Hamilton Jordan noted that they could start killing one person per

day or one person per hour which would put us in a very difficult

position.

Dr. Brzezinski said that the military should be encouraged to refine

this option. If they start killing hostages, we will need to do something.

Stan Turner suggested that we should stage a carrier to the Eastern

Mediterranean.

General Jones noted that we would probably want to have a CVA

in the Persian Gulf.

Hamilton Jordan noted that there would be strong chance that a

third country would observe our movements.

General Jones agreed noting the chances of our being observed in

a commercial airport like Dhahran were very high.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered how quickly the Saudis could react and

transmit the information to Tehran, even if they observed it.

Stan Turner noted that it would be possible to put the refueling

aircraft in Cypress, at Akhatia airbase by prepositioning a carrier and

an LPH in the Eastern Mediterranean with helicopters on board; they

could be much closer to the area of operations.

Secretary Brown generally agreed and said that the way to go in

was to overfly Turkey. That should pose no problem since the Soviets

do it all the time even without permission.

The President said that they should do more work on the plan. To

him it looked more like the Egyptian raid on Cyprus.

General Jones noted that successful raids are always rehearsed many

times and this [did] not offer an opportunity for detailed preparations,

however, they would go ahead and flesh out the plan.

The President said that if they killed the hostages we must be able

to conduct a punitive operation which would blast the hell out of Iran.

by 2 terrorists who had assassinated Youssef Sebai, chairman and editor of Egypt’s semi-

official daily newspaper, al-Ahram, and Sadat’s friend. The terrorists held the hostages

aboard a hijacked Cyprus Airways DC–8 at the Larnaca airport. Egyptian commandos

attacked the plane but were fired upon by Cypriot national guardsmen. The Egyptians

took shelter, then surrendered, and the hijackers gave themselves up. Fifteen Egyptians

died, and their plane went up in flames.

First Responses

Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we could look at the punitive options.

Secretary Brown referring to the earlier discussion noted that we

could defend the compound for an hour.

Hamilton Jordan noted that the press would not keep quiet on this

end and that was the biggest risk to warning them we were up to

something.

The President said the Iranians were not idiots. They would not be

sitting and waiting for us to take them out. They would move the

hostages out of the Embassy to other locations. He wondered whether

the civilians were in fact coming out.

Secretary Vance said we don’t know at this point. We have no one

to talk to, however, normal scheduled airline flights are continuing.

The President wondered if the British could pass word to our people.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we could ask the companies to tell their

people to get out.

Secretary Vance said he would check. He thought that that had been

done but he was not sure.

General Jones noted that for a retaliatory attack Kharg Island was

probably the most critical facility in Iran. Originally they thought it

would require very little to seize the island. Later today however they

had discovered that there were about 250 soldiers, another 250 air

defense personnel, and several hundred (up to 500) military personnel

involved in a hover craft program there. Our tactics could be to either

seize the island or to impose a blockade. We cannot effectively block

the entire Persian Gulf since it is impossible to discriminate between

ships and their destinations. Moreover, Kharg Island is not so easy to

blockade; it is very close to the coast and there are many aircraft.

Secretary Brown noted that Kharg Island provided a bargaining

lever. We could show the Iranians that if they take our oil we can

block theirs. This is a very dangerous process, however. He wondered

whether it would not shut off other oil in the Gulf. How would the

Soviets react.

Dr. Brzezinski said the reaction would depend on circumstances.

If we did something like this right now, it would be extremely bad

and the reaction around the world would be extremely critical. How-

ever, later if killings occur they might possibly consider it alright partic-

ularly if they saw Iran disintegrating.

The President wondered about an aerial attack on the island.

Secretary Brown said that would be more permanent since it would

destroy the installation.

Dr. Brzezinski noted that seizing the island provided a bargaining

lever. We would have land and people in our own custody which

permits us to bargain.

Stan Turner noted that you could not simply count the piers and

put the island out of operation for quite a while.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered how long it would take us to mount that

kind of attack.

Secretary Brown said a week.

General Jones noted that we can lean forward and cut down the

time. At present our Marines are completing an exercise in Spain, but

moving them to the Eastern Mediterranean or into the Indian Ocean

would send a strong political signal.

The President felt that occupying Iranian territory would arouse the

opposition of the entire world.

General Jones noted another option where the small islands of Abu

Musa and the Tunbs near the mouth of the Gulf [which] were occupied

by the Iranians several years ago and their sovereignty was contested

by several of the Emirates in the UAE. They were lightly inhabited

and lightly defended and they had limited strategic value except for

the psychological value of being very near the mouth of the Gulf.

Hamilton Jordan wondered whether Kharg Island was important to

Khomeini and his group.

Secretary Brown said that it might not be in the first instance but

in fact a whole livelihood and economy depended on the oil exports

from Kharg Island.

The President noted that with regard to closing off the oil from

Kharg Island we could stand it. He was not sure, however, that the

French, British, Japanese, and others could stand it especially if other

oil producing nations closed down their own operations as a sign

of sympathy.

General Jones noted that the small islands at the entrance of the

Gulf represent the exact opposite extreme of Kharg Island. Kharg Island

is of enormous practical and economic significance. The small islands

are largely of symbolic importance. Another possibility are air strikes

particularly against the U.S. F–14s in Iran. However, he noted that

many of these F–14s were in shelters which we built specifically for

their protection. Therefore, we could expect to get some of them but

not all. Another possibility is Bandar Abbas a town in the south where

most of their navy is located. However a strike on their military forces

would be most likely to turn against us the people who would be most

likely to be helpful later on.

Hamilton Jordan wondered if it was beyond imagination to do some-

thing like kidnapping Khomeini’s son.

Secretary Brown said that getting Khomeini himself might be easier.

Stan Turner wondered about the possibility of simply mining the

waters around Kharg Island.

First Responses

Dr. Brzezinski said the results of that would be to simply punish

our friends. He thought that there was more merit in taking the little

islands inside Gulf.

The President said they would probably simply say take them and

not worry about it.

Dr. Brzezinski said he thought it would bother them. They have a

strong territorial instinct. Going after Kharg Island would create a

worldwide oil crisis.

Secretary Brown said the three small islands would provide no

bargaining lever.

Dr. Brzezinski noted that if they only kill a few hostages we need

a bargaining leverage; if they should kill all of them we need a puni-

tive action.

Secretary Brown said they will probably kill all of the hostages if

we do anything at all.

Secretary Vance noted that there were also economic steps that we

should look at.

Secretary Brown noted that we could possibly seize an Iranian ship.

The Vice President suggested looking very closely at the economic

steps. He found this to be an outrageous precedent. He wondered what

was the legal status of an act such as this of taking diplomats hostage.

Was it an act of war?

Dr. Brzezinski said it was contrary to a great many agreements to

which Iran was a party but it was not a casus beli unless they begin

killing hostages. He wondered if we should consider taking it to the

United Nations Security Council and seeking a denunciation of

Iran’s action.

Secretary Brown said the Third World would be against us.

The Vice President said he was not so sure. For instance in cases of

piracy and terrorism there were only a few extreme nations who would

not condemn those actions.

Dr. Brzezinski noted that the reaction by Iraq and Kuwait were

both interesting. Both nations were quite concerned and this might be

reflected in any UN debate.

The Vice President said he would like to have a legal analysis of the

situation. He suspected that something like this had happened many

times before.

Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we should take a much closer look

at the military option. First of all we should look at a simple punitive

act which would be effective but would not get us engaged in a long

military campaign. Secondly, we should look at other actions which

would provide us with leverage to deter future action by Iran. He

believed that seizure of the three islands provided interesting possibili-

ties. At this point there was a lengthy break in the meeting while the

President met with Ramsey Clark and William Miller, the two emissar-

ies who were due to leave for Tehran that evening. When the meeting

resumed The President suggested that if the Iranians say yes to our

emissaries we should do nothing to upset that process. Ramsey Clark

believes that movement to the UN would be a good thing but that we

should avoid going to the UN for the moment unless they turn us

down on the emissaries.

Ramsey Clark also recommended calling in the Iranian Chargé as

an interpreter and placing a call from the President to Khomeini appeal-

ing to him on religious grounds if the Iranians will not let our emissaries

come in. With regard to the United Nations, we should focus on the

violation of international law.

Secretary Brown noted that by holding up all actions we would lose

time in the event we should need to retaliate.

The President noted that in the meantime we should simply explore

the possibilities.

Secretary Brown noted that we would be meeting tomorrow morn-

ing to consider whether to move the helicopters, carriers and other

items. He took it from what the President had said that we will do

nothing if the Iranians agree to accept our emissaries.

The President said that was correct. Since these men had put their

lives on the line we should do nothing to endanger their mission. The

President wondered, however, whether there was no way we could

move the carrier without that fact appearing on the front page of the

New York Times.

Secretary Brown said that the carrier was due to arrive in Mombasa

on November 9th; if it did not show up that would attract attention.

He thought that if we did it verbally we could probably turn the carrier

around without it appearing in the news for perhaps two to three days.

Jody Powell said he thought this was one case where it was justified

for the press secretary to tell a lie.

Dr. Brzezinski said we should defer a decision until tomorrow. If

they do not accept our emissaries then it would be appropriate to turn

the carrier around.

Secretary Brown said that we could make up a story why the carrier

was late in arriving in Mombasa. He then suggested considering what

we would do in the event of a break up of Iran. He noted that any

p.m., then returned to the Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary)

First Responses

attack on the Iranian military as a punitive gesture would make much

more difficult actions that we might want to take in the event the

country came apart.

The President said we had not adequately assessed the possibilities

of an embargo on Iran assets and economic steps that we could take.

They were very vulnerable on this score. If we had to move, we should

move on a broad front including economics. To the extent possible we

should avoid the loss of life. Economic options were potentially much

better than bombing.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the United States could get away with

only economic steps if American citizens are killed. After a long pause

the President said that he doubted it. We would probably have to take

some punitive action but he wanted to do something which would

avoid heavy costs and lengthy problems of trying to extricate ourselves.

Stan Turner interjected that we really ought to try to isolate Iran

and blockade it.

The President agreed and said that we should insist that our Euro-

pean allies cooperate with us on an air blockade as well as naval

blockade. They might not agree but we should go to the mat on this one.

Jody Powell noted that our blockade as leverage is alright but if it

is designed as a punitive action where would we end it.

Dr. Brzezinski said we may need both. Even if they kill the hostages

we will still need leverage to prevent further action against U.S. citizens

remaining in Iran.

Hamilton Jordan wondered if the American citizens were truly

identifiable.

Secretary Brown wondered whether we should look at the pipeline

which carries Iran’s refined product from the refinery to the market

place.

The Vice President noted that the weather is getting cold and this

might be a real vulnerability.

Secretary Brown said it would be interesting in several ways since

it would conceivably make them rely on us for refined products.

Hamilton Jordan wondered how much lead time it would take to

conduct an air strike of that sort.

The President wondered how long it would take if we wanted

simply to bomb refineries.

General Jones noted that the Carrier Midway is about five days away.

Another alternative would be to bring in B–52s from Guam which

could be done in about 48 hours or 72 hours at the most. They could

not land at Diego Garcia. We had intentionally kept the runway at

Diego Garcia too narrow for the use of B–52s, however, refueling air-

craft could operate from Diego Garcia. In any event we would probably

want the Midway in or near the Gulf in order to fly fighter protection for

the B–52s. Another alternative would be to bring F–15s into Saudi bases.

Dr. Brzezinski said we would make a decision on the Midway

tomorrow.

Stan Turner said that hitting the refineries would hurt us as well

but others disagreed and said that partially supplied Iran’s needs, not

our own.

The President noted that if they should kill sixty American citizens

we must punish Iran. One way to do that would be to cut off the

supply of diesel fuel and kerosene. We might also declare an embargo.

The Vice President recalled something that Secretary Duncan

has said at the SCC in the morning9 that a very high proportion of

ARAMCO and other American companies’ oil was going to Europe

since it was more profitable there. He thought it was an excellent idea

to call in these companies and tell them that we expect them to make

up any shortfalls in our own production. We should see just how

American they really are.

Secretary Vance said that Ambassador West believes that the Saudis

would be pleased to make up any difference in the event the Iranians

should embargo us.

Secretary Brown wondered if they would be still interested if we

should take out a refinery in Iran.

Dr. Brzezinski said we were having an SCC meeting at 8: in the

morning and Secretary Duncan was to present a report on the energy

situation and the implications.

The President said that we need a way to punish Iran without

punishing the rest of the world.

Hamilton Jordan said that if the Iranians begin killing one American

at a time the American people will expect us to try to rescue them

even if the chances are only one in a hundred.

Dr. Brzezinski noted that kidnappers normally don’t kill all of their

hostages. They are not trained. This group particularly has no combat

training. As the meeting broke up the President approved notifying

the press that an NSC meeting had been held. The group agreed that

it probably would be a good idea for the President to call Khomeini

directly in the event the Iranians turn down our offer of emissaries.

First Responses

9.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, November 6, 1979

SUBJECT

Military Options for Iran

This is to update you on my investigations following the SCC

this morning.

Unless the JCS is told firmly to go forward with staging for an

operation with something like DELTA, they will not get down to the

tough issues and work them out. I worked over the things General

11.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

State

Frank Carlucci

Secretary Cyrus Vance

David Newsom

White House

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Defense

Hamilton Jordan

Secretary Harold Brown

Jody Powell

W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

NSC

JCS

Colonel William Odom

General David Jones

Gary Sick

General John Pustay

Energy

Secretary Charles Duncan

John Sawhill

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The SCC addressed the following issues:

1. Situation. Secretary Vance briefed the group on the expected

arrival of the two emissaries in Tehran tonight. In general, he detected

a lowering of rhetoric from Tehran and considered the situation some-

what better than the day before. A legal analysis of the Iranian actions

shows that they have broken numerous international agreements, from

the UN Charter to bilateral treaties. We have a very strong case if and

when we decide to go to the UN. Ambassador McHenry will approach

the President of the General Assembly today to see if he will join

the Secretary General’s actions of yesterday to put pressure on the

Iranians. (C)

2. Energy. If the Iranians reduce production significantly, this will

pose a problem for us. If oil is only redirected away from the U.S., we

could compensate. The chances are good that we could find 700,000

bpd additional production from other sources at least for a period of

3–4 months. The Saudis would probably be willing to help. A reduction

of that amount would not trigger the IEA allocation mechanism, but

we could manage redistribution through informal consultations with

our IEA partners. We would almost certainly need to institute some

demand restraint program of our own to manage the shortfall and

persuade others to cooperate. DOE and Treasury will meet with oil

company executives tomorrow and will raise with them the question

of reallocation of supplies if that becomes necessary. An EC meeting

next Friday will permit consideration of when and how to use the

triggering mechanism. (S)

3. Economic Countermeasures. Secretary Vance will have a memoran-

dum on this later in the day. Defense will reexamine the military

pipeline, but they believe it can be stopped almost immediately upon

request. One major issue is Fluor company’s construction of a refinery

in Isfahan. The Iranians badly want this for internal needs, and they

are treating Fluor personnel well. Our position has been to recommend

that all Americans be pulled out, but for the moment Fluor is standing

fast. In fact, their withdrawal at this point would be a highly negative

factor in the negotiations. Henry Owen will head a small group to

prepare a checklist of all material flowing from this country to Iran,

including military items. (S)

First Responses

4. Military Options. Thus far, the press has speculated on military

options but has been unable to get any official sources to talk. It was

agreed that no U.S. forces would be moved while the emissaries are

conducting their talks. The principal weakness of the possible rescue

operation is intelligence on exactly where the hostages are being held,

how their captors are armed, etc. This is being worked on, but JCS

continues to be very pessimistic at the odds of a successful operation.

[1 line not declassified]. Stan Turner presented a Presidential Finding

which would permit him to employ agents of influence and propaganda

efforts to assist. The SCC recommended approval. The JCS will con-

tinue with planning on the possible rescue and punitive measures. We

will not for the moment expand our contacts with former Iranian

military and intelligence figures, although we have received strong

indications on the part of some of them to launch a counterattack

through Kurdistan. A meeting will be held tomorrow to examine the

military and intelligence issues in greater detail. (TS)

5. Iranian Nationals and Property. The Attorney General presented

a report on Presidential powers. Although the powers are wide, there

is no quick, effective way to deport Iranians who are out of status.

Justice will coordinate with local authorities and U.S. attorneys to try

to withhold permission for Iranian student demonstrations during this

difficult time. The SCC feared that popular reaction could be violent

and thereby create a threat to the hostages. (C)

12.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of

State Vance

Washington, November 8, 1979

Peter Constable spoke to Kharazi and Beheshti at 1: a.m. and

2: a.m. Speaking in your name he asked for clarification of the position

of the Clark/Miller visit. Both said it would not be possible until the

USG made a statement of its intentions on the Shah. Beheshti said a

new Foreign Minister would be named today from the Revolutionary

Council2 and would discuss these matters with us in the future. In

addition to a request for reconsideration, Constable urged that (1) an

independent observer be given access to the American hostages and

(2) Bruce Laingen be given telephone access to Washington and to his

diplomatic colleagues. Kharazi and Beheshti said a new effort would

be made today to get the Turkish Ambassador into the Compound

(if the student conditions can be met, according to Kharazi). While

defending the necessity for Bruce’s isolation, Kharazi said he would

look into possibility of improving his communications.

A full account of the conversations is attached.

Hal

First Responses

13.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

CIA

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Warren Christopher

Frank Carlucci

Defense

White House

Secretary Harold Brown

Zbigniew Brzezinski

W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

Hamilton Jordan

Lloyd Cutler

JCS

General David Jones

NSC

General John Pustay

Colonel William Odom

(Col. King, JCS, was the

Gary Sick

briefer on military options)

Energy

Secretary Charles Duncan

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Dr. Brzezinski summarized the areas which the President wishes

to pursue: reconnaissance flights over the F–14 air bases (U–2 or SR–

71); diversion of the Midway toward the Persian Gulf; prohibition of

any Iranian student demonstrations on Federal property; a legal brief

for the President on modalities for expulsion of Iranian students; a

stronger statement than heretofore regarding the safety of the American

citizens, our expectation that others will protest these actions by Iran,

and assertion of our right to act in legitimate self-defense under interna-

tional law in the event they are harmed; and an approach to the United

Nations. (TS)

1. Iranian Students. It was agreed that no demonstrations would be

permitted on Federal property. Some properties, e.g. national parks,

require no permit for public gatherings. Justice will review the regula-

tions. Summary expulsion is prohibited by due process. However,

Justice will examine possible legislation to expedite handling of such

cases. Justice will prepare an examination of steps available to the

President. (C)

2. Clark Mission/PLO. Ramsey Clark has been in touch with an

Islamic figure in Tehran who may accompany the PLO delegation to

Qom. Clark believes that he may be able to work something out

and requested that we forego any official approach to the UN for the

moment. The SCC agreed that we would limit our activities today

to the consultations in New York being undertaken by Ambassador

McHenry. The Clark mission will remain in Istanbul for the time being.

Clark is authorized to undertake contacts with the PLO and will serve

as the principal channel for any such contacts. (S)

3. Statement. It was agreed that a draft statement by Vance6 would

be used today, primarily to reassure the public. It will indicate that the

U.S. Government recognizes its obligation to protect innocent American

citizens and will do all it can to fulfill that responsibility. (U)

4. The Shah. We have had signals from high-level Iranians that the

Shah should at least be removed from the United States as a gesture.

There are indications that the Shah may in fact wish to leave. However,

his doctors have thus far advised against moving him. David Newsom

is in New York to talk to those close to the Shah to see what his position

is. All agreed that flying him out when he is in very bad condition

would be a mistake. Dr. Brzezinski observed that sending the Shah

A number of punitive options have been examined in more detail.

An attack on the refinery at Abadan would potentially destroy a large

proportion of domestic fuel stocks and reduce refinery capacity for

kerosene, heating oil and gasoline by more than half. There are three

specific targets: the power plant, the refinery and the catalytic converter.

The power plant could be repaired relatively quickly, although it would

be very disruptive. The refinery would take about six months to replace,

and the catalytic converter would take several years. The operation

could be conducted by carrier-based aircraft from the Midway (4–5 days

away), a Seal team to be put ashore (could be organized in 2–3 days),

and JCS favor the gunship since it is extremely accurate, very effective,

and involves no likely problem of extracting personnel. Air defenses

in the area are extremely light. The AC–130 could make an attack

from Diego Garcia with refueling. Use of Diego Garcia would require

coordination with the British. Defense will examine further the possibil-

ity of such an attack without coordination with any other nation. (TS)

Three Iranian harbors could be mined to close off 65 percent of

Iran’s imports without affecting the oil export facilities. The most appro-

priate [1 line not declassified]. (TS)

An attack on the F–14s could not expect to get more than about

half the Iranian inventory. Defense believes it would be an error to

strike at the Iranian military, since they may be helpful later. Also, a

disruptive attack on the military might tempt the Soviets to move in.

14.

Record of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting

Washington, November 8, 1979

In the course of the meeting, Vance brought up the Shah’s health,

how soon he might be moved back to Mexico. Brown added that he

would look into a military medevac C–9 aircraft to help speed up the

move. The Shah might still be full of post-operation tubes and so forth.

I was aghast at this turn of the discussion, and I watched Brzezinski

boggle. Then he began in low voice, saying that if we were to return

the Shah now, under any circumstances, to Mexico, we would be back-

ing down to the demands of student mob in Tehran. A month ago we

backed down to the Soviets and Cubans after declaring that we found

the status quo unacceptable. Now we shall back down again. What

will this mean for our international role as a global power? What will

it mean for our allies? Who will find us credible on any commitment

First Responses

hereafter? Vance meekly argued that we don’t have to decide these

things as a whole; we can decide the Shah’s disposition and then later

do something different in connection to Tehran. ZB responded that he

was quite prepared to move the Shah as part of a strategy to get our

Embassy personnel back and then retaliate, but only as part of an

overall strategy decided in advance. Vance and Brown argued that an

overall strategy is not essential because we can take the decisions a

step at a time. ZB repeated his lecture, adding that this would be a

historical first for the United States as abject capitulation, not a first

he cared to participate in creating: backing down before foreign mobs,

sullying the dignity of US values and power. He explained that if he

were a relative of one of the hostages, he would naturally be grieved

about their fate and want a concession made for them. But in the

position of responsibility for recommending a decision to the President,

he could not let those feelings prevail. We in the SCC must look at the

larger American interest and the significance for the fate of Americans

and our allies elsewhere. From that viewpoint, Vance and Brown were

making no sense at all. Again, he agreed to consider a plan of deception,

using the Shah to get our people back, but only as a tactical ruse, not

as an ignominious act of surrender.

Brown waffled, agreeing with ZB but also arguing that we should

not take an overall strategic decision. Rather, take each in light of the

current situation. ZB confronted him, “You can’t have it both ways,

Harold; you must decide whether you will surrender the Shah to the

mob or not. If not, you must accept my points.” Brown leaned, sheep-

ishly, toward agreeing with ZB but tried to leave a loop hole for later

escape. Vance’s “lawyer” Weltanschaung, dump the Shah now if expe-

dient, was repeated.

Civiletti was the only other person to speak up. He supported ZB

fully. Strangely, General Jones remained silent and poker faced.

One could only take away a feeling of disgust. Brown’s squeamish

smiles and Vance’s naturally dull face revealed, in this exchange, a

shocking lack of character and moral courage. A sniveling spinelessness

informed their performance. One can only wonder if they are worthy

of the power with which they are entrusted. I confess to a deep sense

of satisfaction in watching ZB confront them so directly and candidly

with the political and moral implications of their positions.

15.

Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

to President Carter

Washington, November 8, 1979

I know that you are pressed from all sides with free advice and

ideas on the situation in Iran. I don’t want to contribute to that problem,

but need to state frankly my views to you.

17.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, November 9, 1979

SUBJECT

The Soviet Role in the Crisis in Iran

The SCC discussions to date have conspicuously ignored the Soviet

variables in the power equation in Iran. I am sure they are clear in

your mind but as a reminder I enumerate the following points:

First, the Soviet strategy in the Persian Gulf region for several years

has been aimed at demobilization. The seizure of power in Ethiopia

and later in Afghanistan2 showed a Soviet willingness to set in motion

upheavals in Iran, Iraq, and the Arabian Peninsula. Clearly the Soviet

decision on this strategy was based on the assumption that they could

ride the upheavals and benefit.

Second, the Tudeh cadres and other pro-Soviet groups have proved

relatively weak as an objective basis for Soviet influence within Iran.

The obvious tactic for them, therefore, is to exacerbate tension and

conflict. What little intelligence we have about the student takeover of

the embassy supports this assumption.

Third, the Soviets can profit from either of two scenarios in Iran.

A radical left regime which gains control of the entire country and

develops a Vietnamese or Cuban-like relationship to Moscow is the

preferred outcome. An alternative outcome is dissolution of the Persian

empire and the intervention of outside forces, possibly Western in

southern Iran, which would justify Soviet intervention in northern Iran.

Fourth, our demonstrated weakness in the present crisis not only

has adverse effects on our allies in the region but also in Europe and

East Asia. If we do nothing, the credibility of our nuclear deterrent

posture is thrown into question. But if we react by punishing Iran and

endangering oil production there, Europe and Japan will be no less

upset at us. Either outcome encourages our allies to avoid tensions

with Moscow.

Fifth, the Politburo faces a dilemma in how to deal with Khomeini

in the present circumstance. Objectively, Brezhnev should support him.

The cost of doing that publicly, however, is so great that he will likely

avoid it. Nonetheless, Radio Tehran reports tonight that Brezhnev and

Gromyko support Khomeini’s stance against “plots.”

Implications for U.S. Policy

—Other forces such as Moslem opinion or world opinion may save

our Embassy personnel, but it looks completely beyond our power.

—It is not in our objective interest either to break up Iran or to

destroy its oil production. In other words, any retaliatory measure may

soothe our emotions, but it is difficult to see how it could serve our

objective interests.

—Other crises like this will face us in the months and years ahead

until we have regained a preeminent military posture based on a

firmer economy.

—A shorter term implication concern is our military posture in the

Persian Gulf. More ships in the Indian Ocean will never compensate

for ground bases and a strong military advisory effort which integrates

all countries on the Arabian Peninsula and perhaps a broader area.

First Responses

18.

Intelligence Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

[cable number not

declassified]

COUNTRY

Iran

SUBJECT

Situation in and around U.S. Embassy in Iran as concerns instigators of the

occupation, access to Embassy and security considerations2 [less than 1 line not

declassified]

SOURCE

[less than 1 line not declassified]

1. The decision to occupy the American Embassy in Tehran was

made personally by the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini on or about 20

October 1979. Implementation of the plan was assigned to students

from the religious center at Qom who have taken the title “Islamic

Students Following the Way of the Imam”. ([less than 1 line not declassi-

fied] comment: The Mujahidin-e Islam probably furnished advisors

and officers (L-Encadrement) for the students.) ([less than 1 line not

declassified] comment: A confidant of former Iranian Prime Minister

Shahpour Bakhtiar in Paris said on 9 November that the occupation

of the Embassy was certainly a planned action authorized by Khomeini

and therefore the identities of the occupants of the Embassy are not

important in terms of freeing the hostages. The order will have to

come from Khomeini. He suggested National Voice and Profile of Iran

Director Sadeq Ghotbzadeh as the one person in the Khomeini group

who might be relatively reasonable, but noted that Ghotbzadeh is not

in Khomeini’s inner circle.)

2. The occupation was carried out by a group of about 100 persons

but that number is now at least 200. The only group located outside

the premises of the Embassy to guard against the curious is a team of

“Guardians of the Revolution”, about twenty to thirty of them by day,

and half that many at night.

3. The Moslem students in the compound possess no heavy arms.

They have light weapons (G–3), grenade launchers, and hand grenades.

produced in Iran under license from the West German firm Heckler

and Koch. It is similar to the U.S. M–14 rifle.)

and held several press conferences. After 6 November, the commu-

niqués stopped, but a press conference was supposed to be held the

afternoon of 9 November.

5. Since 7 November, the Embassy has been completely cut off

from the outside, no one having gone inside except for Ayatollah Sadeq

Khalkhali who went in the afternoon of 7 November. Journalists have

not been permitted to enter, having been brutally pushed away by the

guards stationed outside. The determination of the students seems

certain. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: [1½ lines not declassi-

fied] Khalkhali is the leader of armed group called “Islam Fedayeen”

which is not the same as the Fedayeen-e Khalq who are against the

occupation. It is possible the “Mujahidin Islam” [less than 1 line not

declassified] and the “Islam Fedayeen” led by Khalkhali are the same

group.)

6. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: Except for some intellec-

tuals knowledgeable of international law, the Iranians have absolutely

no idea of the gravity of the action undertaken by the Islamic students

at the direction of the Imam.)

7. The Iranians approve of the action in general, the only reservation

expressed thus far having been those of new Iranian Foreign Minister

Abdol Hassan Banisadr who was concerned on 7 November that Ira-

nian ambassadors abroad might one day suffer the same fate. Since

then, however, Banisadr has rescinded his statement, and as of 9

November, was seeing only the positive points of the students’ action.

8. Iranian opinion estimates that the action constitutes a humiliation

which is without precedent, imposed by a small nation on a great

power. The oppressed have finally had an effect on the oppressors.

([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: This public opinion naturally

does not take into account the consequences which their enterprise

can have and are convinced that the United States will give in to

their demands.)

9. In the mind of Khomeini, these demands are to obtain the extradi-

tion of the Shah, to judge him and to execute him in order to destroy

the only dangerous enemy which remains. According to Khomeini, the

Shah is the only person who is capable of endangering the Islamic

Republic.

10. An American military action could be considered by the Iranians

as a cause for war (casus belli) and could lead Iranian officials to call

19.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

Justice

John Shanafield**

State

Secretary Cyrus Vance

CIA

Warren Christopher

Admiral Stansfield Turner

David Newsom**

White House

Defense

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Secretary Harold Brown

Hamilton Jordan

Jody Powell

JCS

Lloyd Cutler**

General David Jones

David Aaron

General John Pustay

NSC

Energy

Colonel William Odom

Secretary Charles Duncan**

Captain Gary Sick

John Sawhill**

**Those so marked attended only the discussion of domestic issues: Economic,

Energy, Legal.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The SCC meeting was divided into two parts: first, a discussion

of issues involving domestic considerations or with direct domestic

implications; second, a more restricted group to discuss political/mili-

tary issues.

1. Demonstrations. After a close call yesterday, the District of

Columbia has now forbidden any further pro- or anti-Iran demonstra-

tions. There is a need for better coordination between State, Justice and

the White House Counsel’s office to share information and facilitate

decision-making. A joint working group comprising these agencies will

be formed under chairmanship of the Attorney General. State will

explore the possibility of getting the Iranian Government to request

no further demonstrations here. (C)

2. Iranian Students. Justice, State and Cutler will report by Monday

morning specific steps which can be taken in the immediate future.

The most promising approach may be an order requiring all Iranian

students to report to Immigration to verify their status. Such a survey

would be helpful in clarifying the facts and would send a clear signal.

Actual deportation would be a lengthy process. The Attorney General

in August issued an order making the departure of Iranians voluntary,

even if out of status. This was done to protect Jewish Iranians and others

from being forced to return to Iran against their will. Congressman

Fish has asked that this be revoked in view of the present circumstances.

The consequences of such a revocation will be reviewed. (C)

Lloyd Cutler, Box 10)

First Responses

3. Iranian Assets. There is a report that Iran has ordered the with-

drawal of all their assets from U.S. banks. The Federal Reserve can

probably delay acting on this, but private banks will find it much more

difficult. By declaring a national emergency, all Iranian transactions

could be blocked. Dr. Brzezinski and Lloyd Cutler will talk to Treasury

Secretary Miller and ask that he contact Federal Reserve Chairman

Volcker to see what can be done to delay any withdrawals without

taking dramatic, overt actions. Their views will be sought on the impli-

cations of any freeze or other public act on our relations with other

major depositors. (TS)

5. Energy. Secretary Duncan will present a memo on Tuesday

outlining the range of options available to us in the event oil deliveries

are cut off. Basically, these fall into four categories: (1) acts which the

President can take unilaterally; (2) actions which the State governments

can take; (3) voluntary actions; and (4) emergency legislation. (C)

The following issues were discussed in restricted session:

1. Future Options. David Aaron will chair a group composed of Hal

Saunders (State), Frank Carlucci (CIA), and Robert Komer (DOD) to

examine the longer term implications of a possible disintegration of

Iran and how we could best position ourselves to influence the course

of events. The group will look at means of improving our intelligence

[less than 1 line not declassified], identifying groups which might cooper-

ate with us, and evaluating contacts with expatriate opposition

groups. (TS)

2. Evacuation. State is working with the Swiss to develop a plan

for bringing our people out if they should be released. An incomplete

survey indicates 87 known Americans still in Iran in addition to the

hostages. There are probably others that we do not know about. The

two largest groups are the Fluor personnel (about 50) building the

refinery in Isfahan and 30 Americans associated with the international

school in Tehran. Secretary Vance intends to inform Fluor to pull their

people out or their passports will be revoked. (S)

3. Emissaries and Negotiating Efforts. Ramsey Clark in Istanbul is

attempting to negotiate his entrance as a private citizen. Bill Miller will

be told to return. An emissary of the Pope was to see Khomeini this

morning. Four Ambassadors visited the hostages this morning. They

saw the hostages (including 12 women) but could not talk to them.

Waldheim is considering an emissary but wants to avoid crossing wires

with the PLO representative who was reportedly in Qom yesterday.

Secretary Vance has sent a message to Arafat encouraging his efforts

at securing release of the hostages. Strong representations were made

to Soviets to cease their propaganda. (S)

20.

Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central

Intelligence Agency

[cable number not

declassified]

COUNTRY

[less than 1 line not declassified]

SUBJECT

1. Coup plotting regarding Iran by Paris based group

2. [2 lines not declassified]

SOURCE

[3 lines not declassified]

First Responses

1. A group of [less than 1 line not declassified] Iranian expatriates

[less than 1 line not declassified] have formed a group, in Paris, France,

to organize a new, pro-Western government in Iran. The group hopes

to shut down oil production in Iran during November 1979 as part of

its campaign to remove the current leadership from Iran’s political

scene. The group is considering selecting either an Iranian general or

former Prime Minister Shahpur Bakhtiar to be the titular leader of the

provisional government, which could be confirmed subsequently in a

national referendum. A shadow government has been named to the

extent of having three choices listed for each of several principal govern-

ment jobs. Some of those on the list are Iranian expatriates, [1½ lines

not declassified]. Bakhtiar [less than 1 line not declassified] is not everyone

in the group’s first choice to head the government, but he is the most

likely nominee because he already is in France, and previously has

served as Iranian Prime Minister. ([less than 1 line not declassified] Com-

ment: [less than 1 line not declassified]

2. The Paris group has made high-level contacts with at least two

Persian Gulf governments in an effort to secure support for the venture.

[3 lines not declassified] Major Western governments apparently have

not been approached by the Paris group. The expatriates have not

received any firm pledges of support from any foreign government;

the search for signs of encouragement from such quarters continues.

3. The group’s timetable was dictated in part by [less than 1 line

not declassified] the United States Government intended to replace or

repair some of Iran’s military equipment commencing in January 1980.

The group concluded its best chance of success involved taking action

in Iran prior to that time. The expatriates reportedly believe the problem

is not so much the ouster of the Ayatollah Khomeini as it is having

enough support internally to keep a new government in power.

declassified].)

6. Reference: [less than 1 line not declassified]

21.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, November 10, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran (U)

My reading of Khomeini’s past behavior suggests that, although

he is not a man who “bargains” in the normal sense of the word, he

is capable of considering flexibility and even tactical retreat when he

perceives that a specific policy is in conflict with his ultimate goals.

We have a number of instances of such actions in the past. He opposed

the original draft constitution but found that there was widespread

support within his own government. So he permitted it to be published

with his blessing—and then used the Council of Experts to make the

Islamic changes he had wanted all along. He fired the army chief at

one point, then reversed himself when he found that the army chief

had more support than he had expected. The man was later eased out

in a general “reorganization.” He decreed that there would be no more

music, but music continues to be played in Iran. He called for all

women to wear the chador but then allowed that to lapse when there

was a general protest. He launched a major effort to incite the Shia

population of Iraq but then pulled back when he was convinced that

there was danger of an Iraqi attack. He has not changed his mind about

the Shia question, and he has lately raised the temperature again, but

he is being more careful. (S)

In considering our own strategy in the hostage situation, we should

focus all our efforts on convincing Khomeini that continuation of his

present policy is damaging to his long-term goals. Those goals I would

define as two: universal recognition of the Iranian revolution as a new

beginning in Islamic history; and his own retention of absolute power

Our strategy of mobilizing world opinion against the taking of

hostages is aimed directly at the first of those goals, and I believe it

has had considerable effect. The fact that Khomeini apparently felt it

necessary to deliver a long statement of self-justification after his meet-

ing with the Papal envoy2 (atypical of his style), suggests that the

message is beginning to get through. The Papal message, the coura-

First Responses

geous analyses of his representatives in Washington and New York, and

the flood of messages from previously sympathetic or uncommitted

observers throughout the world should at least have given him grounds

for concern that the revolution is being seriously damaged. (S)

Of more immediate importance—and more difficult for us to influ-

ence—is his concern about his own power position. As you know, I

am convinced that he is exploiting this situation (as he exploited the

Kurdish situation) to consolidate his direct control. In each case, he

has used a popular cause to rally public opinion against a well-identi-

fied enemy, thereby taking their minds off the failures of his own

rule. He has also used these occasions to accomplish specific political

objectives. In the Kurdish case, he appointed himself commander in

chief of the armed forces, closed down a troublesome press, and banned

opposition political activity which was beginning to develop some

clout. In the present case he has disposed of the Bazargan government,

which had become a thorn in his side. (S)

Just before going to Algiers, Bazargan had submitted to Khomeini

a petition signed by most of the members of his government calling

for the disestablishment of the Islamic Council of Experts on the

grounds that they had exceeded their mandate in revising the constitu-

tion. Khomeini must also have known that Yazdi, Bazargan and others

were meeting with U.S. [less than 1 line not declassified]—which he would

interpret as nothing more than plotting against him. Although Bazargan

was quite open in admitting his powerlessness, he also refused to shirk

his responsibility to inform Khomeini of what was going wrong and

the disagreeable steps necessary to correct it. Was he the bearer of bad

tidings one time too many? (S)

Every policy option available to us should be examined first in

light of whether it will contribute to persuading Khomeini that his

own power position is being undermined by his present course of

action. We have very little to work with, especially since Khomeini

will be making his judgment in terms of the facts on the ground rather

than words. Some thoughts:

—[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]

—[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]

—I have suggested to State that they take advantage of the telex

link to Bruce Laingen (directly through the Iranian Foreign Minister)

to give periodic updates on events as we see them. We could slip in

a few facts to give the Iranians pause, e.g. the USG is being

flooded with popular calls to take drastic action but the President is

resisting. This telex link is probably the most authoritative way we

have of communicating with the Iranians and we should try to use it

imaginatively. (S)

22.

Editorial Note

On November 12, 1979, President Jimmy Carter announced an

embargo on the import of Iranian crude oil into the United States. He

stated that the “grave situation” in Iran required “constraint” but that

the United States must “refuse to permit the use of terrorism and the

seizure and the holding of hostages to impose political demands.” He

urged the U.S. public to reduce its consumption of oil. The announce-

ment and Carter’s remarks are printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1979,

Book II, pages 2109–2111. Members of the International Energy Agency

(IEA) were also informed of this decision, citing it as necessary “in the

interest of removing oil as an issue in our efforts to free the American

hostages held in Iran” and in order to “emphasize that the issues at

stake are the fundamental international principles of the safety of our

citizens abroad, the prevention of the use of hostages for political

purposes and respect for diplomatic personnel.” (Telegram 294946 to

multiple posts, November 12; Department of State, Records of David

D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files,

prepared by the Department of Energy and the White House for brief-

ing the House and the Senate, November 13, stated that such an

embargo would not increase gasoline rationing, would be supported

ultimately by IEA members, would only briefly increase the price of

oil, and would not affect heating oil supply prices for the coming

winter. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office

After Carter’s announcement, Iranian Acting Foreign Minister

Bani-Sadr announced in Tehran that the Iranian Revolutionary Council

had decided to stop all oil exports to the United States. (Jonathan C.

Randal “Aide Lists Terms on Captives,” Washington Post, November

First Responses

23.

Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Director of the

Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Mark) to Secretary of

State Vance

Washington, November 12, 1979

Prospect of Indefinite Impasse in Iran

We think that enough evidence is now on hand to warrant the

judgment that

1) diplomatic action has almost no prospect of being successful in

liberating our hostages in Tehran;

2) no economic or other American pressure on the Iranian regime

(including U.S. military action) is likely to be any more successful in

securing their safe release; and

3) with a continuation of present conditions, the detention of the

hostages could continue for some months.

No significant improvement has taken place in the status of the

American hostages despite seven days of exceptionally intensive Amer-

ican diplomatic efforts. The Iranian authorities have made it clear that

they are—and will remain—scornful of all foreign initiatives to effect

the release of the hostages

On the other hand, during the same period, the Iranian position

has solidified, and the Iranian determination to stand firm has been

greatly strengthened:

—With ever increasing enthusiasm, the great majority of Iranians

has supported the Embassy seizure. Demands for the return of the

Shah and attacks on the U.S. are being voiced with growing stridency.

Khomeini and others have played on the martyrdom theme by praising

the glory of dying for Islam and the nation.

—The adamancy of the national leaders and of the “student” cap-

tors is now so intense that none but Khomeini himself now has any

flexibility in this affair (not that he has shown any signs of a desire to

exercise such flexibility in any event).

—The Iranian authorities have enunciated a conceptual framework

of self-justification, and it has gained great national acceptance. Accord-

ing to them, the Shah is a criminal, and human decency demands his

return to Iran for condemnation. He has been a U.S. puppet, through

whom America plundered Iran and destroyed its cultural and social

fabric. The American embassy was not a normal diplomatic mission,

but rather an espionage center, through which the U.S. exercised its

control over the Shah and Iran. Thus, the embassy and its staff have

lost all claim to traditional diplomatic immunity.

—The Iranian authorities have begun an international campaign

to present their position to the world. Their explanation of what is going

on coincides neatly with the thinking of many “establishmentarians”

in Third World countries. Some radical nations may soon state public

support of Iran. Others will probably accept Iran’s arguments privately.

In any case, Iran’s currently prejudiced standing in international eyes

is likely to be retrieved in the coming weeks among many Third World

governments, and Iran will gain prestige for having successfully humil-

iated Washington. The Soviets, by their reluctance to speak out in

behalf of established diplomatic principles, and by their support of the

justice of the Iranian students’ cause, are positioning themselves to

exploit the situation.

—We do not anticipate that the Iranian authorities have any present

intention of harming the hostages, but the situation is unstable and

could change, given the volatile nature of Iranian mass emotions. More-

over, if, as seems probable, economic conditions deteriorate further in

Iran over the next six months, and if this evolution generates new

political turmoil, it is impossible to foresee what might happen to our

hostages, should they then still be in captivity.

Only two contingencies offer a possible escape from the impasse:

The Shah’s death, or the Shah’s transfer to a third country. Although

the “students” in the embassy compound have insisted that the latter

event would not lead them to release the hostages, Iranian leaders have

not been so precise. Still, we cannot be at all certain that they would

not accept the students’ position and continue to hold the hostages to

induce the U.S. to bring pressure on Mexico (or the Shah’s other country

of asylum) to extradite him to Iran. On the other hand, Khomeini might

decide at some point after the Shah’s departure that he had gained

maximum advantage from the affair, that he could claim a great victory

over America, and that he should end the matter by expelling the

hostages (and, probably, by breaking diplomatic relations with the

First Responses

24.

Paper Prepared by the Interagency Group

Washington, November 12, 1979

Political Actions Contingency Planning

At SCC direction, David Aaron chaired a small interagency meeting

to consider political action/intelligence aspects of the Iran crisis. The

following points emerged:

—The key issue is whether we now want to undermine Khomeini

with a view to his overthrow. Up to now, we have tried to get along

with him in the hopes that moderates associated with him will prevail.

The assessment is that Khomeini is no longer in control of events, that

leftward radicalization is increasing and that a struggle for power is

under way. The moderates and we may be better off without Khomeini

than with him.

—[1 paragraph (14½ lines) not declassified]

—If we decide to try any of this, should we begin before the hostage

issue is resolved? No one had a clear assessment of whether stirring

up divisions among the current leadership would increase or reduce

Khomeini’s flexibility or the chances of getting the hostages back safely.

25.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

State

Frank Carlucci

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Warren Christopher

White House

David Newsom

Hamilton Jordan

Harold Saunders

Jody Powell**

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Defense

David Aaron

W. Graham Claytor

NSC

JCS

Colonel William Odom

General David Jones

Gary Sick

Treasury

Secretary William Miller**

Energy

John Sawhill**

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti**

**Present for discussion of domestic issues only.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Iranian Nationals. All agreed that a further act directed at Iranian

nationals was not desirable today. The acts taken to date have been

very effective, but if we get into a routine of taking a new act every

day it could be perceived as largely political in motivation. State will

First Responses

provide an advisory opinion by tomorrow on revocation of existing

visas which have not yet been used, exclusion of further Iranian nation-

als from entering the U.S., and the best means for prohibiting or delay-

ing issuance of additional visas. One possibility is to request that all

new visas be referred to Washington for review. It was noted that

about half of the visas granted in the past year were to minority groups

(Jewish and Bahá’í), and a formal exclusion could impact on these

2. Unofficial Trade Embargo. On the military side, State and Defense

have talked to the principal companies involved and they will cooperate

on a quiet basis. Commerce will have a paper ready today cataloguing

other areas of commerce except food. Treasury will provide a recom-

mendation tomorrow on how best to proceed. Secretary Bergland has

provided to the NSC a survey of food exports to Iran which will be

examined today. All agreed that interference with food exports is quite

different from other commodities and should be handled with great

care. Any work on a trade embargo is to be handled as extremely

sensitive. (S)

3. Iranian Assets. There was no unusual movement of Iranian assets

from U.S. foreign branch banks yesterday. The initial report of with-

drawal of Iranian assets appears to have been exaggerated. Major U.S.

banks have been asked privately to keep us closely informed of any

request for withdrawal and to delay action on the grounds of assuring

authenticity of the order after the change of government in Tehran.

All communications on this are to be conducted through Treasury.

State [less than 1 line not declassified] will turn off [less than 1 line not

declassified] normal contacts with banks. Treasury has done a draft

paper for the NSC on steps to be taken in the event of a freeze, and

the machinery is ready if needed. Iranian assets are estimated at $6–7

billion in U.S. banks, versus about $3 billion in U.S. bank loans to

4. Energy. Foreign and domestic reactions to yesterday’s announce-

ment7 have been uniformly positive thus far. DOE has prepared a list

first, a windshield sticker keeping each car off the road one day per

week; and secondly, a backup coupon rationing plan. A small inter-

agency group under DOE is looking at specific steps. It was agreed

that any legislative steps should be carefully orchestrated to prevent

getting bogged down in a lengthy debate on the Hill. The Governors

of the IEA will meet in Paris next Monday and we will need to consider

what we ask of them. (C)

5. Demonstrations. Justice will recommend that Interior revoke the

automatic permit previously granted to a group of Iranian militant

students to demonstrate in Washington. We expect the students to

challenge this in the courts. State and Justice are working together on

this and believe there is a decent chance that the revocation will be

sustained. (C)

Political-Military Issues:

1. Investigation/Trial of the Shah. Ramsey Clark is to talk to Professor

Falk to persuade him to drop his efforts at an international tribunal.

All agreed that a show trial was unacceptable as a means of seeking

release of the hostages. (S)

2. Eilts Mission. Hermann Eilts will arrive in Washington this after-

noon. Instructions will be drafted immediately following the meeting

in preparation for the President’s meeting with him. (S)

3. Fluor. The SCC agreed that it would be best to permit the negotia-

tions between Fluor and the Iranians for departure of their personnel

from Isfahan to proceed without public comment for the moment. It

was felt that drawing public attention to the issue would risk hardening

the Iranian position. Fluor is now down to 25 people. They may be

required to remain for another week to coordinate turnover to the

Iranians and other foreign nationals. (S)

First Responses

4. UN Security Council. The Iranians are calling for a UNSC meeting

to establish a commission to investigate the Shah’s crimes and return

his assets to Iran. All agreed that a formal debate in the Security

Council was undesirable, and Ambassador McHenry has been

instructed to attempt to turn off the request. If a UNSC meeting

cannot be avoided, we would take the position that there should be

no discussion of the Shah until after the hostages are released, since

that represents a clear violation of the UN Charter and international

5. Diplomatic Relations. The SCC believed that severing diplomatic

relations with Iran at this point would complicate the efforts which

are presently under way, including the PLO and the Iranian Chargé

who is trying to get a meeting with Khomeini. It could also introduce

unpredictable and possibly unproductive consequences from the Irani-

ans; however, the possibility of a break in relations should not be

precluded as part of a larger deal. Secretary Vance felt that other

friendly nations would probably resist any attempt to persuade them

to join us in breaking relations. The British Ambassador only yesterday

recommended to London that they cut back as far as possible but

maintain their staff in Tehran. The Mexican withdrawal is related to

their own expectation that the Shah will return to Mexico at some

point. State will do a more complete assessment of these questions on

an urgent basis. (S)

6. Contact by Kurds. State has informed our Embassy in London

not to meet with the Kurdish delegation seeking to contact us there.

We could probably not get the Kurds to do more than they are already

doing, and the contact could be used as evidence of hostile intent. (S)

7. Embassy Security. State briefed the press last week on the precau-

tions which had been taken at the embassy, but the story got little play.

State will make the attempt again to get the story out. (C)

26.

Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, November 1979

Iran: Forces Occupying the US Embassy in Tehran

[portion marking not declassified]

Summary

There are conflicting reports on the composition of the forces occu-

pying the US Embassy in Tehran. The principal organization involved

may be the “Islamic Monotheists,” a group of Islamic militants which

has declared its loyalty to Ayatollah Khomeini, but which apparently

has been heavily infiltrated by leftists whose loyalty to Khomeini is

probably only a protective measure. Leftists in the group may have

links to a radical Palestinian organization, [2 lines not declassified].

Spokesmen for this group have remained adamant in refusing any

negotiated compromise that does not include the return of the Shah

to Iran for “trial.” If a basis for negotiation short of returning the

Shah receives support from Khomeini, the latent ideological differences

among those occupying the Embassy could cause dissension within

the group and confusion over policy. It is unlikely, however, that the

group would continue to hold the hostages if Khomeini ordered them

released. [portion marking not declassified]

The group occupying the Embassy reportedly numbers 150 to 200.

Reports of security measures, including the posting of guards equipped

with light arms both inside and outside the Embassy gates, indicate

they are well organized. The hostages are dispersed among at least

three separate buildings in the Embassy compound, and relations

between the hostages and their captors reportedly are good. [portion

marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is a schematic of Tehran.]

Occupation of the Embassy

On 4 November a group identifying itself only as the “Muslim

Student Followers of the Imam’s Policies” occupied the US Embassy

in Tehran. The incident followed a pattern that has been frequently

repeated since Khomeini took power in Iran last February—that is,

First Responses

groups taking a specific action in Khomeini’s name following his gen-

eral policy statements. [3½ lines not declassified]

Although individual members of the occupying forces are report-

edly equipped with light arms, the initial entry into the Embassy came

as a protest demonstration rather than an armed attack. Some 400 to

500 people were reportedly involved in the initial entry. Their number

apparently has since been reduced to about 150 to 200. [portion marking

not declassified]

The occupying group is well organized. There is a security force

of 20 to 30 men outside the Embassy gates, some are carrying walkie-

talkies, to control the crowd of anti-US demonstrators on the street.

Five or six of these guards are outside the main gate and three or four

are at each of the other gates or on patrol around the Embassy in

several jeep-type vehicles and reportedly are armed with G–3 rifles.

Watch posts reportedly have been established in buildings within at

least a one-kilometer radius of the Embassy. According to one report,

a group has been organized outside the Embassy to come to the assist-

ance of the occupying forces if required. [portion marking not declassified]

Inside the Embassy gates, which are chained and padlocked, a

further security force of 20 to 30 men is reportedly located in the

parking lot. These guards also are armed with light weapons, including

G–3 rifles, machineguns, machinepistols, grenade launchers, and hand-

grenades. The compound and adjacent buildings are illuminated at

night. Despite the presence of armed guards and the daily demonstra-

tions outside the Embassy gates, the atmosphere inside the Embassy

compound is reportedly calm, and groups of up to 60 of the occupying

force gather periodically for prayer services. The relations between the

hostages and their captors is apparently good. The hostages, who have

been dispersed to at least three separate buildings in the Embassy

compound, have been provided with food and reading material from

the Embassy library. There have been no reports of violence directed

at the hostages. [portion marking not declassified]

Composition of the Occupying Forces

Although there are conflicting accounts on the forces occupying

the Embassy, the principal group involved reportedly is the “Islamic

Monotheists,” a group of Islamic militants devoted to Ayatollah Kho-

meini that was formed a number of years ago. The group has been

infiltrated recently by leftists who reportedly compose nearly 50 percent

of the present membership and who strongly influence the group’s

policies. On 9 November, when documents apparently recovered from

Embassy files were released, a statement was issued by spokesmen for

the group that was couched in leftist jargon and contained sophisticated

analysis which indicates that at least some members of the occupying

group are university educated. [portion marking not declassified]

Spokesmen for the group have refused adamantly any negotiated

compromise that does not include the return of the Shah to Iran for

“trial” and have stated they will not obey an order from the Revolution-

ary Council to release the hostages unless the Shah is extradited to

Iran. If a basis for negotiation short of returning the Shah receives any

support from Khomeini, the apparent ideological differences among

various members of the forces occupying the Embassy could result in

dissension within the group and confusion over policy. It is unlikely,

however, that the group would continue to hold the hostages if Kho-

meini ordered them released. [portion marking not declassified]

The Islamic militants who reportedly form the nucleus of the

Islamic Monotheists may be an offshoot of the “Hezb-eh-Allah” (Party

of God): groups of young, poorly educated, lower class Muslim fanatics,

initially organized during the 1967–68 period by the Mujahidin-eh-

Khalq guerrilla group. The Mujahidin organized the Hezb-eh-Allah

as a means of drawing sympathizers and recruits from lower class

opponents of the Shah. Hezb-eh-Allah groups were poorly organized

and engaged in limited operations such as attacks on police to acquire

weapons. These groups, which have gone by a variety of names, have

in the past year stated their allegiance to Khomeini and have been

involved in such activities as attacking liberal demonstrators protesting

Khomeini’s policies. [portion marking not declassified]

The size and organization of groups such as the forces that have

occupied the Embassy are difficult to determine. Unlike the two guer-

rilla groups active during the Shah’s regime—the Mujahidin-eh-Khalq

and the Cherikha-yeh-Fedai-yeh-Khalq—that developed a cohesive

ideology, tight organization, and security procedures that isolated them

from the social environment, the more loosely organized groups of

Islamic militants have tended to remain embedded in the society, draw-

ing support from their families and coming together on an ad hoc

basis. [portion marking not declassified]

The leftists among the forces occupying the Embassy may have

infiltrated the Islamic organization as a means of advancing their goals

under the protective coloration of ostensible fidelity to Ayatollah Kho-

meini. Khomeini has been strident in his attacks on the left, and the

leftist guerrilla groups that played a prominent part in overthrowing

the Shah have since been driven underground. [3½ lines not declassified]

Possible PFLP Involvement

[1 paragraph (5½ lines) not declassified]

We do not believe that the PFLP, whatever its involvement in the

Embassy seizure, is in collusion with Iranian Government officials.

Ayatollah Khomeini and his entourage have been deeply hostile toward

the PFLP and other radical Palestinian groups. Prime Minister Bazar-

First Responses

gan’s government was even more suspicious of radical Palestinian

activity in Iran. We cannot rule out the possibility, however, that the

PFLP is involved with at least some faction of the group occupying

the Embassy. For a number of years the PFLP has had contacts with

Iranian leftists. [portion marking not declassified]

The Palestine Liberation Organization’s Role

[1½ lines not declassified] Principal PLO leaders, however, moved

quickly to gain what international and American good will they could

from the situation. They presumably believe they gained a minor vic-

tory in the relaxation of Washington’s ban on contacts with them, but

their primary goal appears to be the major improvement in their image

if they can play a mediating role in obtaining the release of the hostages.

[portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.]

27.

Memorandum for the Files

Washington, November 13, 1979

forward a summary of the Danish Ambassador in Tehran’s account of

(November 13):2

The EC–9 Ambassadors reaffirmed their humanitarian concerns

regarding the occupation of the U.S. Embassy and reinforced their

earlier protest regarding the violations of international law.

The Danish Ambassador in Tehran commented that Bani Sadr

appeared after 45 minutes of discussion to take the EC–9 concerns

seriously and agreed to look into the betterment of the hostages’

conditions.

The Danish Ambassador in Washington indicated to me that he

assumes the other EC–9 members will be reporting separately and that

the Irish Ambassador is taking the lead in reporting the collective views

of the meeting. He, however, wished to pass on the account from his

Ambassador in Tehran at this time.

The Danish Ambassador called back at 2 PM November 13 to report

the following:

Bani Sadr has also mentioned to the EC–9 Ambassadors that Iran

has asked the UN Secretary General to seek U.S. agreement to (a) dis-

cuss a tribunal for investigating the Shah, with modalities to be decided

in the UNSC; and (b) for the U.S. to agree that it would accept the

decision of the tribunal with respect to the Shah and his family and

the disposition of his assets.

Bani Sadr said that he was hopeful that such an agreement would

be carried through. Bani Sadr had told the EC Ambassadors that this

general proposal had been brought to the Iranian Government by

“American sources”.

28.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, November 13, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran Breakdown?

29.

Memorandum for the Record by the Assistant Secretary of

State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)

Washington, November 14, 1979

In a telephone conversation with an American contact, I received

the following report at 0700: the American contact had received a phone

call from Khalid al-Hassan in Germany. The report was as follows:

—Hani al-Hassan, the PLO representative in Tehran, saw Khomeini

for three and one-half hours Tuesday, November 13.

—They have set up a committee consisting of Khomeini, Hani al-

Hassan, a representative of the students in the American Compound,

a representative of the Foreign Ministry (possibly Bani-Sadr himself).

—The committee is going to arrange that the “blacks, women, and

children” be released to the PLO today. (Khalid al-Hassan’s advice

was that the U.S. should not be overly grateful to the PLO in public

because it would complicate their role in Iran.)

Next, Hani al-Hassan has asked Khalid al-Hassan to check out in

the United States whether the following scenario could be worked out

with the USG: an announcement would be made that the Shah would

leave the U.S. on “x date.” An announcement would be made in Tehran

that the hostages would be released on “x date.”

Khalid al-Hassan also wanted to check out whether it was true

that Ramsey Clark had said that the Shah’s assets could be turned over

to Iran. I responded with the standard line on this subject—that any

Iranian who felt he had a rightful claim to any assets that might be

present in the United States would have access to the courts for pursu-

ing that claim.

During the course of Khalid al-Hassan’s phone call, he warned

against too many people muddying communications channels. He said

that the PLO is uncomfortable with Ramsey Clark and feels that he is

not well plugged in. In this connection, we were asked not to tell

anyone outside the Executive branch of this conversation—particularly

not Paul Findley.

Relations between Khalid al-Hassan and Abu Walid are close.

(Note: I presume from this comment that they would not regard the

Abu Walid channel as a muddying of the waters.)

Finally, Khalid reported that hatred of the U.S. in Iran is so great

that the PLO would prefer not to be thanked for anything it achieves

in this situation.

dor to Lebanon John Dean informed Saunders that he had received a letter from the

PLO stating that Iranian authorities would release the women and African-American

hostages by November 16 and expected “in writing a declaration by the USG announcing

the exact date of departure of the Shah.” (Department of State, Records of David D.

Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot

81D154, Memoranda of Conversation)

30.

Editorial Note

On November 14, 1979, Iranian Acting Foreign Minister Abol

Hasan Bani-Sadr told reporters in Tehran that Iran would transfer

approximately $12 billion deposited in U.S. banks to branches of banks

that would not be able to block the funds. He specifically mentioned

Iranian withdrawal of funds from Chase Manhattan Bank in New York,

headed by David Rockefeller. (John Kifner, “Iran Defends Move To

efeller, a friend of the Shah, had lobbied for the Shah’s acceptance

into the United States for medical treatment. Further documentation

is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume X,

Iran: Revolution, January 1977–November 1979.

The same day, in response, President Jimmy Carter issued Execu-

tive Order 12170, which states that the situation in Iran “constitutes

an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign

policy and economy of the United States and [I] hereby declare a

national emergency to deal with that threat.” Under the terms of this

order, the President froze all Iranian Government and central bank

assets in the United States. A White House announcement issued at

the same time noted that the freeze, which included assets in all U.S.

banks and their foreign branches and subsidiaries, was to ensure that

claims on Iran by the United States or its citizens would be covered,

Secretary of the Treasury William Miller told reporters that Iran’s

liquid assets amounted to less than $6 billion, the largest component

of which was $1. billion in Treasury notes held by the Federal Reserve

Bank of New York. The freeze did not affect the assets of private

individuals, including those of the former Shah. (Edward Walsh and

John M. Goshko, “The Freeze: U.S. Blocks Iran Assets, Heads Off Debate

Gwertzman, “U.N. Session Averted,” New York Times, November 15,

1979, page A1)

31.

Memorandum From the Chief, Near East and South Asia

Division, Directorate of Operations, Central Intelligence

Agency (Cogan) to Director of Central Intelligence Turner

Washington, November 15, 1979

SUBJECT

White House Situation Room Meeting on 14 November 1979 Concerning Covert

Action Prospects in Iran

1. The following is for your information.

signed, attended a meeting chaired by David Aaron at which Mr.

Robert Murray of DOD, Hal Saunders and Gary Sick were also present.

Explaining the background to this and the previous meeting on 12

November, Mr. Aaron said that the Vice President, after consultation

with the President, felt that planning should be initiated regarding

covert action in Iran, but this should be kept outside the SCC framework

at least for the present.

3. The aim of the group, continued Mr. Aaron, was to develop

options on Iran—without having crossed the threshold into anti-Kho-

meinism but on the assumption this will be the case. Mr. Aaron outlined

the broad lines of options as follows:

a. Sowing dissension within the Khomeini regime. Creating differ-

ences within the Revolutionary Council to enhance destabilization. [2

lines not declassified] In general, sowing dissension through both internal

and external contacts.

b. [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

c. The “infrastructure” option: irrespective of a and b above, what

can we do to build up assets (e.g., among the dissidents) who would

play a role in a future, post-Khomeini Iran?

4. Setting a target date of 19 November, Mr. Aaron said he would

like to have from the Agency a paper detailing what steps we could

take in response to the above three suggested options. NE Division

will work with Chief, [less than 1 line not declassified] Staff in preparing

this paper.

First Responses

5. Another consideration in the above context, said Mr. Aaron, is

the Soviet position and response in the current situation. What are the

Soviets doing and how can we counter this? DDCI plans to task NFAC

to respond to this requirement.

6. At the conclusion of the meeting, the DDCI noted that it would

seem feasible to undertake destabilization measures in Iran; e.g., orches-

trating a press campaign that Khomeini is leading the country to disas-

ter; inducing defections; announcing these defections; having Bakhtiar

go public in his opposition; organizing anti-Khomeini rallies, etc.

7. A paper prepared by NE Division (attached) was given to the

DDCI as background and talking points for this meeting.

Charles G. Cogan

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated

Possible Options to Increase Pressure on Khomeini,

Assuming Policy Decision to Unseat Him

I. While the hostages are still held, and there are believable assur-

ances that they will not be harmed:

(A) [1 paragraph (3½ lines) not declassified]

(B) [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]

(C) [1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified]

(D) Orchestrate an open anti-Khomeini rallying call by Bakhtiar.

Insure widespread press play. [1 line not declassified]

(E) [1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]

(F) Float rumor (press) campaign suggesting other western coun-

tries are soon to freeze Iranian assets.

(G) Establish contact with [less than 1 line not declassified] to confer

with him on options for possible future government.

II. While the hostages are being held, but we are uncertain as to

their well-being (threats having been made, one or more having already

been executed); and/or the post hostage situation:

(A) Make the necessary commitments to the following individuals

in order that they issue public statements withdrawing their support

of Khomeini

(2) [name not declassified]

(3) [name not declassified]

(B) After this is done, make needed commitments to the following

to follow suit:

(1) [name not declassified]

(C) [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]

(D) Initiate widespread [less than 1 line not declassified] press cam-

paign pointing out disaster of Khomeini government. Focus on eco-

nomic problems, collision course, isolation, irrationality.

[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]

In efforts such as described under II above, the risk of leading to

the collapse of the central government is inherent. Just what would

suffice to halt the diffusion of power once the Khomeini forces were

gone, is uncertain. Bakhtiar, for all his liabilities is perhaps the answer.

We believe from available evidence the left in Iran is not yet ready to

move to establish control from the center or in any of the provinces.

They do have the capability to instigate economic disruption—particu-

larly in the oil fields. In the face of this, it might look possible that the

succeeding government would have to invite foreign technicians and

skilled workers back to Iran to get the fields working again.

32.

Memorandum From the Inspector General, Central

Intelligence Agency (Waller) to Director of Central

Intelligence Turner

Washington, November 15, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran Situation

1. This memorandum contains an idea for your consideration and

further exploration.

what action we might take in view of the deteriorating situation in

Iran—ideas which, in my opinion, should be based on the premise

that any viable accommodation with Khomeini is neither possible nor

desirable. This does not address itself to the more acute problem of

the refugees.

3. I have attached a few thoughts. I am sending copies to the DDCI,

the DDO and Chief, Near East and South Asia Division, whose grasp

of the present situation is better than mine and who may have a sound

basis on which to reject this out of hand or modify it. Clearly there are

some drawbacks. Any covert action under the 662 procedures carries

with it the consequences of leakage. Also any dynamic political action

in the south of Iran, if it became known, could stimulate compensating

Soviet covert action in the north (including Tehran), in which leftists,

Kurds, Azerbaijanis, Mazandaranis, etc., are used to promote pro-

Soviet regimes, as was the case in 1945–1946. I believe, however, that

it must be assumed that the Soviets already have dynamic links to

one or more leftist movements and would be quick to capitalize on

provincial chaos in the north anyway, if they could do so.

John H. Waller

Attachment

Paper Prepared by the Inspector General, Central

Intelligence Agency (Waller)

Washington, November 15, 1979

POSSIBLE U.S. COURSES OF ACTION

[1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified]

a. Provide secret encouragement and give material assistance to

Bakhtiar as the moderate opposition figure who seems to have the

most momentum. But this course of action must presuppose that he

can overthrow Khomeini and form a viable alternative government. I

believe he may be able to upset Khomeini, providing two things: (a) he

can rally some kind of viable military underground which can seize

street power in the face of both leftist and pro-Khomeini street machin-

ery, and (b) he can somehow get Khomeini personally out of the pic-

ture—[less than 1 line not declassified]. But, I doubt if Bakhtiar could last

long if he did overcome the odds and take power. Either resurgent

Islamic mass protest or leftist street disruption could prevent him from

effectively ruling. He might well be assassinated by one fanatic or

another. In sum, Bakhtiar, bearing an intolerable burden of ousting a

saint, ill-equipped to contest on the street and with the best of luck

armed only by an uncertain military force, and with no provincial

backing (except the Bakhtiar tribe between Tehran and Isfahan) is not

a good bet, in my opinion. [2 lines not declassified]

b. Let nature take its course in Tehran—monitor it but not influence

it—until someone else rids Iran of Khomeini, [3½ lines not declassified].

The purpose of the following analysis is to explore in outline how

we could achieve this latter alternative:

[heading (1 line) not declassified]

The Saudi Arabian Government must be assumed to be concerned

and worried by events in Iran as:

a. A breakdown of Iran would lead to leftist, pro-Soviet control

or, at a minimum, a feudal chaos in Iran. Geopolitically, either possibil-

ity must be frightening to the Saudis.

b. Evidence of Shia missionary zeal could pose a direct threat

to Gulf Sheikhdoms who have significant Shia populations (Bahrain,

particularly) and, more importantly, pose a possible—at least, theoreti-

cal—threat to the Saudi Shia population which dominates Saudi Ara-

bia’s oil producing and refining regions near Dhahran.

c. Apparent U.S. impotence and inability to do anything once again

underscores how little hope Saudi Arabia can put in the U.S. as its

protector.

d. As a provincial vacuum in Iran provides its prime rival, Iraq, with

a happy hunting ground for intrigue amongst the Arabs of Khuzistan

(possibly also amongst the Kurds, although the Iraqis must view the

Kurds as a double-edged sword).

e. As a situation in which an irresponsible clerical, nationalist gov-

ernment might revive irredentist agitation for the return of Bahrain.

33.

Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political

Affairs (Newsom) to Secretary of State Vance

Washington, November 15, 1979

34.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to President Carter

Washington, November 15, 1979

I believe that any rescue operation into Teheran within the next

two weeks would have a very low probability of success.

We need better to help you prepare for a decision on such an

operation, and on what the alternatives are.

First, you deserve an explicit statement of the likelihood of success

of a rescue attempt. (Recall that the JCS reviewed the plan for the Bay

of Pigs and judged it to have a “fair” chance of success. To the military,

“fair” is like a “D” in college; the White House interpreted the JCS

opinion as a “fair chance of success.”)

Next, you need to know how the likelihood of success would

improve over time. You may not be able to control the timing, but you

will want to consider alternatives in this light.

In addition, you deserve optional rescue strategies that have differ-

ent political requirements. Only you can balance the political costs with

the changes in probability they afford.

I suggest that you ask the JCS and Secretary of Defense to prepare

a chart like the attached. (A second copy with only nominal entries is

also attached to provide a feel for how useful it might or might not be.)

Finally, you deserve a considered list of alternatives. If you eschew

a rescue operation, the pressure of public opinion will require as imme-

diate and decisive a set of actions as possible.

First Responses

Attachment

Chart Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, November 15, 1979

RESCUE OPERATION OPTIONS

Probability of Success by:5

Type of

External

Key Factors Driving

Plan

Operation

Support

Nov 20

Nov 27

Dec 3

Dec 10

Dec 17

Probabilities

A

Air land rescue team;

[less than 1 line

Very

Very

Low

Low-

Medium

Vulnerability of air lead;

helo to Tehran and

not declassified]

low

low

Medium

availability of helos.

return; fly out.

B

Air land rescue team;

[less than 1 line

Very

Low

Low-

Medium

Medium

Vulnerability of air lead;

helo to Tehran and

not declassified]

low

Medium

availability of helos. [less

return; fly out.

than 1 line not

declassified] distances

less; chance of land

exfiltration higher.

Air land rescue team;

[less than 1 line

Very

Very

Very

Low

Low-

Difficulty of exfiltration

infiltrate to Tehran;

not declassified]

low

low

low

Medium

by road.

exfiltrate by road to air

field.

Infiltrate attack team;

[less than 1 line

Not

Not

Not

Low

Low-

Need time to infiltrate

helo directly in and out.

not declassified]

possible

possible

possible

Medium

rescue team, helo

distance long.

E

Infiltrate attack team;

[less than 1 line

Not

Not

Low

Low-

Medium

Distances less.

helo directly in and out.

not declassified]

possible

possible

Medium

F

Infiltrate attack team;

[less than 1 line

Not

Not

Low-

Medium

Medium- Distances still less.

helo directly in and out.

not declassified]

possible

possible

Medium

High

35.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

CIA

Hamilton Jordan

Admiral Turner

Jody Powell**

Frank Carlucci

State

Justice

Secretary Vance

Attorney General Civiletti**

Warren Christopher

Treasury

Dave Newsom

Secretary William Miller**

Harold Saunders

Robert Mundheim**

Defense

Energy

Secretary Brown

Secretary Charles Duncan**

Graham Claytor

John Sawhill**

White House

NSC

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Gary Sick

David Aaron

Bill Odom

**Present for discussion of domestic issues only.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Hostages. Secretary Vance briefed on the announcement this

morning that women and blacks not guilty of espionage would be

released. The decree by Khomeini has been confirmed by the students.

Arrangements have been made with the Swiss to fly them out when

the release actually occurs. They will go to Frankfurt for medical exami-

nation and a rest of a day or so before coming back to the U.S. We

expect about 10–12 people. We do not know how the transfer will

actually take place. The hostages may be released to the PLO or some

other intermediary. (C)

2. Demonstrations. The Attorney General believes that the ruling

yesterday permitting demonstrations will be upheld by the Circuit

Court on appeal. However, in view of the strong belief of the Secretary

of State that the danger to the hostages created by any incidents is

very great, the ruling will be appealed. (U)

3. Iranian Assets. Transactions involving the FMS trust fund under

control of the Department of Defense will be licensed. Operation of

the Bank Melli in New York was unilaterally assumed by New York

authorities. Secretary Miller believed this was unfortunate, but it is

now an accomplished fact. The Iranian Embassy officials state that they

need $20 million per month to maintain remittances for students in

this country. Treasury is still investigating the actual procedures used,

but intends to authorize new Iranian funds (i.e. beyond those blocked

by the action earlier this week) to pay for these remittances as well as

financial obligations.

Iran also holds accounts in foreign branches of U.S. banks in curren-

cies other than dollars. These amount to $300–500 million total. Contin-

ued blocking of these assets will intensify the conflict of laws problem,

e.g. preventing transactions in British pounds in a London bank. The

SCC agreed with Treasury that these funds should be unblocked.

The British have thus far refrained from issuing any counter order

and are being generally cooperative. Secretary Miller intends to stop

in London for further discussions on his way back from the Middle

East. The latest figures on total Iranian assets are as follows: $1. billion

in the Federal Reserve (hard figure); $5. billion in foreign branches

of U.S. banks. The $5. billion includes the foreign currency accounts

of $300–500 million and may include double counting of some oil

payment accounts of as much as $1 billion. Iran has claims of about

$1. billion on U.S. banks, so the net advantage in U.S. favor is about

$5 billion. Other claims may also appear, including up to $1 billion of

U.S. direct investment in Iran. The Export-Import Bank has a technical

default on an Iranian loan for failure to meet a payment of $2,000.

Treasury intends to proceed very deliberately in declaring a default

since Iran may have been unable to make the payment as a result of

our action. Private banks, however, may declare default on Iranian

36.

Paper Prepared by the Joint Staff

Washington, November 17, 1979

BEST ESTIMATE OF SITUATION AT THE COMPOUND

Immediate Security of Compound:

Although not confirmed by hard intelligence, it appears that hos-

tages are being held in at least five and possibly eight locations within

the compound. Security includes 20–30 “students” and Islamic Revolu-

tionary Guard (IRG) personnel at the Chancellory gate, supported by

foot and motorized patrols. News reports on evening of 16 November

indicate that up to 100 “soldiers” are joining guard personnel around

compound. There are 20–30 additional “students” and IRG in the Chan-

cellory, with 125–175 “students” providing direct security of the hos-

tages, who are reportedly loosely bound. “Students” inside the hostage

holding areas appear to be armed with pistols while those outside

have automatic rifles and submachine guns. Explosive devices on the

perimeter wall have also been reported. It is likely that the compound

is under surveillance from adjacent buildings although no observation

posts or gun positions have been seen on surrounding rooftops.

Reinforcements:

militia can be at the compound, followed by an IRG motorized “Strike

man Ranger reaction company and up to 1500 IRG back-up strike force

personnel may arrive in 30–45 minutes, followed shortly thereafter by

an additional 1500–2000 man IRG Strike Force. In addition, an easily

excited populace has tended to rally to the compound in large numbers

in support of the students when unusual events occur (e.g., recent

power outage resulted in mob scene at Embassy). The sheer numbers,

without regard to their discipline, cohesion or competence, add up to

a most significant threat.

Rescue Assault at the Compound:

Best judgment is that it would take all of the available 75 specially

trained Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta personnel scaling

the walls during darkness and with complete surprise to have a reason-

able chance of freeing at least a substantial number of the hostages.

The assault personnel would have to complete their task within 30–40

minutes, from assault to movement from the compound. The assault

would be timed for the quiet hours after midnight when few people

are on the streets. If surprise is achieved and Delta’s actions can be

completed quickly within the compound, the probability of successful

movement away from the compound is enhanced. However, there is

a high risk of any movement being impeded by the convergence of

reinforcing elements and civil mobs. Cover and deception actions else-

where in the city and the neutralization of the radio/TV stations are

being planned.

Insertion and Extraction:

Any chance for success is critically dependent upon achieving sur-

prise and therefore a low visibility insertion concept is envisioned. This

First Responses

would entail having people in the city providing hard intelligence,

developing safe havens in advance, arranging for guides, transporta-

tion, communications, and general support. Some progress is being

made in developing this capability and personnel involved believe

much can be done but some time will be required to reach the desired

level of effectiveness. Insertion concept is to have two MC–130 “Combat

Talon” aircraft (specially equipped C–130 aircraft and crews trained

for blackout night operations at low altitude over hostile territory) take

off from a country in area (planning now from Aswan, Egypt) and

airdrop or assault land Delta personnel in outskirts of Tehran to be

met by personnel in-country, transported to safe havens, and spend

approximately 24 hours reconnoitering and preparing for assault the

following night. If successful in freeing hostages, force will then move

to transportation (such as garbage trucks which are reportedly a com-

mon sight during the night). Departure would be to the north and west

(into area of city with best roads and fewest people) to designated

departure airstrip (e.g., blocked off road or flat open field) for MC–

130 aircraft pick up. Aircraft will make an assault landing, quickly load

passengers and depart for third country.

Personnel and Aircraft Preparatory Movements:

Air refuelable MC–130s are required, and because of their limited

number would have to be drawn from Florida and Okinawa. The

aircraft from Florida would go through Europe to Egypt and aircraft

from Okinawa through Diego Garcia. Personnel from Delta would be

transported to Europe via C–141 aircraft and transferred to MC–130s

in forward area for onward movement to Aswan.

Actions Required for Implementation:

—Delta personnel must assemble in isolation, plan, rehearse and

make final preparation. Thirty-six Delta personnel have been isolated

and are in training, preparation and rehearsal. A scale model of the

compound has been provided to assist with familiarization and plan-

ning. The number of Delta personnel in isolation is being increased

gradually and carefully to reduce potential for compromise.

—Detailed planning will continue by Delta personnel [less than 1

line not declassified] until departure. Planning with limited, essential

interagency interface will continue in Washington. MC–130 crews will

have to be alerted to begin their specific planning and rehearsal for

the mission. Some limited face-to-face coordination and planning

between the Florida crews and Delta personnel can take place prior to

departure for Europe; the entire force will not be assembled until arrival

at Aswan.

—From standpoint of moving people and aircraft, insertion could

be made in about four to five days from the decision to go, with

assault about one day later. However, there are still many loose ends,

particularly as to in-country arrangements. It is difficult to tell how

soon those arrangements can be brought to a minimum satisfactory

level. To shorten the movement time appreciably it will be necessary

to alert MC–130 units and link up elements with Delta personnel in

forward areas, with attendant obvious security risks. Proceeding from

where we are to D-day would then still depend upon receiving defini-

tive intelligence and solving support problems in Iran.

Required Decisions:

Authority already given:

—Isolate, train, rehearse, and prepare Delta personnel.

—[1 line not declassified]

Authority required:

—Establish [less than 1 line not declassified] contacts for required

assistance for insertion of the force, for aid in assault and extraction

or, if necessary, movement to safe havens.

Authority required, but no action recommended until in-country

elements are in place and preparations underway:

—Alert MC–130 crews and have them begin required preparations

(some of this may be feasible to begin covertly without informing crews

of the nature of their mission).

—Move MC–130s from Okinawa to Diego Garcia.

—Provide tanker support as required throughout operation.

—Move US-based MC–130s to Europe.

—Move Delta from isolated training area to Europe to join MC–

130s.

—Direct movement of all elements to Aswan.

—Launch aircraft and insert Delta.

—Execute Delta assault and extraction following night (MC–130

aircraft launched for extraction timed to rendezvous with Delta and

hostages on designated pick-up assault landing strip).

Actions to Improve Probability of Success:

Continue to:

—Assemble intelligence on actions within and in vicinity of com-

pound. This intelligence will be fed to Washington planning cell, to

Delta, and to MC–130 planners.

37.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, November 18, 1979

SUBJECT

Looking Ahead

The Constitution as Prime Mover

The events in Iran since mid-summer can be related directly to the

power struggle underlying the formulation and adoption of a new

constitution. In June and July, Khomeini acceded to a western-style

constitution based on the 1906 document. However, in late July and

August he moved with great determination to insure that his own

version of the constitution would be adopted. First, he packed the

Council of Experts with his own radical Islamic followers, headed by

Beheshti, and directed them to rewrite the original draft according to

his own vision of an Islamic Republic. To support this effort, he used

the crisis with the Kurds to proclaim himself commander in chief of

the armed forces, to shut down press opposition and criticism, and to

ban independent political organization.

This initial coup successfully rallied the people around his own

leadership and threw the incipient opposition off balance. The show

of force was sufficient to convince Iranians inside and outside the

country that it was futile to oppose Khomeini, and it solidified fickle

Iranian political opinion behind him as the apparent winner. The Coun-

cil of Experts proceeded to redraft the constitution systematically, plac-

ing the clergy at the center of power and creating a special role for

Khomeini personally as a sort of President for Life. Once this was well

underway, Khomeini’s interest in the Kurdish conflict waned. Recently

he has shown willingness to negotiate an accommodation providing

for considerable cultural autonomy.

Bazargan and his cohorts in the “government” opposed the super-

Islamic constitution, and they began to press more and more openly

for a more democratic model. Shortly before Bazargan, Yazdi and

Chamran left for Algiers, they presented a petition to Khomeini asking

that the Council of Experts be disbanded on the grounds that they had

exceeded their mandate. Khomeini refused. This may have been the

final straw. In addition, Khomeini was probably aware that the Bazar-

gan faction had begun [less than 1 line not declassified] establishing the

potential for eventual opposition to his personal rule.

The arrival of the Shah in New York and the absence of Bazargan

et al. in Algiers provided the opportunity for the second coup. The

focus of propaganda attacks shifted from the Kurds to the United

States, and Bazargan suddenly came under attack for his meeting with

you. The attack on the embassy was carefully organized. Not only did

the attackers come prepared with detailed information and equipment

(gas masks and acetylene torches), but the coincidence of the attack

with a massive (diversionary) demonstration at Tehran University and

the absence of all responsible government officials insured that police

protection would be unavailable during the critical first hours.

The incident provided the opportunity to remove the Bazargan

government and replace it with the Revolutionary Council. It also

solidified support from the students who were an unpredictable ele-

ment in the anticipated debate on the constitution. Thus, Khomeini

further consolidated his personal control of effective power and elimi-

First Responses

nated those elements most likely to be troublesome in achieving his

own vision of an Islamic Republic.

Khomeini’s Position

Khomeini now has a tiger by the tail, but he is playing for high

stakes and is willing to risk all. By placing himself at the visible center

of authority, he becomes directly responsible for government actions.

Since he and his people are largely incapable of administering the

country, this will work against him in time. However, by seizing the

initiative in a bold way, he assures that all factions remain cautious.

Groups may get together and complain, but as long as he is unyielding

and winning, they will probably do little but talk. The stakes have

been increased, however, since Khomeini cannot allow himself to be

perceived to be out maneuvered or defeated in this latest test of wills.

I suspect that his confidence at present is based on several

assumptions:

—The United States will take no direct action for fear of losing

the hostages.

—He can wait longer than we can, and eventually he will be able

to drive a bargain that makes him appear the winner.

—If the U.S. should strike, the U.S. moral position will be under-

mined and his own position strengthened. He does not mind losing

even large numbers of lives.

—He is the glue holding the country together, and especially in a

time of great threat, Iranians will stick behind him as the only alterna-

tive to total chaos and dismemberment of the country.

—Although he cannot ride this wave forever, it should be enough

to get him through the announcement of the constitution and the refer-

endum now scheduled for December 2. In the meantime, he will

attempt to shift the burden of proof to the United States by conducting

spy trials.

—Celebration of Ashura on November 28–29 assures that religious

frenzy and emotional commitment will increase, rather than decrease,

in the short run.

Nevertheless, Khomeini is not in full control. His control over the

students is less than complete. Unrest is growing in the military and

probably in other areas of society. He is losing in Kurdistan. Azerbaijan

is on the verge of revolt and would require only the smallest signal

from Shariat-Madari to move against him. The oil fields are increasingly

anarchic. Iraq is sending threatening military signals. The Bazargan

group is looking for an opportunity to reestablish itself. And the aver-

age Iranian is probably far more apprehensive about a direct clash

with the U.S. than Khomeini himself.

U.S. Options: Strategy I

Khomeini is playing for time. He must get the constitution ratified

by referendum. After that, the usefulness of this ploy will no longer

be great and he may be willing to resolve the problem or try to make

it go away—as he did with the Kurds after a month or two.

In the meantime, we should work for limited objectives:

—Get additional hostages released on the grounds that they are

not spies. Khomeini may find an occasional release is a means of

keeping the international community off his back, while he determines

the pace of events. The PLO and UN channel could work on this.

—Get the hostages transferred from the students to the Revolution-

ary Guards. This might appeal to Khomeini since it would give him

better control over the day-to-day situation. At the same time, it would

increase the pressures within the Revolutionary Council and elsewhere

favoring release since it would require only a government decision

rather than a prolonged negotiation with the students. We could start

working on this objective now, even though it may not be doable until

after the referendum or some other later time.

In support of this strategy, we should continue the international

barrage, while pressing hard for regular contact with the hostages.

Strategy II

Khomeini is ultimately susceptible to domestic pressures. If there

is substantial evidence that this approach is working against him and

seriously eroding his power base, he will be inclined to find a way to

shift his approach. We can help speed up that realization:

—[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

—[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

—[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]

Strategy III

We must recognize that neither of the above courses may succeed.

It may be preferable to seize the initiative by a rescue effort. I cannot

second guess the expert thinking on this, but I would offer the

following:

—[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]

—November 29–30 is the obvious date.

Although preparations for such an effort are compatible with Strat-

egy I, Strategy II should be avoided to prevent growing suspicions of

an active U.S. intervention. Also, it would be useful to send some

lulling signals via covert channels (particularly the PLO) to the effect

that we might consider releasing the Shah in certain circumstances.

This would engage them in internal debate and reinforce their belief

that we were thinking of no direct action.

38.

Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central

Intelligence Agency

[document number not declassified]

Washington, November 19, 1979

Iranian-US Economic Sanctions:

Impact and Reactions [portion marking not declassified]

Iran’s revolutionary leaders appear determined to continue their

head-on conflict with the United States. The Ayatollah Khomeini and

his advisors now believe they have the opportunity to extract retribu-

tion from the United States for its past support of the Shah. Further-

more, Khomeini undoubtedly is using the anti-US campaign to revital-

ize his revolution and to distract attention from the country’s pressing

domestic economic problems. The Ayatollah and his entourage, increas-

ingly carried away with revolutionary zeal, are showing little concern

for the impact of their moves on Iran’s economic and political future.

[portion marking not declassified]

Economic Moves to Date

The Iranians have used a number of economic weapons—some

pre-dating the most recent seizure of the US embassy in Tehran—in

their attempt to apply pressure to the United States:

• All banks and insurance companies—including US holdings—

were nationalized prior to the current flareup. While compensation

for the value of US investments (estimated at $100 million) has been

promised, payment has not been made.

• Oil shipments to US companies were banned following US action

to prohibit the import of Iranian petroleum. While adding some pres-

sure on oil prices, this action will not have a major effect on the world

oil market so long as Iranian production is not cut.

• Withdrawal of Iranian funds from the United States and from

foreign subsidiaries of US banks was threatened. Initially causing some

confusion in currency markets and driving down the value of the dollar

somewhat, this action—even if not thwarted by a US blocking of Iranian

assets—would have had little impact as long as the funds were placed

in dollar-denominated accounts.

• Remaining US investment in Iran (estimated at $300 million)

reportedly has been nationalized. Considerable amounts of equipment

and supplies owned by US contractors also are involved. [portion mark-

ing not declassified]

The United States, for its part, has (a) frozen Iranian assets,

(b) banned the import of Iranian oil, and (c) halted all shipments of

military supplies. [portion marking not declassified]

Future Economic Moves by Iran

Although the opening salvos have been fired, neither Iran nor the

United States has wheeled out its major economic guns. Iran’s prime

economic weapon would be the complete cutoff of oil exports. Varia-

tions could include: (a) reducing oil exports only by the amount going

to the United States or to US companies or (b) extending the embargo

to cover countries supporting US policy. The impact of these measures

would depend on the reaction of other oil producers who could:

(a) do nothing (possible), (b) cut output in support of Iran (unlikely),

or (c) increase output to offset the shortfall (possible). [portion marking

not declassified]

First Responses

Unless it felt seriously threatened by the United States, Iran proba-

bly would prefer to take less drastic actions. These might include:

• Refusing to accept dollars for payment of oil. With 70 percent

of oil payments to Iran in dollars at present ($15 billion annually) this

would cause minor, short-term disruptions in world currency markets.

• Blocking debt payments to the United States. Total Iranian debt

to the United States amounts to about $3 billion, with debt-service

payments probably running over one-half billion dollars a year. US

banks reportedly have seized an estimated $1 billion of frozen Iranian

assets to cover themselves against this contingency.

• Converting all liquid dollar assets to other currencies. This would

put substantial downward pressure on the value of the dollar. [portion

marking not declassified]

Possible US Countermoves

Most US economic countermoves would involve cutting Iranian

imports. The Iranian import picture has changed drastically since the

revolution. Exports to Iran, led by capital goods and semi-manufac-

tures, have fallen about 70 percent in value so far this year compared

with 1978. Food imports, down 25 percent from last year, still cover a

quarter of Iranian requirements. [portion marking not declassified]

Iran is especially dependent on imports for the following agricul-

tural products:

• Vegetable oil imports equal about 80 percent of domestic consump-

tion; shortages have already been reported.

• Corn, sorghum, and other feed grain imports cover nearly 60 percent

of domestic consumption; stocks are low.

• Rice imports provide about 40 percent of domestic consumption;

current stocks are probably sufficient for one to two months.

• Wheat imports provide 15 to 20 percent of consumption; current

stocks probably equal one and one-half months of supply.

• Mutton and beef imports supply about 20 percent of domestic

consumption; current stocks are reportedly very low. [portion marking

not declassified]

The United States, West Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom,

Italy, and France (in that order) have been Iran’s major suppliers during

the past several years. These countries provided roughly 70 percent of

Iran’s imports in 1978. This year, because of the increased importance

of food items and Iran’s attempt to diversify trading partners, Australia,

New Zealand, and some less developed countries—especially sugar

exporters—have grown in importance. [portion marking not declassified]

About three-fourths of Iran’s international trade arrives at the Per-

sian Gulf ports of Khorramshahr, Bandar Khomeini, Bushshr, and

Bandar Abbas. Khorramshahr, traditionally the best equipped and most

modern port (surpassed by Bandar Khomeini in traffic in 1978), primar-

ily handles private sector trade, while Bandar Khomeini is the port of

entry for government imports. The port of Khorramshahr is up the

Shatt al Arab River, which is used both by Iran and Iraq. The remainder

of Iran’s foreign trade passes through rail and road links with Turkey

and the Soviet Union or through minor ports on the Caspian Sea.

[portion marking not declassified]

Iranian Vulnerability to Economic Sanctions

The principal economic levers available to the United States

include: (a) a partial or complete unilateral trade embargo against Iran,

(b) a collective embargo by the United states and its main allies, and

(c) a US naval blockade. Of these, a naval blockade would be most

disruptive to the Iranian economy. [portion marking not declassified]

Unilateral Embargo on Exports

An embargo imposed by the United States alone would exert only

slight economic pressure on Iran. With a few possible exceptions, other

suppliers could be found for most categories of Iranian imports, includ-

ing food. The cutoff of US food shipments to Iran would likely cause

only a few months of disruptions. Even before the recent flare-up, the

Iranians were diversifying their sources of agricultural imports in order

to become less dependent on the United States. [portion marking not

declassified]

• Vegetable oil imports—half of which normally come from the

United States—could be obtained in South America and Western

Europe, albeit with considerable delay. Brazil, for example, has frozen

export sales of soy oil until the next crush is completed in March 1980

due to a poor crop.

• Rice—now supplied almost entirely by the United States—is

available from other sources, especially Japan.

• Wheat is available on the world market. While the United States

once supplied 90 percent of Iranian imports, Tehran has already sub-

stantially diversified its source of supply by signing agreements with

Australia for 520,000 metric tons and Turkey for 50,000 tons. [portion

marking not declassified]

The transhipment of US food through third countries would be

extremely difficult to control. Export agents have already started to

designate the Persian Gulf and Pakistan as destinations in order to

overcome problems associated with the refusal of US longshoremen

to load Iran-bound cargoes. There have also been reports in recent

months of extensive shipments of US rice to Dubai, undoubtedly for

transhipment to Iran. [portion marking not declassified]

While other indusrialized countries, including those of Eastern

Europe and the USSR, could eventually replace the United States as

suppliers of most raw materials and spare parts, some items can only

be provided by the United States, at least for an extended period of

First Responses

time. The most critical items include military equipment and spares,

spare parts for civilian aircraft, turbine compressors for gas pipelines,

pumps, drilling rigs, power generating equipment, and telecommunica-

tions equipment. How long it would take for an embargo on these

items to have some effect would depend in part on inventories in

Iran. While we do not have specific information on inventories, recent

trading patterns would suggest that stocks are extremely low. Stocks

of kerosene, in short supply earlier this year, have been rebuilt, and

kerosene should not be a problem as long as the oil refineries are kept

operating. [portion marking not declassified]

Collective Embargo by the West

A collective ban on exports to Iran is only a remote possibility as

long as Iranian oil continues to flow. Given their heavy dependence

on Iranian oil and worsening domestic economic conditions, Japan,

Western Europe, and major LDCs such as Brazil would oppose actions

that could lead to a complete oil cutoff. Collective action by even a

few countries would probably prove difficult as illustrated by the in-

ability of the United States to get support for its trade embargo against

Cuba. [portion marking not declassified]

Upon extreme Iranan provocation—a cutoff of oil exports or the

killing of US Embassy hostages—a collective export embargo might

be feasible. Such action, if rigidly enforced, would affect some three-

fourths of total Iranian imports, including over 50 percent of all food

imports and most manufactured and industrial imports. The problems

associated with controlling a US embargo would also apply in the case

of a collective embargo. Although the USSR and other suppliers, mostly

less developed countries, would be unable to replace all the embargoed

trade, they could supply most essential imports. Replacement of spare

parts for Iranian industry, which was developed largely with West-

ern equipment, would be especially difficult. [portion marking not

declassified]

Naval Blockade

An effective naval blockade of Iran would have the most serious

disruptive effects on the economy. The international support of a block-

ade would depend upon whether it was seen as an unprovoked US

unilateral action or as a countermeasure to extreme Iranian measures.

Barring further Iranian provocations, such action would probably be

vigorously opposed by the major foreign oil importers. If employed

as a countermeasure, it would receive more support in the West. [portion

marking not declassified]

History has shown that efforts to interdict a nation’s lines of com-

munications on a sustained basis are rarely completely successful.

While a naval blockade would increase the cost of transport of Iran

and cause severe economic disruptions, basic requirements could con-

tinue to be imported along established rail, highway, and waterway

links with the USSR and, to a lesser extent, with Turkey and with

Pakistan. These transport links have combined optional capacity of

some 7 million tons per year. The most these routes have carried in

recent years, however, is 3 million tons. Iranian imports are currently

running at about 7. million tons per year, one-half last year’s amount.

[portion marking not declassified]

In this situation, transport routes through the northwest region of

Iran would become an important funnel for the movement of high-

priority goods. On the rail side, the Soviets could increase the volume

to the rail link with Iran at Jolfa. The two lines, however, are of different

gauges and would require either transhipment or a change of wheel

sets. If there were a substantial pickup in truck traffic, the Iranians

would soon be confronted by problems of both road and truck mainte-

nance (especially since the flow of parts and supplies would be dis-

rupted), which would reduce the capacity of the highway alternative.

[portion marking not declassified]

Other fallback possibilities would include the limited rail and high-

way link with Turkey and the road link with Pakistan. The Pakistani

rail and highway line runs as far as Zahedan, Iran. Zahedan, however

has no rail link with the rest of Iran and the road link is difficult.

For this reason, high-priority goods coming through Pakistan would

probably be airlifted from Zahedan’s airport; Zahedan was used as an

airlift facility for Iran’s support of Pakistan during the last India-Paki-

stan War. [portion marking not declassified]

The backbone of any regional airlift operation would be the Iranian

mately 1,700 tons at any one time. We estimate that three-fourths of

the combined fleet would be initially available for airlift activities. A

sustained and concerted airlift operation, however, would quickly run

into maintenance problems. [portion marking not declassified]

Iranian Pain Threshold

The effectiveness of economic trade sanctions to compel nations

to act against their perceived national interests has traditionally been

overstated. In the case of the US embargo against Cuba, for example,

the Cubans were able and willing to increasingly tighten their belts.

Khomeini would be able to rally some mass support, especially from

the poorer classes, by focusing on the theme of martyrdom in Shia

Islam. However, substantial disruption of supplies would almost cer-

tainly heighten opposition among the middle and upper classes. The

First Responses

bazaaris who were the financiers of the revolution would be hard hit

by economic sanctions; their support of Khomeini has already waned

because of deteriorating economic conditions. [portion marking not

declassified]

The most immediate pressure on Khomeini could come from the

cutoff of US military equipment and supplies. While he has shown little

concern over the domestic economic and political difficulties created

by his actions, Khomeini might be more disturbed by the loss of military

equipment because of the sorry state of the Iranian military and the

tense state of Iranian-Iraqi relations. The most realistic members of

Iran’s military are already aware that they are no match for the Iraqis.

As the US ban results in a further military deterioration, their views

are increasingly likely to be transmitted to Qom where they probably

will cause great concern. [portion marking not declassified]

The timing of US actions will also be critical in determining the

resolve of the Iran populace. US actions taken without extreme provoca-

tion would probably solidify Persian support behind Khomeini’s anti-

American campaign. All economic hardships—including those suf-

fered since the start of the revolution—are now justified by blaming

the United States. In the absence of what the Iranians see as new

provocations, a chance exists that in time Iranian attention will be

refocused on the domestic economic situation. The revolution has not

produced the hoped-for improvement in economic conditions. Indeed,

it has made things worse for many, including the large number of

unemployed urban workers, and disillusionment is spreading. More-

over, many Iranians are becoming increasingly uncomfortable with

the fundamentalist Islamic percepts that guide today’s Iran. [portion

marking not declassified]

The urban workers would be the hardest hit, at least initially, by

trade sanctions. These workers, who had hoped to reap substantial

economic benefits from the new Islamic government, are instead find-

ing high unemployment, rising inflation, and shortages of goods. Given

the exodus of middle and high level managers and skilled technicians,

industry is unlikely to be kept running at even its current low rate

with the additional burden of trade sanctions. Thus, as unemployment

mounted and additional shortages appeared, a trade embargo or block-

ade could exacerbate the frustrations of many socioeconomic interest

groups. These frustrations could be vented against the Khomeini gov-

ernment as well as against the United States. [portion marking not

declassified]

Foreign Reactions and Positions to Date

Foreign official reactions to the US-Iranian confrontation have been

predictably low-profile and publicly balanced. Privately, foreign gov-

ernments have been somewhat more supportive of US measures. [por-

tion marking not declassified]

Most Arab nations have privately condemned the seizure of the

American embassy, with only Libya supporting Iran. Many Arabs feel

that the Iranian regime is giving Islam a bad name. The Arabian Penin-

sula Arabs, moveover, fear the new Shia militancy being pushed by

Khomeini. Iraq has been the most vocal in expressing anti-Iranian

feelings. The Iraqis have talked of abrogating the 1975 Iran-Iraq security

agreement and have signaled to the United States their support of

continued US pressure on Khomeini. [portion marking not declassified]

The Arabs have, however, expressed concern over the precedent

being set by the blocking of Iranian assets. UAE officials, for example,

reportedly feel that the US move was misguided and that it will force

a reevaluation of UAE foreign investment policies as well as those of

other oil producers. The Libyan delegation to the Arab Foreign Minis-

ters meeting in Tunis called for joint Arab reprisals against the United

States. The Libyan initiative received only mild support from Syria

and was soundly rejected by the conference, suggesting considerable

sympathy for the US position. [portion marking not declassified]

Reactions from the major industrial countries have been subdued

and publicly balanced. This apparent lack of enthusiasm for US

measures is probably due to nervousness over the potential for disrup-

tions in international financial and oil markets. Reaction to the US

halt of purchases of Iranian oil has been positive and supportive, but

extremely low key. [portion marking not declassified]

The US decision to freeze official Iranian assets held abroad is

causing few specific difficulties for foreign governments, but almost

all foreign governments have questioned the legality of the US action.

Nevertheless, there appears to be general agreement not to actively

pursue the question of legality at this moment. All available reports

indicate that the US blocking order has been extremely effective abroad,

particularly in the United Kingdom, which harbors a large percentage

of Iranian investments. [portion marking not declassified]

Prospects for Foreign Cooperation With Other US Sanctions

The prospects for active foreign support of additional US counter-

measures against Iran are slim, if the American hostages are not harmed

and if other countries are not more directly provoked. The West Europe-

ans and Japanese will continue to maintain as low a profile as possible

and will watch the mood and response of the other OPEC states

extremely carefully. In the meantime, they will likely continue to

applaud US firmness, argue against military action, and attempt to

remain as uninvolved as possible. [portion marking not declassified]

A request that Brazil—a possible major exporter of food to Iran—

join an embargo would be met by stiff opposition on the grounds that

39.

Editorial Note

On November 19, 1979, the White House released the following

statement:

“Three of our hostages in Tehran have been released and have left

Iran. After a brief period of rest and care, they will be reunited with

their families here in the United States. The remaining hostages must

also be released. Their detention is without justification. The Govern-

ment of Iran is responsible for achieving their immediate and safe

release, and the United States has the right to expect that Iran will do

so. The specter has been raised of other American diplomatic hostages

being placed on trial. Such a step would be a further flagrant violation

40.

Report Prepared by the Interagency Group

Washington, November 20, 1979

BLACK ROOM REPORT

We have been examining the situation in Iran from the standpoint

of influencing the course of political developments. These develop-

ments are likely to include one of the following:

—a hostile Islamic state or hostile leftist state—either supported

by the USSR.

—disintegration of Iran with possible Soviet intervention in the

north.

To influence events, there are several approaches which could be

followed. Each involves an increasing level of U.S. commitment:

1. Contingency Planning. Let nature take its course and be prepared

to weigh in at the appropriate moment by virtue of indirect contact

with dissidents.

First Responses

3. Contact Opposition. Direct U.S. contact with potential alternative

leaders indicating support for their efforts. Expanded contacts with

tribal elements, initially aimed at better intelligence collection.

4. Encourage/Organize Alternative. On political side, aim at a govern-

ment-in-exile or creation of a political cadre which could move in

quickly. On the tribal side, provide arms, support and coordinating

mechanism for regional movements.

Several basic policy questions must be answered in considering

our approach:

1. Are we prepared to accept a commitment to destabilize the

situation in Iran and try to replace the present leadership?2

—It could be a protracted effort, and success is by no measure

assured.

—The commitment will tend to grow over time and to become

increasingly visible.

—This could weld the left and religious extremists together on a

common anti-American theme.

But

—Friendly opposition forces are unlikely to act effectively without

a clear signal from us.

—Continuation of Khomeini’s rule is likely to destroy the moderate

elements in the political spectrum, leaving the left as the only credible

alternative to religious fanaticism when Khomeini inevitably falls or

passes from the scene.

2. If we make such a decision, what is our strategy? Should we

focus our efforts on the regime in Tehran and attempt to replace the

central government?

—Tends to preserve territorial integrity and unity.

—Minimizes risks of Soviet (or Iraqi) dismemberment.

But

—Khomeini is strongest in Tehran—controls the streets.

—[1 line not declassified]

3. Alternatively, should we focus our efforts on the periphery to

build up an alternative government?

—Tribal opposition is real and could undermine Khomeini’s

authority.

—The oilfields are the possible prize. We would maximize our

chances of holding the oil in the event of complete collapse or Soviet

intervention.

But

—The risk of civil war and complete disintegration is serious.

—The danger of Soviet intervention in the north is increased. This

is likely to be a partition option.

What assets do we have?

—[3½ lines not declassified]

—[2½ lines not declassified]

—[1½ lines not declassified]

—Exile groups are begging for a signal from us. There are some

good people (Amini, Bakhtiar) outside Iran that can have an impact

there, but they would need a lot of help to become a significant factor.

—Ultimately, direct overt U.S. intervention could be required. The

extent of our commitment should be no greater than our willingness to play

it out to the end. This is particularly important the more we involve the

Saudis and Egyptians.

—The Iranian military at present belongs to no one. Although our

capability to swing it to our support is limited, neutralizing it is a

realistic objective.

Our liabilities:

—Khomeini is viewed as a saint by much of the Iranian population

and the embodiment of the national will. Opposing him directly may

only strengthen his appeal. He is ruthless and thrives on confrontation.

—Khomeini controls Tehran and the streets. It is hard to visualize

any leader or organization taking him on on his own turf.

—There is no obvious alternative leader. Most have been tainted by

association with the Shah. This is particularly true of the exiled military.

Three alternative assessments:

1. The only way to find out how much strength Khomeini really

has is to test it. That means we have to take some action, e.g. [less than

1 line not declassified], probing weak spots in the military and political

structure, and increasing our level of contacts with tribal elements and

exiles. We are never going to be able to work with the Khomeini regime.

We might as well recognize that fact and begin a systematic effort to

build an alternative infrastructure. Letting nature take its course in fact

means abandoning the field to the left as the only viable alternative.

The longer Khomeini remains in power, the more tempting it will be

for the moderates to move to the left or be crushed. A center coalition

will emerge only if we encourage and support it.

2. Although we do not like Khomeini, [less than 1 line not declassified].

By opposing him directly, we play into his hands and strengthen his

appeal. Khomeini is his own worst enemy. Left to his own devices, he

will destroy himself. We should prepare for that event and [less than

1 line not declassified]. But we should not get ourselves committed to

41.

Editorial Note

On November 20, 1979, Carter administration officials held a series

of meetings to discuss developments in the hostage crisis. The SCC

preliminary ideas for responses to hostage trials, ongoing consultations

at the UN, and a special report prepared by the Interagency Group

(printed as Document 40). Vice President Walter Mondale, Secretary

of State Cyrus Vance, Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher,

Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Harold Saunders, Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, Graham Claytor

from the Department of Defense, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs General

David Jones, General John Pustay from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Director

of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner, Frank Carlucci from the Cen-

tral Intelligence Agency, Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan, Press Secretary

Jody Powell, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

Zbigniew Brzezinski, the President’s Deputy Assistant for National

Security Affairs David Aaron, and William Odom and Gary Sick from

the National Security Council Staff attended the meeting. (Carter

Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional File (H–Files),

President Jimmy Carter, who was at Camp David for the upcoming

Thanksgiving holiday, called Powell at 11: a.m. and told him to join

with Vance and others in an emergency SCC meeting to draft a state-

ment in response to a speech Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini would

give that day. (President’s Personal Notes, November 20; Carter

Library, Plains File, Box 1) Khomeini’s speech was reported by FBIS

at 12: p.m. that afternoon. In the speech, Khomeini characterized

President Carter and likeminded leaders as a “clique” of oppressors

given to the “disease of self-glorification.” He said that Mohammed

Reza Shah had “the illness only to see himself and a few flatterers and

a number of clowns around him, to see only these people and not to

have any consideration for the nation” and that this illness had caused

his destruction. Carter, he said, “is afflicted with the same disease,

except in a more severe form—the more the power, the more severe

the disease.” According to Khomeini, the hostages were spies, and

unless the Shah was returned to Iran, the hostages might be tried and

20; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Coun-

That afternoon, several meetings occurred to address the issues of

the potential trial and execution of the hostages and Khomeini’s speech.

the Interagency Group. Policy Planning Staff Director Anthony Lake,

Saunders, Robert Komer and Robert Murray from the Department of

Defense, Carlucci, and Sick attended the meeting.

The Interagency Group reviewed a contingency paper prepared

by the Iran Working Group that delineated U.S. options should a

trial occur and/or the hostages be moved to an Iranian prison under

Pasdaran Guard control. The last option (Item 31) in the draft plan

was to carry out a military rescue operation to save any hostages not

First Responses

executed as the result of a trial. This group dispersed at 2 p.m. so that

some of its members could attend the emergency SCC meeting called

by Carter. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

The emergency SCC meeting took place at 2 p.m. in Washington.

In attendance were Vance, Christopher, Carlucci, Turner, Hamilton

Jordan, Claytor, the President’s Assistant for Congressional Liaison

Frank Moore, Pustay, Mondale, Brzezinski, Aaron, Sick, Odom, and

Powell. Carter called Brzezinski during the meeting to say he was

leaving Camp David for the White House to hold an emergency meet-

p.m. without a decision, although Vance remained behind to work on

the draft reply to Khomeini’s speech. (Carter Library, National Security

account of this meeting has been found. Carter returned to Camp David

after the meeting.

While principal members of the administration attended this emer-

gency NSC meeting, Aaron, Lake, Carlucci, and Sick concurrently

reconvened the Interagency Group at 4 p.m. and resumed the discus-

sion on the contingency paper that had been suspended at 2 p.m. While

the Interagency Group was meeting, the emergency NSC meeting con-

cluded and sent to Aaron a “Matching Options” paper prepared by

the President, which provided a checklist of possible U.S. responses to

hostage trials, including non-specific potential military actions. Later

that evening, Sick took this “Matching Options” paper to Lake’s office

for incorporation into the draft contingency paper that the Interagency

Group had been discussing. Both papers are attached to the record

of the Interagency Group’s November 20 meetings. (Carter Library,

National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 35, Sub-

meetings have been found.

42.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, November 20, 1979

CONTINGENCY PAPER

SUBJECT

Trials of Hostages

I. Introduction

Khomeini apparently has now committed himself to trying the

hostages for espionage. He has said nothing about the modalities or

how many would be tried, nor has there been any official comment

on the possibility raised by the German Embassy that prisoners would

First Responses

be moved to Ebin Prison. (The Germans believe the latter would be a

constructive move since it would place the hostages outside of stu-

dent control.)

The trials could take a number of alternative courses:

—Quick, in camera trials with some or all of the hostages found

guilty and all expelled unharmed. If trials are inevitable, as now seems

likely, this is the most favorable outcome.

—Some hostages are found innocent, but others are found guilty

and sentenced to prison terms. This could include a public show trial

in which hostages “confess” and “documentary” evidence of espionage

is produced.

—As above, but with some hostages sentenced and quickly

executed.

—Trials could be held at the compound by students, or by revolu-

tionary courts, or by both.

General Strategy

—While we want to generate universal condemnation of the trials

by governments, organizations and jurists in an effort to prevent them,

we will also want, in recognition of the probability that trials will be

held, to work through some special channels for the least damaging

outcome.

—Our primary objective, once trials seem imminent, should be

to influence the Iranians to adopt the most moderate approach in

conducting the trials, i.e., rapid, in camera proceedings leading to quick

and safe expulsion of all hostages.

—We should avoid any steps which would lend any legitimacy to

the trials, such as urging the presence of international observers.

—Policy options below should be considered against the following

criteria: (1) will they have an impact on the Iranian position on trials

or (2) will they further inflame opinion in Iran without producing

the desired outcome? And will they help the President maintain the

initiative with domestic opinion, but without inflaming U.S. public

anger?

—We need also to consider the psychology of Khomeini and his

entourage. Open threats and punitive signs may influence the Revolu-

tionary Council toward moderation, but may inflame Khomeini and

arouse his own sense of martyrdom. Threats quietly delivered can

also influence the Council, and may speak to Khomeini’s respect for

“strength.”

—A crucial question is whether a series of “tit for tat” actions, or

a more dramatic step, is more likely to be effective in moving Khomeini.

—In any case, we should keep the negotiating track open through

Waldheim and the PLO, with elements already introduced, i.e., once

the hostages are released, willingness to accept a Security Council

debate on the Iranian complaint, leading to some sort of inquiry of

human rights under the Shah; placing no obstacles in the way of Iranian

efforts to obtain the Shah’s assets through our court system; and agree-

ing to conduct relations in accordance with UN principles.

Section II, which follows, provides a chart illustrating the options

available to both the Iranians and the United States, at various levels

of escalation. It is broken down into those actions each side can take

itself and those requiring action by others.

Section III discusses diplomatic steps.

Section IV outlines the advantages and disadvantages of action

options available to us. The options are divided into diplomatic, eco-

nomic, and political. (Military and intelligence options are addressed

elsewhere.) Within these three categories, the options are listed in order

of increasing severity.

[SECTION II] ILLUSTRATIVE LIST OF ACTIONS

Level of

Iranian Actions

U.S. Actions

Multilateral

International

Confrontation

Against U.S.

Against Iran

Acts vs. Iran

Acts vs. U.S.

Present

Took Hostages;

Embargo oil

UNSC

Seek UNSC

partial release

imports

Statement

debate

Threaten Trials

Freeze Assets

EC–9

Seek OPEC non

Closed

Hint military

Declaration

use of dollar

Consulates

response

Démarches in

Seek

Kitty Hawk

Tehran by

condemnation

INS and

others

of Shah

students

Continued

(no success to

efforts to

date)

mobilize

world opinion

and

supportive

statements

Escalation

Announce

Restrict and/or

Press foreign

Continue to

Trials

declare PNG

governments

seek

Stop using

Iran diplomats

to reduce

support—

dollars for oil

Revoke/

presence in

probably with

Reduce oil

Revalidate

Iran

little success

production

Iranian visas

UNGA

700,000 bpd

Embargo

condemn

Withdraw

imports from

Ostracize Iran

diplomatic

Iran

diplomats

personnel

High-level

Intensify

Hostages

Emissary

appeals

moved to

consult

prison

Saudis,

Break

Shaikhdoms,

diplomatic

Iraq(?)

relations

First Responses

Embargo all

Further

U.S. products

reinforce

military

forces, Indian

Ocean

Initiate

destabilization

efforts

Break

diplomatic

relations

Serious

Students hold

Overflights

Seek economic

Escalation

trials

Step up

measures by

Islamic Court

destabilization

U.S. allies

begins trials

efforts

Seek UN

Reduce oil

Deny visas to

sanctions

exports to 2

all Iranians

Shah to Mexico

mbd

except special

or Egypt

Burn/Destroy

cases

Ask many

Embassy or

Move carrier

nations break

U.S. property

close to or in

diplomatic

Expel all

P.G.

relations

Americans

Expel Iranian

Convince IFIs/

Some hostage(s)

students/

UN reduce

found

others

operations in

innocent,

Total Embargo

Iran

others await

on exports to

trial

Iran

Severe

Hostage(s)

Selective

Emergency

Escalation

found guilty

military

UNSC

American(s)

option(s)

hurt or

executed

Declares war on

U.S.

Attack U.S.

ship/acft

[Omitted here are Sections III and IV of the Contingency Paper.]

43.

Memorandum From Ambassador Eilts to President Carter

Washington, November 21, 1979

This supplements my series of reports from the field (attached).

IRANIAN HOSTAGE PROBLEM

My Two Talks With Sadat (November 14 and 18)

As we had anticipated, Sadat felt that there was relatively little

that he could do with respect to the Iranian hostage situation. He

characterized Khomeini as “mad.” He suggested that Fahd might be

able to exert some influence on Khomeini, but acknowledged that

because of Sunni/Shi’a cleavages, even Fahd’s prospects might be lim-

ited. He doubted that the Lebanese Shi’a leadership could do much,

but thought it was worth a try and suggested the Saudis be asked

about this.

I explained to Sadat that you were thinking of (a) a possible contin-

gency action in the event our hostages were hurt, and (b) a possible

punitive action against Iran after the hostages have been gotten out.

While you had not yet made any decision, you would welcome Sadat’s

views and also, should you decide to undertake one or another such

action, his help. I specifically mentioned your hope that he might permit

us to use the Aswan Airfield for staging purposes. Aswan, I noted, is

somewhat remote and therefore out of the public eye.

Sadat said that he had been thinking a great deal about the Iranian

hostage problem. He had been looking at maps to consider what kind

of action he might take if he were in your position. He spoke firmly

about the need to undertake some kind of punitive action against Iran

in order to reestablish the United States’ credibility and national honor

in the Middle East. If Khomeini gets away with his action, Sadat said,

the position of the United States in the Middle East will be badly hurt.

At my first meeting, Sadat had no specific ideas; at my second meeting,

however, he suggested that after the hostages are out, the United States

should level the Iranian oil fields as a lesson. Whatever you decide to

do, Sadat emphasized on both occasions, should be done in the form

of a one-time action rather than an American occupation of parts of

Iran. A one-time, punitive strike, in Sadat’s view, will be understood

by most of the nations of the Middle East, even though some will

publicly protest. An American occupation, on the other hand, will be

counterproductive in terms of Middle East attitudes.

Sadat wants you to know that, should you require help, any facility

in Egypt is at your disposal. He mentioned Aswan and also Berenice

as possible places to be considered. Should you wish to send an

advance team for planning purposes, this can be taken up with

Mubarak. Mubarak was present at both meetings and Sadat instructed

him to handle the matter with all discretion. Mubarak told me, inciden-

tally, that aviation fuel is available at both places. I stressed to Sadat

that you have not as yet made any decision on this matter, but that I

knew you would be very grateful for his understanding and prof-

fered help.

Sadat also suggested that a second strike through Turkey might

be useful, but acknowledged that the Turks may be reluctant. He had

heard news reports of the move of the MIDWAY toward the Persian

Gulf, applauded this show of force and suggested that a second carrier

be sent to show the American determination.

Talk With Prince Fahd (November 17/18)

I conveyed to Prince Fahd your appreciation for what he has

already done in connection with the hostage problem and asked if he

had any further thoughts on what Saudi Arabia might be able to do

with Khomeini in order to get the hostages released. I said nothing to

Fahd about possible contingency or punitive action.

Fahd spoke scathingly of Khomeini and affirmed that Saudi Arabia

has been trying, in an Islamic context, to point out how Khomeini’s

action is hurting Islam’s international reputation. He said that he had

earlier in the day sent Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal to see

Yasir Arafat in Riyadh in order to press Arafat to continue the PLO

effort with the Iranians. He freely acknowledged that the Saudis are

making the point to Arafat that the PLO image in the United States

and in the world at large will be immeasurably enhanced if it can

somewhat succeed in getting the hostages released.

Fahd’s only other thought was the possibility of trying to organize a

multi-national group of distinguished ‘ulama (Islamic religious doctors)

who would go to Tehran to remonstrate with Khomeini about the

damage that the Iranian action is doing to Islam’s good name. Such a

group, Fahd noted, would be able to point to Khomeini that the Iranian

treatment of the American diplomats is totally contrary to the Prophet’s

handling of diplomatic envoys. Fahd acknowledged the potential diffi-

culty caused by the Sunni/Shi’a cleavages and said he was not sure

whether his idea is viable. He planned to discuss it before he left for

Tunis the following day with Qudhi Harakat, one of the most learned

Saudi religious doctors and a former Minister of Justice, in order to

ascertain the latter’s estimate of the feasibility of such an idea. If Harakat

believes it makes sense, Fahd said, he would try to enlist support for

the idea at the Tunis Summit meeting. (I rather doubt that this idea is

viable with a man like Khomeini and since, I understand, Fahd’s visit

First Responses

to Tunis was cut short because of the Mecca incident, he probably did

not have the opportunity to raise it. Still, it is worth a try.)

I asked Fahd if he thought that the Lebanese Shi’a leaders might

have any influence on Khomeini. Fahd noted that since the disappear-

ance of the Imam Musa Sadr, there is no acknowledged Lebanese Shi’a

leader. He frankly did not know whom to suggest, but said he would

consider the matter further. Later in the conversation, he suddenly

reverted to this theme and said he would be seeing Lebanese politician

Saeb Salaam the next day and would ask him. (I am not sure Salaam

can help much, since he is Sunni.) It might be worth following up on

this with Fahd, although the prospects are limited.

Fahd had two other points on Iran. First, he was extremely curious

about the Shah’s state of health. Did the Shah really have cancer and,

if so, how serious is it? (I think his curiosity was prompted primarily

by suspicion that we may have allowed the Shah in under a pretext

of the need for medical treatment.) In asking these questions, he showed

no signs of hostility toward the Shah, but also no particular affection.

Second, after I had told him that the blocking of Iranian assets was

prompted by the need to assure that American claims against Iran will

be settled, Fahd wanted to know what the extent of these American

claims might be. Again, he did not criticize our action, but I did sense

an underlying uneasiness on his part over the freezing. Since I did not

have specific information on either of these two points, I limited my

comments to an assurance that I understood (a) the Shah is indeed

seriously ill and (b) the American claims are sizeable, though I had no

specific information on their exact amount. You may wish to consider

instructing Ambassador West to provide clarification to Fahd on these

two points.

Talk With Chatti (November 16)

Chatti, who has just taken over the function of Secretary-General

of the Islamic Conference, had relatively little to offer.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

the Islamic University of Medina, attacked and occupied the Grand Mosque in Mecca.

The attackers were led by Juhaiman ibn Muhammad ibn Saif al-Utaibi, who claimed to

be motivated by opposition to the Saudi ruling family. After receiving permission from

the ulema to bear arms in a holy place, the Saudi Arabian National Guard (SANG) tried

unsuccessfully to regain control of the mosque. Approximately 127 people died. Two

weeks later, a coordinated assault by the Saudi military, under instructions from three

French special operations commanders, defeated the students, leaving 250 dead and 600

wounded. By November 27, the Saudi Government had regained complete control of

the mosque. Al-Utaibi was subsequently found to have been a member of SANG. Sixty-

three people, including al-Utaibi, were publicly beheaded on January 9, 1980, for partici-

pation in the attack. For the U.S. reaction to the attack, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,

vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula, Documents 201–205.

44.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Brzezinski)

Washington, November 20, 1979

SUBJECT

CIA Support to Rescue of Hostages in Iran [portion marking not declassified]

1. This Agency has been asked to undertake activities in support

of possible DOD Delta team efforts to rescue the hostages in Iran by

assisting in contingency planning and training and by furnishing cer-

tain supplies and support services. To date the only activities of this

Agency have been the provision of documentation for the members of

the Delta team. Now, however, we have been requested to provide

ammunition, communications equipment, travel arrangements and cer-

tain other supporting material and services to the Delta team. Because

these activities involve a not insubstantial expenditure of Agency funds,

they raise a serious question of legality under the Hughes/Ryan amend-

ment. [portion marking not declassified]

2. My General Counsel advised me that there are two bases on

which the Agency could proceed:

a. A possible interpretation of the Hughes/Ryan amendment is

that the amendment does not apply to covert CIA activities when

conducted in support of operations by another agency of the United

States Government that will not be conducted or designed in a fashion

intended to conceal the role of the United States Government. This

interpretation, while finding some support in the legislative history of

the amendment, is not entirely consistent with analyses of Hughes/

Ryan previously written by the Office of Legal Counsel of the Depart-

ment of Justice. Therefore, my General Counsel is not willing to render

an opinion that Hughes/Ryan is inapplicable without an opportunity

to consult with the Attorney General, although he is hopeful that the

Attorney General would accept the same interpretation of the statute.

First Responses

b. The Hughes/Ryan amendment provides that it is inapplicable

“during military operations initiated by the United States under a

declaration of war approved by the Congress or an exercise of powers

by the President under the War Powers Resolution.” My General Coun-

sel is of the opinion that the current level of activities in support of

contingency planning would be subsumed under this exception if it

were clear that any actual operation, when and if initiated, would be

pursuant to an exercise of the President’s powers under the War Powers

Resolution. The General Counsel cannot, however, render an opinion

to this effect without appropriate assurance that any approval to carry

out the proposed contingency plan will in fact be given by the President

and in accordance with the War Powers Resolution. [portion marking

not declassified]

2. Based on the foregoing, I must conclude that the CIA cannot

properly provide the required assistance unless the legal doubts are

resolved in one of two ways:

a. Permission for the Agency’s General Counsel to consult with

the Attorney General of the United States, or

b. A written assurance from the President, either directly or through

you, that any initiation of actual operations would be pursuant to an

exercise of powers by the President under the War Powers Resolution.

There is no guarantee under option a. that the Attorney General

would agree with the preliminary legal view of the CIA General Coun-

sel, in which case it might be necessary to proceed to option b., in any

event or even to seek a Presidential finding under the Hughes/Ryan

amendment. [portion marking not declassified]

Stansfield Turner

45.

Telegram From the Consulate in Frankfurt to the

Department of State

11239. Pass to IWG. Subject: (S) Debriefing of Hostages.

1. (S) Entire text.

2. The treatment of the hostages varied from harsh to mild, with

the women receiving considerably worse treatment than the Marines.

During lengthy interrogation, three of the women were threatened at

gunpoint and all but Gross were verbally threatened. One woman was

subjected to a form of Russian roulette. The military hostages were not

threatened. In contrast to harsh treatment during interrogation, the

women’s physical needs were met. The Marines feared their lives were

in danger during the first day but were less fearful in the following

days. The women, in contrast, were not concerned the first day but

became increasingly fearful as the days progressed.

3. The captors relayed no oral or written personal messages to the

hostages. Although some asked if they could communicate with their

families, they were told they could not.

4. All the hostages were given a few hours of revolutionary propa-

ganda just prior to their release. The students showed them one one-

hour movie and one video half-hour tape of the revolution and stu-

dents’ demonstrating. They also had photographs of SAVAK’s atroci-

ties and books on the revolution. The films had a significant impact

because the hostages had spent two weeks without communicating.

5. The assault on the Embassy appeared to be well-planned in

advance. The students brought bolt-cutters with them to cut the chain

of the front gate. While many of the Iranians appeared to be students,

as they claimed, several among them appeared to possess a high degree

of organizational ability and set up separate guard groups and shift

schedules. There was a high degree of discipline and orders were

usually strictly obeyed. It is possible that a handful of students had been

trained in logistics and psychology of conducting a hostage terrorist

First Responses

incident. They employed such interrogation techniques as playing one

hostage against another, and telling them the U.S. had abandoned

them. While the hostages could not discern all the leaders or a chain

of command or fixed command post, there appeared to be a firm

leadership within the compound. The students would not identify who

was in charge when asked, but the Iranian who appeared to be the

chief interrogator claimed to have been trained by the PLO. He gave

his name as “Mehdi.” He claimed to have operated in the U.S. for the

PLO and also claimed to have been incarcerated in an Israeli jail for

three years for PLO activities. He claimed to be from the Isfahan area

and gave his PLO name as Abu Ali.

6. There were several religious leaders in the compound but none

appeared to play a leadership role. Khomeini’s son however played a

major part and reportedly visited the compound often; he had much

authority and was responsible for having Joan Walsh released from 36

hours of solitary confinement. The students stated firmly that they

would do whatever Khomeini told them.

7. The hostages believe that the remaining hostages will be freed

when Khomeini orders it.

8. All cryptographic equipment was reportedly destroyed in the

communication center. All files of the following offices were not repeat

not destroyed: DAO, Embassy Political Office, Ambassador’s suite, and

MAAG offices. The students highlighted the following documents:

—Precht/Laingen letter dated August 2, 1979, Secret “Eyes Only”

concerning ramifications of Shah’s entry into U.S.

—Airgram drafted by Mike Metrinko re sabotage of oil fields.

—RSO Golacinski’s report of counterfeit money in Iran which a

walk-in provided to RSO and was under investigation. The students

convoluted this report into a plot by the United States to destroy the

economy of Iran.

—Metrinko memcon with a relative of General Bolibzan, a figure

in Kurdistan whom the students feel is fomenting revolt there. [5 lines

not declassified] The students were extremely intent on identifying intel-

ligence personnel and claimed that those so identified would be

executed.

9. The students were defensive about being labeled terrorists. Dur-

ing the press conference at the Tehran airport, the Iranians appeared

concerned that the students were being portrayed as abusing the hos-

tages. The Iranians took pictures the first week, asking the hostages to

smile and look comfortable. The day the Pope’s emissary arrived was

the only day the women were untied all day and given a snack. When

46.

Message From the Chargé d’Affaires in Iran (Laingen) to

Secretary of State Vance

[Omitted here are handling instructions.] Following is message

from Laingen addressed to Secretary Vance, which he handed to the

First Responses

Norwegian Ambassador when the latter visited him today. As Norwe-

gians have only limited facilities we have been asked to transmit it. I

should be grateful if text could be conveyed urgently to Mr. Vance.

Begins: For the Secretary.

1. We had an opportunity to send a message several days ago via

the British Ambassador with some specific suggestions on the situation

here and which we hope you have seen. This morning the Australian

Ambassador was allowed to see us and we asked him orally to convey

via his Embassy in Washington some of our concerns about the period

immediately ahead. We reiterate them below, hoping we will have

some means later today to communicate them on the record.

2. Before doing so, I must note with regret that aside from these

occasional Ambassadorial contacts and access to a portion of the media,

our ability to know what is underway in the background is extremely

limited. I have had no substantive contact with Iranian authorities for

the past ten days.

3. The public atmosphere here is one of dangerous emotional

frenzy. Yesterday’s demonstrations around our Embassy were almost

unprecedented in size and venom and were supplemented by similar

affairs in cities all over the country. Khomeini and his entourage of

clerics have skillfully used the seizure of our Embassy, charges that

our diplomats are spies, and our refusal to hand over the Shah, to

develop a mass psychology of hate that may have few parallels in

history. The few Iranians who recognise the disastrous implications of

the course Khomeini has set for his country are too frightened to

speak out.

4. Worse, we are now entering the mourning month of Moharram,

a period when even during normal times emotions run high. Hence

the next week to ten days will be exceedingly dangerous for the hos-

tages. We cannot emphasize too much the importance of avoiding as

much as possible any actions and statements on our side during this

period that risk exacerbating the situation here, no matter how compel-

ling they may appear in terms of public opinion at home. It is in any

event vital that we avoid any action that risks vitiating in any way the

overwhelming support we now hold with world public opinion on the

seizure of our Embassy and the treatment of our hostages.

5. We are dealing with a populace for whom demonstrations have

become a way of life, a religious period (Moharram) that glorifies

martyrdom, a revolutionary leadership that sees its success in over-

throwing the Shah as assurance that mass demonstrations will again

succeed, and a single leader whose whole life has been one of refusing

to brook compromise. Regrettably, because of this mentality and

because of the way Khomeini’s actions and statements have in them-

selves restricted Iran’s options, there may remain very few courses of

action that he can take (and that would be tolerable for us) without

risk of great loss of face for Iran internationally and for Khomeini

domestically. It seems to us there are essentially only two broad options

in terms of courses of action that Khomeini will or could take.

6. The first is that he may himself decide to hold the line in terms

of further threats and actions until at least the constitutional referendum

process is complete on December 2. With the overwhelming endorse-

ment that the campaign against us helps assure him in that vote it is

conceivable that he might then be prepared either a) simply to announce

a full rupture of relations and an expulsion of the hostages (without

trial) as spies or b) to continue holding at least some of the hostages

while signaling a willingness to begin talks through some UN arrange-

ment or third party intermediary.

7. The first of these is at least feasible, given Khomeini’s overwhelm-

ing authority, but it would not be easy given the heady talk of trials

here. The second is also feasible but only if offered promise of meeting

at least some of Iran’s demands vis à vis the Shah.

8. But more likely than either of these may well be that Khomeini

will go ahead with trials of some sort, for all or a selected number of

the hostages, followed by their total expulsion from Iran. The call by

the student occupiers of the Embassy on November 21 for trials and

Bani Sadr’s almost desperate appeal to the US via his telephonic inter-

view with NBC’s Today program the same day not to be too afraid

of the eventuality of trials, suggests that this option is under active

consideration.

9. There is obviously great risk in such a course, both in practical

terms and in terms of principle. There is the danger that the sentences

handed down would go beyond mere expulsion. And for us to acqui-

esce in such trials would mean accepting a process that flies in the face

of all international convention and practice and civilized behaviour

and undermines the very principle on which we now stand. We believe

our preferred course must remain that of strenuous opposition to such

trials, while buying time to secure the hostages release (or simple

expulsion) by diplomatic means.

47.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

State

Frank Carlucci

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Warren Christopher

White House

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Defense

David Aaron

Secretary Harold Brown

W. Graham Claytor

NSC

Colonel William Odom

JCS

Gary Sick

General David Jones

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. AWACS. Secretary Brown and General Jones will prepare a rec-

ommendation for the President concerning the possible location of an

AWACS aircraft in the region, possibly at Aswan, with overflight rights

for Saudi Arabia. (S)

2. Presidential Views. The President talked to Dr. Brzezinski just

prior to the meeting. He wants the group to consider how to prepare

for the next stage. Should we try to deter trials? Should we communicate

privately with Khomeini or those around him, informing them how

we would react in the event of trials, including the possibility of military

action? The SCC should review our options, including possible restric-

tion of Iranian diplomatic activities in this country. The President felt

that a break in diplomatic relations would be premature at this point.

It had been suggested to the President that he might consider making

an address to the UN General Assembly. He asked for the views of

the SCC. If this seems appropriate, he would suggest a small drafting

group under Hedley Donovan. (S)

3. United Nations. Secretary Vance believed that we should begin

work on a draft Presidential speech, but he thought it was too early

to go to the UN. He expects the Security Council to meet on Monday

or Tuesday3 as part of the negotiating effort being conducted through

the Secretary General. He felt that a Security Council resolution should

precede any Presidential address. He recommended that the negotia-

tions through the UN channel be permitted to play out for a bit more.

After the SC resolution, we can consider a possible Presidential address

calling for Security Council sanctions. Three of the four points in the

present negotiating package seem to be negotiable. He was uncertain

about the fourth. We should know by mid-week if this approach has

worked and if the Secretary General could go to Tehran to bring back

the hostages. It was agreed that Hedley Donovan would begin drafting

a statement in cooperation with State. (S)

4. Trials. The group agreed that we wished to deter the holding of

trials and, if trials were held, to deter any executions. We could privately

inform Khomeini or those close to him that holding trials would bring

States. It would be useful to have direct information, rather than second-

hand messages, about what the Shah is thinking. The DCI will consult

with the Attorney General about possible technical surveillance. The

DCI believes the Shah’s departure would lead to an emotional outburst

in Tehran which would be unpredictable but dangerous for the hos-

6. Iranian Diplomats. The SCC felt that restrictions on Iranian diplo-

mats were too insignificant to have any effect on the negotiating situa-

tion. They might, however, interfere with the progress of negotiations

or—if our restrictions were very severe, e.g. restricting them to the

embassy—it could lose us support by dragging us down to Khomeini’s

level. The Vice President recommended continuing for several more

days with the negotiating track through the UN. If that does not work,

then we should do something with some bite, such as sanctions, limiting

sale of foodstuffs, perhaps mining harbors. (TS)

7. Covert Action. The DCI will prepare a finding for the meeting

tomorrow to begin specific steps [3 lines not declassified].

8. Longer Range Options. The SCC discussed our objectives in the

post-hostage situation. All agreed that a decision to work for the over-

throw of Khomeini would require a major U.S. commitment to follow

through with money and the risk of direct military involvement. David

Aaron will circulate an options paper drawn from the work by his

“black chamber” group. (TS)

48.

Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury

(Carswell) to the Special Coordination Committee and the

National Security Council

Washington, November 22, 1979

SUBJECT

Extension of Economic Measures Against the Government of Iran

Background

On November 14, the President blocked all assets of the Govern-

ment of Iran and its controlled entities held by persons subject to the

jurisdiction of the United States. This action appears to have blocked

assets with a market value substantially in excess of $8 billion, of which

more than half are dollar deposits in the foreign branches of U.S.

banks. The present estimate of claims of Americans against the Iranian

Government is around $3. billion but that is probably low by at least

$1 billion. Since it is unlikely that we will be able to “vest”, that is to

seize, assets outside the United States, at this point it is not certain that

U.S. claimants against Iran would receive full payment from the assets

presently blocked.

Principally because of that uncertainty, Treasury has modified the

blocking regulations so that “setoffs” against blocked deposits in the

foreign branches would not be unlawful under the regulations. A setoff

is an action by a bank whereby it uses deposits of a customer without

the customer’s consent to pay off a loan to that customer. The conditions

under which a setoff may be used by a bank are governed by the law

of the jurisdiction where the setoff is made, and it is by no means clear

that the setoffs described below have been effective. In any event, the

effect of the Treasury action was to permit setoffs where the foreign

law permits and thereby to satisfy U.S. claims against Iranian assets

in foreign countries, thus increasing the chance that the Iranian assets

in the U.S. will satisfy the rest of the claims. (Setoffs have not been

permitted in the U.S. because to do so might result in banks being paid

off 100¢ on the dollar when other claimants receive less.)

First Responses

Since the Treasury action permitting setoffs in blocked accounts,

up to $1 billion in setoffs have been made by U.S. banks—mostly in

London. Some banks that have made sizeable loans to Iran did not

have Iranian deposits, and they have, therefore, not been able to setoff.

Those banks are presently considering attachments, that is action by

which they can seize Iranian assets wherever they can find them by a

court order known as an attachment, to satisfy their loans to Iran.

Again, attachments (like setoffs) are governed by local law and it is

by no means clear that they can be utilized in the present state of

affairs. The only attachment Treasury knows of is the Morgan Guaranty

attachment in Germany of the Iranian’s shares in Krupp.

Generally speaking, neither a setoff nor an attachment is available

to satisfy a debt unless the debt is due and unpaid. Debts become due

and payable when there is a failure to pay interest or principal when

due or when there is an anticipatory breach or a violation of a term

in the loan agreement. For instance, some of the Iranian loan agreements

contain a provision, known as a cross-default clause, that states that

the loan becomes due and payable if Iran defaults under any other loan.

As a consequence of the blocking, Iran did not pay the interest

due on a $500 million loan on which Chase Manhattan is the agent

bank. Chase notified all the members of the syndicate of the default

and asked instructions as to whether the loan should be accelerated

and thus become immediately due and payable. A majority of the

banks in the syndicate (including all U.S., but none of the foreign banks)

voted to accelerate the loan. Chase accelerated the loan on Tuesday

(November 20). Several other loans have since gone into default; others

are soon expected to. Thus, cross default provisions are being triggered

and other loans will also soon become due. That will widen the scope

of setoffs and attachments that are possible. It could lead foreign banks

to try to protect their positions by setoffs and attachments, thus wiping

out most of Iran’s presently free assets. (It also may be relevant to this

discussion that last week Treasury modified its regulations to permit

the Iranians to pay interest and principal due on a loan, with new

(unblocked) dollars. Thus Iran cannot argue that the blocking made

compliance with the terms of the loan impossible. Iran has made no

attempt to pay interest or principal on any loan with new money.)

Eximbank has about $400 million in loans outstanding to Iran.

Several of these are now in default, either because interest has not

been paid or because of cross-default provisions. Eximbank has never

declared a loan to a foreign government to be in default and initiated

attachment proceedings, although there have been a number of defaults

in the past.

Options Available

The balance of this memorandum discusses the options available

in the context of the situation described above and in the context of

possible pressure on the dollar that may come if the Iranians no longer

accept dollars in payment for oil or try to shift their unblocked assets

out of dollars.

They are not mutually exclusive and are not ranked in any order

of preference. All but the first two require active cooperation (which

has not yet been forthcoming) from our major allies: United Kingdom,

Germany, Japan, France, and possibly the Swiss.

It should also be recognized that none of these economic measures

will have much immediate impact. Over weeks and months, they may

help to destabilize conditions in Iran. Over a longer term Iran, like

Rhodesia and other recent subjects of economic warfare, will be able

to frustrate even our best designed measures because eventually it will

be able to sell its oil.

Option 1. Continue the present policy of eliminating obstacles to

setoff or attachment and maintaining neutrality as to whether defaults

are declared and loans accelerated.

• This may result ultimately in most loans to Iran being accelerated

and Iran’s assets being wiped out. But it is also possible that some

foreign banks may not accelerate but will try to help Iran, in the hope

of becoming its lead bank in the future.

• This is the lowest profile position to take and the least likely to

antagonize our allies.

Option 2. Encourage U.S. and other banks to declare defaults by

Iran and accelerate their loans. A second variation of this option is to

have Eximbank publicly declare a default and accelerate.

• This may happen anyway but overt government encouragement

would speed up the process, but it would also identify the U.S. publicly

with a quasi-economic warfare measure.

• Indirectly this action would put pressure on foreign banks who

would worry about the soundness of their loans which would probably

be in default because of cross-default provisions.

• If the Eximbank were to accelerate its loans that would unmistak-

ably signal U.S. resolve.

Option 3. Encourage U.S. and other banks to make setoffs and

attachments to collect accelerated loans. A second variation of this

option would be for Eximbank to proceed by way of attachment in a

foreign jurisdiction.

First Responses

• This action is the natural corollary to Option 2 and the same

considerations apply.

Option 4. Request the key foreign central banks to advise their

banks to proceed with calling defaults on Iranian loans and collecting

by way of setoff or attachment.

• If the key foreign central banks were to act, this would be the

most effective way to ensure that all credits to Iran are collected. That

would dry up at least another $2 billion of Iranian dollar assets.

• The central bankers are in a position to advise their private banks

that Iranian credits are unsafe and unsound, but they are not likely to

do so without instructions or acquiescence from their governments.

Option 5. Obtain agreement from the major purchasers of Iranian

oil that they will only purchase, or facilitate the purchase of Iranian

oil, through dollar contracts.

• This would preserve the oil market as a dollar market and reduce

possible damage to the dollar in the exchange markets.

• Technically it may be difficult to make this stick for the long

term because Iran might be able to switch a good part or all its oil

sales to the spot market through non-major entities.

• This would expose our allies to possible oil cutoffs by Iran.

Option 6. Obtain the agreement of our major allies to prohibit their

central banks from taking substantial increases in non-dollar Iranian

deposits.

• This would complement Option 5 and would have the effect of

locking the Iranians in dollars.

• On the one hand this would run counter to a general policy of

free exchange rates and markets; on the other hand, it might appeal to

Germany’s desire to avoid having the mark become a reserve currency.

• So long as the Iranians were unable to find a way to hold large

amounts of foreign currencies through intermediaries, this would

strengthen the dollar. However, it is unrealistic to think that this type

of action would be sustainable over the longer term as too many evasion

routes are available.

Option 7. Move to a full export embargo and get our allies to do

the same.

• In the longer term quite apart from other considerations, this

would not be effective.

• It might have limited appeal domestically as it is readily

understandable.

Option 8. Move to a broad range effort to mobilize overt multilateral

support, of which some or all of the economic measures outlined above

would be a part.

• To be effective, even for a brief period, economic measures will

require the active support of our allies. That may be best obtainable

through a broader based appeal.

49.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

Washington, November 22, 1979

MEMORANDUM FOR

The President

The Vice President

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The National Security Advisor

On Tuesday2 we discussed the pros and cons of the Shah’s depar-

ture to some country other than Iran. I have since asked the [less than

1 line not declassified] and Iranian experts to articulate their views on

this succinctly. The result is attached.

I agree with their views, though I am less persuaded that the

students in the embassy may act independently of Khomeini. The initial

debriefings of our 13 released hostages seem to indicate a close loyalty

to Khomeini on the part of the student captors.

Stansfield Turner

First Responses

Attachment

Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, November 21, 1979

SUBJECT

Dangers if the Shah Leaves the US

I. We are concerned that an early departure of the Shah from the

US would increase the risks faced by the hostages.

A. The present tenuous equilibrium in the hostage situation would

be broken by the Shah’s departure, especially if it occurs in the emo-

tional religious mourning period over the next four weeks.

—Early on, such a move might have been interpreted by the captors

and the Khomeini regime as an act of good faith by the US.

—Now, it would increase their frustration over their inability to

bring the Shah and the US to account for past actions and to prevent

future US/pro-Shah involvement in Iranian affairs.

B. The captors have been operating in a very well organized man-

ner, but we think they might split over how to react to what they would

see as a US effort to circumvent their rightful claims. Individually or

as a group, they might over-react.

—We believe their public announcements show a significant degree

of tension over possible US retaliatory moves against them.

—As little as a single frustrated captor’s angry outburst or blow

(or a slight provocation by a hostage) might spark a disintegration of

the group’s internal control that could lead to abuse of the hostages.

C. As the captors see it, the US will have given an absolute no to

their demands that the Shah be returned to Iran.

D. Some, if not all, will also see his departure as the first step in

a new US attempt to overthrow the Iranian revolution.

E. At the very least, the Shah’s departure is likely to precipitate

trial of the hostages.

—Despite a statement on 20 November by a government spokes-

man that the Revolutionary Court would [not] conduct any trial, it is

not certain that the Khomeini regime could easily take control of the

hostages from their captors.

—Khomeini apparently had some difficulty in arranging the release

of the thirteen women and blacks.

—Any effort by the regime to remove the hostages remaining on

the compound from their captors’ control would be seen by the latter

as indicative of the regime’s lack of trust in them and even of its

intention eventually to compromise with the US.

II. We believe the group at the Embassy, and possibly Khomeini

and some of his most influential advisors, would not now back off

under any circumstances short of a US agreement to return the Shah.

A. In our opinion the captors’ shift of emphasis in their statements

to US espionage in Iran suggests that they now realize that the US will

not meet their demands and that they are trying to force a complete

severance of Iran-US contacts.

B. Consequently, the captors are likely to underscore further their

“proof” of the “guilt” of these particular individuals held as hostages.

C. [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

D. [1 paragraph (7½ lines) not declassified]

—[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]

—[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]

III. Circumstances of the Shah’s departure could modify the reac-

tion in Iran—but probably not change it fundamentally.

A. His removal to Mexico would be a lesser provocation than his

arrival in, or stated intention to go later to Egypt, which has actively

opposed the Khomeini regime.

B. Statements by the Shah permanently renouncing any Pahlavi

claims to power and assets in Iran, and/or offering to account for or

return some assets would be generally disbelieved and create far less

impact than if they had been forthcoming in the immediate aftermath

of the Embassy takeover.

C. The coincidence of the Shah’s departure with the highly emo-

tional period of Moharram, the Shia time of mourning in commemora-

tion of an important early martyr, is likely to intensify reactions by the

Khomeini regime, the captors, and the populace to his move.

50.

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated

THE U.S. STAKE IN IRAN

I. Introduction

The purpose of this paper is to analyze the U.S. stake in Iran

from a broader perspective than that of our present concern with the

hostages. In effect, it attempts to leap across the morass of negotiating

tactics and turbulent Tehran politics to the situation a year hence,

however the hostage situation is resolved. Its approach is: first, to

define critical U.S. national interests in Iran as they now appear; second,

to identify the range of possible Irans of, say, 1981; and third, to analyze

each of these in terms of U.S. interests.

II. Assumptions

A. Khomeini’s attempt to rule a semi-developed state of the late

twentieth century by the standards of a tenth century theocracy will

ultimately fail.

B. If there were ever any possibility of the U.S. doing business with

the present regime, it has been destroyed in the past few weeks.

C. The Soviet Union’s primary national goals are to strengthen

itself and to weaken the U.S. It will exploit any opportunity open to

it in the pursuit of these goals, restrained only by its calculations of

risk. It is not in the interest of the United States to become, or to be

perceived as becoming, weaker than the USSR.

III. U.S. National Interests

1. U.S. national interests in Iran are many and complex, but events

of the past two years have served to clarify in the starkest way which

of these can be termed vital. We have four critical national interests;

two of them vital. These four are listed below in priority order:

A. It is vital to prevent the turbulence in Iran, or the outward drive

of a Shiite state, from disrupting the flow of oil from the Western shore

of the Gulf.

B. It is vital to deny Iranian oil to the Soviet Union and to keep

Iran out of the Soviet sphere of influence.

C. It is critical to avoid serious confrontation with the USSR.

D. It is critical to keep Iranian oil flowing to the West.

In subsequent paragraphs, each of these goals is viewed in geo-

political terms.

A. The Flow from the Gulf

2. The “quarantine” of Iran is ranked first because the loss to the

West of the oil of the Arabian Peninsula and Iraq would threaten its

collapse. The Iranian debacle can impact on the Gulf States in at least

three ways:

—Export of radicalism, either leftist or Muslim, leading to political

instability. Production facilities would be subject to physical damage

and export flows to political uncertainty.

—A reinforcement of the growing tendency among exporting states

to see a reduction of production as the most desirable course in a

period of short supply and unspendable national revenues.

—Military interruption of oil flow from the Gulf by a power control-

ling the Straits of Hormuz. Such a power might be a resurgent Iran,

the USSR, or conceivably Iraq if Iran became even weaker.

3. So far, the industrial economies of the West and Far East have

proved remarkably resilient; they successfully weathered the crisis of

1973–74 both in energy supply and money flows and are managing

reasonably well with the uncertainties of Iranian supply; they have

come to understand their vulnerability and taken some tentative steps

to reduce it. The non-oil LDC’s have done less well and their ability

to absorb an even greater shock is questionable.

4. Cessation or severe reduction of the oil flow from the Gulf,

however, coupled inevitably with price rises on a scale hitherto unimag-

inable, would test and perhaps even break the resilience of the West.

It would produce at the least severe depression and inflation. Turmoil

in the LDC’s would contribute by interrupting the supply of other

commodities. In such a situation, the stability and orientation of major

U.S. allies, and of the U.S. itself, could no longer be assumed. The

USSR and its allies, with a basically autarchic economy, would be

shielded from these effects. In simplest terms, the present world power

equation, in which the military strength of the USSR is roughly balanced

by the economic and technological strength of the West, would be

fundamentally and perhaps irretrievably changed to the detriment of

the West.

First Responses

B. Denial to the USSR

5. Even without Iran, the power balance will be exceptionally deli-

cate in the early to mid-1980s. In this period Soviet military strength

will grow substantially relative to that of the U.S., an imbalance that

will only be redressed when military programs now underway or

under consideration come to fruition in the later years of the decade.

On the other side of the scale, the USSR will be subject in roughly the

same time-frame to increasing economic difficulty, most notably in the

energy field. Petroleum production has peaked and will apparently

begin to decline sharply. The Soviet economy, lacking the West’s cush-

ion of unnecessary consumption that can be conserved, can only main-

tain its present position by a combination of drastically reduced exports

and purchases in the Western market. In fact, the Soviet leadership

may be able to maintain its military power advantage only by accepting

even greater economic and ideological disadvantages—sacrifice of tech-

nology imports for imports of grain and petroleum, political turmoil

in Eastern Europe, a reduced standard of living at home, all adding

to a demonstration that the Soviet model for a modern state is a failure.

6. Moreover, the Soviet leadership itself is in a state of interregnum.

The introverted cluster of old men surrounding the fading Brezhnev

are jockeying among themselves to succeed him, but appear united in

resistance to the admittance of younger and more vigorous men to

their circle. Their behavior as a group, with or without Brezhnev, is

likely to become increasingly erratic and unpredictable until power

passes to the next generation, although it could lapse into paralysis.

We know little of the policy views of the younger men, although some

analysts have suggested that they are impatient with the caution of

their elders: the Soviet state has too long tolerated the pretensions of

a declining West; it should take advantage of the power it has achieved

and press more aggressively toward its national goals.

7. We are not sure how fully the Politburo yet understands its

predicament. If the power balance is delicate without Iran, however,

it will become even more so when the Soviet leaders recognize their

situation and the possible role that Iran might play in it. To an old

Soviet leadership that sees its achievements of decades past gravely

threatened by a lack of petroleum, or to a younger one that sees its

opportunities for the future equally threatened, the prospect of a chaotic

Iran, its armed forces shattered and its allies alienated, may become

tempting in the early 80s. Not only could Soviet energy shortages

be alleviated, but the supply of foreign exchange could be assured.

Moreover, in geo-political terms the Soviets would be in a position

from Iran to dominate the Middle East and South Asia, and ultimately

to deny Gulf oil to the West.

8. Either leadership would of course calculate the risks. They would

be relatively small if a Marxist, preferably controlled Communist,

regime could be brought to power in Tehran without overt Soviet

intervention, but would appear much greater if military intervention

were required. How much greater would in turn depend on Moscow’s

assessment of the “correlation of forces.”

9. In that the Politburo members would see geography as on their

side. Not only are their general purpose forces stronger than those of

the U.S. (and any allies that might become involved), but their ability

to project that power into Iran far exceeds that of the U.S. Against this

they would weigh the danger that a venture in Iran could not be

confined to Iran and its neighbors but might escalate to nuclear confron-

tation. The critical factor for them would be the U.S. leadership. They

clearly see the present one as weak and indecisive, but they do not

fully understand the U.S. political process. To them the U.S. is unpre-

dictable and especially dangerous in adversity, when it may react like

a wounded animal. Both these considerations will be strongly operative

in the election year 1980. Moreover, they may calculate that the adminis-

tration that takes office in 1981 will have a mandate to restore U.S.

military strength, although any actions it could take would not substan-

tially affect the power balance for several years.

10. This is not an estimate that the Soviets will seize the Iranian

oil fields. It is rather that the combination of the Soviet need for oil,

the power vacuum in Iran, the “strategic window” of the early 80s,

the perceived weakness of U.S. leadership, and the geographic advan-

tages of the USSR make such an action a thinkable course either for

an erratic older Soviet leadership or an aggressive younger one. The

Politburo might come to see Iran as the schwerpunkt2 of the long Soviet

struggle with the U.S. A successful Soviet operation in Iran, even if it

did not lead to a cut-off of other Gulf oil, would affect the power

balance almost as decisively as a long-term disruption of that supply.

C. Avoid Confrontation with the USSR

11. Controlling risks by avoiding confrontation is obviously a desir-

able goal for the U.S., but it ranks below those of protecting the other

Gulf states and denying Iran to the Soviets. These are vital to the U.S.

national interests in the long term. Indeed, they may only be achievable

by risking confrontation. That said, the arguments that make military

action appear less risky for the USSR in the early 80s window are

equally applicable to risk-taking by the U.S. Short of a direct threat to

our vital interests, the risk of military confrontation with the USSR

First Responses

should be limited, particularly so on ground so disadvantageous as

Iran.

D. Maintenance of Iranian Oil Flow to the West

12. Obviously, a substantial and dependable flow of Iranian oil

would, at least in the short run, relieve pressure on the oil market

and limit economic difficulties in the West. The market, however, has

absorbed a considerable decrease in Iranian production and continuing

uncertainties as to its future. A complete cut-off of exports would drive

prices higher, slow Western growth and severely handicap the non-

oil LDCs, but would be far less traumatic than the loss of oil from

across the Gulf. Its loss has already to a certain extent been discounted

in the West; supply will in the longer run decrease in any case.

IV. Interests of other Powers

13. It is as critical for the West Europeans and Japanese as it is for

the U.S. that the flow of non-Iranian Gulf oil be sustained and that the

world power balance not be seriously disturbed in favor of the Soviet

Union. There is no question that these states recognize the importance

of the flow, but some will believe that they can better protect themselves

by bilateral than by multilateral action. Some will not see the balance

as so seriously threatened, short of Soviet military operations in Iran.

The greater weight they give to avoidance of US-Soviet confrontation

will make it difficult to convince them of the reality of the Soviet threat.

As to Iranian oil flow, they are likely to view this and to seek ways to

maintain it in bilateral, nationalistic ways, regardless of the position

of the U.S.

14. The Middle Eastern states, and particularly those of the Gulf,

are of course less concerned with the economic well-being of the West

than of their own, but their interest in avoiding infection from Iran is

as great as ours in protecting them from it. Some are concerned over

the general U.S.-USSR power balance (Saudi Arabia) but most (Iraq)

would be more concerned over the clear and present danger of a Soviet-

oriented Iran. They would fear a U.S.-Soviet confrontation, if only

because it might force them to chose sides between a USSR that was

militarily stronger in the area and a West on which their economic

well-being depends. Their attitude toward Iranian oil as opposed to

Iranian politics will range from indifference to pleasure at the effect

of its loss on a sellers’ market.

15. China desperately needs a strong West to divide Soviet atten-

tion, but it sees the West as losing its will in the face of Soviet power.

China may well believe it sees the dangers to Western interests in the

Iranian situation more clearly than the West itself. It certainly will be

more strident in pointing out those dangers. For Peking some degree

of U.S.-Soviet confrontation would be desirable, because it would have

the effect of strengthening U.S. will and accelerating Western arms

programs. In China’s view Gulf oil, from Iran or elsewhere, is important

only in that if it flows south it strengthens the West, but that if it flows

north it both weakens the West and strengthens the USSR.

16. The non-oil LDC’s outside the Middle East will be forced by

their dependence on foreign sources of energy and the general weak-

ness of their economies to view Iran in essentially opportunistic terms.

They will want a maximum flow to keep prices down and their econo-

mies turning over, and they will deal with whoever can provide such

a flow, if anyone can. This means they would prefer the status quo in

the Gulf. If the status quo were disturbed, they would want to see

stability restored by whatever power had the strength to do it, and if

that power were Soviet they would not be overly concerned. In any

case, they would see themselves, accurately, as having little influence

over the course of events.

V. Possible Irans of 1981

17. There are at least six possible outcomes, each with infinite

variations, for the present mess in Iran. In general terms, these are:

—Survival of Khomeini’s primitive Moslem theocracy.

—Replacement of Khomeini, et al., by a radical nationalist regime.

—Replacement of Khomeini by a Soviet-oriented Communist or

strongly Communist-influenced regime.

—Disintegration of Iran into a number of smaller ethnically-based

entities, with or without partition or occupation by neighboring nations.

—Civil war, involving any of a number of combinations of antago-

nists, ethnic, political, and religious.

—Emergence of a right or center-right regime backed by the

military.

18. Any of these outcomes could lead to any other. In fact, by 1981

Iran could have seen all of them. The present state, and the anarchy

into which it seems to be collapsing, is clearly a transitional phase. A

civil war could lead to the emergence of a strong state of the left or

right, to partition, or back to anarchy. The uncertainties are so great

that there seems little purpose in speculating on the likely sequence

of events, although it can be said that a leftist outcome appears the

most probable and a rightist one the least. For the purpose of this

paper, however, the important thing is not to determine what might

produce a particular outcome or assess its probability, but rather to

see how each might affect the U.S. national interests defined above.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

VI. Conclusions

39. As long as Iran remains in chaos, it will be a source of political

instability in the Middle East and uncontrollable economic fluctuation

51.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The Vice President

STATE

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Warren Christopher

DEFENSE

Secretary Harold Brown

79. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place at Camp David.

JCS

General David Jones

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

WHITE HOUSE

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Hamilton Jordan

Jody Powell

The President: Need to reasses where we are. We cannot let the

Iranians decide the pace. We may need to bring the situation to a head.

Should the Shah leave? How can we expedite it? What can we tell

Khomeini about the consequences of a trial, of harm to hostages? Harm

to even one is the same as to all.

There are two military options: mine three ports; destruction of

Abadan refinery. How do we get Khomeini to realize that we will do

this without having him lose face? That is something we need to resolve.

When should we exercise that option?

We should try to get our allies to do more. They have not done

enough. They have not really reacted. We might call to stop all shipping.

What terms through Waldheim would be acceptable? They could

have recourse through our courts but that and international review of

the Shah’s policies would be seen as a political defeat for the United

States. Our hostages have already been punished—we have already

been abused.

Should be restrict or expel Iranian diplomats? We should kick them

out. These diplomats are of no use to us here.

To what degree should we consult our allies on our options? If

they knew we might mine ports, it might spur them into more action.

Secretary Vance: PLO and UN are our main channels. UN exploring

the four-point proposal that you and I have approved.

The President: And Zbig.

First Responses

Secretancy Vance: Clark spent four hours with the Iranian emissary.

The emissary asserts he has Khomeini’s approval. McHenry thinks we

should go to the Security Council on Monday3 with a three-point

resolution:

(1) respect for diplomatic immunity and release;

(2) U.S. and Iran peacefully to resolve differences;

(3) Secretary General to offer good offices.

The PLO channel was helpful in the release of the 13. I believe one

must test fully the UN channel.

The President then reviewed the four points that “Cy, Zbig and I”

went over last Friday. The Iranians sense their increasing vulnerability.

(Discussion of the four points—what do they mean?)

General Jones: Point 4 rules out punitive action.

The President: It would not prevent breaking diplomatic relations.

Dr. Brzezinski: The mining then wouldn’t make much sense; a single

punitive strike would be better.

Hamilton Jordan: Our signing a document like this will cause a

domestic outcry.

The Vice President: We may have to sign to get our people out.

Secretary Brown: How about substantial economic warfare and sub-

stantial military presence?

Admiral Turner: Is there a moral difference between violating the

agreement and publicly doing something?

Dr. Brzezinski: We should act in a way that retains international

respect for ourselves; a punitive strike after signing an agreement

would be counterproductive.

Point #2 to be interpreted as including Khomeini, and this woud

be made clear on the first day of the debate.

Jody Powell: This means we have accepted preconditions. We

claimed before that we wouldn’t.

Dr. Brzezinski: Suggest second sentence of #2 be amended.

The President: “None of the interested parties.” (Changes in #3

dictated by the President; #4 slightly amended to permit breaking of

diplomatic relations.)

Hamilton Jordan: If it looks like we ate crow and then diplomatic

relations are broken, it will sit badly with the American people.

The President: Fairly severe punishment—diplomatic and economic

relations broken.

Admiral Turner: The results would not be that bad; embargo without

international cooperation would not be that bad.

Dr. Brzezinski: argues that we should accompany the negotiating

approval with a credible threat that we will mine if trials are held and

will do more if our people are harmed. If peace succeeds, we could let

it be known that we made a credible military threat.

Secretary Vance: (Recounts how bitter our people are against the

press.)

Hamilton Jordan: If the mining could be done prior to release, it

will look better.

Secretary Vance: We shouldn’t act unless our people are hurt. (Cites

Truman with Angus Ward and Johnson with Pueblo.)

Dr. Brzezinski: The public and world are now much less certain

about the United States; hence this is not the same situation.

The President: Go ahead and negotiate—and plan punitive action.

Assuming the above doesn’t work, what about the Shah? How

authentic is the PLO claim? If the Shah goes and our people are released,

we would free to take punitive action. Mining appeals to me.

The Vice President: We don’t know the basic facts.

The President: Zbig, how do you feel?

Dr. Brzezinski: It depends on how it is perceived. If it looks like we

contrived it, it will look bad. If the Iranians are against it, it looks less

bad. But I am skeptical that we can avoid such an impression. Also, I

don’t think we would then take the punitive action that we would

need to take.

Admiral Turner: A high risk for our hostages if he leaves. Could

we negotiate with the Iranians?

The President: That would be the worst. Now it would be a blow

to Khomeini if he went to Mexico. Should ZB talk to David Rockefeller?

(Discussion of contacts)

First Responses

The President: Authorization of telephone tap through Attorney

General. Newsom to talk to Reed about the Shah leaving.

What means should we use to warn Khomeini of consequences

of trial?

Dr. Brzezinski: What is the message?

The President: We should say: (1) any trial would result in interrup-

tion of Iranian commerce; (2) any harm to any one would result in

direct retaliatory action.

Secretary Vance objects to the first.

The President: How can I sit here as President and watch the trials?

Dr. Brzezinski: Either the Iranians understand we will do something,

in which case it is a useful repetition; or they don’t, in which case they

need to be told.

The President: We need to put more pressure on our allies. We

should communicate the foregoing also to our allies.

General Jones describes modalities of blockade; also it variants. Min-

ing best.

Secretary Vance objects to threats.

Secretary Brown supports Secretary Vance. You have a bigger effect

by military deployments.

Dr. Brzezinski: So far they have done daring things without advance

warnings from us. So we know they do outrageous things if or when

not warned by us.

The President asks the Vice President.

The Vice President: It is very difficult.

The President: This puts our allies under pressure. There is no way

I could sit here. We would have to take action if there is public trial.

Secretary Vance: You would not be ruling it out.

Admiral Turner: Khomeini said you have been bluffing. You need

to make it clear.

The Vice President: Might not this threat imperil the success of the

negotiating track? Might not a few days be needed—then if hostages

are hurt, national honor will come first.

The President: National honor comes first.

Jody Powell: The longer we wait, the less we deter.

Dr. Brzezinski: Suggest that we leave the UN channel only for

negotiating; and that we ask the French to carry the threat to Tehran.

The President: I would prefer to tell the chargé, and we notify the

French, British, Germans, etc. I want to stop the trials. You decide, Cy,

how to get to Khomeini. My decision is as indicated above.

Secretary Vance: Ambassadors will call on heads of government in

Paris, London, Bonn to carry out. Who will tell Waldheim?

Dr. Brzezinski: How do we convey it to Khomeini?

Admiral Turner: Entezam could be a channel.

Dr. Brzezinski asks should we separate the negotiating process from

the Shah initiative? Both together might be too much.

The President: The negotiating process won’t work.

On diplomats, I feel strongly, but will defer to Cy. On punitive

steps later, Jody’s idea of closing down their ports for how long the

prisoners were held is good.

Attachment

Paper

Undated

1. Release of personnel held in the United States Embassy in Tehran

and permission to leave the country immediately for all U.S. Govern-

ment employees.

2. Establishment of an international commission to enquire into

allegations of grave violations of human rights in Iran under the for-

mer regime.

3. The Government of the United States will raise no objection to

any legal recourse in the courts of the United States by Government

of Iran in relation to its demand concerning assets which in its view

have been illegally taken out of the country by the Shah.

4. Affirmation by the Government of Iran and the United States

to abide strictly by the declaration on principles of international law

concerning friendly relations and cooperation among states in accord-

ance with the charter of the United Nations, and by the provisions of

the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

[header and 4 paragraphs (21 lines) not declassified.]

First Responses

52.

Message From the U.S. Government to the Iranian

Government

53.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, November 23, 1979

SUBJECT

SCC Meeting on Iran (C)

Attached is the Summary of Conclusions of the SCC meeting this

morning. Two items are of particular note:

—Bani Sadr’s statement that Iran will not honor its financial obliga-

tions3 may do more to destroy Iran’s international standing in the

economic community than anything we can do. For the moment, we

should just monitor the effects. By tomorrow we will give you a recom-

mendation on whether or not the Export-Import Bank should declare

54.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee (Intelligence) Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

CIA

Warren Christopher

Frank Carlucci

David Newsom

OMB

Harold Saunders

John White

Defense

White House

W. Graham Claytor

David Aaron

JCS

NSC

General John Pustay

Colonel William Odom

Justice

Gary Sick

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The SCC(I) met to discuss a proposed finding by the DCI (attached)

[1½ lines not declassified] to influence Khomeini and others to abandon

or moderate anti-American positions and to reduce their ability to

incite anti-American violence or threats to U.S. interests. (S)

Mr. Carlucci described the range of activities contemplated, includ-

ing broadcasts critical of Khomeini’s policies as violations of Islamic

teachings, providing a forum for opposition figures to address the

Iranian people, stressing that present policies are leading Iran down a

road to disaster, publicize links between some present leaders in Iran

with SAVAK, and warn of leftist efforts to exploit religious leader-

Mr. Christopher questioned whether the actions envisaged were

in fact compatible with the objective of reducing anti-American posi-

tions by Iranian leaders. The Attorney General and all others noted

that the finding as written was sufficient to allow for such activities,

particularly since it calls for “reducing the ability” of Khomeini and

others to incite violence. Their ability could not be reduced without

taking some of the steps called for in the finding. (S)

Mr. Carlucci noted that we might be backing into a major political

decision to overthrow Khomeini by this finding. He noted, however,

that Khomeini is already accusing us of worse than what we are propos-

ing. In the acts proposed in this finding, the U.S. hand will not show.

We will need to coordinate [less than 1 line not declassified] for specific

technical access to broadcast and other facilities. (S)

The finding was approved, with State reserving its position until

the issue could be discussed with the Secretary. (U)

Mr. Newsom provided a brief summary of the debrief of hostages.

Those released warn that we should not try to make a case about forged

U.S. documents since the Iranians have many genuine documents that

they can produce. They appear to be focusing their “spy” charges on

Mike Metrinko, a Foreign Service Officer who maintained contact with

Kurdish leaders prior to the fall of the Shah, and on Ann Swift, a

Foreign Service political officer. They do not appear to have identified

Agency people, [1 line not declassified]. (TS)

[5½ lines not declassified] Damage assessment is proceeding, and we

are attempting to match faces (on TV, etc.) with individuals who were

in charge or who conducted interrogations. An older man named Mehdi

apparently ran the operation. (TS)

Two of the hostages were particularly susceptible to indoctrination

about the crimes of the Shah. The decompression period in Wiesbaden

was invaluable in helping to deal with this problem before the hostages

met with the press. The Marines felt that the Code of Conduct did not

adequately prepare them for this type of situation and they were unsure

what to do. (S)

First Responses

Attachment

Presidential Finding

Washington, undated

Finding Pursuant to Section 662 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,

As Amended, Concerning Operations in Foreign Countries Other

Than Those Intended Solely for the Purpose of Intelligence

Collection

I find the following operation in foreign countries is important to

the national security of the United States, and direct the Director of

Central Intelligence, or his designee, to report this finding to the con-

cerned committees of the Congress pursuant to Section 662, and to

provide such briefings as necessary.

SCOPE

DESCRIPTION

WORLDWIDE

Using any and all possible means, including

tasking or encouraging the network of

agents or other contacts in foreign countries,

clandestine radio broadcasting and the use

of media placements, to cause the

distribution or broadcast in foreign countries

of non-attributable propaganda for the

purposes of: influencing the Ayatollah

Khomeini, other Iranian religious and

political leaders and anti-American segments

of the Iranian populace to abandon or

moderate anti-American political and

economic positions and to protect the safety

of U.S. nationals and U.S. property in Iran;

and reducing the ability of the Ayatollah

Khomeini and other anti-American religious

and political figures in Iran to incite anti-

American violence, or to stimulate policies

and activities hostile to the interests of the

United States and to the safety of U.S.

55.

Memorandum Prepared by the Iran Task Force, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, November 23, 1979

SUBJECT

Iranian Exiles and Exile Movement

Almost all of our information on Iranian exiles and their organiza-

tion comes from reports from new sources or from the exiles them-

selves. Much of the information that follows has not been substantiated

by more than one source. [portion marking not declassified]

The main figures in the opposition movement among exiles appear

to be Shahpour Bakhtiar, General Jam, General Oveisi and Naha-

vandi—with Bakhtiar as the leading figure. [portion marking not

declassified]

We do not think at the present time any of the exiles or exile groups

pose a challenge to the Khomeini regime in Iran. Most exiles, though

perhaps supporting one or more leaders with their money, have not

wished to get involved in an organized movement. Many exiles in

Europe do not want to become involved in opposition activities because

they fear reprisals against their relatives in Iran. Many in the middle

First Responses

class and the military in Iran fear that opposition to Khomeini would

lead to a civil war where the leftists would be the final victors.

56.

Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

to President Carter

Camp David, undated.

The longer the situation in Iran drags on, the more complex it

seems and the more reluctant I am to try to offer advice. I lack a sure

sense of what we should do as we weigh the lives of the hostages

against several abstract principles against our country’s interests after

the present crisis is over. And although the principles involved are

pre-eminent, they are also abstract and easily deferred in their applica-

tion when the lives of 49 human beings are at stake.

Having established that I am not in a good position to offer advice,

I do have some feelings in my gut that I wanted to pass on to you.

First, I agree strongly with your desire to bring this thing to a head. It

seems to me that the passage of time makes the situation more difficult

for everyone involved:

—The American people, who have been supportive to date, will

soon begin to sour on the situation and we will see increased support

for extreme measures from giving the Shah back to wiping Iran off the

face of the earth;

—The passage of time will make it more difficult for you and

Khomeini to find a satisfactory political solution to this problem;

—The passage of time increases the chance that the mobs will

overrun the Embassy and do harm to the hostages and/or increases

the chances that some of the students will take the situation into their

own hands;

—The passage of time will take its toll on SALT II ratification; I

do not believe that SALT II will be ratified unless we have a politically

First Responses

satisfactory resolution of this crisis; I know that SALT II will certainly

not move ahead in the present atmosphere;2

—The world community which presently supports us will begin

to fall off given its heavy dependence on Mideast oil and their desire

to avoid an international conflict;

—The crisis is taking a toll on your Presidency and your ability to

lead. Politically, a protracted crisis will prevent you from doing the very

minimal things that you need to do to win the Democratic nomination;

I don’t have a sure sense of how it is done, but I would argue that

there are many good reasons for trying to bring this thing to a head

at the earliest possible date. Most of the Iranian/Moslem experts seem

to agree that we should wait until after Ashura and the December 2nd

Constitutional vote to take those steps. Again, this is a difficult decision,

but at some point in time, you are going to have to take some risks

and make some very difficult decisions, I believe that the risks and

difficulty of those decisions will increase with the passage of time.

(You should read the most recent cable from Laingen if you have not

already seen it.)

Secondly, I share your concern about the negotiations and the UN channel.

I don’t think that we have much choice but to try that approach, but

I personally hope that it does not succeed. Despite our best efforts to

explain and defend, I believe that we will be savaged politically for

signing a document permitting a trial of the Shah by an international

tribunal. Our participating in that exercise comes very close to violating

the principles that we have adhered to throughout this crisis.

If those four principles are the basis for the safe release of our

hostages, it will make it all the more important that we take some

punitive steps against Iran. For the balance sheet will not be even, and

the UN trial will be seized upon by our critics at home and abroad as

evidence of our lack of strength and resolve.

Review with me the results of this crisis precipitated by Iran:

—The national humiliation of our country and its ability to protect

our diplomatic interests;

—The crisis has required actions on our part—Iranian oil embargo

and the freezing of assets—that will work a very specific hardship on

our people and has had some adverse impact on friendly nations (like

Saudi Arabia).

—Emotional wear and tear on our people at the Embassy. I saw a

“terror psychologist” on television last week who said that a good

If we are ultimately successful in getting our people back via the

UN channel, the balance sheet will be far from even. I would argue

that we have to do something that is measured and reasonable to meet

domestic political pressures and to serve as a deterrent to others who

might be tempted to test us in the months and years ahead.

If and when we get our people back safely, there will be tremendous

pressure for you to do nothing. People who urge us to do nothing will

use the Soviet threat as a primary excuse. But, if after such an outra-

geous act directed against us by another country, we are compelled to

sit silent and not retaliate, then perhaps we really have become a

helpless giant. There is certainly less respect at home and abroad

than there should be for U.S. military and economic strength. We

can certainly argue that our nation’s cumulative strength is greatly

underestimated but at some point that perception becomes reality.

I believe that a measured punitive act is absolutely essential to

your own re-election and to America’s image in the world. I don’t

think that the break in diplomatic relations is particularly relevant to

the American people and that economic measures are difficult to

explain and/or appreciate.

Thirdly, implied in all of this is the fact that we will probably not have

good relations with Iran for some time to come. We will obviously have to

be concerned about Soviet attitudes and actions in that area of the

world, but we will have to accept the fact that it will probably be

difficult to have good relations for some time to come. Even after

Khomeini falls, his great legacy will probably be that he personally

engendered an anti-American xenophobia that will remain among Ira-

First Responses

nians for a long time to come. We certainly have to be concerned about

Iran post-hostage and post-Khomeini, but we should be realistic about

what that means. I am sure that there are people in the middle class

in Iran and persons with Western educations that deplore what Kho-

meini has done and is doing, but those people will be outnumbered

by many times by the people whose religious zeal has resulted in a

strong anti-American feeling.

I believe that some time soon you should spend several hours with

the Iranian experts from State and CIA and talk about Iran post-hostage

crisis. We have been focused almost exclusively on the day-to-day

situation with the hostages and some of the decisions that you will

have to make soon as relates to the hostages will have implications for

us in terms of our long-term objectives in Iran.

Fourth, if possible and compatible with the best strategy for safely extract-

ing the hostages, the application of one of the military options resulting in

their release is much better than the application of the military options after

their release. The best scenario would be that we exercise one of the

military options and the hostages were then released. This would show

American will and ability to act and would respond to the pressure

for us to “punish” the Iranians for their actions. If we have to punish

the Iranians after the release of the hostages (which I would strongly

favor), world opinion might very well turn against us. At that point,

I would say to hell with world opinion.

You know, Mr. President, it is difficult to be the richest kid on the

block and also the most popular. As a people and as a nation, we desire

to be loved and respected. As a result, we are neither. Looking at the

great challenges which face our people in the future, it seems that at

this point in time in our history it is much more important that our

people have their self-respect and some respect from the international

community. If we are not respected around world and at home, there

is no chance for us to be loved.

57.

Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political

Affairs (Newsom) to Secretary of State Vance

Washington, November 24, 1979

SUBJECT

Condition of the Shah

Joseph Reed called again this morning to ask whether I had any

advice for him to give to the Shah.

Reed said he had spent two hours with the Shah last night. He

found him sad and dejected and looking worse than the medical reports

suggested that he was.

He found him anxious to do whatever is necessary to help resolve

the present impasse. He is prepared to move right away if that would

be helpful and could, with difficulty, move before Tuesday. He can

only walk short distances and any such move would have to be accom-

plished by the use of wheelchairs and helicopters.

58.

Memorandum from the Executive Secretary of the

Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, November 24, 1979

SUBJECT

Seizure of Documents in Tehran

This responds to your November 22 memorandum to the

Secretary.

The attached paper3 summarizes the information available Novem-

ber 23 about the Tehran Embassy documents under Iranian control.

None of the working files of the Chargé, the Political Section, the

Economic Section, the Defense Attaché Office (DAO), and Military

Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) were destroyed.

NODIS and EXDIS messages concerning the Shah, a telegram

reporting a meeting with Yazdi and Bazargan, [1½ lines not declassified]

and a State telegram and a State letter and memorandum concerning

the Shah’s possible admission into the United States were among the

documents seized (the last three documents are mentioned in a Novem-

ber 21 article in the London Times).

Political and Economic Section files contain information concerning

local sources, interviews with members of minority groups, and bio-

graphic data that could be used to damage innocent persons.

DAO files include material about U.S.-Iranian cooperation in mak-

ing technical assessments of Soviet-origin military equipment. MAAG

files record cooperation on military procurement matters that was con-

tinuing up to the time the Embassy was seized.

In brief, though some of the safes had not yet been opened when

the last group of hostages was released, Embassy files now in Iranian

hands can compromise many of those with whom we have dealt, and

if disclosed or used as the basis for distorted stories can do incalcula-

ble damage.

Although virtually all CIA documents in the Embassy were

destroyed, a safe containing Iranian, U.S. [less than 1 line not declassified]

currency notes was seized by the Iranians. These will confirm Iranian

suspicions about espionage activities conducted from the Embassy.

We do know that records relating to the recent [less than 1 line not

declassified] survey were destroyed with the material in the Embassy’s

central files. We also believe that the material on the recent intelligence

briefing of Entezam and Yazdi was destroyed.

As soon as officers recently returned from Tehran who are familiar

with the DAO and MAAG files can be reached, we will provide a further

assessment of the material in those offices that was compromised.

Peter Tarnoff

Executive Secretary

59.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

Treasury

Robert Carswell**

State

Secretary Cyrus Vance

White House

Harold Saunders

Stuart Eizenstat**

Lloyd Cutler**

Defense

Hamilton Jordan

Secretary Harold Brown

Jody Powell

W. Graham Claytor

Zbigniew Brzezinski

JCS

David Aaron

General David Jones

NSC

General John Pustay

Colonel William Odom

CIA

Gary Sick

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Frank Carlucci

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti**

Energy

Secretary Charles Duncan**

John Sawhill**

**Present for discussion of domestic issues.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Update. Secretary Vance reported on efforts under way at the

UN to get a Security Council resolution in the next few days which

will call for the immediate release of hostages, a peaceful resolution

of the problem and directing the Secretary General to report urgently

to the Security Council. All U.S. embassies in the region are being

directed to begin quietly reducing the numbers of Americans who may

be subject to further attacks. The situation is becoming increasingly

dangerous as the Ayatollah focuses on “believers versus infidels.” The

announcement by the Kurdish Democratic Party that they are prepared

to act in unity with Khomeini in the event of U.S. military intervention

is perhaps indicative of greater support throughout the Arab world

on that issue. (S)

2. Energy. DOE is conducting a survey of the oil companies to get

a better fix on the gasoline production versus draw down of crude

reserves. They will continue to report as the information becomes

clearer. It would be premature to take the issue to the President at this

point. The IEA meeting went well, but the IEA is probably going to

ask the U.S. for more visible leadership, specifically some tough steps

on the energy front, e.g., a move toward rationing or an increase in

excise taxes on gasoline. (C)

3. Iranian Assets. There was considerable confusion in the interna-

tional markets concerning Iran’s intentions to meet their financial obli-

gations. Thus far there has not been a cascade of seizures. It was the

judgment of the SCC that we should not push the Export-Import Bank

to declare Iran in default during the next few very dangerous days. The

Bank would prefer to follow its usual procedure of trying to negotiate

a settlement. (C)

4. Iranian Exports. State, Commerce and Treasury will meet today

to review our position on exports of food and other commodities.

Although we have taken a public position exempting food and medi-

cine from the freeze, should we be in the position of pushing the unions

and others to continue loading ships? This question will be reviewed

tomorrow. (C)

5. Immigration and Civil Rights. There have been a number of com-

plaints about the rights of Iranians being violated by being fired from

jobs, refusals to serve them, etc. The SCC agreed that the Attorney

General should let it be known that violations of U.S. law will not be

condoned. (C)

6. Public Posture. Jody Powell will consult with State and provide

for the meeting tomorrow a list of actions which we could promote to

demonstrate U.S. popular solidarity with the hostages. Bruce Laingen,

for example, has suggested that church bells be rung each day at noon,

First Responses

and this seems to be catching on. A flood of telegrams to the UN or

Iran was also mentioned. (C)

7. Shah. Iran intends to bring suit against the Shah. One suit will

probably seek the return of his assets to Iran and the other will attempt

in some fashion to bring him to account for crimes. We have always

said they could resort to our courts, and there is no immediate decision

required on our part. However, we may later wish to consider filing

an amicus brief or otherwise intervening if the question arises about

Iranian standing in our courts, especially while they continue to hold

hostages. (S)

Political-Military Issues:

1. International Court of Justice (ICJ). The SCC agreed that we should

be prepared to request the ICJ for a finding on interim measures for

protection and release of U.S. hostages. It is anticipated that the Court

could act within a week to ten days. Going to the ICJ would complete

a record of having exhausted all available remedies under international

law. It does not deprive us of the right of unilateral action while the

case is under consideration, although it may make certain actions more

difficult. Under the terms of our treaties with Iran, they can renounce

jurisdiction by the ICJ by simply sending a telegram; therefore, we

should not reveal that this course of action is under consideration. All

agreed that no approach should be made to the ICJ until 24 hours after

the Security Council resolution, to avoid providing an excuse for Iran

to delay on the grounds that the matter was under consideration by

the Court.

2. AWACS Deployment. A possible base has been identified at an

isolated location in Egypt in the Eastern Desert. Two AWACS aircraft

can fly non-stop from Oklahoma to Egypt. Refueling aircraft would

be required from the Azores, four KC–135 tanker aircraft would have

to be positioned at the Egyptian field, and support equipment would

of the two. The Secretary of State believes strongly that such a large

movement would become known and could endanger the hostages in

this period before Ashura. He felt that even approaching the Saudis

concerning overflight rights or to get their reactions could be dangerous

at this moment. Nevertheless, the JCS felt that we should take whatever

steps are possible to expedite deployment of the AWACS in the event

they should be needed. The clearance process and filing of flight plans

60.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to

President Carter

Washington, November 26, 1979

1. Meeting with Families of Embassy Tehran Hostages—I met with

about forty family members of Embassy Tehran hostages today in the

Department. I assured them that the release and safety of their families

is uppermost in our mind and that we will continue to work around

the clock. I described in particular our current efforts at the United

Nations to obtain their release.

Dave Newsom continued the session and spoke about our efforts

to ensure regular visitation and proper care for the hostages. He also

read a message to the families from Bruce Laingen praising the charac-

ter and conduct of the hostages and urging patience and restraint. The

tenor of the initial questions from the family members was disturbed

and many were particularly forceful in criticizing the decision to admit

the Shah. However, after they expressed their feelings and frustration,

there was a general recognition of the need for patience and restraint

aimed at securing the release of the hostages. The group decided to

draft a public statement along these lines. They also indicated interest

in having periodic meetings until the hostages are released, with the

next one possibly scheduled following the December 2 Iranian

referendum.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

4. Iran—Warren briefed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,

more than 100 House Members, and Tip O’Neill today on the situation

in Iran. A good deal of interest in the activities of George Hansen was

evidenced. Warren characterized them as unhelpful, and explained

that promises of Congressional hearings on the Shah before the hostages

are released undercut our efforts. Frank Church and Clem Zablocki

both issued statements after the meetings to the effect that hearings

would be considered only after release of the hostages.

Deep concern was again expressed in the Foreign Relations Com-

mittee over the Soviet role. Jack Javits urged that we be in touch

with the Soviets at the highest levels with respect to the situation.

Questioning also centered on the Mecca incident and its impact on the

internal situation in Saudi Arabia and on the US posture in the Islamic

world. George Ball’s interview yesterday inspired a number of inquiries

on Henry Kissinger’s advice. Several Members pressed for details on

the decision to let the Shah in the country, and Warren outlined in

some detail the humanitarian considerations upon which our decision

was based. Members also wanted to know why it took so long for the

Pakistani army to come to our assistance. Warren indicated that it

was a matter of concern that we are studying, but pointed out that

moving armies is frequently a time-consuming process.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis]

61.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, November 27, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran: What Next?

I enclose today’s SCC minutes. As you will see from them, we

appear to make useful current decisions, but it is extremely difficult

to get the group to focus on any strategic goals or steps. I again tried

to push the participants to reflect on the needed steps if our current

“litigational” approaches fail. I asked, what will we do if the Security

Council’s resolution is defied? What will we do if the World Court’s

ruling is also defied? There simply was no predisposition to answer

these questions.

As a result, we are locking ourselves into a litigational approach,

which is fine if our strategy is to transform the crisis into a prolonged

malaise. But we need to ask more directly whether that is what we

want. More specifically, Iran poses for us three interrelated dilemmas:

1. How to get the hostages out;

2. How to get rid of Khomeini—or, in other words, how to save

Iran for the West;

3. How to get on with the Moslem world.

What are the implications of the above and what are some of the

contradictions between them?

Patience and Litigation

The easiest way might seem to be by peaceful means. We are trying

that now. But it may not succeed. In the meantime, however, we might

lock ourselves into a pattern which increasingly excludes the use of

force. I can see us sliding already into the usual litigational mode to

which there is no end and from which there is no easy extrication

(because a peaceful solution is always around the corner). Meanwhile,

our domestic support will gradually fragment—with some howling

for military action and others engaging in a do-it-yourself diplomacy.

Our international support is also likely to be dissipated in the context

of prolonged litigation, with more and more states focusing not only

on the hostage issue but increasingly on Iran’s alleged grievances.

If, in the end, we do get our hostages back through accommodation,

we still run the risk of jeopardizing our electoral chances if the public

perceives us as having been intimidated in some fashion. From every

public contact I have had, I sense a strong desire for U.S. honor to be

reasserted and for American power to be demonstrated. Moreover, the

Moslem world, and especially those Moslem states most dependent

on us, will become increasingly convinced that the United States can

be coerced. This will make our friends more insecure and our enemies

more assertive, and thus it will also jeopardize goal #3 (a respectable

relationship with the Arab world).

A punitive post-release strike, in my judgment, will not correct the

above deficiency. It will be seen by much of the world as a petulant and

perhaps even cowardly act, and it would almost certainly precipitate

an explosion in the rest of the Moslem world. (In this connection, it is

useful to remember that Shi’as number 55% of the population of Iraq,

about 18% of Pakistan.)

The only acceptable outcome of the peaceful route would be some

formula along the lines that we discussed at Camp David: release of

our people concurrently with a UN discussion of Iran’s other griev-

ances, perhaps also accompanied by the Shah’s voluntary departure.

We could follow that by severance of all diplomatic and economic

relations with Iran. We could then also quietly pursue objective #2

(getting rid of Khomeini), though he would be fortified in the meantime

by what in Tehran will appear to have been a successful humiliation

of the U.S. All in all, this particular outcome—if accomplished without

humiliating conditions—still remains the least risky and the best possi-

ble one, all things considered.

The Risky Alternative

The other alternative is to increase pressure on Iran and on the

international community, once we have had recourse to all the peaceful

options. The best means to do so would be to blockade Iranian ports

while announcing:

1. They will stay closed until our people have been released;

2. That massive and instant retaliation will follow any harm to any

one of the hostages.

The above will involve a high-risk strategy. It could result in the

forfeiture of the lives of the hostages. Nonetheless, such an action

First Responses

would be understandable to much of the international community,

especially if the UN/International Court options were exhausted. I

suspect that it would also prompt a less hostile reaction from the Arab

world than a punitive post-release strike, since Moslems generally

respect firm action based on clear legal/moral principle.

Such an action could also contribute to Khomeini’s eventual fall.

If he were to back down and release our hostages, he will have been

humiliated. If he did not, the cumulative effects of the blockade as well

as the punitive strike would encourage Iranian internal opposition,

especially if we were to couple such action with more direct appeals

to Iranians to overthrow his regime. Many Iranians are concerned that

Khomeini is jeopardizing their chances to enter the 20th century as an

independent and viable nation.

Finally, I believe that this course of action, though inevitably risky,

would be politically more appealing. The public senses that our position

is 100% correct on grounds of principle and that a strong reaction is

justified. It would support it.

To conclude, I see us facing three possible outcomes:

1. A positive solution by peaceful means. If accomplished without

too much humiliation, it is the best course of action, especially if fol-

lowed by political/economic sanctions against Iran. We should know

in a week if we can get it.

2. Endless litigation, transforming the crisis into a prolonged mal-

aise. This seems to me to be the worst outcome possible, for reasons

already outlined.

3. The application of military pressure, which involves very high

risks but which historically and politically is a preferable course to #2

above. Moreover, the paradox of the situation is that increasingly evi-

dent willingness to use military pressure may actually hasten a peaceful

outcome, because it is likely to generate greater worldwide desire for

a rapid termination of the crisis.

62.

Editorial Note

In the Summary of Conclusions of the November 27, 1979, Special

Coordination Committee (SCC) meeting (see footnote 2, Document 61),

Item 3 under Political-Military Issues reads: “Dr. Brzezinski raised the

question of whether we were getting ourselves locked into a pattern

where our freedom of action was being chipped away while world

support eroded for our position. All agreed that this was an important

issue and that our overall strategy would be discussed at the meeting

tomorrow.” At the bottom of the page, Carter wrote:

“My present belief is that we should:

“a) Get strong condemnation from UNSC

“b) Get the Shah out of the country directly after Ashura (Sat or

Sun) [December 1 and 2]

“c) Call publicly for embargo of all shipments of goods to Iran

until hostages are released

“d) Seek Article 7 sanctions against Iran

“e) Follow up with mining of Persian Gulf ports; with statement

that strong punishment will be inflicted if hostages are harmed.

“f) Be prepared to destroy refinery if any hostages are harmed.”

Carter then added a note at the top of the first page of the Summary

of Conclusions: “Zbig—Discuss my comments only in small group.”

(Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 17)

“Small group” is a reference to Aaron’s interagency group.

The following day, November 28, Carter handwrote a note to Brze-

zinski that reads: “Zbig—In addition, of course, to specific steps out-

lined in yesterday’s SCC minutes, we should do everything we can

covertly to restrict Iran’s credit & reduce all foreign commerce with

Iran.” (Carter Library, Plains File, Box 10)

First Responses

63.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Secretary Harold Brown

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Zbigniew Brzezinski

After a review of the urgent cables from the British Embassy in

64.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the Deputy Director for Operations, Central Intelligence

Agency (McMahon)

Washington, November 27, 1979

SUBJECT

Documentation Support

1. Bill Bowdler brought over the attached messages from the Cana-

dians. These should be held very closely. They indicate that the agricul-

tural attaché who used to be under Swedish protection is now under

Canadian protection in Tehran. Bowdler would like us to look at

quickly developing documentation for all six Americans under Cana-

dian tutelage.

2. On the one hand, we can work U.S. passports with nonofficial

associations. On the other, we can try foreign passports if we could

find enough data to tell what cover these individuals might utilize. If

you need help on this, only David Mark and Bill Bowdler are privy

in INR.

Stansfield Turner

First Responses

65.

Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, November 27, 1979

SUBJECT

The U.S. and the Islamic World (U)

It disturbs me that the net result of our response to critical events

in Iran and elsewhere in the Muslim world contributes exactly to what

our enemies most want to see: we isolate ourselves from Muslims, mutual

suspicions grow and permanent alienation sets in. Thus we will find

it harder and harder to communicate with Muslims—because we

reduce our opportunities for communicating. If we do not stem this

process, the Carter Administration will have left its successors a legacy that

will require many years to eliminate. (U)

Steps to protect Americans in Muslim countries from imminent

attack by evacuating dependents and reducing staffs are probably una-

voidable in the circumstances in which we now find ourselves, but I

sense that we may be on the edge of a form of bureaucratic panic. The

more we reduce presence in such countries, the less opportunity we

have for communication with their governments and peoples on any

level and the more opportunities there will be for suspicions and misun-

derstandings to grow. Rather than demonstrating to the world that we

break and run when under pressure, we would serve our own interests

better if we displayed a stubborn insistence on staying in place, asserting

ourselves and being ready to fight (let the Marines shoot!) to defend our

installations and our principles when challenged. (C)

Eleven hundred Marines to protect more than 150 diplomatic instal-

lations around the world is too few. We need to double that number. We

still possess the most advanced technology in the world—we should

announce a new program to apply it to defense of our diplomatic establish-

ments abroad. Our information efforts are already too weak in most of

these countries; our exchange efforts are oriented too much toward

listening to others and too little toward telling our own story. The

naive idealistic thrust of these programs which has become enshrined

as a set of sacred principles in recent years should be reversed. (C)

We are well on our way to being cast as anti-Islamic, anti-nationalist

and “imperialist” in most of the Muslim world. Local demagogues find

such tactics expedient, and their appetites are whetted every time we

look weak. The Soviets cannot resist exploiting these opportunities. We

deceive only ourselves if we take soothing words Dobrynin may utter

to Marshall Shulman as evidence of real Soviet concern for our welfare

in these countries. If we apply the “but-there-is-no-evidence” principle

to judging what the Soviets may be doing to undermine us among

Muslims and avoid looking for it, we delude only ourselves. We might

serve our national purposes better if we reverted to some of the healthy

suspicion that characterized our reaction to events such as the North

Korean invasion of the South in 1950. (C)

The Soviets, who have been viciously oppressing Islam in their

own territories for 60 years, aim to emerge from the present commotion

in the Middle East with an enhanced image as protectors of Islamic

nationalism. They will have to resort to some extraordinary acrobatics

to get this point across in Afghanistan—but what has been happening

in Iran, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia has pushed Afghanistan far into

the background. We can challenge Soviet misrepresentations and

expose their own record successfully only if we equip ourselves with

the means to do so. (U)

There is nothing irretrievable about our present predicament in

the Islamic world. We survived commotion which was at least as severe

its interests and protects those associated with it was a bit brighter

then than it is now; and the Soviet effort to denigrate us was not so

highly developed. We have neglected our defenses too long in this

part of the world, and have slipped into a habit of defensiveness. We

have become too apologetic about our own interests. This makes it

difficult for our friends—who still outnumber our enemies in the

Islamic world—to take any kind of action in our behalf. (U)

Bluster, military threats with little obvious rationale or substance

behind them, retaliatory schemes contrary to our traditions, and puni-

tive measures against minor or defenseless groups do us no credit as

a great power. They will not help us achieve our goals in this important

region of the world. Quite the opposite. (U)

In our approach to the Islamic World we need:

• to display a determination to stick it out and assert ourselves,

• to maintain embassies, cultural centers and other facilities and

let everyone know they are going to be strongly defended,

66.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to

President Carter

Washington, November 27, 1979

1. UN Security Council Meeting on Iranian Situation: After consulta-

tions throughout the day which resulted in an agreed scenario, the

UN Security Council met this afternoon to hear statements by Secretary

General Waldheim and the President of the Council (Palacios of

Bolivia). Characterizing the conflict between Iran and the US as a grave

threat to international peace and security, Waldheim said the US was

deeply concerned with the seizure of the Embassy and the detention

of diplomatic personnel “in violation of relevant international conven-

tions.” He noted that Iran seeks the redress of perceived injustices and

abuses of human rights by the previous regime. Waldheim said it

would not be appropriate for him to make detailed proposals at this

time, but that he was certain the parties want to see an end to the

present situation. He appealed for maximum restraint and avoidance

of any actions which could “further inflame the situation.”

The Council President then read an agreed statement in which he

noted Waldheim’s letter of November 25 calling for an urgent Council

meeting and the Iranian statement of November 27 asking for a delay

in formal deliberations because of Iran’s holy days. He also read his

statement of November 9 urging the release of the hostages and reiter-

ated that appeal “in view of the serious threat to international peace

and security.” Stating that the Council would continue its efforts to

find a peaceful solution, he adjourned the session without further

statements until Saturday evening, December 1.

The response from Iran has been mixed. Bani Sadr has sent an

official letter to Waldheim saying he will appear before the Security

Council on Saturday evening. Khomeini meanwhile has begun strong

attacks on the UN as a creature of the USG.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

6. Shah’s Health: The senior attending physician for the Shah

informed us today that the radiation treatments for the Shah’s neck

glands have been completed and that a non-surgical procedure to

extract the gallstone was undertaken last night. Because the stone was

too large to be extracted whole, the doctors attempted to break it up and

remove it in pieces until excessive bleeding occurred. The extraction

procedure may have to be repeated if large stone fragments remain.

If additional extractions are not necessary, and there are no further

complications, Dr. Kean believes the Shah may be able to travel “within

a week.”

a summary of the proceedings and communications, see Yearbook of the United Nations,

67.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Treasury

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Robert Carswell**

Warren Christopher**

White House

David Newsom**

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Harold Saunders**

Hamilton Jordan

Defense

Jody Powell

Secretary Harold Brown

Lloyd Cutler**

W. Graham Claytor**

Charles Kirbo

JCS

NSC

General David Jones

Colonel William Odom**

General John Pustay**

Gary Sick

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Frank Carlucci**

Justice

Attorney General Benj. Civiletti**

** Present only for first part of meeting.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. President’s Views. Dr. Brzezinski reported on the President’s deci-

sions from the previous day’s meeting. He supports the idea of Senator

Mathias’ proposal of a mail campaign. Jody Powell said that was being

implemented. The President did not endorse the New York takeover

of Iranian agencies; he agreed that demonstrations should proceed so

long as Lafayette Park, the Ellipse and the Capitol were not involved.

He agreed that we should maintain our position on payment of Iranian

students. (C)

2. Iranian Assets. Litigation is picking up. In particular, we anticipate

a major judicial challenge in London about the NIOC account of $3

billion held by the Bank of America. Treasury and Justice are taking

steps to get counsel there, and Secretary Miller will be in London today

for talks. A ruling could be produced within a few weeks. The Japanese

are not being helpful on financial matters. They will be contacted with

a more direct appeal for cooperation. (S)

3. Iranian Credit. State, Treasury and CIA will present options for

the meeting tomorrow in response to the President’s suggestion that

we step up efforts to restrict Iranian credit access. (S)

4. Immigration. 20,000 students have been interviewed and the

Attorney General believes that it is time for a high-level note of congrat-

ulations to the INS. A draft will be prepared. Guidelines for exemption

in cases of humanitarian concern will be required by next week to

prevent deportation of minority groups and other individuals put into

jeopardy. (C)

Political-Military Issues:

1. International Court of Justice. In view of the postponement of the

Security Council session until this weekend, the Secretary of State

recommended and the SCC agreed that it would be desirable to proceed

simultaneously with our suit in the ICJ, subject to further discussion

with the President later today. The Attorney General registered concern

about the timing of an approach to the ICJ, that it might introduce an

element of confusion into our various approaches, and that it could

give rise to counter-claims and charges of intelligence activity. Secretary

Vance said that those claims are going to be put forward this weekend

in any event. (I feel you should know that this step will lock you

into up to three weeks of litigation, making other alternatives more

difficult.) (S)

The SCC then went into restricted session with only those principals

who had been present at Camp David for a discussion of our overall

strategy.

Public Posture on Hostages. Before beginning the principal topic,

Secretary Vance noted that the report of hostages being moved out of

the embassy to other locations5 was probably going to leak soon since

it was known in at least four capitals and rather widely in Washington.

He proposed that we be prepared to respond quickly with a statement

together with information about mining the embassy walls, etc., as

evidence that this is a measure to protect the hostages. State is preparing

a statement which will make these points and reiterate that we hold

the authorities in Tehran accountable for the safety of the hostages. (C)

Next Steps: (All of the following is Top Secret)

Dr. Brzezinski opened the discussion by noting that we may be

facing a situation where Iran will continue to defy all of our diplomatic

and international moves while gradually undercutting international

and domestic U.S. support by focusing on U.S. intelligence activities.

In the meantime, we will have locked ourselves into a litigation strategy

which ties our hands. The President had asked the group to think

about the following options, to reflect on them, refine them and discuss

them with him later:

1. Seek strong condemnation of Iran in the Security Council;

2. Have the Shah leave the country this weekend. There is concern

that Khomeini may at some point commit himself to trials if the Shah

is permitted to leave the country;

3. Call publicly for the embargo of all shipments to Iran until the

hostages are released, and ask other nations to support us in this;

4. Seek sanctions against Iran under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter;

5. Mine Iranian ports and issue a statement that strong punishment

will be inflicted on Iran if any of the hostages are harmed; adding that

the mining will be lifted immediately once they are released;

6. Taking of stronger reactions which have been planned in the

event the hostages are harmed.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we should not escalate the situation in

a measured way as a means of bringing other nations into support for

us rather than let the crisis subside into a condition of normalcy.

Hamilton Jordan observed that it was not only the President’s politi-

cal situation that was at stake but also U.S. national interests. He was

surprised that the situation had not turned sour already, but he did

not see how the country could go on for two or three months this way.

Secretary Vance agreed but noted that the question is what can

be done to change the situation in an effective way without making

it worse.

Hamilton Jordan said that once the Shah leaves, they will have to

respond. With all that is going on, a lot might happen by next week.

We should not escalate until we have exhausted diplomatic remedies.

Our interests will not be fully satisfied unless all the hostages are

safely returned.

Secretary Vance observed that items 1–4 could be done without

seriously threatening the hostages. The break point comes at mining.

Dr. Brzezinski and Secretary Brown said that the threat of mining

could be used to get others to cooperate with us in bringing pressure

on Iran.

Secretary Vance responded that, if that were done under Chapter

7 sanctions, that would be one thing. If not, it would be quite different.

Hamilton Jordan added that the Soviets could veto sanctions, and that

would mean the end of SALT II.

Each participant was then asked for his views.

Secretary Brown said the key was whether or not the hostages were

directly threatened. If so, we should be ready to carry out severe actions.

He agreed that a decision to mine would put the hostages under more

serious danger. There was a 50–50 chance that some might be killed

in response. The question is how long we can wait. Over time the

chances of harm coming to the hostages increases and our ability to

act declines. Items 1–3 could be done quickly.

Secretary Vance said it will take at least a month to exhaust available

diplomatic remedies. He did not believe we would get the support

even of many of our close allies on a blockade, noting that not one

country was willing to join us in 1967 opening of the Strait of Tiran.

General Jones said that the key was to keep world opinion and the

Moslem world with us. Strong action could work either way depending

on whether it was perceived as justified or not. He noted that his French

counterpart recommended against the use of force as counterproduc-

tive in this situation. The French would probably not join with us in

an economic embargo. If we mine harbors and some hostages are killed,

we may be seen as guilty. We might consider mining only imports

to start.

Secretary Vance said that before mining we should get virtually all

Americans out of the Moslem world.

Admiral Turner said the U.S. position was eroding, noting the events

in Mecca and Pakistan. Those in Tehran are as convinced as we are

that their position is righteous. If we get ahead of Khomeini, we risk

all Israeli shipping through the Red Sea. President Lyndon Johnson tried unsuccessfully

to get the Strait reopened.

First Responses

losing world opinion, yet we must stand up at some point. He had no

answer as to when.

Jody Powell agreed with Harold Brown that the danger to our people

increased over time, and our position at home is eroding. Time works

against us and appears to work for Khomeini. He favored taking some

action to reverse this situation. However, such action would not only

put our people in danger but it was unlikely Khomeini would respond

positively in the near future. We should know what we intend to do

if any of the hostages are harmed. A rescue operation—even if unlikely

to succeed—might be desirable. We should not go after Chapter 7

sanctions unless we think there is a good chance we will succeed. A

Soviet veto would be undesirable.

Hamilton Jordan agreed, noting that other things we might do could

also damage SALT.

Mr. Kirbo said that as long as we know our people are safe, the

public will stay with us. If they pull people out of the compound,

there will be rumors that they are being killed one at a time. We should

not take drastic actions as long as we are fairly sure they are there. If

that vanishes, it becomes very difficult. He was unsure about the Sovi-

ets. Cutting off supplies might do the job, but if the Iranians kill some-

one, we must kill someone. Khomeini was the only one he wanted to hit.

Dr. Brzezinski summarized the following points of agreement:

1. Any such act (mining or military) increases the danger to the

hostages.

2. If any hostages are killed, we should react forcibly. Mining was

not enough. (Our act should be precise, not indiscriminate.)

3. We should exhaust all diplomatic recourse.

4. We should take the first four steps now.

Secretary Vance agreed we should do points 1 and 2 on the Presi-

dent’s list, but felt that we should not ask other countries for embargo

until all diplomatic recourse has been exhausted. That will take three

weeks to a month.

Secretary Brown said we should not wait for one thing: we should

insist immediately—perhaps in the press conference tonight9—that

there be daily visits to the hostages by neutral observers.

Mr. Kirbo said he had heard nothing we could do to defend our

honor without bad results and possibly getting us mired down over

the long run.

Secretary Vance agreed.

Hamilton Jordan said that the hostages could continue to be held

indefinitely while we do nothing.

Dr. Brzezinski added that in the meantime we can expect trials,

intelligence documents and a shift of attention to U.S. illicit activities.

Secretary Vance said that he considered mining would produce

harm to the hostages and he would not advise it as long as they are

safe—even if trials begin. He did not interpret “interrupting commerce”

as meaning mining necessarily. It could also be an embargo.

Dr. Brzezinski argued that without physical interruption, others

would not join in.

Secretary Vance believed that the Security Council session would

go on for a week or so and that negotiations would accompany it while

Bani-Sadr was in New York. This might result in some new movement.

He would like to have our case before the ICJ before Bani-Sadr presents

his case in New York. Hamilton Jordan agreed.

Secretary Vance added that a threat of mining or military force could

have exactly the opposite effect desired, i.e., it could turn many of our

friends against us. He preferred a peaceful blockade to mining.

Secretary Brown argued that a blockade forced us to take the last

act of sinking a ship whereas mining placed the burden on the ship that

entered the mined waters. Mining was more passive than a blockade.

Secretary Vance reported that the Shah is unlikely to be able to

travel before about one week.

All agreed that the discussion had been useful and would provide

the basis for a discussion with the President.

68.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to President Carter

Washington, November 28, 1979

A cost benefit calculation for these options is not very favorable.

As posed, the financial options involved considerable long-run costs

to the international economic system and to individual countries.

Achieving them will therefore impose great strain on the willingness

of our allies to cooperate along these lines.

At the same time, we doubt they will be immediately understood

by Iranian leaders except insofar as they represent a demonstration of

solidarity among the key industrial countries.

The eventual impact of such actions will not be immediately appar-

ent to those unversed in finance, and their full effects on Iranian trade

will not appear for several months. The disruption will mainly affect

urban dwellers, who are dependent on foreign foodstuffs and on

foreign inputs for industrial and commercial activity.

There are other ways, and probably more effective ways in terms

of their immediate impact on Iranian leaders, to demonstrate solidarity

of other countries with the U.S. One would be a drastic coordinated

reduction in the size of embassies in Tehran. Even stronger collective

action would be a Chapter 7 embargo in the United Nations, on the

grounds that the Iranian behavior represents a threat to the peace.

Chapter 7 action would be a striking demonstration of global solidarity,

it would put much more economic and political pressure on Iran, and

at the same time, by virtue of being a sanctioned collective action, it

would sharply limit both the perceived and actual damage to the

international economic system over the longer run.

None of these actions, including financial options through six, will

be easy to achieve. Tentative contacts suggest it will not be possible

to engage the cooperation of financial officials alone on the financial

measures suggested. Therefore, a high level and perhaps a high pres-

sure political approach, will be required.

Our approach at the SCC meeting should be to clearly distinguish

between our objective—to secure the hostages’ release—and the many

possible means to attain that objective. If it is decided that one of the

means to this end is a demonstration of Western solidarity, then we

should search for actions that will be most effective on the Iranian

leaders and followers.

To the extent that the other financial options are seriously dis-

cussed, our approach should be the same. Several of the remaining

Options 3b and 10 would be regarded as a disguised political act.

More generally, they would not impress the Iranian leaders and would

require an unprecedented degree of cooperation from foreign central

and private banks in taking hostile action against a customer. They

would be impossible to enforce and, for the private banks, easy to

evade.

70.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

Treasury

Robert Carswell**

State

Anthony Solomon**

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Warren Christopher

White House

Richard Cooper**

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Harold Saunders

Hamilton Jordan

Lloyd Cutler**

Defense

Stuart Eizenstat**

Secretary Harold Brown

Charles Kirbo

W. Graham Claytor

NSC

JCS

William Odom

General David Jones

Gary Sick

General John Pustay

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Frank Carlucci

Justice

Attorney General Benj. Civiletti**

John Shenefield**

** Present only for discussion of domestic issues.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Update. The Secretary General plans to continue with the sched-

uled Security Council meeting on Saturday2 night whether or not the

Foreign Minister comes from Iran. The U.S. filed its case with the

International Court of Justice this morning and we anticipate that the

ICJ will meet next week. We have two low level reports that indicate

the Soviets will not interfere if we should intervene in Iran. This appears

to be a signal and is quite unexpected. (S)

2. Economic Actions. Treasury presented a paper outlining options

available to us to increase the financial squeeze on Iran (attached).

Option 4 would be felt immediately upon adoption by foreign central

banks and would have a significant impact. Options 5 and 6 would

not have any noticeable impact for months. There will be considerable

resistance from the British and others to option 4, and it will be neces-

sary to twist their arms rather hard to insure their cooperation. Our

best argument will be that this action is preferable to the more severe

military actions necessary to pressure Iran, which would damage allied

interests in Iran far more. All agreed it would not be desirable to

approach the allies on this issue until we are ready to make a strong

case at the highest level. That point is most likely to occur after Iran

has rejected a Security Council resolution. State and Treasury will

prepare Presidential messages to be available by Saturday for consider-

ation and decision by the President. In the meantime, Secretary Vance

believes strongly that we should take no additional actions toward

Iran until after Ashura and the meeting of the Security Council. (S)

3. Iranian Assets. A number of court cases are building up, especially

in London, challenging the legality of the freeze of Iranian assets in

foreign branches of U.S. banks. The principal case, involving the Bank

of America, will probably be heard in London next week. We are likely

First Responses

to lose the judgment, although appeals can stretch the process out for

several additional weeks. This fact is an additional argument for going

ahead with Option 4 in the relatively near future, to avoid the impres-

sion that our position is unravelling. (S)

4. Student Remittances. Licenses have been issued for $20 million

in payments to Iranian students. Another $20 million will be licensed

next week. The program is about $1 billion per year. All of this is new

money being brought in for that specific purpose, consonant with the

previous decision to license student remittances. (C)

5. Japan. Mr. Carswell will talk to the Japanese at a high level today

and will make clear our displeasure at their lack of cooperativeness

on financial matters regarding Iran. (C)

6. U.S. Payments. The SCC agreed that Treasury should issue licen-

ses for about $100 million in new Iranian money to pay U.S. creditors

for exports shipped before the freeze went into effect. (C)

7. Transfers out of Dollar Accounts. Iran has offered to pay interest

on a loan for which Chemical Bank is the agent, if it is licensed to be

paid in Switzerland in other than dollars. The amount of this payment

is about $7 million. The SCC recommended that we insist on payment

in this country in dollars as specified in the contract. We do not want

to license moves away from the dollar, even though the company may

not get its payment right away. (C)

8. Immigration. A total of 26,000 students have been interviewed;

asked to provide additional information; 405 have chosen voluntary

departure; 300 have requested asylum. There is some reluctance of

many Iranians to choose asylum out of fear of retribution. An interpre-

tation of INS regulations is being prepared which will specify the

conditions for exception to deportation procedures in humanitarian

cases. The legality of the original order will be tested in court next

week; Justice feels that its legal position is good. (C)

Political-Military Issues:

1. Hostages. We will continue hammering away in every available

public and private channel to get access by neutral observers to the

hostages. (U)

2. The Shah now wants to leave and has asked us through intermedi-

aries to make arrangements to go to Mexico. We approached the Mexi-

cans at the Presidential level last night. Sunday is apparently the earliest

date a transfer can be arranged, and more pressure on the Mexicans

may be required. State is helping to arrange secure transport to the

airport in New York. Secretary Vance took note of the President’s

concern that the move take place before Khomeini can lock himself

into an ultimatum linking the treatment of the hostages to the Shah’s

departure. However, Secretary Vance does not believe the arrange-

ments can be completed with the Mexicans before Sunday. (TS)

3. Saudi Arabia. Ambassador West is to see Crown Prince Fahd

today to ask his views on the threat to Americans in Saudi Arabia. The

SCC recognized that the possibility of a U.S. evacuation cannot be

divorced from the larger question of U.S. strategic position in the region.

Dr. Brzezinski noted that an evacuation could seriously destabilize the

regime and undermine our strategic position in the entire region. It

would be a signal to the Saudis that the U.S. is disengaging from the

region—and that could have the gravest consequences for our vital

interests. Accordingly, we should ask the Saudis to assure the security

of our people (and not talk of evacuation), and we should even consider

offering U.S. military assistance—including the 82nd Airborne if

required—to insure the security of the Eastern Province, if the Saudis

would welcome it. This question will be reviewed further after we hear

Fahd’s response. (TS)

4. Reduction at U.S. Embassies. Dr. Brzezinski raised the question of

the impact of the reduction order, particularly in Oman which appeared

to be quite secure. Secretary Vance said that he was not confident of

the security of any of the smaller states in that area. It is only a handful

of people being removed in any event, and he was inclined to let the

order proceed despite a few squawks of protest. The President’s meet-

ing with American Moslem organizations next week will provide a

useful forum to address the status of our relations with the Islamic

5. Espionage Charges. We expect the Iranians to make a major case

about U.S. espionage activities at the embassy in Tehran. In general,

we would prefer to have that information come out in an international

forum rather than in trials of our people. It is certain to be a major

media event, and we will have to be carefully prepared in our responses.

State and CIA are working on a strategy paper which will be ready

FOR FINANCIAL MEASURES

AGAINST GOVERNMENT OF IRAN

The following are a series of steps that could be taken in the

financial area to interdict Iranian financial transactions. Options 4

cant) could not be implemented without the wholehearted support of

the government authorities of our key foreign allies. In our view, that

support can only be obtained by forceful intervention at the political

level to the effect that the assistance requested is necessary as part of

the common defense of the Western alliance. In our view, the financial

and central bank authorities will not act on their own because to act

will cause difficulties and turmoil in their markets.

1. Continue the present policy of eliminating obstacles to setoff

or attachment and maintaining neutrality as to whether defaults are

declared and loans accelerated.

2. Encourage U.S. to declare defaults by Iran and vote for accelera-

tion of their loans.

• We are currently somewhere between options 1 and 2 in our

posture with the U.S. and other banks.

3. Have Eximbank publicly declare a default and accelerate its

loans to Iran. [In addition, Eximbank could proceed to attach Iranian

assets in a foreign jurisdiction.]

• This option would publicly reveal a U.S. decision on default and

might be of some marginal assistance to U.S. banks and others in

making setoffs or obtaining attachments.

4. Request the key foreign central banks to advise their banks to

proceed with calling defaults on Iranian loans and collecting by way

of setoff or attachment.

• This option would have the effect of cascading defaults and loan

accelerations. It would tie up all Iranian financial transactions for some

period of time. It might be difficult legally for some of our allies.

5. Obtain agreement from the major purchasers of Iranian oil that

they will only purchase, or facilitate the purchase of Iranian oil, through

dollar contracts.

6. Obtain the agreement of our major allies to prohibit their banks

from opening new non-dollar accounts for Iranian entities.

• Options 5 and 6 are complementary and over the longer run

would serve to buttress the position of the dollar and the international

monetary system.

7. Obtain agreement from foreign banks that they will not consent

to Iranian requests to conceal the identity of any Iranian party involved

in financial transactions.

8. Obtain agreement from foreign banks that they will not consent

to any Iranian requests to modify existing transactions to eliminate

any U.S. party.

9. Obtain agreement from foreign banks and other foreign parties

that they will not consent to requests to delay completion of existing

Iranian transactions.

10. Obtain agreement from our major allies that they would not

guarantee any export obligations for Iran.

First Responses

71.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, November 29, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran: Next Steps

Your press conference2 has been enormously helpful in placing the

issue in perspective, in reassuring the U.S. public, in dramatizing your

personal leadership, and in keeping up front the central issue: the

illegal detention of hostages.

72.

Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the

Department of State (Tarnoff) to Secretary of State Vance

Washington, November 29, 1979

SUBJECT

Your Breakfast with the President Friday, November 30, 19792

1. The Shah’s Departure. As of this writing, we are considering how

to react in light of Mexico’s decision not to allow the Shah to return.

Since Lopez-Portillo reportedly made the decision personally—proba-

bly on the advice of Foreign Minister Castenada who wants Mexico to

play a larger role in the Third World—an appeal to Mexico is probably

fruitless. The delay in the Shah’s departure, although he will be medi-

cally fit to travel this weekend, adds a troubling element to a situation

First Responses

in Tehran that is already highly charged by the advent of Ashura and

the upcoming constitutional referendum.

Attached at Tab 14 are some thoughts on alternate countries of

residence that we may want to pursue with Armao.

We are also considering suggesting to the Shah that he return to

Mexico since his visa does not expire until December 9. This will allow

him to consider to ask for political asylum in Mexico, and it will permit

us to help him check with other countries which might be willing to

receive him. Although his visa is technically valid until December 9,

we cannot exclude the possibility that the Mexicans, who have publicly

discouraged him from returning for a short period, would actually

revoke it if the Shah actually attempts to return there.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis]

73.

Paper Prepared in the National Foreign Assessment Center,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, November 30, 1979

Options Identified

74.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

CIA

David Newsom (left after 20 min.)

Frank Carlucci

Harold Saunders

Energy

Defense

John Sawhill**

Robert Komer

White House

JCS

Stuart Eizenstat**

General John Pustay

David Aaron

Justice

NSC

John Shenefield**

Colonel William Odom

Gary Sick

Treasury

Anthony Solomon**

**present for discussion of domestic issues

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Shah. Mr. Eizenstat suggested that at some point, and in an

appropriate context, we should consider announcing that we have no

intention of assisting the Shah to return to power. All agreed that this

could be a useful gesture, but the timing and formulation would be

important. It will be kept under close consideration. (C)

2. Partial Release of Hostages. The question of the release of Laingen

is academic for the moment since the Foreign Ministry is unwilling to

provide assurances of safe passage outside the building. Concern was

expressed on the effect on the hostages and the public of any impression

that the senior officers were leaving the rest behind. (C)

3. United Nations. Work is going forward on the Security Council

meeting for this evening. A draft statement was circulated by State.

Options Identified

Efforts are continuing to get as many nations as possible to speak on

behalf of release of the hostages. The Soviets are being unhelpful by

requesting that no meeting be held tonight. Mr. Newsom will raise with

Secretary Vance the advisability of raising this directly with Dobrynin

4. Iranian Assets. Mr. Solomon said that there is a noticeable erosion

of our position on the assets frozen in U.S. banks abroad. An adverse

court ruling in London may come within a matter of days. Mr. Solomon

stressed the urgency of deciding on a course of action. The options

are: (1) proceed to ask our allies to adopt financial sanctions of their

own, which would then assure their intervention on our behalf in their

own national courts; (2) ask our allies to intervene with their courts

for a delay in judgment on the grounds that this is a sovereign matter

between governments; or (3) we can begin taking steps to withdraw

on the foreign freeze as gracefully as possible. (TS)

Mr. Solomon stressed that option (1), getting our allies to impose

sanctions, will be very tough and will require extreme pressure, includ-

ing threats to the allies that a failure to respond will adversely affect

our overall defense relationship. He did not believe that a strongly

worded letter from the President would suffice nor would the prospect

that we might take some military action against Iran which would

ultimately interrupt oil supplies. The British, in particular, were not

concerned about Iranian oil. (TS)

The second option, getting allied governments to persuade the

courts to stay a judgment, would protect our present freeze position

but not place more pressure on Iran. The U.K. is the key since that is

where Iran is presently challenging us in court. Mr. Solomon reported

that the British told us informally that they wanted to stay neutral and

avoid getting involved in the case. (TS)

The rationale for the third course of action would be that we have

now determined that sufficient assets exist within the United States to

cover prospective claims; therefore, there is no need to hold assets

abroad. It would be seen as a retreat but perhaps less so than if the

U.K. court ordered the freeze lifted. (TS)

Mr. Solomon stressed that option (1) would take very significant

pressure at the highest level and should not be undertaken unless

we were determined to follow through. Moreover, it was becoming

increasingly difficult as each day passed. Mr. Komer noted that if we

interfered with our NATO defense relationship, we would be threaten-

ing self-defeating action which might not be credible. [Note: The fact

that the U.K. wants a decision in the near future that we will help

modernize the U.K. deterrent does provide us with very significant

leverage over this key country. Moreover, U.K. refusal to help could

75.

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to

President Carter

Washington, December 1, 1979

SUBJECT

The Dynamics of the Hostage Situation

Pursuing the diplomatic options and applying the pressure of

world opinion to the Iranians is clearly the right approach over the

next several days. The question of the Shah’s departure from the U.S.,

the UNSC and ICJ proceedings, the religious fervor of Muharram,

the Iranian vote on the new constitution, the continued international

perception of the U.S. as the aggrieved party—all argue that it is too

soon to move to “other means.”

But as time goes on, the Iranians, and the world—though not the

American people—are likely to begin to see the holding of the U.S.

hostages as the natural state of things, rather than as an abomination.

There may then be more international pressure on the U.S. to “confess

our sins of espionage,” and to promise amnesty to Iran, than on the

Iranians to release the hostages. At home, the general support for our

policy (strong pressure with peaceful means, holding military action

in reserve) will begin to fragment. On one side there will be calls

for extreme military actions, on the other for meeting some or all

Iranian demands.

Your press conference of Wednesday evening2 (the most effective

of your Presidency thus far) has held the situation together for an extra

week or so. Early in the week of Dec. 3, I believe it will be time to

push our Allies and friends to adopt some of the strongest economic

measures we can devise. Apparently action by the European and Japa-

nese banks similar to our own—blocking, defaults, etc.—would soon

have increasingly severe effects. But those countries correctly view

such action as risky and painful to themselves. They will take it, if at

all, only if they believe the alternative is military action by us that is

even more risky to them in economic and political terms. We must be

prepared to threaten such action.

If we cannot persuade them to take such economic and political

action, or if it fails to secure release of the hostages, we will have to

consider military options very seriously. Our approach should be to

make it painful to Khomeini to hold the hostages (so far it hasn’t

been painful—world public opinion doesn’t bother him much), and

prospectively much more painful to him if they are harmed. Then he

may be pushed toward a face-saving solution (e.g., expulsion with or

without a quick trial). Though many suggest blockade, mining of har-

bors through which most Iranian imports flow is clearly, to my mind,

less risky and less escalatory. With mining, we need not stop ships

with our own ships; our forces are there to be shot at only briefly; and

ships which might be sunk must themselves take the last move that

has that result. Mining is the mildest military action I have found. We

are seeking others, for example various acts to demonstrate how we

could damage Iran, but I doubt that we will come up with any that are

effective without being at the same time more escalatory.

Mining, like blockade, is an act of war—though a bloodless act of

war, like invading an embassy and taking hostages. There would be

a real risk of upsetting our Allies, and a greater one of upsetting

or even severely alienating other Muslim states in the Gulf region

and elsewhere.

It could derail the negotiating process, such as it is, although it

might also revive that process. And it would certainly increase the risk

to the hostages—probably severely, for a time, though not as likely

fatally so as a rescue attempt would do. But it would show we are not

to be trifled with and that we will not accept a status quo that has

some of our people hostage without corresponding pain to those who

hold them hostage. It would avoid a situation that might otherwise

drag on, where the U.S. is hurting and Iran—or at least the Iranian

leadership—is not. Mining would—over a couple of months—affect

the Iranian economy significantly. It would, by the implicit threat of

further escalation, get the attention of Iranian leaders, and convince

them we are not bluffing, much faster than that.

The question on which your advisers will probably divide is

“when?” That judgment will turn on: our estimates of the likely course

and outcome—both for the hostages and for perceived American stand-

ing in the region and elsewhere—of diplomatic negotiations that last

for months; whether the hostages are put on trial; the outcome of UNSC

and ICJ proceedings; the willingness of others to join us in non-military

actions and the effect thereof on the Iranians; how well we think we

can make our case to the moderate Muslim countries.

My own judgment is that we can go for a period of ten to fifteen

days along the diplomatic/economic route, if it appears to be moving

in a promising way, and if there is not evidence or grave suspicion

that any hostages have been harmed. If strong economic measures

against Iran are taken by our key Allies acting with us, that might give

Options Identified

us another week or so. But even then I do not think we can delay

facing up to at least the mildest military actions for more than about

a month from now.

Harold Brown

76.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to

President Carter

Washington, December 1, 1979

The Shah—We worked out the plans for the movement of the Shah

to Wilford Hall Hospital at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio.

Lloyd Cutler has gone to New York with Peter Tarnoff to present these

plans to the Shah and get his concurrence.

The Group who will implement the plans in New York consists of

a representative of State, Defense and the FBI. Arrangements are being

made to take him from the hospital to the Marine Terminal at LaGuardia

Airfield. The FBI will be in charge of that operation. The anticipated

time of departure from New York will be tomorrow morning. The

precise timing has been left to the implementing team who will be

working out the details in New York. They will keep us informed here.

77.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

Justice

John Harmon**

State

Secretary Cyrus Vance

White House

Warren Christopher

Hamilton Jordan

Harold Saunders

Stuart Eizenstat**

Richard Cooper**

Lloyd Cutler**

Jody Powell**

Defense

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Secretary Harold Brown

David Aaron

W. Graham Claytor

NSC

JCS

Colonel William Odom

General David Jones

Gary Sick

General John Pustay

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Frank Carlucci

Energy

John Sawhill**

Treasury

Secretary William Miller**

Richard Solomon**

Robert Mundheim**

**Present for discussion of domestic issues only

Options Identified

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Economic Sanctions. Secretary Miller reviewed the three options:2

(1) persuade our allies to take more stringent economic actions of their

own; (2) persuade the British to intervene with their courts to stay a

judgment; or (3) move to unfreeze the Iranian assets held abroad as

gracefully as possible.

He felt that a letter to the heads of state would not be sufficient.

It would be better to call them to Washington and invoke our defense

alliance as persuasive leverage. Similarly, a public appeal to these

states would be likely to backfire since there is little public support for

stronger action. All of these countries foresee damage to their own

interests if they act against Iran. Specifically, they are concerned about

an oil cutoff (Japan gets 13% of its oil from Iran), disruption of their

own investments in Iran (which are sizable for Germany especially),

and instability of the banking system (a tender issue for the British).

Our contacts to date reveal that they are opposed to any action. All

agreed that an attempt, and failure, to get option 1 would be worse

than not trying at all. The SCC recognized that the dollar was under

severe pressure and that the failure of our allies to support us could

unravel the situation not only to the detriment of the situation in Iran

but also the strength of the dollar generally. It was agreed that Treasury

would take another hard look at option 1 in a smaller group, including

the possibility of the Export-Import Bank declaring Iran in default. (S)

Option 2 appeared feasible. Mr. Christopher suggested that option

2 should make clear that we intend to fight hard and with imagination

to win the cases in British courts, even if the British refuse to intervene.

Mr. Cutler strongly agreed and noted that British statements in the

Security Council could be cited as evidence that blocking of assets was

consistent with British public policy. The cases might be won if a stiff

fight were put up. Even if they are lost, we can tie up the process for

several months with appeals, which will keep the Iranian economic

process in some turmoil, and that is to our advantage. We can

strengthen our case by U.S. Government intervention in London. Mr.

Aaron observed that we have the means to bring some real pressure

on the British. All agreed that we should proceed immediately with

option 2, as modified by Mr. Christopher. (S)

Option 3 was not recommended at this time, since it would tend

to signal a retreat and could remove pressure on Iran. (C)

2. The Shah. Secretary Vance briefed on the contacts presently under

way with two countries to provide refuge for the Shah. It will be several

more days before the Shah is physically up to a long trip, and Mr.

Cutler felt that there was no better than a 50–50 chance that we would

be able to find him a residence abroad within the next week or two.

All agreed that we should avoid getting ourselves into a public posture

of forcing the Shah to leave or an undignified scramble to find him a

place to live. Nevertheless, the SCC believed that on balance the Shah’s

departure would be more helpful than harmful to our chances of getting

the hostages released. (S)

Political-Military Issues:

1. Kennedy Speech. All agreed that Kennedy’s comments attacking

the Shah were factually exaggerated and very unhelpful. The President

and the White House should not respond, but there were others who

could make that point effectively. (C)

2. Referendum. The rather poor vote turnout thus far suggests grow-

ing opposition to Khomeini, particularly in the minority areas. We will

have a better reading tomorrow. (C)

3. AWACS. Material is being moved into Cairo West and transferred

to the isolated base in eastern Egypt. Secretary Vance continues to

oppose deployment of the AWACS to Egypt.

4. Libya. The SCC agreed that we should suspend relations with

Libya. The American diplomatic staff would be reduced from 12 to 5,

no consular duties would be performed, and our diplomats would work

out of an Interests Section in another country’s embassy. Depending

78.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 3, 1979

SUBJECT

Mid-Range and Longer-Range Strategy

A checklist and possible structure for your meeting on Tuesday.

A mid-range negotiating strategy is not incompatible with a longer-

range strategy aimed at replacement of Khomeini or other strategies

which seek a fundamental change in the political situation. The key

decision to be made is whether or not we will place all our eggs in the

negotiating basket and let ourselves be carried along by events or whether

we will consider negotiations as one arm of a more activist strategy aimed

at transforming the situation.

Next Several Weeks: Negotiations

—Security Council Resolution

—World Court meets December 10

—Syria, Arafat, papal envoy, and perhaps other mediation efforts

now in train. Several personal missions (lawyers, doctors) going on.

—Secretary General may become more actively engaged in direct

negotiations once the Security Council has acted.

—Chapter Seven economic sanctions could be sought as a follow-

up to the Security Council action. This might be one way to bring our

allies into the sanctions.

—Ghotbzadeh has suggested a Carter statement. Although his

ideas are not acceptable, we might drop some acceptable language on

his themes into speeches, statements and the like which could then be

put together into a “package” and presented to Ghotbzadeh. This is

essentially what we did with the first PLO effort. (This is Hal Saunders’

idea as a next step on the negotiating track—please protect.)

—Shah may leave, thus changing the situation further.

—The espionage campaign is bound to increase, and the students

may go to trials—over the objections of Ghotbzadeh and others. This

will force us to ratchet up our overt opposition. If we react with limited

military action, that will derail or divert the diplomatic track.

—I heard today that the constitutional referendum will be put

before some kind of Islamic Council on December 10. That may turn

out to be an important date, but we have little information thus far.

The objective of the negotiating strategy should be to build as much

pressure as possible on Khomeini and his cohorts as we can. They perceive

the economic steps we have taken as quite significant, and any short-

ages of goods, unemployment, credit breakdowns, and simple eco-

nomic foulups will probably be attributed to our efforts. That is just

established to examine the Shah’s regime. (Memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski, Decem-

ber 2; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 31,

Options Identified

what we want. If we can convince them that they are in a net with no

way out, pressure will build rapidly to change the situation.

However, the negotiating strategy is unlikely to be successful in itself.

They can potentially live with economic chaos for a prolonged period of

time. Khomeini’s support is the “rabble” which has been disadvantaged

historically and which can survive at a level which the intelligentsia

would find intolerable. If he can keep them minimally fed and full of

glorious dreams, they will stay with him. He is their man.

Change is not likely to be evolutionary. Pressures are building for a

new explosion which will come from dissaffected elements: the army,

a disillusioned faction around Khomeini, a loose tribal coalition, a new

strongman . . . perhaps all of the above. It could also come from the

left, which is gaining strength but still far short of the kind of support

needed for a direct challenge. Our objective should be to encourage

forces which we see as desirable alternatives to Khomeini and help

them to be ready to step in when the explosion occurs.

We cannot directly change the course of events, but we can nudge

them in the direction we want them to go. Our nudges are likely to

be ineffective, however, unless we are acting in an agreed policy context

with clear objectives and a degree of commitment which will lend consistency

and purpose to our efforts. Otherwise, we are going to find ourselves in

the same position as last year when different sides of the policy house

were speaking with different voices and fighting their battles in the

press. We are edging toward that situation.

An Activist Policy

I outlined my ideas on this yesterday4 and will not repeat them

here beyond a schematic:

—Policy Decision: We cannot work with Khomeini. A gradualist

approach is futile in a revolutionary situation and only encourages

the left.

—Covert Action. Must be a major effort. We need to build (or

rebuild) a cadre of imaginative, effective talent.

—Coalition Building. Potential allies are everywhere. Our support,

even if private and qualified, will speed them to do their own thing.

—Military. Our presence in the region is vital and effective. We

must know when and how we will be prepared to use it in order to

79.

Paper Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)

Washington, undated

THE INTERNAL OPTIONS IN IRAN

The small group chaired by David Aaron has considered essentially

two strategies toward the evolution of the internal Iranian political

leadership.

Before one gets to either one, there is a debate over (1) whether

we decide now that we can not live with Khomeini and should set as

our objective his downfall or (2) whether we should assume that we

cannot have much effect on this symbol of the revolution and concen-

trate on bolstering constructive forces which might emerge when it

becomes apparent that Khomeini himself is incapable of running a

country and has to be eased aside from decisions on managing

Iran’s affairs.

In our meetings, two different approaches have been laid out:

1. One is referred to as the “southern strategy.” This approach

involves providing support for certain expatriates like Bakhtiar and

Gen. Djam, who might work with ethnic minorities in Iran and eventu-

ally try to set up a rival Iranian Government in one of those minority

areas. The objective would not be the disintegration of Iran, because

its integrity remains the best defense against the USSR. The objective

Options Identified

would ultimately be to rally so much opposition to Khomeini that new

leadership could move into Tehran and take over. Clearly, this process

would be difficult, if not impossible, to control, and the results might

be quite different from our plans.

2. The other approach is to begin putting lines out to moderate

leadership in Tehran and in the religious community with an eye to

developing relationships which will put us in a favorable position

when responsible elements decide to take more and more of the deci-

sion-making out of Khomeini’s hands.

We need not view these approaches in either/or terms. We could

set in motion the second option, holding in reserve consideration of

the first. Both options present us with the same problem we have faced

all along: There are no groups with sufficient strength and popular

appeal to pose a serious threat to Khomeini. Those that we can deal

with are fragmented and fearful. Thus, we will have to move with

great caution and not expect early results.

[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

If one were to bridge this longer-term program—if one is decided

on—and the present situation, the point would be that efforts in the

present situation to demonstrate that Khomeini’s government is not

able to manage Iran’s economic problems as long as Iran remains

isolated from the rest of the world and in confrontation with us.

80.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, December 3, 1979

SUBJECT

NSC Agenda, December 4, 1979

Subject to your approval, I would propose to introduce the

following agenda at the meeting:

1. Collective economic sanctions;

2. Additional political measures;

3. Escalating military/economic pressure;

4. Longer term political strategy;

5. Public posture;

6. Middle Eastern security.

This is a rather full agenda, and yet all the items need to be cov-

ered—and only decisions by you are likely to generate the needed

action. I will try below to summarize as concisely as possible the basic

options so that the discussion can move expeditiously. (In the morning,

I will try to guide the SCC through a preliminary run on the above

topics.) However, before doing so, let me register one central and

strategic issue with you: Is time working to our advantage or disadvantage?

I am concerned over two trends: (a) the transformation of the

conflict from Iran vs. the international community into America vs. Islam;

(b) the erosion of support for us among friends and non-friends.

Recent attacks on our embassies, as well as various Middle East

press comments (encouraged probably by very subtle Soviet insinua-

tions), point in the direction of transforming the conflict into a wider

assault on “corrupt and impotent” America. This is a dangerous trend.

It could make our friends in the region run for cover and our allies

increasingly to cut their own deals.

Perhaps I am wrong, but the issue is worth examining because

whatever answer you give should drive our strategy. (Right now it is

being driven by a diplomatic timetable.) My concern since a year ago

Options Identified

has been that a regional crisis is likely to develop as a result of the Shah’s

fall. It could even become a global crisis. At our meeting yesterday2 the

Vice President said that the emerging confrontation between Islam

and the United States, accompanied by European backsliding, could

transform overall international and economic relations in a drastic

fashion—and I fear he is right. Accordingly, we need to look beyond

the hostage issue in shaping our broad strategy.

Specific Issues:

1. Economic Sanctions

Options:

(a) To ask our allies to adopt financial sanctions of their own. This

would require a very major effort, including perhaps convening an

emergency Summit meeting of the Seven. Solomon feels that something

like this may be necessary because, otherwise, our allies will cut their

own deals while the dollar will continue to decline.

(b) To ask our allies—notably Great Britain—to intervene with their

courts for a delay in judgment on the grounds that the financial steps

taken by us involve a sovereign matter between governments. This

will work best with the UK, and the SCC, in general, leans toward

this option.

(c) To invoke Chapter 7 of the UN. This could follow a Security

Council vote, though support is not certain.

(d) You should also consider sending a top level emissary to consult

with our allies.

2. Additional Political Measures

Cy envisages proceeding with the Security Council toward a resolu-

tion, and in the World Court toward a judgment. You might ask him

what additional steps he envisages beyond these two. You have previ-

ously urged an expulsion of Iranian diplomats from this country. Is

the time right to take that action?

In addition, you should explicitly review the possibility of a dra-

matic personal appearance by yourself before the General Assembly.

A powerful speech, with the tone and substance much like your last

Press Conference, could have a dramatic impact. It would also lay the

ground for more decisive action.

More generally, is it possible to adopt the more extreme collective

economic sanctions (option 1(a)) without threatening more in the politi-

cal/military realm? Are our allies likely to support us in what is to

them a drastic economic measure if our political steps seem essentially

litigational? There is general agreement that only fear of some unpleas-

ant consequences is likely to get our allies to help us with the more

drastic economic steps.

3. Specific Military Preparation

Should AWACS proceed to Egypt? Should the rescue option be

reactivated and even some preliminary deployment undertaken? Both

steps could be useful signals of our seriousness. Finally, should F–111’s

be sent to Egypt?

4. Escalating Military/Economic Pressure

If your conclusion is that time is not working in our favor, we

could couple a request for collective financial sanctions by our allies

with the threat—which we should only make if we are serious about

it—to proceed with a direct blockade of our own. Alternatively, we

could begin to apply such a blockade ourselves (by mining), and simply ask

for allied support for that step, rather than insist on an allied initiative

in the economic area.

It is self-evident that any such step by the U.S. will raise the risks

to the hostages. It will have to be accompanied by a credible threat to

escalate military sanctions and by a prior decision to implement such

escalatory steps if the Iranian response to mining is physical harm to

any hostage.

I would urge you to consider such action only if you were prepared

to reach the following two judgments:

(a) That time is not working in our favor, and that

(b) Khomeini needs to be brought down expeditiously.

This leads me immediately into discussion of the next point.

5. Longer Term Political Strategy

At least a portion of the government has operated for almost a

year on the assumption that the U.S. could work with Khomeini. I

believe that recent events have demonstrated that this was, throughout,

a dangerous fallacy. We have to recognize that Khomeini is a dedicated

enemy of the United States, for he sees the U.S. as a greater danger

than even Marxism. To him, America is the embodiment of an anti-

religious and corrupt West, which is all the more dangerous because

its influence has been so pervasively felt in the changing Iranian life-

styles. He is determined to eradicate that influence at all costs and he

hopes to do so by creating a far-reaching rift between the U.S. and Islam.

Options Identified

We will present specific options to you at the meeting after review

by the SCC. [7 lines not declassified] We need to shape a coalition to

defeat Khomeini; and we should orchestrate a propaganda campaign

to help achieve that end.

To reinforce this strategy, we would have to maintain as many

economic pressures on Iran as we can generate, both directly and

indirectly. Once the existing fervor dies down, economic dislocations

will make more modernistically minded Iranians think about the lunacy

into which Khomeini has plunged them.

I have tried to raise the subject repeatedly in SCC meetings, but

almost everyone shies away from reaching any firm conclusion on the

subject. [4½ lines not declassified]

[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]

6. Public Posture

The conflict is not with Islam. I have raised this matter at SCC

meetings on more than one occasion, and I explicitly spoke to it at the

Jewish Labor Committee convention. More important, and with far

greater effect, you commented on it very eloquently in your last Press

Conference, but the point needs to be made over and over again. It

might be useful for you to reiterate that point and instruct all U.S.

spokesmen to keep repeating it at every opportunity.

7. Middle Eastern Security

[Omitted here is information on Saudi Arabia, Oman, Somalia,

and Egypt.]

81.

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, December 4, 1979

The Iranian Crisis: International Economic Fallout

[portion marking not declassified]

The US decision to block official Iranian monetary assets in US

banks here and abroad coupled with Iran’s technical default on several

loans and its threat to blacklist the use of the US dollar have sent shock

waves reverberating throughout the international community. These

measures have: (a) created confusion in the international banking sys-

tem in its dealings with Iran, impeding Tehran’s ability to import;

(b) drawn the West Europeans, Japanese, and other allies reluctantly

into the financial dispute and sent a few of them scurrying to capitalize

on the situation; (c) raised concern among OPEC members over the

security of their foreign assets; (d) led Iran and Libya to demand that

OPEC unsheathe the oil weapon; and (e) raised questions about the

future role of the dollar as an international reserve currency. [portion

marking not declassified]

While much of the confusion in international economic circles

would abate quickly once the crisis between Iran and the United States

were resolved, the dispute has longer term implications for all parties

involved. For Iran, the protracted hiatus in its international economic

affairs will mean a downturn in coming months from an already

depressed level of economic activity. Hence, while the crisis will not

change the Ayatollah’s mind set in the short run, over time it will have

substantial political repercussions. Although OPEC members recognize

the special circumstances of the US actions, the United States will find

that OPEC members will intensify their efforts to diversify their foreign

investment portfolios; if other countries block Iranian assets before the

dispute is resolved, OPEC members will feel even more strongly that

keeping their oil in the ground is the most prudent policy. As for the

Japanese and the West Germans, they will have to deal with growing

pressures to internationalize their currencies. A reduced role for the

Options Identified

US dollar as a reserve currency would cause difficult adjustments in

the near term, but could prove beneficial over the long haul to the

United States. [portion marking not declassified]

Monetary and Trade Problems

Theoretically, the US order blocking Iranian monetary assets

should not impede international economic transactions with Iran. In

practice, however, confusion on the part of the Iranian banks and

general uncertainty over the present situation among Western traders

and bankers—largely inspired by intemperate and ill-chosen remarks

made by high Iranian officials—are creating problems for all parties

concerned. As a result, oil revenues continue to flow into blocked

accounts, and some foreign companies and banks are unwilling to

accept letters of credit (L/C) for exports to Iran. [portion marking not

declassified]

The reluctance of international bankers to open new lines of credit

with Iran stem from fears of not being paid. In particular, the banks

do not wish to comply with the Iranian requirement that L/Cs be

drawn on Iranian banks. They are afraid that possible massive loan

defaults by Iran would trigger blocking orders by West European

governments, tying up almost all of Iran’s official assets. Some of the

L/Cs that are being opened apparently carry risk premiums. [portion

marking not declassified]

Chaos in the Iranian banking system has made it difficult for Tehran

to sort out trade financing problems; inadequate—sometimes conflict-

ing—instructions are being sent to customers, branch banks, and corre-

spondent banks. Lack of management and direction as a result of the

flight of key personnel are largely responsible for the chaos. Indeed

with careful management, the solution to the US asset block would be

relatively simple: the Iranian government need only maintain deposits

exclusively in non-US banks and cancel outstanding letters of credit

that would channel money into blocked accounts. However, given the

erratic behavior and uncoordinated efforts of Iran’s government and

banks, the process of establishing new, orderly relations with non-US

banks is taking considerable time and depends heavily on assistance

from foreign bankers and traders. [portion marking not declassified]

Iran-US Financial Dispute Spreads

Because of their dependence on OPEC oil, US allies are trying to

remain neutral in the US-Iranian financial hassle while generally voic-

ing support for release of the hostages.

[1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified]

Western Europe and Japan

West European central banks and governments are attempting to

maintain positions of strict neutrality on financial issues in the face of

mounting difficulties. [9 lines not declassified]

A US bank may have beaten Bonn to the punch by obtaining a court

order to seize Iranian government shares in the Krupp conglomerate.

Fearing hostile reaction from Tehran, Bonn issued a strong disclaimer

of any government involvement in the court order. The Ministers of

Finance and Economics have publicly “deplored” what they view as

the US bank’s interference in West German foreign policy. [portion

marking not declassified]

While the French have voiced support for the US position on the

hostages, they have attempted to keep commercial dealings with Iran

outside the dispute. [2½ lines not declassified] Recent publicity surround-

ing a French move against Iranian assets taken a month ago may,

however, draw Paris more directly into the financial tangle with Iran.

At that time, French courts issued an order freezing Iran’s $1 billion

stake in the European uranium enrichment group, EURODIF. The

French move stems from Iran’s failure to fulfill its financial obligations

as a 10-percent shareholder in the Tricastin uranium enrichment plant

in France. [portion marking not declassified]

[2 paragraphs (17½ lines) not declassified]

Other Non-OPEC

[1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified]

Oil Producer Reactions

Although the major oil exporting countries recognize the special

circumstances of recent US actions, the blocking of Iranian assets has

raised a few apprehensions. These countries are especially concerned

over the precedent being set by the blocking action since the US measure

was tied to Iran’s attempt to withdraw its funds rather than to the

seizure of the American Embassy, which most OPEC countries have

at least privately condemned. [portion marking not declassified]

• UAE officials feel that the US move was misguided and will

force a reevaluation of UAE foreign investment policies as well as those

of other oil producers. [3½ lines not declassified]

• Kuwait has publicly commented favorably that the US move is

a case of “extreme action, provoking extreme measures.” [2 lines not

declassified]

• Although some Saudis are upset about the precedent set by the

US action, [1½ lines not declassified] SAMA’s investment operations and

policies remain unchanged.

• Iraq, because of its own confrontation with the Khomeini regime,

has intentionally avoided criticism of US actions. In any event, Iraq

has almost no assets in the United States; its foreign holdings are widely

dispersed throughout the West and Communist countries. [2½ lines not

declassified]

Options Identified

• Venezuela, the only non-Arab OPEC member with large foreign

holdings, has expressed concern that the flare-up might create a rift in

OPEC. [portion marking not declassified]

Only a few oil producers, notably the radical states of Algeria and

Libya, sharpened their public anti-US stance in response to the US

financial action. The Libyan delegation to the Arab Foreign Ministers

meeting in Tunis called for joint Arab reprisals against the United

States. The Libyan initiative received only mild support from Syria

and was soundly rejected by the conference. [8 lines not declassified]

Little OPEC Support for Iranian Initiatives

[1 paragraph (10½ lines) not declassified]

The Iranians have received no support for their request that OPEC

discontinue the use of the dollar as the means of payment for oil

exports. Acting in their self interest, the oil exporting countries seem

unlikely to reject the dollar as a vehicle currency as long as it remains

a principal currency for transactions by the rest of the world; they will

need dollars to pay for their imports. Some would be especially reluc-

tant to take actions that might be thought to have a long-term, adverse

effect on the dollar, because more than half of their assets are dollar-

denominated. [portion marking not declassified]

Longer-Term Implications of the Iranian-US Flareup

The following is our preliminary reaction to the longer-term impact

of the Iranian crisis.

Impact on Iran

The financial and governmental confusion generated by the US-

blocking of Iranian assets and by the threats of the Iranians to default

on their external debts is having a seriously adverse effect on trade

and other external relationships that will be felt for many months

to come. In addition, skepticism about the government’s ability and

willingness to ensure personal security will slow the return of foreign

contractors and technicians who are leaving the country. Overall, spin-

off from the current crisis is undermining Iran’s ability to supply itself

while making imports more difficult. Hence, worsening economic con-

ditions—including spot shortages of critical commodities such as

food—are certainly in the cards. The worst of these problems, however,

are a few months off. [portion marking not declassified]

While the economic downturn being brewed by the current crisis

is not apt to change the Ayatollah’s mind set in the short run, its

political impact will be felt in the longer term. Most Iranians are willing

to pay some price to ensure the success of the revolution, and for the

time being many find the United States a handy scapegoat for most

of Iran’s problems. Nevertheless, before the current flareup in US-

Iranian relations, signs of discontent with the quality of economic man-

agement were apparent, especially among some of the staunchest back-

ers of the revolution such as the Bazaaris and urban workers. These

tensions are likely to grow in the next several months as a result of

commodity shortages, accelerated inflation, and persistent unemploy-

ment. [portion marking not declassified]

Whether or not the strains generated by a deteriorating economic

situation will crystallize into resistance against the Ayatollah’s leader-

ship will depend on several factors. Once the crisis with the United

States is resolved the Ayatollah will have to find another focus of blame

for his policy blunders. He will also have to select his future policy

options gingerly, taking care to avoid extremist measures such as wide-

spread wage and price freezes or forced return to the countryside,

which would provide a focus for protest. Failure to follow an economic

course that holds the promise of a better future for most Iranians would

provide opportunities for the left and others to exploit. [portion marking

not declassified]

Impact on Oil Producers

Over the long term, the US blockage of Iranian assets will cause

other oil producing countries to reassess their asset portfolios. Oil

producing governments are likely to try to continue diversifying their

new investment as well as their existing assets away from the dollar

and from US institutions, more closely matching their asset holdings

with trade patterns. [2½ lines not declassified]

If other countries join in the blockage of Iranian assets, the trend

toward reduced oil production in countries currently accumulating

excess oil revenues will likely accelerate. Given the tight world oil

supply-demand balance, even a small shift in production policies

induced by the financial aspect of the US-Iranian crisis could have a

significant influence on the oil market. At this juncture we have no

indication that production policies have been changed. [portion marking

not declassified]

It is important to note that a number of countries were already

considering production cuts prior to the US-Iranian flareup, and that

moves in this direction in coming months should not be construed as

support for the Ayatollah Khomeini.

• [3 lines not declassified]

• [7 lines not declassified]

• [8 lines not declassified]

Implications for the US Dollar

The US blockage of Iranian assets has added to already existing

concerns about the suitability of the US dollar as the major international

currency. Yet, there is no other currency capable of assuming this role.

Options Identified

In addition, Swiss, Japanese, and West German banking officials fear

the increased use of their currencies as reserve assets and settlement

currencies. The Japanese, for example, strongly resisted US pressure

in the early 1970s to further internationalize the yen. Wider use of the

Swiss franc, yen, and Deutsche mark, would lessen the control of

domestic monetary authorities, making money management more diffi-

cult. Unregulated Euro-markets in these currencies—now limited—

would undoubtedly grow, as happened with the US dollar in the 1960s.

If other developed countries continue to resist pressures for greater

international use of their currencies, support for a broader role for the

SDR in international transactions would likely grow. [portion marking

not declassified]

Although other oil exporters have rejected Iranian demands that

oil be priced and sold in other currencies, the issue is not a new one.

Indeed, OPEC as a whole has been discussing for some time now the

possibility of pricing its oil in a currency—or a basket of currencies—

stronger than the dollar. If only Iran shifted away from using the dollar,

the result would probably be a brief flurry in exchange markets. If all

oil were suddenly priced and sold in other currencies, however, the

one-time drop in demand for dollars would be dramatic and adjustment

problems could be severe. World oil trade at current prices is now

running at the tremendous level of something more than $250 billion

a year. If the value of the dollar takes a plunge, however, so does the

value of OPEC assets worldwide. [portion marking not declassified]

Over the longer term, the strength of the US dollar will essentially

be determined by fundamental economic factors, such as the US infla-

tion rate, current account balance, and the general health of the econ-

omy. Thus, any erosion in the status of the US dollar as a reserve

currency would not cause serious long-term damage, provided it occurs

on a gradual basis—a process that OPEC countries have a strong inter-

est in assuring because of their large dollar holdings. Providing the

change in the international currency regime is a gradual one, the dollar

over the longer run might benefit. Such a move would give the United

States greater control over monetary policy and an enhanced competi-

tive position. [portion marking not declassified]

82.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The President

CIA

The Vice President

Admiral Turner

State

White House

Secretary Vance

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Deputy Secretary Christopher

Hamilton Jordan

Jody Powell

Treasury

Lloyd Cutler

Secretary Miller

Charles Kirbo

Defense

David Aaron

Secretary Brown

NSC

Deputy Secretary Claytor

Gary Sick

JCS

Chairman Jones

MINUTES

The President opened the meeting, noting that it was an important

meeting and that he wished to review his present thinking on the

circumstances in Iran. The most serious question is how to handle the

status quo. The domestic situation is okay, and he was not nervous or

impatient about U.S. public support. He was concerned that our world

wide posture could begin to deteriorate. The time when we could get

by without the help of our allies is past. The British, Germans, French

and others must face the fact that they must decide either to help us

actively or to stand aloof as the financial world chipped away at our

position. Potential adversaries would begin to coalesce if they saw our

common purpose wavering. The Soviets thus far have been seemingly

helpful out of fear of aggravating us, although lately there was report-

ing about some bad press statements. Incidents in Libya and Kuwait

were disturbing, and Saudi Arabia had been inflicted for the first time

in the President’s memory with serious internal disruption. World

opinion is on our side thus far, but the danger that it may decrease is

Options Identified

growing. Lopez Portillo of Mexico has been critical of our economic

measures.

Begging others will not help. We must be pragmatic and take into

account other nations’ interests in Iran so long as they stay with us. If

he were Schmidt, for example, he would try to stay out of this as long

as possible. But if Schmidt had to choose between Germany’s relations

with us on economic, military and political areas as opposed to their

temporary interests in Iran, he would choose the U.S. Some economic

matters must come to a head. If we cannot depend on others, the

President wanted to know it. He wanted to insure that the status quo

hurts Khomeini. He felt that Khomeini was benefiting from continued

trade and diplomatic presence. The presence of our naval forces was

a major factor in his reticence to do damage to the hostages.

We must act carefully, not lash out in a way that would embarrass

us. We should leave no peaceful stone unturned, but we must have

our allies on board—which they are not. The President had outlined

his ideas in his comments on the SCC notes each day. No timing had

been established yet for next moves. There was one thing he feared,

that the status quo would be established on a permanent basis. Domes-

tic support will not last. He had deliberately withheld some actions to

have them in reserve. We do not know if they have moved the hostages.

It is time to inform our three major European allies about the options

we may take in the future. Eventually we will have to draw the line,

through Chapter Seven sanctions and trade by our allies with Iran. It

will be good to know their attitude. The President did not fear a rebuff

if we are in the right and have a good case. We have worked to try to

find a way out, but we have found no flexibility from Khomeini except

for the release of the 13 hostages. In that case he chose only women

and blacks to try and divide the country. We need to find a place for

the Shah to go.

Dr. Brzezinski proposed discussion in the first, larger half of the

meeting first of internal economic steps, then the status of political

negotiations, and additional sanctions against Iranian diplomats. We

should also discuss how to respond to Mexico. On economic matters,

Secretary Miller could speak on possible collective actions—either a

full embargo or cross default—as well as the status of court proceedings

in London and the special problems with the French.

Secretary Miller said he had some good news. One case involving

Citibank in London had resulted in an important legal step. The judge

had ruled that all of these separate cases should be consolidated, and

that they dealt with such grave matters that they deserved full prepara-

tion. He did not intend to hear the cases until after Easter. This was a

hearing by Judge (Goff?) in chambers. He wanted to ascertain American

interest in intervening in the case. We have counsel in London and

are preparing a response. Bank Markazi had raised no objection. Our

objective will be to hold to that calendar.

The President said that was the best news he had heard for some

time. He wondered if they could have their case prepared by Easter.

Mr. Cutler responded that they would be prepared by Easter to

go till the following Easter. This was a very good start.

Secretary Miller said he would not review the status of the New

York cases. The next area was the French where the Iranians were

seeking an order compelling transfer of funds. Our officials have sought

a delay on the grounds that this is a grave matter which requires

consultations. Should the Ambassador go to the Prime Minister? (The

President said yes.) We will now be able to point to the British court

ruling that this is not just a standard case of commercial law.

The President asked about Volcker’s position.

Secretary Miller said he now agreed, particularly since it was

becoming very clear that Iranian withdrawals would have left our

banks high and dry.

The President said he should tell that to the German Banks.

Secretary Miller then turned to the question of getting multilateral

cooperation. The first step should be triggering cross default provisions

to protect their own claims against Iran. This must not be just U.S.

banks. This step is the easiest to do. It does not require a government

decision to impose sanctions, but it would be very effective and would

support the dollar. If instituted by the Germans, Japanese and others,

the Iranians would have trouble finding a place to put their money

and it would force them into using dollars.

The President asked what would prevent the Iranians from isolat-

ing us, since they had excellent relations with all of the other countries.

Secretary Miller replied that what was binding was the $15 billion

of liabilities and the fact that they had their cash spread around in

such a way that they would have extreme difficulty meeting claims

quickly without moving money into the U.S. This option would make

it more difficult to do what they are doing now, i.e., demanding that

others pay them in currencies other than dollars and holding out the

bait of substantial new deposits to cooperative banks. It would certainly

hold them off for one or two months at least.

Secretary Vance asked whether we should also approach Italy, the

Netherlands and Canada.

Secretary Miller went on with his explanation that loans were

syndicated among many banks. If loan A was called, it was then proper

Options Identified

to call loan B and so on. Declaration of default by the Export-Import

Bank would reinforce this process some, but not add much since most

American loans have already been triggered.

Secretary Brown noted that the trick is to get other countries’ banks

to join in.

The President asked whether it takes action by the heads of state.

Secretary Miller replied that it differed by country. The French

own the banks, so it is a government question, whereas in Germany

the banks are private. However, it requires a head of state decision

since without that kind of political judgment the banks will not do it.

It is not a legal decision, it is policy. It will not be easy to get. He

suggested proceeding in steps. First we should approach the various

advisors through emissaries with written instructions. They should

brief but not pull out all the stops. That would be premature until we

have softened the turf. Treasury and State representatives should go

to the UK and France, another team to Germany and Switzerland this

week. There should be a Presidential message saying they are coming.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered if this message should preview economic

sanctions? We would be using up a lot of ammunition on this initial

step.

Secretary Miller said that the tougher message should be carried

by Vance, who will be going to Europe for the NATO meeting.

Secretary Vance agreed.

The President agreed, noting that Vance should sit down with each

of them for an hour or so. They must know the seriousness of the

situation and the seriousness with which we regard their reluctance

to help. In the letter he should say that Vance was coming later.

Dr. Brzezinski said Vance should make the point that the only

alternative to multilateral economic actions was unilateral action by

the U.S.

Secretary Vance said the implications of an embargo were very

serious. We must think how it would be received in the Arab world.

The reaction could be violence in spades. It would be viewed as the

Western Christian world ganging up on the Islamic world.

Secretary Miller said there were serious implications about contin-

ued oil delivery.

Mr. Cutler wondered about the legal ability to proclaim an

embargo.

Secretary Vance said the alternative was to seek sanctions at the

UN. That way it would not be just the West, but an international body.

There was the possibility of a Soviet veto.

The President could foresee calling for sanctions and unilateral

acts by our allies at the same time. Public opinion will work for us.

He noted that Sadat and Clark were ready to go an extra mile. The

others were not so sure.

Secretary Vance said that he thought it would be better to reverse

the order. We should call for Chapter Seven sanctions and ask them

to join in. Get a debate in the Security Council, especially if the World

Court’s order has been ignored.

Dr. Brzezinski said that Secretary Vance’s idea had merit. We want

to avoid a clash between Islam and the West. We want to build collective

responsibility, which we could do by calling on the UN, even if there

were a veto, which he hoped the Soviets would avoid.

The President said he did not want a six month debate which

would leave the hostages there until after Easter.

Dr. Brzezinski said we could seek Chapter Seven sanctions next

week.

Secretary Vance said he wanted to review briefly up to 20 steps

which are available to us from now on. Some we are already taking,

others would be helpful if the negotiations do not go well.

The President returned to the question of the teams and said they

should go directly.

Secretary Miller noted that there was not much time, since pressure

on the dollar was growing. The Europeans would be tough, that was

why he wanted the teams.

Dr. Brzezinski summarized that the teams would go immediately,

that Vance would go early next week, and that a Presidential message

would go tomorrow.

The President said the message should simply say that the teams

were coming and that Vance was coming. It should not pressure them.

Secretary Vance noted that we were completing our Security Coun-

cil action. Now we will be bringing together a number of strands which

will hopefully bring the release of the hostages.

The President wondered if we should tighten up more in the United

States to bring more pressure on Iran.

Vest visited London, Rome, and Paris on the same dates. (Memorandum from Vance

to Carter, December 5; Carter Library, Plains File, Box 15) Vance traveled to London

Options Identified

Admiral Turner suggested that we might wish to encourage trade

unions around the world to join with our own unions to boycott Ira-

nian shipping.

Secretary Miller said that Iranian commerce is well contained for

the moment. There is virtually nothing moving from the U.S. to Iran.

Secretary Brown agreed that it was a trivial trickle. Some corn was

moving from the West Coast.

Admiral Turner noted that another step would be to have Navy

ships interrogate all ships bound for Iran. This would not interefere

with shipping, but it would raise insurance rates and increase appre-

hension about shipping to Iran.

Secretary Miller noted that Lloyds has already quadrupled insur-

ance rates and declared Iran a war zone.

Secretary Vance noted that we need to generate additional pressure

on the trial question. We need more public demands that there will be

no trials.

Mr. Powell noted that the tickers were very heavy with news

that there will be trials. That is an important question today. It has a

short fuse.

Secretary Vance said we should go to various countries and have

them weigh in.

The President said this concerned him. We need to get our timid

allies to speak out. We must let them know what we would do if there

are trials. He knew that the group was more timid than he was. We

should get the EC Nine.

Dr. Brzezinski interjected a reminder that we had told them before

what we would do.

Secretary Vance noted that the Ambassador of Sri Lanka has

received a commitment for favorable action from the Iranians and he

proposes to go to Tehran with a representative of the Secretary General.

The Secretary did not know if the Ambassador had overstated Ghotbza-

deh’s position. We can also ask for a freeze on military shipments. He

could do this while he is abroad, as well as getting in touch with the

Pakistanis, Turks and others who have been approached.

Admiral Turner noted that a Pakistani delegation is scheduled to

go to Iran soon.

Secretary Brown said he would be seeing the Turks soon and would

raise the issue.

Secretary Vance said we should pursue our case in the World

Court. They will meet on Friday or Monday. In addition, we should

continue with our channels through the UN, the PLO and others to

seek release of the hostages. A representative of the Secretary General

should leave for Tehran tonight or tomorrow. Crown Prince Fahd has

asked Arafat to go. We have been in touch with Arafat. We called him

today from Beirut. Arafat is timid about taking any action until he has

an assured result, but Fahd has said to push him on the plane if

necessary. In addition, there are possible intermediary efforts by Assad

of Syria and Demirel of Turkey. Nothing will be lost if they can be

persuaded to go, although he was not too sanguine about their pros-

pects. President Zia of Pakistan has asked to talk to our Ambassador

about this. Should we agree? (The President said sure.) We are also

working on the departure of the Shah. Chapter Seven sanctions are

available as well. These are all steps we should pursue.

The President asked for comments.

The Vice President observed that with the religious holidays over

and the vote on the constitution behind us, if there is going to be a

change we should see it soon. Our time runs out fairly rapidly. We

should find some way—through Arafat to Ghotbzadeh to Khomeini

perhaps—to tell them this is it. We have kept our tempers for thirty

days. We need to know if they are going to start to move. We need to

know if it will be another six months. We now see ourselves in an

entirely different interval than before.

Mr. Jordan noted that the easiest course for the Iranians each morn-

ing was to say that they would wait till tomorrow. It is in their interest

to prolong the situation. They keep world attention focused on their

grievances and they are not paying a high price.

Mr. Powell asked to raise a new point. If they are not suffering

and simply maintain the status quo, should we start to ratchet up?

Should we wait for a few days to see while we prepare to heat up the

situation? What posture do we want to be in and how long are we

willing to stay in this new period? There is some public expectation

that the next few days may provide an opening. We have a few days

to see if something develops.

The President said that we cannot stand for the status quo to

perpetuate itself. Thus far we have been balanced in our actions. We

have lucked out in several instances by acting in the nick of time. We

have to get our allies with us or tighten up ourselves. He sensed that

in the past few days the support of our allies has been waning, and

he feared that our adversaries would assess our weakness which would

83.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The President

White House

The Vice President

Zbigniew Brzezinski

David Aaron

State

Secretary Vance

Defense

Secretary Brown

MINUTES

After the meeting reduced itself solely to the statutory members,

Dr. Brzezinski noted the previous discussion of diplomatic and eco-

nomic steps and outlined the proposed agenda for this portion of

the meeting.

—The military steps that might be required;

—The longer-term political actions which we might take regarding

the Khomeini Government; and

—Our future military posture in the region.

Before turning to this agenda, Secretary Vance reported on an oral

message to the President on Iran from President Brezhnev. He said

that the first two-thirds of the message was all right and that the last

third was about what could be expected from the Soviets. He explained

that it had been given to him by Dobrynin over the phone. Dobrynin

has been called home for consultations and Secretary Vance would meet

with him on Wednesday, December 5 and review both Iran and SALT.

The President noted that the Soviets had taken a very negative line

in TASS. He said the private assurances about their position were of

no help. Secretary Vance indicated that he would pursue this issue

vigorously with Dobrynin. The Vice President added that a continua-

tion of the Soviet press line will kill SALT.

Turning to the agenda, Dr. Brzezinski said that the principal issue

is the relationship between the military and diplomatic steps and the

economic measures which we had under consideration. He noted that

we had sent the message to the Iranians concerning holding trials of

our hostages3 which foreshadowed certain steps that we would take

to interrupt commerce with Iran.

More specifically, Dr. Brzezinski noted the decision of whether to

deploy the AWACS, whether to deploy F–111s and whether to revitalize

planning for rescue operations which had become dormant. Separate

from these deployment decisions, he added, were action decisions

address these measures with our Allies to encourage their help on the

economic measures discussed previously in the NSC meeting.

Finally, Dr. Brzezinski said there was the question of timing: is

time on our side or is there a continuing erosion in our position interna-

tionally? He concluded by suggesting that Harold Brown brief the NSC

on the military options which he had under consideration.

The President indicated that he first would like Secretary Vance

to respond to a question he had asked earlier: what should the U.S.

do if the Iranians institute trials. He said that he was at ease about our

military preparations and he felt that Khomeini was ill-at-ease. He said

the Ayatollah knows that we can blockade Iran, that we can destroy

the refineries at Abadan and that we can take out their aircraft and

airfields. He noted that we had reached a consensus on the nature of

these options within the government but that he would decide when

they might be implemented.

On the other hand, there was no consensus on the possibilities that

were available to us short of these military actions. He thought that

as soon as the Security Council finishes its action and the International

Court of Justice renders its decision, the U.S. should proceed to ask

for mandatory sanctions in the UN Security Council and call for other

countries to join us on a voluntary basis. He said he was not certain

exactly when economic sanctions should be applied, but it was clear

that if the Iranians start trials, the U.S. should move forward on sanc-

tions. He recalled that we had already informed the Iranians that we

would seek to interrupt their commerce if they tried the American

hostages.

Secretary Vance said he had no problem with calling for sanctions

but he opposed the mining of harbors to achieve an interruption in

Iranian commerce.

The President explained that he was not in favor of mining harbors

as soon as the trials start as long as the Allies have joined us in imposing

voluntary economic sanctions and the Security Council is debating in

good faith the possibility of mandatory sanctions. However, if this

effort is not successful, he reserved the right to mine Iran’s harbors.

He said he wanted Prime Minister Thatcher, President Giscard and

Chancellor Schmidt to know that this is an option that we have, and

that we are prepared to exercise, if economic sanctions do not work.

The Secretary of State said that he agreed with the President but

was against mining.

The Vice President asked whether the concept was that if the Irani-

ans start trials we would immediately move to sanctions and mining.

The President replied “No.” We would call for sanctions, but since

Security Council debate could go on for weeks, we would accompany

this with a call for like-minded countries to join us immediately in

applying voluntary sanctions.

Dr. Brzezinski said that if the latter is effective, that would be fine.

But if not, we would come to a crunch.

Secretary Brown said that it is quite important what we say to

our Allies. If sanctions are called for, but will not be imposed by the

International Community or by our friends, it may be necessary to go

to unilateral action.

Secretary Vance said that in that case we should be sure to be clear

that we are talking about mining and not bombing.

The President agreed that we should make clear we are considering

mining or blockading. He added that he would feel better if Thatcher,

Giscard and Schmidt understood that this is a likely prospect if appro-

priate actions through UN sanctions do not materialize. He added that

irrespective of UN action, if they kill a hostage, that is a different

situation. He noted, however, that if that happens, a step such as

bombing might lead to the killing of the other 49.

The President said that his worst period was earlier when the

Iranians might have killed the Marine they had captured and we had

thousands of Americans in Tehran against which the Iranians could

retaliate. He concluded by saying that we should agree on what we

will do if trials take place.

Dr. Brzezinski summarized that without trials we would pursue

economic sanctions at a slower pace. Secretary Vance agreed that that

was the right approach.

The President said that Hodding Carter and Jody Powell should

explain what we mean by the economic steps that had been discussed

earlier in the meeting. He said they should hone down their arguments

and be prepared to make a clear presentation. The Secretary of State

said that the concept of cross defaults was not that complicated once

it was explained.

The Secretary of Defense said that the real issue is how we can

go down the negotiating path without making it harder to use non-

negotiating methods. We will confront the argument that if we have

gone a month without the Iranians harming the hostages, why not

continue to refrain from action.

Dr. Brzezinski said that there are military options that involve

additional deployments rather than operations. Secretary Brown said

that we already have enough forces deployed to carry out the options

we have under consideration.

The President said his approach was to never let the situation

freeze up. We must keep taking steps. He said we must not let this

Options Identified

become a “normal” situation. We are really skating on thin ice with

the American public. The Secretary of State said that one action we

could take is to move the Shah to a permanent home. The President

agreed.

Dr. Brzezinski said that there were deployment actions, like posi-

tioning AWACS in Egypt, that also might be undertaken.

The Secretary of State opposed deploying AWACS to Egypt. He

said that we will be pursuing the negotiating track with the Secretary

General, with the PLO and others. He thought that the deployment of

AWACS to Egypt would put a big obstacle into this track. He thought

it would only serve to get the Iranians to rally around Khomeini and

toughen up again just when we were hoping to induce them into a

more accommodating stance. He said it simply did not make sense to

move the AWACS in at this time.

Secretary Brown said that there were considerable difficulties in

Libya at the moment and that the movement of the AWACS to Egypt

could be related to Libya as opposed to the Iranian situation.

Dr. Brzezinski said that we have followed the two-track approach in

this crisis—increasing military preparations and pursuing negotiating

efforts. He said the political negotiations will be going forward and

that the deployment of AWACS will demonstrate that the military

track is moving forward in case negotiations should fail. Secretary

Vance disagreed. He said he thought it would block negotiations. Har-

old Brown recalled that this was what the Secretary of State had thought

if a second carrier were moved into the Arabian Sea.

The President said that he did not agree with the Secretary of State.

He said that the use of American planes in this situation is a real

possibility and we need to prepare for it. He recalled that he had turned

down proposals to deploy a third carrier to the region or to put Marines

into the area. But he thought the reaction to AWACS would be no

worse in Iran than to the two-carrier deployment and that he would

feel better if the AWACS were there in case of a conflict.

The Secretary of Defense said that we could get the AWACS there

in a short period of time. The President responded that he thought he

had decided to do this ten days ago at Camp David. Secretary Vance

responded that he had not been a participant in that decision. Dr.

Brzezinski recalled that the decision had been taken in connection with

the Defense Budget meeting4 and that immediately thereafter, when

the Secretary of State had learned about it, had registered his concern.

The President concluded by saying that he did not agree with the

Secretary of State and that Harold Brown should go ahead and put

the AWACS into Egypt.

The Secretary of State asked who should be notified and when.

Secretary Brown said that the Egyptians would obviously be notified.

The Secretary of State added that our European Allies should be notified

as well.

The President asked for the status of the deployment. Secretary

Brown said that the AWACS can be in Egypt by Friday. He added

that we can refuel from Mildenhall and not the Azores and so we need

not inform the Portuguese. It would therefore be possible to deploy

the AWACS on a quiet basis.

The President said that he had no aversion to people knowing

about it. Secretary Brown said that it was best to pursue the quiet track

and then notify people after we land the AWACS in Egypt.

[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

The President asked the Secretary of State for his opinion about

discussing this issue on a private basis during his visit with Prime

Minister Thatcher, President Giscard and Chancellor Schmidt. The Sec-

retary of State thought this was a good idea. He said we have not

thought through who are the best people to support and we should

obtain our Allies’ thinking. The President indicated that he was particu-

larly interested in the views of Thatcher and Giscard on General Djam

and Bakhtiar representatives. The Secretary of State added that we

need to do more analysis for a successful operation.

The Secretary of Defense said that we could not wait forever for

a perfect analysis. We have links into the opposition and we need to

exercise them in order to get more information on its capability. The

Secretary of State responded that as the Vice President once observed,

the U.S. has a poor record in carrying out such operations and therefore

we need better information.

Dr. Brzezinski said he agreed that more information is desirable.

He thought that we should talk to the Germans as well. But he recalled

the French dictum that to get engaged is to see.

The President said we do not want to do anything until Cy gets

back. He suggested that Stan Turner promptly provide CIA’s best

assessment of potential successors to Khomeini for Secretary Vance’s

use. Dr. Brzezinski thought that in addition the Secretary could explain

Options Identified

the program we have in mind. The President said that we should get

the Allies thoughts rather than lay out a U.S. plan. He also thought

there might be a possibility that the French could help provide us

information on the Iraqi position and their intentions in this situation.

The Secretary of State said that Dick Cooper had been in contact

with oil company officials operating in Iraq. They were all convinced

that the Iraqis will invade Iran’s oil fields.

[Omitted here is information on regional security.]

Turning to the question of a permanent location for the Shah,

Secretary Vance outlined the situation:

In Argentina, Videla has said “the negative generally outweighs

the positive.” The price they want is for the United States to lay off on

human rights and to say nice things about their government. They

also want the Shah to invest his fortune in Argentina. The President

commented that we certainly could congratulate them on their

hospitality.

The Secretary said that in Austria, Kreisky is waiting for Arafat’s

reaction on the consequences to the hostages should the Shah relocate

there. The President asked what Kreisky had in mind. Secretary Vance

replied that Kreisky does not want to be responsible for the deaths of

the hostages. The President replied that Kreisky could write a letter in

advance disclaiming responsibility. Secretary Vance concluded that we

will learn soon what the Austrian reaction is.

South Africa wants a request from the Shah in order to consider

seriously the possibility of granting him asylum. The Shah has said

that he does not like South Africa because they are racists. We are in

touch with his people to say that this response is not satisfactory. We

understand that the Shah told Peter Tarnoff that he would go to South

Africa but that the Shahbanou does not want to go there.

Continuing, the Secretary said that Guatemala too would accept

the Shah but they too want a big price. Tonga has volunteered asylum,

but the Shah has said he does not like islands. There is even the

possibility of Ireland. A church leader in Iceland, speaking on behalf

of the Government, has said that he might come there. We have asked

our Ambassador to Iceland to assess that possibility. Finally, we know

that Paraguay will take him, but he will not go there. Costa Rica has

said in the past that they would take him, but we do not know what their

present position is and we are concerned that it would be impossible

to protect them there.

Dr. Brzezinski said that Guatemala sounded best. The President

asked about Panama. Secretary Vance replied that the Panamanians

have not made their position clear.

The Secretary of State said that they were trying to get more respon-

sible people to Texas to work on the Shah’s staff. The current key-staff

person, Robert Armao, was not helpful and we are trying to encourage

Jackson to get more directly involved.

The Secretary asked whether the President had seen the analysis

of how long the Shah has to live. Dr. Brzezinski said that the CIA

estimated 6–18 months, but he noted that this was an analysis by a

doctor who has not been directly involved in the Shah’s case.

[Omitted here is information on SALT II.]

The President then asked about the Iranian diplomats and measures

that might be taken against them. Secretary Vance said that PNGing

the Iranian diplomats might lead the Iranians to decide that they can

do whatever they want with our hostages. However, if we must do

something, we should cut down the number of Iranian diplomats and

restrict their freedom of movement. He said it was important to keep

a handful in this country to service the students. Moreover, in the end,

we may want to trade a mutual break in relations as part of the final

resolution of the crisis.

The President said that by PNGing he meant he wanted to kick

out all of those except those who are needed to take care of the students.

Secretary Brown said that if the number of Iranian diplomats was cut

in half, that would be a help. The President observed that when we take

this action, the American public’s reaction will be—are they still here?

[1 paragraph (4½ lines) not declassified]

The President asked what is the least number with which the

Iranians could operate? Secretary Vance replied five. The Vice President

asked whether anyone has asked us to remove them; whether there

has been any political pressure on this score. He said that he had not

sensed that it was a point of irritation with the American people.

The President responded that he wanted Khomeini to know that

the situation is deteriorating. He thought that they feared a break

because they worry about not being able to defend themselves against

Iraq. The President said that he wanted to tighten the noose that Kho-

meini had tied around his own neck. He asked why it was necessary

to keep open any consulates.

The Secretary of State replied that they were the only ones who

could deal with the students. Dr. Brzezinski asked why the banks

cannot do it directly. The Secretary of State said that the consulates

give the money to the banks to give to the students.

84.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 5, 1979

MEMORANDUM FOR

The Vice President

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Treasury

As the result of the NSC meeting today, it was agreed that the

following strategy should be pursued with respect to increasing eco-

nomic pressure on Iran for the release of American hostages.

top of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “ok, but prepare with Cy more detailed instruc-

tions for my approval. Let’s send the msg from me to leaders immediately. Let me see

text. J.”

The U.S. will seek support from the Governments of Britain, West

Germany, France, Switzerland and Japan to encourage their banks to

declare cross defaults against Iranian deposits.

Teams of Treasury and State Department officials will be dis-

patched immediately to these countries to explain our approach.

At the same time the President will send messages directly to the

leaders of these countries explaining our general strategy and informing

them of the arrival of the U.S. teams. The Secretary of State will follow

up with Prime Minister Thatcher, Chancellor Schmidt and President

Giscard during his trip to Europe next week.

The Presidential letter and the Secretary of State’s presentation will

make clear that we are asking for this support in order to forestall the

necessity of taking more drastic action. The Secretary in particular

should make the following points:

—The U.S. is prepared to call for Chapter 7 sanctions in the United

Nations and accompany this with a request to our Allies and friends

to voluntarily implement a trade embargo against Iran.

—The President will decide when to take this step, but should the

Iranians try any of the American hostages, the U.S. will immediately

call for Chapter 7 sanctions.

—To the extent that the debate on Chapter 7 sanctions is going

forward in a positive way and we receive effective allied support for

implementing voluntary economic sanctions on trade with Iran, we

will not take direct unilateral measures to interrupt trade with Iran.

However, the Secretary should make clear that should this not prove

to be the case, the President reserves the right to act unilaterally to

interdict commerce with Iran by other means. The Secretary should be

explicit in spelling out what means might be employed.

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Options Identified

85.

Memorandum From the Special Assistant for Counter

Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency (Kalaris) to

Director of Central Intelligence Turner

Washington, December 5, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran—Balance Sheets

I don’t think there is anything new in what I have to say in the

balance sheets. The stark presentation, however, leads to the conclusion

that our long-term national interests call for decisive military action.

a. Gains/Losses in pursuing present direction for the following

three months:

86.

Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for the

Soviet Union and Eastern Europe (Horelick) to Director of

Central Intelligence Turner and the Deputy Director of

Central Intelligence (Carlucci)

Washington, December 5, 1979

SUBJECT

Vance-Dobrynin Conversation

1. Dobrynin has been recalled to Moscow for 10 days for consulta-

tions and is leaving today. Because of his imminent departure, Secretary

Vance called Dobrynin in this morning to protest this morning’s Pravda

article by A. Petrov on Iran. [portion marking not declassified]

Options Identified

2. Two days ago the Soviets advised us in an oral note that they

had made a démarche to the Iranians urging the release of the hostages

and expressed the hope that the US would continue to act with restraint

in this matter. [portion marking not declassified]

3. Secretary Vance said that the US appreciated the cooperation of

the Soviet Union in some matters pertaining to Iran and took note of

the Soviet démarche to Iran several days ago. But the Secretary went

on to say that the Soviets were now undercutting this kind of useful

behavior with the Petrov article. [portion marking not declassified]

4. Dobrynin replied that he had not seen the article but from what

he had been told it probably reflected anxiety in Moscow about reports

of American preparations to take other measures. He said that military

action by the US would create a situation in which the question would

be raised about possible Soviet involvement. The Soviet side would

want very much for that question not even to be raised. [portion marking

not declassified]

5. Secretary Vance said that the President would exhaust all diplo-

matic means to resolve the issue, but that if any harm were done to

the hostages that would create an intolerable situation. Dobrynin said

that he understood that harm to the hostages would represent a kind

of threshold for us (Although Vance was not unconditional or explicit

on this point, it would not be unreasonable for the Soviets to infer

from what he said that if the hostages were not harmed, the US would

not resort to military force—ALH). [portion marking not declassified]

6. Dobrynin asked Vance if the US agreed that Khomeini may be

looking for a face saving way out. Vance said that if that were the case,

we had indicated that we would be prepared to work out something

with the Iranian authorities (The context in which Dobrynin asked this

question did not seem to suggest that the Soviets had their own source

of information on Khomeini’s desires for a face-saving solution, but

seemed rather to suggest a speculative line of inquiry intended to

probe US willingness to compromise rather than employ force—ALH).

[portion marking not declassified]

7. SALT—Dobrynin said that Vasev had reported to Moscow that

the Administration would not push for SALT ratification. Vance said

he was conveying to Dobrynin a decision by the President that the

Administration would indeed push for SALT ratification and would

convey the treaty to the Senate in January (The implication intended

may have been that the Soviets indeed did still have something to lose

by exploiting Iran against us as in the Petrov article—ALH). [portion

marking not declassified]

Arnold L. Horelick

—Waldheim has a strong mandate; from his statement to the Coun-

cil it is clear that he intends interpreting his mandate broadly and is

open to innovative ideas. He is awaiting an initial response from Iran.

Options Identified

—Some members of Iran’s leadership find it possible to interpret

the resolution in a positive light.

—The Non-Aligned clearly are on record with Iran’s leadership

that they cannot argue publicly in favor of Iran’s revolution as long

as Iran continues to hold hostages.

Looking ahead over the next few weeks, I suggest that we work

along a two-track strategy:

1. We should allow Waldheim, the Non-Aligned and other interloc-

utors to continue to apply pressure on Iran’s leadership. We should

say nothing which would diminish the credibility of Waldheim’s diplo-

macy. In this regard, we should do everything we can to prevent press

leaks about plans to “punish Iran.” Instead, our public visible effort

should be directed at encouraging, reinforcing and cooperating with

Waldheim’s diplomacy. It is only if we are seen to be pursuing honestly

this track that we can have some hope of succeeding on the second track.

2. We would develop the second track leading to an effort at sanc-

tions gradually. Thus, we would not jump immediately to Article 41

sanctions as some statements from the White House suggest. Rather we

would first wait until the Iranians have rejected the current resolution

(which we must hope they will not do). We would next move to have

the Security Council formally declare a threat to the peace under Article

39. We would then await another Iranian response before proceeding

to Article 41. In all of these steps we must recognize that only actual

direct threats to the lives of the hostages are likely to induce the Council

to consider seriously the grim prospect of sanctions against a country

as important as Iran. For this reason, even when we invoke Article 41,

I would argue against full sanctions. We should start with items which

are serious for Iran but not dangerous for others. A cut off in air traffic

is an example. In preparation for this we should quietly begin to plan

on steps leading towards implementation of our policy, initially letting

our friends know what we have in mind and seeking support in princi-

ple for invoking Chapter VII. While the fact that we are holding such

discussions with other governments will become known, that in and

of itself would probably stimulate others to work harder to assure the

success of the track one approach. We could respond publicly to any

rumors that we obviously are reviewing all contingencies in an effort

to ensure the availability to us of all the remedies contained in the

UN Charter.

In your discussions with our Allies during the trip, I recommend

that you review with them this two-track approach, and seek the

following in addition:

—Support for the two-track approach.

—Agreement in principle that Chapter VII and sanctions will have

to be invoked if Iran does not release the hostages in a reasonable

period of time or if it formally rejects the decision of the International

Court of Justice.

—Agreement to join us (preferably in New York) to engage in

contingency planning on sanctions and their application. We would

be willing to provide a working paper.

88.

Memorandum From the Inspector General, Central

Intelligence Agency (Waller) to Director of Central

Intelligence Turner

Washington, December 6, 1979

SUBJECT

Soviet Attitude Toward Iran

1. I am attaching a paper2 which represents an effort to analyze

the Soviet attitude and strategy toward Iran.

2. In today’s issue of Pravda, the Central Committee of the Soviet

Union accused the United States of “crude military and political pres-

sure” against Iran. It described the situation as one which “threatens

to become one of the most serious international incidents since World War II.”

Options Identified

3. The attached paper concludes that direct military intervention

in Iran by the U.S. would provoke retaliatory intervention by the USSR

and create a situation potentially more damaging to U.S. policy than

that which faces us now. It also concludes that Soviet tactics will, for

the time being, call for support of Khomeini. The Tudeh Party will

accordingly continue its popular front stance in support of Khomeini.

89.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci) and

the Deputy Director for Operations (McMahon)

Washington, December 7, 1979

SUBJECT

Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 6 December 1979 [portion marking not

declassified]

1. I discussed the covert action situation and Secretary Vance’s trip

and my concerns over it. I made it clear that we were in no position

to decide with whom or how we would go about such a covert action.

He understood that but will be looking for something more specific

if, after Secretary Vance comes back, we decide to go ahead. I worked

hard to persuade him there wasn’t much more specific that we could

do and we needed flexibility to establish contacts and their confidence

in us. We might be thinking, however, of what we could write that would be

supposedly more specific, e.g., [less than 1 line not declassified] initial people

we would contact until we saw where that led us (that was attached as an

annex to the proposal but we could spell it out a little bit more including

where they were and something about how we would make contact—

[less than 1 line not declassified] with Bakhtiar, for example). In short,

Dr. Brzezinski feels he’ll need something with a little more teeth in it to get

the President on board.

Among other things, I think we should be very lucid in stating that

this is an effort to gain contact with these people so that we can assess what

they are doing and what their potential is and so that we can gain their

confidence. We should then state quite precisely what level of commitment

we are going to give to them so that they will feel it worthwhile talking to

us, [1 line not declassified] but indicate we need a lot of latitude on it depending

on what turns up. Overall, I think we just need to discuss the art of entering

into such a covert action in a tutorial sort of way, interleaving it with the

specifics of money and names. [portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

Stansfield Turner

90.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to

President Carter

Washington, December 7, 1979

1. Briefing of Hostages’ Families: Your appearance today at the meet-

ing with the families of the hostages was greatly appreciated, as I am

sure you could tell. We found the families understanding of the difficult

circumstances and supportive of our actions. They were very apprecia-

tive of the job that Dave Newsom, Hal Saunders and Hodding Carter

did in answering their questions. Many of them remarked afterwards

that your willingness to spend so much time with them in the afternoon

convinced them of your determination to get our people out of Tehran.

They particularly appreciated your expression of restraint.

2. Permanent Residence for the Shah: Following our approach to him

yesterday, the South African Ambassador responded this afternoon

that Prime Minister Botha wants us to know that he will consider the

matter very seriously over the next several days. He will probably

Options Identified

want to consult with some of his cabinet colleagues and expects to

have a reply for us by the middle of next week. I asked the Ambassador

to express our appreciation to the Prime Minister, and urged that the

South African government make a positive decision as soon as possible.

We have also gotten a reliable report that General Torrijos is pre-

pared to issue an invitation to the Shah. The Shah had indicated that

he preferred not to go to Central America but we have told one of his

representatives that he must seriously consider Panama in light of

Torrijos’ putative invitation. Torrijos apparently explained that the offer

to the Shah was unconditional and that he would be able to provide

adequate security. If other alternatives fail, we will push the Panama

alternative hard.

[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

91.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

Treasury

Secretary William Miller**

State

Robert Mundheim**

Warren Christopher

Anthony Solomon**

David Newsom

White House

Defense

Hamilton Jordan

Secretary Harold Brown

Jody Powell

W. Graham Claytor

Lloyd Cutler**

JCS

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Admiral Thomas Hayward

David Aaron

General John Pustay

NSC

CIA

Colonel William Odom

Frank Carlucci

Gary Sick

Energy

John Sawhill**

Justice

John Shenefield**

**Present for domestic issues only.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Public Statements. Dr. Brzezinski relayed to the SCC the Presi-

dent’s concern about the stories that are beginning to appear about

U.S. plans and other insider speculation. The record to date of maintain-

ing the confidentiality of SCC discussions and of the Administration

speaking with one voice has been very good. It is very important that

any briefings or backgrounders be coordinated in advance. Jody Powell

is the proper point of contact. The Vice President commented that

unauthorized briefings and the usual business of building up credit

with particular reporters was unjustified and unpatriotic. (C)

Options Identified

2. Japan. Dr. Brzezinski briefly reviewed his meeting with the Japa-

nese Ambassador, in which he had noted the rather weak UN state-

ment and efforts by Japanese financial institutions to circumvent our

restrictions on Iran. The Ambassador had agreed, noting that his

country was very selfish, and promised to carry the message back.

The Ambassador said he was certain the Prime Minister wanted to

cooperate. (S)

3. Economic Steps. Mr. Solomon and Mr. Mundheim reported on

their discussions in Europe. Surprisingly, the Swiss appear to be the

most cooperative. They want any action taken to have the appearance

of private actions by banks rather than a formal act at U.S. request,

but they say they are prepared to act and will inform Solomon on

Wednesday. Whatever action the Swiss take will be observed very

quickly in the market and will have a desirable effect. The Germans

were more reluctant, although they raised some “private” counterpro-

posals stopping short of cross default. The Germans are evidently

prepared to instruct their banks to declare default on Iranian loans

within 24 hours of a missed payment, to accept no new deposits from

Iran in currencies other than dollars, and to instruct their oil companies

to insist on payment only in dollars. The Italians have many loans to

Iran but few assets; they also have problems with oil deliveries and

their large presence in Iran. They probably will have little effect on the

situation. The British were very hostile to the idea of cross default.

They would prefer to take measures which are directly linked to the

holding of hostages and which can be lifted quickly once the hostages

are released. They fear that cross defaults will get out of hand once

begun and be difficult to unravel. The British tend more toward a

government freeze or blocking of assets to complement our own

actions. They were also not enthusiastic about intervening with the

British courts. The French were neutral and cold.

All agreed that there was reason to be hopeful. The ground had

been prepared for Vance’s efforts, and if the Swiss in fact begin to

move it could begin a cascade of actions by other European banks. Mr.

Solomon of Treasury and Mr. Cooper of State will follow up on the

implementation and the inevitable negotiations which will follow the

Vance mission. (S)

4. Oil Purchase. Secretary Miller reported that Treasury had been

requested to license purchase of Iranian oil at a contractual price of

$16 per barrel by a Japanese company which is half owned by U.S.

companies. The SCC agreed that such a purchase at a low price would

be in our interest and that such a license should be issued. (C)

5. Iranian Diplomats. State will call in the Iranian Chargé, Mr. Agah,

today and notify him that the Iranian embassy in Washington should

be reduced to 15 people and the consulates reduced to five persons

each, for a total representation of 35 people. An announcement will

be made by State. State will reexamine the question of closing one or

more consulates entirely. (S)

6. Immigration. A total of 46,000 Iranian students have been inter-

viewed thus far, of which 37,000 are in status. Fewer than 1,000 have

chosen voluntary departures; the remaining 8,000 or so face deportation

hearings. Many of those will choose asylum or plead extenuating cir-

cumstances. Justice is preparing a public announcement on the status

of the program within the next few days, which will be coordinated

with Jody Powell. (C)

7. IEA. According to preliminary reports, Lamsdorff is resisting

our efforts at import quotas and tough controls. He told Mr. Solomon

that the IEA meeting was going to produce nothing meaningful. We

will have more detail when Secretary Duncan returns. (C)

8. Espionage Tribunal. State, CIA, Defense and Mr. Cutler are to

consult on the best approach to deal with charges of U.S. interference

in Iranian domestic affairs which we could anticipate coming out of a

tribunal. State is extending its White Paper to cover the period since

Mossadeq. In the first instance, all agreed that we would focus on

abuse of the hostages and the fact that convening such a tribunal while

they are being held was an additional form of abuse. If the hostages

are released, interest in the tribunal will decline. Mr. Cutler will take

the lead in examining legal steps we could take to obstruct participation

in such a panel by respected American or European figures. (S)

Options Identified

Political-Military Issues:

1. AWACS. For the moment, the AWACS will remain in Europe

for several weeks. Talks are continuing with the Egyptians, but it is

clear that their idea was for the planes to come only prior to a U.S.

action. They may be amenable to some other form of cooperation.

Secretary Brown is to write Mubarak. It was considered unwise to send

a Defense emissary such as David McGiffert until a decision has been

taken on the military cooperation program for Egypt. (S)

2. Huyser Mission. Because of the Shah’s book, as well as a political

effort by certain individuals, attention is being focused on the Huyser

mission as having permitted the collapse of the Shah’s regime. This is

not receiving heavy attention at the moment, but it will be quite impor-

tant in the post-mortem following the hostages’ release. For the

moment, all agreed that it sufficed to take the position that Huyser’s

mission was to hold the military together so it would be intact for

whatever moderate government was likely to emerge after the Shah’s

departure. His objective was to smooth the transition and keep the

army from falling apart. (S)

3. U.S. Strategy. Dr. Brzezinski drew attention to the story in the

New York Times this morning10 suggesting that our strategy of exerting

pressure on Iran in favor of a more moderate leadership was not

working. Instead, the country is being polarized and pushed toward

the left. Should we continue on the same path or should we force the

issue to a head by a real jolt at some point? The Vice President agreed

that we needed to take stock of our position and consider whether our

strategy had any real prospect of achieving the release of the hostages.

We should consult the most expert views available, not only in our

government agencies but also in the academic community and among

our allies. Mr. Carlucci observed that most expert opinion was agreed

on the fact that Khomeini did not yield to pressure and that it promised

to be a long process. All agreed that the question was fundamental

and that a high-level review should be conducted as soon as Secretary

Vance returns from his consultations in Europe. One of his objectives

was to seek their best judgment on the evolution of events. (S)

92.

Telegram From the Executive Assistant to the Deputy

Secretary of State (Oxman) to the Executive Secretary of the

Department of State (Tarnoff)

0553. For Tarnoff only from Oxman. Subject: Meeting With Shah,

1. (S) I just met with the Shah for 45 minutes and told him the

result of country number 1. He had not heard from Bill Jackson (and

was quite perturbed that he had not) and therefore I was breaking the

news to him. It appeared to be quite a blow to him. I stated the great

lengths to which we had gone to persuade the leader of country number

1. Citing Hal’s special trip, the fact that Jackson accompied him to that

country, and the over-arching high-level phone contact.

2. (S) I said that President Carter remained fully committed to the

proposition that it is essential to find an alternative country for the

Shah. I said we will continue to press at the highest levels and will

continue to need Shah’s assistance in these efforts.

3. (S) The Shah was or purported to be incredulous at the position

taken by the leader of country number 1. I said that that leader had,

from the first, feared for his standing in the Arab world and particularly

among the Palestinians, if he should accept the Shah. I said he had

sought the views of Arafat, among others, who had confirmed his

initial fears. “First Lopez-Portillo and then the leader of country number

1,” the Shah said. He claimed that this caving in to pressure meant

that the regime in Tehran was actually gaining something with its

outrageous tactics. “Where will this stop”? he asked.

4. (S) I said there are other possibilities and that it is essential to

focus on them. I said we would know more about country number 23

by mid-week and that setting it aside for the moment, it was important

to focus on possibilities in this hemisphere. He said, “like what?” I

mentioned country number 3, our new country number 5, and the

Bahamas. I also probed whether he had considered approaching Lopez-

Portillo about extending his visa on a temporary basis. He said the

Options Identified

latter was beneath his dignity and again expressed amazement, bitter-

ness, and sorrow at Lopez-Portillo’s turn around. He was contemp-

tuous of the Bahamas. He was negative on number 3 and 5 as well as

on country number 2—in part on the grounds that these are places

where “people go to hide”. I said there are no ideal solutions in a

situation like this and pointed out the important distinctions between

number 3 and number 5. He listened carefully to this and seemed

uninformed about number 5. When we come to making the strong

pitch on number 5, I could make effective use of some talking points

from the Department, explaining the character of that regime, its stand-

ing in the hemisphere and in the Third World, and its relationship

with the United States.

5. (S) The Shah raised the question of Switzerland but seemed to

feel it is a non-starter.

6. (S) The Shah was very indignant at a comment which he said

Andrew Young had just made to the effect that the Shah should go to

country number 2 where he could “join his fellow fascists and racists.”

Without commenting on this alleged remark, I said it was important

not to rule out country number 2, even if it is the Shah’s last choice.

7. (S) The Shah’s wife had raised Canada with me this afternoon

in a conversation reported septel, and I explained to the Shah that it

would not be possible. He said the Canadians will do what the British

do. He expressed interest in Australia and New Zealand, but dismissed

them on the grounds that they too would simply follow the British. If

either of these is a possibility, please advise.

8. (S) The Shah brought up the question of an international commis-

sion “to try me and America”. He expressed his contempt for it, he

said that if it goes ahead, he would have to defend himself. He said

the regime in Iran would presumably present documents covering the

37 year period of his reign and that in defense he would have to call

witnesses, even including perhaps former Presidents of the United

States. I said that whatever may eventuate with respect to an airing of

charges, there was no relationship between this and finding another

country in which he can reside. He agreed with this. I assume he was

trying implicitly to point out the possible risks to us in the international

commission approach. I expect him to raise this again and request

(Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political

Vol. IV)

93.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to Secretary of State Vance and the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 11, 1979

SUBJECT

Direct CIA Contact with Shahpour Bakhtiar

1. On 8 December, an officer of this Agency established direct

contact [less than 1 line not declassified] with Shahpour Bakhtiar. An

indirect channel of communications between Bakhtiar and this Agency

had previously been arranged in late August, but recently Bakhtiar,

because of the critical situation in Iran, reiterated his request for a

personal meeting with a CIA officer.

2. During the one and one-half hour meeting with our officer,

Bakhtiar said that he believes any viable future government must be

slightly left of center and must include elements of the far right and

far left in order to control them. He believes Khomeini has three months

remaining at most and, as a result, he has been making strenuous

efforts to put his organization together. Bakhtiar contended that while

it may appear [less than 1 line not declassified] he is not doing much, he

has in fact made a lot of progress. Specifically, he professes that:

Options Identified

a. He has been assembling a “staff” in Tehran to plan for his return.

Among the members are military officers who can mobilize large

groups upon which he can call for support in time of need.

b. He is planning to return to Khuzestan in about a month if his

planning permits.

c. He has established contact with Admiral Madani, Governor of

Khuzestan Province and Commander of the Iranian Navy. [3 lines not

declassified]

d. He has links to [less than 1 line not declassified] prominent Iraqi

Kurdish factions, the [2 lines not declassified].

e. The National Front now completely supports him, and he consid-

ers this a solid political development. Karim Sanjabi has allegedly been

thrown out along with others who oppose Bakhtiar.

f. His staff in Tehran is now operating a small portable FM station

broadcasting cassettes of his speeches.

g. The Iraqis have offered him support in exchange for an agree-

ment that he would not oppose their absorbing Kuwait. Bakhtiar

believes that he can make this deal now but subsequently when in

power in Iran ignore the part of the bargain concerning Kuwait.

h. [4 lines not declassified]

We lack corroborating evidence that would either confirm or deny

that Bakhtiar has made as much progress as he avers. We will continue

to check on his actual state of progress.

3. Our officer was also told that Bakhtiar is concerned about his

contacts with General Gholam Ali Oveisi, former commander of the

Shah’s army. While Oveisi is a highly competent officer and would be

very useful to Bakhtiar, he feels that Oveisi’s contacts with Princess

Ashraf and supporters of the Shah could cause trouble, and he empha-

sized that he wants nothing to do with the former royal family. [2 lines

not declassified]

4. Our officer then asked Bakhtiar exactly what he wanted from

the United States Government. Bakhtiar replied as follows:

a. He would like us to influence other governments to support

him. He would like favorable media coverage. He would like us to

encourage some governments [less than 1 line not declassified] to provide

financial support.

b. He would like us to try and keep the Shah and his supporters

from becoming involved.

Bakhtiar said that time is critical because Khomeini will soon fall,

creating a political vacuum that must be filled. He said that he is

prepared to move and that if he gets the necessary financial support

he has a reasonable chance of succeeding. While Bakhtiar’s requests

for assistance are modest, we believe from other information that he

feels without US support behind him, and without direct US guidance,

he has little chance of success. He has said that while he would willingly

accept material assistance from other nations, the “brainpower” must

come from the US.

94.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 12, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran—Next Steps

The situation in Iran is building toward an explosion. Khomeini

must take most of the responsibility for that, but our firm stance in

the hostage situation and particularly our military presence has given

heart to some who would not have been willing to stand up otherwise.

Although an explosion of the internal situation is not without its risks

to our interests and to the lives of the hostages, it is nevertheless true

that the present impasse can be broken only by some significant change

in the internal power structure of Iran. In a revolutionary situation,

change is unlikely to occur peacefully or incrementally. The building

pressures must therefore be regarded as an opportunity.

The Constitution

I continue to be persuaded that the central issue is the constitution.

Not only does the constitution define the future shape of Iran and spell

out in some detail what the revolution was about, but it has acquired

special significance as Khomeini’s personal life testament. Very much

in the sense of a biblical prophet, Khomeini is driven by a dominant

inner vision—an idea to which he has dedicated his life. The peculiar

expression of clerical rule under a sort of philosopher king (which is

how Khomeini must see himself) is the outcome of a lifetime of clois-

tered thought in medieval settings. It is his divine destiny and he is

willing to risk everything to achieve it.

His technique has been very simple. At each turning point Kho-

meini has identified a tangible enemy which could rally public unity

and deflect criticism. In the late summer, the enemy was the Kurdish

rebellion and the threat of Soviet involvement. He used that as an

excuse to proclaim himself commander in chief, to close down the

press, to terminate all opposition political activity, and to attack the

Soviets and their minions. At the same time, he packed the membership

of the Council of Experts and, while people were distracted, mandated

them to systematically gut the liberal draft constitution and replace it

with a document more to his liking.

As the Kurdish problem wore on, it lost its crowd appeal. The

attack on our embassy came along just as he faced the next great test

of the referendum. He may or may not have engineered it, but he has

exploited it to the limit. Recognizing this, we anticipated a change once

the referendum was over. We may have been right, for there are clear

signs of a new willingness on the part of many in Tehran to get this

monkey off their back. But the process is complicated by the power

struggle that is raging just below the surface and by the unexpected

demonstration of weakness by Khomeini in the referendum itself.

Despite heroic efforts to whip up religious and political frenzy, he

could manage to get only 70% of the eligible voters to back his version

of the constitution—and that is by his own count.

The Emerging Opposition

Khomeini is aware that the longer he waits to implement his ideas,

and the more people have an opportunity to think about [what] they

mean for Iran, the less likely they are to accept his vision of an ideal

Islamic state. So he intends to cram it down their throats while he still

has the power to do it.

But the referendum was a curious watershed. Instead of demon-

strating strength and sustaining momentum, it brought a sizable oppo-

sition out of hiding for the first time and forced them to realize that

they had to act soon or not at all. Shariat-Madari is the key. Previously

he had kept his own counsel, but the referendum was too much for

him to swallow and he began to speak out. That gave heart to others.

Khomeini has lost his aura of invincibility. When he left his house to

call on Shariat-Madari, he admitted to vulnerability for the first time.

When the Imam himself is perceived as fallible and vulnerable, it is

the beginning of the end.

Iranians everywhere seem to sense this tidal change. The coffee-

house chatter is beginning to turn into serious purpose. As you know,

I am in personal contact with several senior Iranians who have consider-

able networks of influence. Within the past week, one of these men

has identified high level channels directly to Admiral Madani in

Khuzestan and to Shariat-Madari. For the moment, [2 lines not declassi-

fied]. But the moment of truth is at hand.

The Need for a Decision

If Shariat-Madari, Madani, and others who share their abhorrence

of a theocratic dictatorship under Khomeini—and who may potentially

be willing to risk their lives to oppose it—if they are to move, they are

going to need more than kind words of reassurance from us. They do

Options Identified

not want—in fact they fear—any direct action on our part which would

make them appear to be imperialist tools. However, Khomeini’s hench-

men are ruthless, the left is seeking an opportunity to assert itself, and

they badly need evidence of support.

The Saudis are contributing through Bakhtiar. The Iraqis have

made an offer. The forces of moderation in Iran are now coming to

us. If we merely equivocate, they may go ahead on their own; but we

must realize that the absence of any policy decision on our part is

going to make them more cautious and increase their proclivity to look

for allies among the radical opposition. This is not a situation where

outcomes are neatly predictable. However, the general trend of events

is clear.

If we sit on our hands and refuse to establish the beginnings of an

operational relationship with those who hold the only promise of a

moderate future for Iran, we must recognize—and accept responsibility

for the fact—that we are prolonging Khomeini’s rule, the continued

polarization of extremism on the left and right, and the likelihood that

the left will increase its strength and legitimacy. We are coming to the

point where no decision is in fact a decision.

At this stage, what is required is a clear decision that we cannot

accept Khomeini as the arbiter of our future relationship with Iran. We

must be willing to recognize that the longer Khomeini remains as the

supreme power in Iran, the more likely we are to have a takeover by

radical elements of the left. We must be clear in our own minds that

the risks of an early breakdown of authority and struggle for power

are less than the risks of prolonged manipulation by Khomeini which

will eventually lead him into a coalition with the left and with the

Soviets in order to maintain himself in power.

What is required is a quiet signal through available channels to

the people who are beginning to act that we support their efforts and

will quietly back them up through political efforts and with some

financial support. We can put limits on our support, but we must

declare our intentions.

The very act of decision will free us to talk operationally with the

Saudis and other friends in the region. It will give us the basis for a

serious relationship with the Iraqis—[less than 1 line not declassified]. It

will provide an order and structure to our actions. In short, it will

provide a policy rudder to guide us through a dangerous and tumul-

95.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State and the White House

Secto 12022. Eyes only for Dr. Brzezinski and Mr. Christopher From

the Secretary. Subject: Memcon With Foreign Minister Francois-Poncet.

Following is conversation of December 10, 1979 at the Quai d’Orsay

with Minister of Foreign Affairs, H.E. Jean Francois-Poncet. The subject

was my talks on Iran (and NATO communiqué). Other participants:

M. Bruno de Leusse, Secretary-General, MFA; M. Jean-Claude Paye,

Director, Economic Affairs, MFA; M. Henri Servant, Deputy Director

for the Middle East, MFA; Ambassador Arthur A. Hartman; and

Richard N. Cooper, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs.

The Secretary began his presentation by saying that he wished to

outline the current negotiating situation on Iran, the history of our

contacts and the current status of these exchanges.

footnote 6, Document 82. The talking points for his trip, which were personally edited

by Carter, are in Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under

at the December 6 SCC meeting. In the left margin of the meeting notes, beside Item 2,

“Vance Trip,” under “Domestic Issues,” Carter wrote: “Make talking points complete &

detailed for benefit of all of us.” Beside Item 1, under “Political-Military Issues,” Carter

wrote: “I do not want to be hostage to European views.” (Carter Library, National

Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 17, Meetings File, SCC Meeting #221

Options Identified

First, after the passage of the UN Resolution in the Security Coun-

cil, Waldheim got in touch with the Iranians to see whether he, Wald-

heim, should send someone to Tehran or whether they would send

someone to New York. Waldheim thought of sending Rafiuddin

Ahmed, his Chef de Cabinet. As an alternative, Ghotbzadeh said he

would prefer that discussions continue with the man he planned to

send as Iran’s new representative in New York. This man’s name is

Mansour Farhang and he was the Cultural Attaché in Washington after

the revolution, but really no. 2 in the Iranian Mission in Washington.

The Secretary said that he knows that Farhang has always opposed

the taking of the hostages and has argued strongly with his own govern-

ment that this would only isolate Iran from the rest of the world. [1

line not declassified] For example, we know that when he was asked to

take the job in New York, he said he would do it only if he were

allowed first to return to Tehran and talk to the Revolutionary Council

and go to Qom and talk to Khomeini. He only decided to take the job,

he has said to his friends, when these conditions were accepted. He

has said that he wanted to convince the people in Qom that the Shah

would never be returned by the United States.

Our current information on the hostage situation is ambiguous.

There seems to be a move to assemble what has been referred to as a

“grand jury,” which will examine US policy from 1953 to the present

and “investigate the crimes of the US”. Farhang has reported that the

question of trying the prisoners is “dead.” Our view is that if he gets

to New York, it will be a plus rather than a minus.

Waldheim has also authorized the Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka

to pick up again in Tehran talks he had on the way to the US and

continue those discussions, once again looking toward the specific

proposal of getting in to see the hostages themselves and verifying

their condition. Waldheim is no longer considering sending his own

representative to Tehran at this time.

Second, today we have gone into the World Court asking that

they grant us immediate interim relief by ordering the release of the

hostages. We assume that Iran will boycott this proceeding and ignore

its results. We will then face a situation in which Iran will have refused

to obey a Security Council resolution and a World Court order—thus

totally flouting international opinion.

Third, we have been attempting to use the PLO. The Secretary said

that he had been in almost daily contact with Arafat, who had been

very helpful on gaining the release of the first thirteen hostages. We

continue to work this channel and exchange views. There is still some

possibility of Arafat going to Tehran, but he is hesitant to go if he is

not likely to succeed. Fourth, we have been in contact with a number

of Islamic leaders—heads of state—who have expressed a willingness

to go to Qom and see Khomeini directly. We have also got members of

the Islamic clergy to weigh in, but unfortunately not senior Shia leaders.

That is the sum and substance of our contacts. We expect an Arafat

decision in the next two or three days and he has been pressed very

hard by Prince Fahd, plus the Islamic Council.

The Secretary said he would like to discuss military options in a

smaller group and thus did not wish to say anything more than that

we had placed adequate forces in the area and that he felt this was a

useful step. We intend to pursue and exhaust all peaceful means, but

we cannot allow the situation to continue indefinitely as it is and, in

effect, freeze the status quo. We believe there is only a small chance

of the steps already taken having an effect, so therefore we have added

economic pressures as the main element, along with our diplomatic

activities.

In that area, we will soon face the question of Chapter 7 sanctions.

We cannot sit by and see the Security Council and the World Court

ignored. The world must recognize that this indeed constitutes a threat

to the peace and, therefore, Chapter 7 would be appropriate. We hope

and expect the support of the world community and, of course, particu-

larly of our friends and allies if that action becomes necessary. In the

meantime, we would like to have international actions to help with

the economic pressures we have already begun. The time for collective

action is now. We know that even the economic action that we have

taken thus far is beginning to hurt because we know that one of Far-

hang’s instructions will be to get the removal of the freeze on assets.

Therefore, we know they are having a negative impact. The Secretary

then turned to his discussions with Prime Minister Thatcher and

Foreign Secretary Carrington. In those discussions, it was agreed that

the best way to support our actions would be for our allies to join us

in freezing Iranian assets. This would be the most direct means and it

would be related directly and solely to the hostages. Thus the freeze

could be lifted if the hostages were released. Second, another means

could be used short of a total freeze, which would be to invoke the

cross-default clauses in outstanding loans. The Secretary said that such

steps were necessary to make our action effective in putting on pressure

for the release of hostages and also to prevent any undermining of the

Options Identified

dollar by the Iranian authorities. He asked Dick Cooper to explain

these measures in more detail.

Cooper explained the cross-default situation. He said that these

clauses existed in one way or another in most of the loan agreements

and permitted any participant in a loan to call for immediate repayment

if evidence of a default on another loan was presented. We are not

certain of the situation in all cases, but we do know that Iran is currently

in default to American banks even though our freeze would have

allowed them to continue payments under those loans. We carefully

drew our regulations on blocking in order to permit such repayments

and they could have been made to Chase and others. We know that

these clauses exist in most of the international consortia loans. We are

not sure whether the French are participants in these. If they are, the

clauses could be used to trigger cross-defaults. This would snarl up

even further the Iranian payment situation. The attraction of such a

course of action would be that it would not require government action,

but rather private or public advice to banks that they invoke these

clauses. It would give the right signal and bring home to Iranian author-

ities that others are as concerned as we are over the taking of hostages

and threats to the international monetary system.

The Secretary said that the British were leaning toward a general

freezing action. They were checking their law to see if there was a legal

basis. At first, the UK Treasury thought there was not a legal basis,

but we have presented an opinion to the Prime Minister from a top

British lawyer saying that under a 1947 act the Treasury can freeze

assets. There is as yet no firm British Government decision, however.

The Secretary went on to say that the firmer and more tangibly

we and our allies and friends act today, the more likely we will be

able to get the hostages out and prevent a situation from developing

in which military means might have to be used, which, of course,

would lead to unpredictable and certainly serious political and eco-

nomic results. He wanted to state quite clearly, however, that if any

of the hostages were harmed, we would have to react and he would

discuss the various possibilities for our action in a smaller group at

the end of the meeting. If we want to avoid that situation, now is the

time to act.

The Secretary said he wanted to speak for a moment about the

situation with respect to the Shah. He said that his treatment had been

completed and that he can now travel. He wants to find a place where

he can stay indefinitely. There seemed to be two realistic possibilities

at the moment. One was Panama and the other was South Africa,

where his father had lived for some time. Although Sadat continues

to hold open his offer of refuge in Egypt, no one thinks that this is a

good idea since it would present a real danger to Sadat and open up

a whole new set of issues.

The Secretary said that there was another area he would at least

like to flag. We all need to look at the longer-term options. It was

certainly possible that Khomeini might not endure. We had to see what

are the real alternatives. We very much appreciate the exchanges of

views that have already taken place and we think it would be a good

idea to continue these exchanges about future developments. For exam-

ple, are you in touch with any of these forces and how do you evaluate

them? We know that none of them seems to be perfect, but on the

other hand, some may be worse than others. Should we try to influence

the situation or not? We ought to put these things on the table.

Francois-Poncet said that the Secretary would be getting an authori-

tative response from the President at dinner in the evening. We could

be sure of French Government sympathy and support. They have been

looking at the various alternatives. Legally, on the question of the

freezing action by US banks, there was every chance that a court would

decide that the US could not apply its order to American banks in

France. They recognize that this decision would have importance, but

their researches had led them to the conclusion that on the straight

legal point, there could be no doubt about how the case would go.

They were, however, looking into the question and also the possibility

of delays. He said that they would also look at the question of outstand-

ing loans, the possibility of a French freeze and the cross-default clause

situation. They would have to examine French law to see if there was

a basis.

Francois-Poncet said that they had great understanding for the

situation that we face and they recognize that this is of concern to all

of us. What is at stake here is the whole international order. We should

be in no doubt about their basic philosophy. “We want,” he said, “to

take the most effective action and to help avoid reactions in other parts

of the world.” He wondered whether Chapter 7 action might not be

the next step. If we decided to move in that direction, France would

have a positive attitude and that would then give them the legal basis

for action on their part. The problem as they saw it now was that they

needed some UN decision as they did, for example, in the case of

Rhodesia. He then made a side reference to the Mozambique situation

in which the “no answer” was a “yes answer.” He said they would

continue to look into the legal situation.

Francois-Poncet went on to say that there was a link here to the

internal Iranian situation. Was it disintegrating and how fast? We don’t

want to do anything that would prevent this disintegration, e.g., taking

action that might unify internal forces and, therefore, we had to weigh

that against the bad effects of inaction. Clearly, international action is

most desirable. In answer to a question, the Secretary said that he

had been in contact with Dobrynin on the Soviet response. He had

Options Identified

specifically put to Dobrynin, who has now returned to Moscow, the

question of whether the Soviets would veto a Chapter 7 action in the

Security Council. He had in fact said to Dobrynin that we would assume

the Soviets would not veto, and Dobrynin had replied that he would

have to check this in Moscow.

The Secretary said that he would like to discuss another aspect of

the economic situation, namely, the effort of the Iranians to open new

accounts and thus get around our blocking action. Dick Cooper

explained in some detail the variety of means which this was taking.

He had been surprised at the slowness of the Iranians in moving to

get either new accounts in dollars or other currencies set up to make

their payments. They were beginning to get cooperation from others

and this was giving a mixed signal to the Iranians. What they were

seeing on the economic front in many cases was business as usual. We

know that it is being interpreted this way because, for example, the

Daily Telegraph reported that certain British, French, Austrian and Japa-

nese banks have cooperated and that the Iranians are concluding that,

therefore, their governments are “with us.” It was important to elimi-

nate this ambiguity. The Iranians are attempting to handle normal

trade by the creation of new accounts, sometimes using coded numbers

or false names. Francois-Poncet said that, as we knew, the French

were not taking any more oil than they had normally from Iran and

wondered what we wished them to do—not pay at all or only pay in

non-dollar currencies or to open new accounts, the French should

refuse. Then the Iranians will begin to get the right signal.

The Secretary said that the lower level reaction in the Federal

Republic was that they will insist on dollars and not allow any payment

in Deutschmarks. Jean-Claude Paye said that he knows there has

already been a request to pay in Deutschmarks in one case. Francois-

Poncet concluded that perhaps this is something that should be dis-

cussed in the “four-power meeting” in Brussels later this week.

[1 paragraph (11½ lines) not declassified]

Both Cooper and the Secretary said that there were important risks

to the international monetary system and, therefore, it was important

to proceed. He has asked Mr. Carswell to go to Japan. We have already

talked to the Germans, British, Italians and Swiss6 and he would be

not discuss Chapter 7 action.

11 in Bonn, and with Pertini and Cossiga in Rome on December 12. (Telegrams Secto

96.

Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

No. 1293

Washington, December 13, 1979

IRAN’S POLITICAL PROSPECTS

Key Judgments:

—Khomeini is in a serious period of testing, as some of the regime’s

weaknesses grow and may be tending to get out of control.

Secret; Noforn. Prepared by Grummon. Approved by Harris.

—But the Khomeini regime and the Islamic republic seem likely

to continue for at least the next 6 to 12 months, despite such problems

as the insurrection in Tabriz.

—During that time, the regime will face increasing problems,

chiefly as a result of the need to assert full control over the country

and to improve the economy.

—Implementation of the regime’s ill-defined policies continues to

be chaotic and is unlikely to improve significantly.

—When Khomeini dies or is incapacitated, he will probably be

succeeded by a strong religious leader, a coalition of secular opposition

forces, or a combination of a moderate cleric and some of the more

moderate opposition leaders.

—No single element of the opposition or a coalition among them

can be identified as the likely eventual successor to the present

government.

—There is little chance for the left to assume power in the near

future.

As the Iranian revolutionary regime approaches its first anniver-

sary, it faces mounting problems. The current situation is highly fluid

and in particular will be affected by the ultimate resolution of the US

Embassy hostage situation.

Strengths and Weaknesses

The strength and legitimacy of the Khomeini regime rest on:

—religious authority;

—Ayatollah Khomeini’s revolutionary charisma;

—mass support;

—abundant money;

—the opposition’s weakness; and

—the outside world’s tolerance.

But the regime does have weaknesses which have been increas-

ingly evident:

—collapse of the broad coalition which overthrew the Shah;

—lack of institutions; it is a government that relies on individuals,

chiefly Khomeini himself;

—limited experience in running an effective government;

Options Identified

—lack of full control over important sub-centers of power such as

the students occupying the US Embassy and the ethnic and tribal

minorities in Azerbaijan, Kurdistan, Khuzistan, and Baluchistan.

The hostage crisis was originally a welcome opportunity for the

regime to reassert its strengths in the face of mounting weaknesses.

As it is developing, the crisis may actually have demonstrated a weak-

ness, i.e., inability to control the hostages’ captors.

Thus, Khomeini’s government is in a period of crucial testing. The

situation is not out of control, but the trend is clearly in that direction.

The Islamic Government and Its Tasks

How much is accomplished over the next 6 to 12 months toward

building institutions for the Islamic republic will determine its longev-

ity. If little or nothing is accomplished, the relative strength of the

opposition forces will be greatly increased.

A significant amount has already been accomplished. The adoption

of the constitution in the referendum sets the institutional shape of the

Islamic republic. Elections for president and parliament will be held

soon. Clerics and their allies will be the chief victors.

But what the new government’s policies will be is not much clearer

now than when Khomeini first proposed an Islamic republic. In theory,

the regime seeks the elimination of Western cultural and social “domi-

nance” and its replacement by Islamic values. Khomeini has been par-

ticularly interested in dismantling the Western-inspired legal appara-

tus. In general, though, the government must undertake a major effort

before its policies will be fully defined.

Two other tasks require urgent attention. One is the economy. We

know little about what an Islamic economy would be. Iran’s leaders

have suggested that all relationships which are not “beneficial” will

be eliminated, without defining that key word. It will certainly involve

a realignment of all international contacts, with a strong emphasis on

self-dependence. The regime probably will curtail consumer imports

and may be prepared to embark on fairly radical land and agricultural

reform programs. Oil income will, of course, continue to be the essential

ingredient to make the economy run.

Even though economic policies may not be clear, the problems are.

The food supply in the coming months is uncertain, unemployment is

growing, and business and relevant government activity are stagnant.

From what can be inferred from government policy, it appears unlikely

that these difficulties will be improved soon. Prolonged failure to make

progress in the economic realm would spur discontent with the regime.

The other area where government action is needed is the reassertion

of central authority over and the depoliticizing of ethnic and tribal

minorities. Historically, Iran has always had strong centers of decentral-

ized power. The Shah’s firm control over the country during most of

the 1960s and 1970s was an exception to the general rule. With the

Shah gone, rival power centers are reasserting themselves. The Azerbai-

janis have now joined the Kurds in actively pressing Tehran for

autonomy.

Khomeini, given his many problems, has no chance for the present

of reestablishing firm control over all elements of Iranian power. Thus,

the key question is whether he has the flexibility to reach necessary

compromises with other competing power centers—the tribes, the left,

the ethnic minorities. Khomeini’s experience and style so far indicate

a complete lack of flexibility. Consequently, his chances of reimposing

full authority or of reaching a modus vivendi with these dissidents are

not good. Maintaining central government control will, thus, remain

a major problem.

The Opposition

During this difficult time, the government will be faced by pressure

from four different directions by forces that would like to see the

replacement of the Khomeini regime.

Ethnic and Tribal Minorities. The minorities seek as much decentral-

ized power as possible.

—The largest group is the Azerbaijanis under Ayatollah Shariat-

Madari. Their recent seizure of power in Tabriz, demanding changes

in the constitution to permit greater autonomy, will be difficult for the

government to handle. The Azerbaijanis have a powerful, recognized

leader and widely shared grievances.

—The Kurds, of course, are continuing to fight for greater auton-

omy as well, although they lack the heavy weapons necessary to be

able to consolidate control over the urban centers in their area.

—The Arabs are quiet now but are capable of causing trouble again.

—Elements of the Qashaqai and Bakhtiari tribes are armed.

—The Baluchis have ambitions but have not done much to accom-

plish their aims.

Individually, none of these groups can overthrow the regime, but

they present it with a great challenge which must be met if Tehran’s

authority is to be countrywide. This becomes a chicken-and-egg prob-

lem in which the minorities are not likely to accept terms until a strong

government insists on them, but a strong government is not likely to

exist until the minorities give up their opposition.

The Left. Iran’s leftist forces are not prepared to assault Khomeini

frontally. Instead, they ride his coattails where they can and strengthen

their own position for the longer run. They are already represented in

several key places: the student movement, the oil workers, the fedayeen

movement, the PLO’s activities.

Three leftist organizations are particularly significant:

Options Identified

—Fedayeen-al Khalq: These secular Marxists have broken with Kho-

meini. Their activities are illegal, their headquarters has been raided

and closed, and their leaders are underground. Individual members

may be associated with the Embassy occupation. They may have con-

nections with the Kurdish rebels.

—The Tudeh (Communist) Party: This party, now open and legal,

supports Khomeini and carries on various activities, such as organizing

meetings and publishing a newspaper. Its membership strength is

unknown, but it was quite small during the Shah’s period.

—Mujahiddin-al Khalq: These Islamic Marxists during the summer

became estranged from Khomeini. Like the fedayeen, they were

attacked and criticized. They have not gone underground, however,

and are trying once again to win Khomeini’s support.

Many observers have suggested that if the Khomeini regime col-

lapses, power will fall to the left. But the latter so far is not sufficiently

organized or strong to assume power. For the longer term, the left

breeds and grows on troubles and turmoil. If, however, there is real

political power in the left’s future, it is a distant future.

The Military. The Shah’s once-vaunted armed forces remain shat-

tered. Personnel is at about half-strength; equipment suffers from lack

of use; spare parts are in short supply. Competing armed groups, such

as the Revolutionary Guards, exist in many key locations. The officer

corps is well aware that the troops are more responsive to the religious

leaders than to military commanders. Thus, for the present, the armed

forces are not a potential source of anti-government activity.

They do, however, contain important resources for the future: a

tradition of backing strong leaders, an established institution in a coun-

try where there are few, and some remaining leaders of intelligence

and ambition. The military could eventually be a force of real political

significance, but first it must decide where it is politically. With the

loss of the Shah, the armed forces lost their raison d’etre, and a new

one has not reappeared.

The Moderates. Most of Iran’s moderate, secular leaders (including

those of the National Front) are in hiding or exile. They have been

almost eliminated as participants in the current political process leading

to the establishment of the Islamic republic. They will have little or no

representation in the new parliament. What remains of their strength

is among escapee groups, chiefly that of Shahpour Bakhtiar in Paris.

But Bakhtiar is only beginning to organize and seems to understand

that his problems far outnumber his realistic hopes.

Thus, none of the opposition groups is likely to wield much power

in the coming year or so. Their weakness is one of Khomeini’s main

strengths.

A nascent cooperation among some of these opposition groups

is, however, developing. It involves Bakhtiar, other moderate secular

figures, some escaped senior military officers, and elements among the

tribal and ethnic minorities. This is a coalition with precedent in Iranian

history, and so it is possible to imagine its assumption of power

some day.

Prospects

This survey of the political scene suggests four general develop-

ments that are possible over the coming months:

1. The Islamic republic under Khomeini moves haltingly to implement

its ill-defined policies. This is the most likely possibility for the next 6 to

12 months. Khomeini remains Iran’s essential figure. No alternative

leader or group exists. A significant amount of the forward thrust from

the revolution still exists, the constitution and its institutions are about

to come into being, oil money is still flowing in, and the masses are

still on Khomeini’s side. These considerations should suffice to keep

the leaders of the new republic in power.

But problems will mount. As noted above, the economy and the

minorities need urgent attention. Many members of what remains of

the armed forces are increasingly unhappy and frustrated. Iran has

still not found a comfortable place on the international scene. Kho-

meini’s rule to date has given no indication that he and his associates

will be able to move rapidly and effectively to solve any of these

problems. Thus, the unhappy opposition will surely grow. The question

is: how long will the regime’s basic strengths continue to outweigh its

mounting problems?

2. A coup. It is possible to imagine a coalition developing among

some of the opposition groups—Bakhtiar, the moderate secular figures,

minority leaders, and a few senior military officers—in an effort to

seize power. But the opposition groups which these leaders represent

lack wide popular support or means to appeal to the lower-class masses

that form the base of Khomeini’s power. Such a coalition would be

united chiefly by opposition to Khomeini, and that would not provide

sufficient unity to overcome the underlying mistrust and rivalries

between the constituent factions. It is not likely, therefore, that this

broad grouping could act effectively enough to take over.

3. The greatest threat to the regime is simply that it could collapse under

the weight of its problems. This might happen if the government lost

visible control over events. The Embassy’s captors might even emerge

as an alternative power center as a result of the hostage crisis. Insurrec-

tion in Tabriz could spread to all of Azerbaijan if Shariat-Madari were

to depart Qom and openly lead the rebellion. That could facilitate

successful Kurdish action against the regime. The government’s inabil-

ity to handle ethnic dissidence on a broad scale coupled with economic

reverses and maldistribution of food would severely undermine the

Options Identified

regime’s support. However, Khomeini still retains much charisma, and

none of these problems has yet gone past the point of no return.

4. Khomeini dies or is totally incapacitated. When Khomeini’s hand is

no longer at the helm, the Islamic republic will have lost the man

who has held the revolutionary cause together. His departure will not,

however, bring an end to either the republic or the revolution. The

momentum of the revolution, the strategic placement of his associates,

the new constitution, and the dominance of religious figures in the

new parliament and cabinet will give some shape to the successor

regime. Khomeini’s assassination would add uncertainty, but the basic

religious framework of the government would still be a major factor

in determining the future.

Khomeini’s death will most likely be followed immediately by

the creation of an informal coalition of the most senior religious and

governmental figures—held together at first by their desire to protect

their power and the revolution. The Council of Guardians, the presi-

dent, a few senior clerics, and one or two top military figures would

keep the country going. But such a coalition would not last for long.

It would contain too many ambitious men and too many political and

religious schisms.

As this informal coalition began to split, several successors would

be possible:

—One strong man could emerge to dominate the apparatus, but

not with the stature of Khomeini. Ayatollahs Beheshti and Montazeri,

Admiral Madani, and Foreign Minister Qotbzadeh would be leading

possibilities.

—A religious, but anti-Khomeini, coalition. This could be under

the overall religious leadership of Ayatollah Shariat-Madari, but with

day-to-day power in the hands of secular figures, such as Bakhtiar

or Madani.

—A traditional coalition of opposition forces: National Front (Bakh-

tiar, former Prime Minister Bazargan, and Hedayatollah Matin-Daftari),

tribal leaders (Qashqais and other Bakhtiaris), and some moderate

bazaar and religious figures.

A broad coalition would make the most sense in terms of Iranian

tradition and centers of power. But the pull of the Khomeini revolution

would probably be too great for at least a while for such a clear break

from the dominance of the religious establishment to occur. Thus, the

first of the above possibilities would be the most likely one to follow

the initial informal coalition of Khomeini’s followers.

97.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Treasury

Warren Christopher

Robert Carswell**

David Newsom

Anthony Solomon**

Harold Saunders

Energy

Defense

John Sawhill**

W. Graham Claytor

White House

JCS

Stuart Eizenstat**

General David Jones

Hedley Donovan

General John Pustay

Zbigniew Brzezinski

David Aaron

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

NSC

Frank Carlucci

Colonel William Odom

Gary Sick

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti**

John Shenefield**

** Present for domestic issues only.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

98.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

Treasury

Secretary William Miller**

State

Anthony Solomon**

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Robert Mundheim**

Warren Christopher

Harold Saunders

White House

Richard Cooper**

Stuart Eizenstat**

Lloyd Cutler**

Defense

Jody Powell

Secretary Harold Brown

Hedley Donovan

W. Graham Claytor

Zbigniew Brzezinski

JCS

David Aaron

General David Jones

NSC

General John Pustay

Colonel William Odom

CIA

Gary Sick

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Jerry Schecter****

Frank Carlucci

Energy

John Sawhill**

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti***

John Shenefield**

** Domestic issues only

*** Domestic issues and Shah

**** Present only for discussion of Shah

Options Identified

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues

1. Economic Steps. Secretary Vance and Mr. Cooper reported on the

discussions with the Europeans. The acceptability of various steps

differs from country to country because of legal and policy problems.

It was felt, however, that it is not necessary for all of our allies to adopt

exactly the same posture. Dr. Brzezinski asked State to prepare a matrix

which will show the position of each country on each of the prospective

actions. (S)

Secretary Vance reported that when and if we come to the point

of requesting sanctions under Chapter VII, the Europeans are pledged

to support us. We will have to decide whether to go for complete

sanctions or in stages. We can initially request limited sanctions, e.g.

denying military credits and military equipment deliveries; a second

stage could be a selective trade embargo, excluding food and medicine,

and termination of mail and rail links, which would involve removal

of foreign nationals; the third stage would involve a total embargo. By

Monday, State will be prepared to discuss options regarding resort

to Chapter VII and the pros and cons of various strategies. Based on

the discussions Monday, a recommendation will be prepared for the

President. All agreed it would be premature to make a recommendation

until we see what the reaction is to the World Court ruling. The Euro-

pean allies, however, have agreed to go ahead with sanctions if Chapter

VII is defeated by Soviet veto in the Security Council. (S)

State and Treasury will today prepare and send cables to the Euro-

pean allies which clarifies and ties down the specific commitments

they have made. This will be necessary before the European finance

officials meet on Monday. On Monday, follow up messages jointly

from Secretary Vance and Secretary Miller will request immediate

implementation of the measures as agreed. It was agreed that no imme-

diate steps would be taken with regard to Belgium, the Netherlands

and Canada until after the Europeans have had their meeting on

A separate cable of instructions will be prepared for Mr. Carswell,

who is on his way to Japan. These instructions will outline the various

steps which the Europeans have agreed to and request that the Japanese

accept those steps plus a few technical elements which are applicable

only to Japan. The instruction will set forth what we are asking the

Japanese in very clear form and request that these be implemented

directly. The Japanese will also be advised that sanctions under Chapter

VII remain a possible next step. (S)

2. World Court. The ICJ order is expected today. State will see that

VOA picks this up and broadcasts the text of the order in Farsi to

3. White Paper. State recommended and all agreed that we should

not proceed with a formal statement of our position for release in the

form of a White Paper. In the past, such documents have provided a

target for all to shoot at and have promoted, rather than discouraged,

dispute. Instead, State proposes to collect the necessary information

and provide position papers on particular issues which can be used

as required. It will not be our intention to release a single document,

however. The documents will be held in the White House. (S)

4. Lawyers for Tribunal. Lloyd Cutler has been working with a group

of 40 lawyers who are preparing themselves in the event counsel is

required for Americans on trial in Iran. At this point, they are relying

primarily on the New York Times Index and other unclassified sources.

State is making available some open source information. It was agreed

that press guidance should be prepared for discussion at the Monday

meeting. We wish to avoid any moves which would lend legitimacy

to a trial in Iran, while recognizing the rights of Americans to legal

counsel.

Political-Military Issues:

1. Shah. Press guidance had been prepared by Jody Powell for the

Shah’s departure to Panama this morning. The guidance was reviewed

and approved by the SCC for use as soon as Panama makes its

announcement or when the story breaks. Congressional leaders were

briefed this morning and a circular is being sent to all posts alerting

them to possible demonstrations or reactions. Mr. Cutler reviewed the

Options Identified

U.S. commitments flowing from the discussions with the Shah and his

representatives. We have agreed that: (1) the children can remain in

the United States for schooling and the FBI will continue its liaison

with those providing security; (2) the Shahbanou will be permitted to

visit the children here from time to time; (3) the Shah will have access

to U.S. medical facilities in Panama as required; the Shah’s doctors have

advised that the necessary [operation] can be performed in Panama;

one of the U.S. doctors worked in Panama for seven years; (4) the U.S.

will provide transportation and assistance for a medical team to visit

Panama for the operation as required. The deposition required in the

legal case brought by Bell Helicopter can be taken in Panama. (S)

2. Palestinians. The PLO representative in Tehran has made a pro-

posal which will be delivered to Congressman Findley today about a

delegation to Tehran which could result in release of the hostages.

State will follow up. (S)

[Omitted here is information on Afghanistan.]

99.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) and the Director

of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Bowdler) to

Secretary of State Vance

Washington, December 15, 1979

SUBJECT

Extraction of the Six Americans From Tehran

The Canadians have conveyed to us their great nervousness and

sense of urgency about taking decision on their houseguests. Essen-

tially, the Canadians have two concerns:

—What are U.S. plans for removing the six?2

—What should Canadians do if there is an uprising in Tehran and

the Canadian premises are threatened by a mob? What steps should

be taken if the story breaks in the press? The Ambassador wants guid-

ance as to whether he should turn the six into the Foreign Ministry,

the compound, or a third embassy.

100.

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated

SUBJECT

Status of Hostages

[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]

1. The following conclusions about the condition of the hostages

held in the American Embassy in Tehran are based on psychiatric

debriefings of released hostages as well as general knowledge about

how individuals react to similar captive situations.

2. Although bound, occasionally blindfolded, and kept in semi-

isolation, the hostages on the whole are likely to feel they have been

fairly well treated. They have been fed regularly, kept clean and warm,

and most importantly have not been killed. Since this treatment com-

pares favorably to their probable expectations and/or fears, their per-

ception is therefore one of good treatment.

3. The actual mental or physical condition of any one hostage will

vary depending on his prior mental and physical state, his character,

and his individual idiosyncrasies. The captive experience is extremely

traumatic, and each individual will respond to this trauma according

to his own resources. After over a month of captivity, these hostages

have probably developed rather stable adaptive mechanisms, so that

as time goes by one would expect relatively little change from their

current behavior.

4. During any hostage-taking incident one can expect the adaptive

mechanisms of both the hostage and hostage taker to lead to what may

initially appear to be a paradoxical alliance between them. When people

are together, especially under stress, relationships develop among

them; similarly, hostages and hostage takers begin to form relationships

that tend to unify them into a group. The interests of both the hostage

takers and the hostages are served by giving in to the hostage takers’

demands; therefore, the hostage takers and hostages are natural allies.

Also, as a means of coping with his helplessness, the hostage often

unconsciously identifies with the more powerful hostage taker.

5. In this particular incident, there is inferential evidence that the

captors are attempting to systematically influence their captives.

Following a period of sensory deprivation, the released hostages were

subjected to intense propaganda just prior to their release. All of these

factors result in the captors’ ability to heavily influence the thinking

of the hostages. (Although “brainwashing” has been used to describe

this process, this term is subject to misuse and probably best not be

used. There is not at this time enough hard data to conclude that the

hostages are being subjected to the treatment suffered by a number of

former prisoners of war. At any rate, many of the effects herein

described would occur without any systematic treatment.)

6. The effects of being held hostage vary from individual to individ-

ual and will vary in one individual over time. In a large group one

might witness everything from complete rejection of the hostage taker

to total sympathy with him. In general, however, one should expect

to hear favorable statements made about the captors, particularly with

respect to treatment. In most cases the hostage and/or the released

hostage will say that he was well treated. Upon release, each of the 50

hostages must be treated as an individual case and evaluated with

respect to his psychological condition. A reasonable period of time

(possibly several days) should be provided to a released hostage prior

to any media exposure.

7. In considering official responses to statements that may be made

by some of the individuals currently in captivity, two conditions must

be considered. The first involves statements made during captivity,

including those that may be made during a “trial”. These should be

discounted with words to the effect that statements made under coer-

cion need to be analyzed for distortion. The second condition is that

of the released hostage. Responses to statements made by released

hostages should be to the effect that anyone held in captivity is bound

to be heavily influenced by his captors, and any statements should be

interpreted in that context.

8. It should be emphasized that despite comments that may be

made by released hostages, one should not jump to conclusions and

question their loyalty. In spite of the heavy influence brought to bear

on them as well as their natural inclination to sympathize with their

captors, there are few, if any, cases in which a hostage becomes a

defector or traitor. In general, one should avoid extreme comments on

how the hostages have been treated. Although psychiatric effects can

be expected to occur following captivity, the effects of such trauma

will vary in duration, and some released hostages may do quite well;

thus, general statements predicting psychological damage should be

avoided.

101.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of

State Vance

Washington, December 16, 1979

SUBJECT

Decision on the Negotiating Strategy for Iran

Because of the movement of events, we need in the next 24 hours

to pull together (1) the substance of a precise US negotiating position

and (2) the choice of negotiating tracks.

Events are moving ahead as a number of our negotiating tracks

have suddenly come alive again:

—Farhang is meeting here in Washington over the weekend with

a number of his American “advisors” to talk about the international

tribunal and, presumably, how it leads to the release of the hostages.

—Henry Precht has asked to have a talk with Farhang, with no

response yet.

—We are talking with Richard Falk and Roger Fisher, who are

both talking with either Farhang or Rouhani.

—Congressman Findley is considering what to do about a proposal

from the PLO that he lead a delegation of private Americans to visit

the hostages and talk with Iranians about grievances. This proposal

seems to be a result of the Iranian offer to allow a humanitarian visit

to the hostages and a variant of the idea discussed when Hansen

was in Iran to create a forum in which the real representatives of the

American people could hear Iranian grievances.

—Now that we seem to be getting a new proposal from the PLO

representative in Tehran, we can still go back through our channel

in Beirut.

—Swiss Ambassador Lang has a channel to Ghotbzadeh. Ghotbza-

deh’s complaint about the condition of Iranian students in the US is

pending, and we could send a response along with other proposal

through Ambassador Lang.

—Hashemi in London is in touch with his contact in Qom and

says they are having “encouraging” meetings. We have the opportunity

to put any scenario we devise through that channel as well.

The key substantive issue now that the Shah’s return to Iran has

been removed from the negotiating agenda is the relative timing of a

hearing for Iranian grievances and the release of the hostages. This

was one of the issues on which the Waldheim/Salamatian negotiations

foundered. Now the Iranians are trying to put together a forum for

their hearings and seem to be thinking of releasing a number of hostages

before long but at the same time seem to be thinking about holding a

few of them to appear before their international tribunal.

Our basic position has been negative on the tribunal on grounds

that it would prolong Iran’s illegal action in holding hostages and delay

their release. We repeatedly stated that once all hostages are released

Iran can have a hearing in any reasonable forum. The problem now is

that our position may not be sufficiently nuanced to allow for the

possibility of a scenario in which some preliminary steps toward a

tribunal could be connected with the release of the hostages.

Specifically, the questions arise as to whether we should encourage

or discourage private Americans from responding to invitations to

participate in the tribunal and whether we should discourage some-

thing like a Findley visit to Tehran which might lead to the release of

some of the hostages.

We obviously want to bargain hard for the release of the hostages

before a tribunal begins. A proposal such as the one included in our

longer memo yesterday3 may have to include willingness to have some

group—whether a UN group or a group such as that proposed for

Findley—engage in some kind of hearing on Iranian grievances.

The next issue is whether we are prepared to let such a group go

without assurance that it will be able to bring hostages back home with

it. A third issue is whether to allow any group to go if it can only bring

a small number of the hostages home with it.

102.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

Treasury

Secretary William Miller**

State

Anthony Solomon**

Warren Christopher

Robert Mundheim**

Harold Saunders

Richard Cooper**

White House

Hamilton Jordan**

Defense

Jody Powell**

Secretary Harold Brown

Stuart Eizenstat**

W. Graham Claytor

Lloyd Cutler**

JCS

Zbigniew Brzezinski

General David Jones

David Aaron

General John Pustay

NSC

CIA

Colonel William Odom

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Gary Sick

Frank Carlucci

Thomas Thornton***

Robert Dean***

Energy

Secretary Charles Duncan**

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti**

John Shenefield**

**Domestic Issues Only

***Afghanistan Only

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Economic Steps. A message was sent out on Saturday clarifying

our understanding of the various steps which the allies will implement

on a voluntary basis. We should have reactions from the various

capitals today. Once those reactions are in, a joint message from Secre-

taries Vance and Miller will be sent requesting immediate implementa-

tion. That message will be prepared for Presidential review today, in

anticipation of its being sent tomorrow. State has prepared a matrix

showing our present understanding of what the allies are prepared to

do. A copy is attached. (S)

State also prepared a paper on the steps available to us in invoking

Chapter VII sanctions through the UN. A copy is attached. The SCC

was briefed on the President’s interest in taking the necessary prepara-

tions to move on Chapter VII if and when a decision is made and the

President’s preference for seeking maximum sanctions. The SCC did

not believe that seeking Chapter VII sanctions would provide an excuse

for delay of action by the allies since they already seem prepared to

proceed with limited voluntary steps but will be reluctant to go beyond

those measures in any event without Chapter VII authorization. We

will wish to consult in advance with the Soviets5 since a veto could

have serious implications for SALT, as well as preventing sanctions.

We should seek Soviet abstention, if support is not possible. Mr. Cutler

suggested that we move immediately to get a finding by the SC on

Article 396 that the Iranian situation constitutes a threat to the peace,

since the Soviets may be willing to support that. State pointed out that

a call for a finding under Article 39 is, in effect, a call for sanction and

should not be undertaken until we are prepared to follow through

with the entire program. (S)

The SCC agreed that it would be useful to wait for several days

before invoking Chapter VII in order to see the outcome of allied

decisions on voluntary steps, effects of the ICJ ruling, reaction to the

Shah’s departure, and the results of consultations between the new

Iranian Ambassador to the UN, Mansour Farhang, with the Secretary

General. In order to sustain momentum, it would probably be useful

to be prepared to proceed with Chapter VII on about Thursday or

Friday. Once the decision is made, the SCC recommended seeking

steps 1 and 2 of the State paper (denial of military sales and credits,

interruption of normal air, rail, post and telecommunications links, and

a selective embargo except for humanitarian items), but stopping short

103.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

The President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The Vice President

Secretary of State Cyrus Vance

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Ambassador Kingman Brewster

Ambassador at Large Henry Owen

George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State

Robert D. Blackwill, NSC Staff Member

Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Margaret Thatcher

Lord Carrington, UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs

Sir Nicholas Henderson, Ambassador to the U.S.

Sir Robert Armstrong, Secretary to the Cabinet

Sir Michael Palliser, Permanent Under Secretary of State, Foreign and

Commonwealth Office

Sir Frank Cooper, Ministry of Defense

Michael Alexander, Private Secretary to the PM

George Walden, Principal Secretary to the Secretary of State

The President began by saying how delighted he was to have Prime

Minister Thatcher in the United States. It was a thrill to have her visit

him in the White House. After noting that he and the Prime Minister

would have a few moments at the end of the general meeting to discuss

sensitive matters, the President expressed the deep gratitude of the

American people for the help that Mrs. Thatcher and her people had

given us during the Iranian crisis. Securing the release of the hostages

was the all-consuming concern of the American people. The President

noted that the U.S. had gained the almost unanimous support of the

world community in seeking to obtain the release of the hostages, but

the UK had especially been in the forefront of those who had been

assisting us. That UK role in the crisis; the President said, filled him

with admiration. (S)

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

The Prime Minister said that she assumed it would be appropriate

to talk first about Iran so that the UK could know our minds in order

Options Identified

to respond in effective ways as quickly as possible. She had been

asked about Chapter Seven sanctions against Iran this morning in a

TV interview and had, of course, said Britain would support the U.S.

in such action. It could never be otherwise. But it would be helpful if

she knew the President’s mind on timing for next steps to increase the

pressure on Iran. (S)

The President responded that he would be brief since Mrs. Thatcher

no doubt had been following the crisis in detail. Lately we had been

reasonably encouraged. Initially the Iranian authorities had said that

the hostages would be tried individually as spies. That theme had

gradually diminished which was a good sign. The U.S. was prepared

to use naval forces if the situation demanded it but certainly wanted

to avoid such action. The President said that if there were public trials,

the U.S. would interrupt commerce with Iran as had been made clear

to the UK, France, the FRG, Italy, and to Khomeini. If any of the

hostages were executed, we would reserve the right to take more

forceful action. The President said he prayed that that would not be

necessary and repeated that there were some hopeful signs. He said

it was his sense that Khomeini had decided that holding the hostages

was counterproductive. The President continued that Panama’s coura-

geous act in accepting the Shah had also helped after Lopez Portillo

had pulled the rug out from under us having given a firm commitment

to take the Shah as late as the morning that Mexico announced the

reverse. (S)

The President said that Khomeini seemed to be shifting toward a

multinational tribunal approach—not a trial but the equivalent of a

grand jury. This was quite a change from Iran’s original position but

it was hard to know how much control Khomeini had over the students.

In a showdown, the President said, Khomeini could probably prevail,

but Khomeini no doubt wished to avoid just such a showdown. The

President noted that three of our people in Tehran at the Foreign

Ministry, including Bruce Laingen, had been able to communicate with

us. Laingen had felt that the departure of the Shah would help in

defusing the crisis. Indicating that we must do everything possible to

prevent the Iranian crisis freezing into a status quo, the President said

that later today he would know more precisely the time schedule for

our next steps to increase the pressure on Iran. He would discuss this

privately tonight at dinner with the Prime Minister. Secretary Vance

added that both Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh and the Iranian Chargé

had said that the Shah’s departure would be an important first step in

beginning the process to free the hostages. (S)

The President then noted that Sadat had always been forthcoming

with respect to providing a home for the Shah, but we did not favor

this solution to the problem. It would produce difficulties for Sadat in

the Arab world and could be seen in Iran as a step by the Shah to get

close enough to reassert himself into Iranian affairs. (S)

The Prime Minister asked for our view of the process of a general

trial. What were the Iranians trying to accomplish? How long would

it last? Was it designed by them as a way out of the crisis? If the answer

to the last question was yes, the Prime Minister thought the U.S. attitude

should be to assist the Iranians in finding a face-saving device which

did not at the same time humiliate America. (S)

The President responded that we knew very little about what the

Iranians had in mind concerning the Tribunal. He hoped Khomeini

was looking for a way to save face, but he guessed there was very

little rationality in Iran about the idea. The President said he thought

that the Iranians knew we would punish their country if their action

so warranted. But it was our hope that Iranians would not call the

hostages before the Tribunal, even as witnesses. Our position would

be to continue to do nothing which would endanger the safety of the

hostages, but at the same time not lend any dignity or authenticity to

the proceedings. (S)

Indicating that he would like to make two points, Dr. Brzezinski

said there were a number of specific financial steps our friends could

take before a Chapter Seven finding was adopted at the United Nations.

Now was the time to take those steps. With respect to the Tribunal,

Dr. Brzezinski noted we were witnessing a struggle for the future of

Iran. A major actor in this struggle was a group dedicated to using the

crisis to permanently sever links between Iran and the U.S. and between

Iran and the West. This highly destabilized situation raised an impor-

tant longer-range strategic question. How could we influence the course

of events in Iran so as to minimize the danger that it would gradually

assume the role of a satellite of the Soviet Union, an evolution which

events in Afghanistan did not make any less likely. (S)

In response to Dr. Brzezinski’s first point, Lord Carrington said

that experts from France, Germany and the UK had agreed last week

in Brussels after the Quad meeting that it would be much easier to

take specific financial steps after a Chapter Seven finding at the UN

rather than before. Lord Carrington then asked how long the U.S.

would wait before taking further positive action against Iran. A matter

of days, the President responded. Secretary Vance said that he guessed

that the Iranians did not know what they wanted to do with the Tri-

bunal. Mrs. Thatcher observed that this Iranian uncertainty and confu-

sion made a quick trial highly unlikely and could also produce humilia-

Options Identified

tion for the hostages in Tehran. She said that, as she understood it, the

U.S. would neither oppose the Tribunal nor support it. (S)

The President responded that in public we would oppose the Tri-

bunal stressing that it had no legitimacy and no relevance to the central

fact that Iran in holding the hostages was violating every norm of

international behavior. At the same time, we recognized that the Tri-

bunal could be a way to the hostages’ release. We had asked nations

not to participate in this kangaroo court, but it was a delicate balancing

act. The President added that if we do go for sanctions, we would like

the UK unilaterally to impose them immediately rather than waiting

for what could be a lengthy UN debate on the subject. Mrs. Thatcher

wondered what sanctions we would be asking for at the UN. The

President replied that he would decide this during the course of the

day, but stressed that we would probably move in the UN before the

end of the week. It was nearly inevitable. Mrs. Thatcher asked whether

a naval blockade would be part of our action. Noting that such action

posed some difficulties, the President said he would discuss this with

her privately. In closing the discussion of Iran, Prime Minister Thatcher

repeated that it would be easier for Britain to take certain economic

and financial steps against Iran after a Chapter Seven finding rather

than before. (S)

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

Mrs. Thatcher said it was her impression that the U.S. public did

not know how helpful the PLO had been during the Iran crisis. Observ-

ing that this was not the case, the President said that the positive

PLO role had been much in the press. Secretary Vance added that all

members of Congress knew we had been in touch with the PLO

although they did not know the specific role the PLO had played in

the crisis. The President said that we would wait until the next tranche

of land was returned and the ambassadorial exchange occurred in

January before taking a stronger lead in the Middle East negotiations.

There had been indirect communication with Arafat on the hostages

and Israel knew this. (S)

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

104.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Treasury

Warren Christopher

Secretary William Miller**

David Newsom

Anthony Solomon**

Harold Saunders

Robert Mundheim**

Defense

White House

Secretary Harold Brown

Jody Powell

W. Graham Claytor

Stuart Eizenstat**

Frank Moore**

JCS

Hedley Donovan

General David Jones

Lloyd Cutler**

General John Pustay

Zbigniew Brzezinski

CIA

David Aaron

Admiral Stansfield Turner

NSC

Charles Cogan

Colonel William Odom

Energy

Gary Sick

John Sawhill**

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti**

John Shenefield**

**Domestic issues only

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Economic Steps. Dr. Brzezinski asked about the status of the

Vance-Miller letter which was to be completed the night before. State

Options Identified

and Treasury said they had worked on it but they were not aware of

the status. They said that in the absence of a clear decision by the

Europeans on each issue, the letter will call for the allies to “agree and

implement” the recommended voluntary steps. They said the letter

would be provided within one or two hours for the President’s

approval. Dr. Brzezinski briefed the group on the President’s comments

on yesterday’s notes. Regarding the possibility of a Soviet veto of

Chapter VII sanctions, he said we would go ahead in any case. The

President indicated that he would prefer going for Article 39 finding

at the same time as sanctions. We should not wait too long to proceed.

Thursday4 was okay. Any exclusions from the trade embargo (e.g.

food, medicine, etc.) should be defined narrowly. (S)

Mr. Solomon noted that Iran’s only real vulnerability was on food,

but that was probably not feasible to include in the embargo for a

number of reasons. Mr. Newsom wondered about mail for the hostages.

Mr. Aaron pointed out that it could be provided by diplomatic pouch

of a friendly power. (C)

The President approved a backgrounder on Wednesday to publi-

cize the types of actions our allies have been willing to take. It was

the President’s guess that the allies would be more willing to make

their actions public after we had asked for Chapter VII. Mr. Eizenstat

noted that the President had mentioned to the leadership breakfast

that we were prepared to go to the UN to ask for an embargo to enforce

UNSC decisions. There is a good possibility of leaks. (S)

State will follow up the decision to move ahead. Don McHenry will

begin consultations in New York, a message will be sent to appropriate

capitals, and we will consult with the Soviets. All agreed we should

protest strongly to the Italians about their intention to permit licensed

helicopters to go to Iran in the next five days. At the same time, State

and Defense will review the possibility of revoking the licenses. (S)

The group reviewed briefly the results of the talks with the British.

It appears they agreed to all the governmental actions we requested

(short of a freeze, which they said required new legislation), but they

have gone back to London to try and reverse the negative positions of

the banks on those items which would involve only official government

“guidance.” It is evident from intelligence that we may find it extremely

difficult to get the necessary nine votes in the Security Council. Don

McHenry is somewhat more optimistic than his West European coun-

terparts, and we will not know just where we stand until consultations

are well under way. The situation could be made much worse if Cuba

gets a SC seat. All agreed that we should redouble our efforts in opposi-

tion to Cuban election, stressing that a vote for Cuba is a vote for

2. Public Posture. Today is Unity Day. Is there something more we

should do or say? Jody Powell noted that the joint communiqué with

the British will come out today. If it is perceived that we cannot get full

British cooperation on voluntary steps with Prime Minister Thatcher

in Washington, the credibility of allied support will collapse. There is

generally a sense of relaxation in the U.S. public and in world opinion,

some of which has been generated by our own statements reflecting

optimism. The SCC discussed a possible statement by the Vice President

or Jody Powell which would focus on the renewed Iranian calls for

trials. We could state that trials would be regarded as a grave provoca-

tion for which Iran would bear full responsibility. A firm restatement

of our previous policy might be desirable at this point. Jody Powell

will coordinate with State about the wording, timing and location of

such a statement. State cautioned that a Swiss report indicates that

Khomeini has already agreed that there will be no trials, despite what

is being said publicly. Our statement should be carefully worded to

avoid disrupting that. (S)

3. Trials. Lloyd Cutler will convene a small group to examine the

question of how we can tread the line between protecting the legal

rights of the hostages while not legitimizing Iranian trials. The SCC

noted the President’s comment that it is important to lend legitimacy

to any trial of the hostages. (C)

Political-Military Issues:

[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

3. Strategy. Dr. Brzezinski noted that [less than 1 line not declassified]

we may not be able to get Chapter VII sanctions in the UN. Are we on

the right path? As time passes, our posture might appear increasingly

flabby. We need to ask if we may be inoculating the Iranians against

our pressure at every stage, and they might be adjusting to it as they

go. We did jolt them at one point by indicating flatly that severe

to support us. General Jones added that there are a number of minor

military steps, e.g. SR–71 overflights, which would underline our ability

and willingness to turn to other options. Mr. Newsom argued that

Ambassador McHenry should be given 48 hours to sound out attitudes

in the SC. Secretary Brown warned that one outcome of the SC debate

might be to get a resolution opposing the use of non-peaceful means.

Mr. Christopher observed that we could get a message back to the

Iranians through the Swiss channel that our patience is running out.

Mr. Donovan pointed out that we might succeed in getting Chapter

VII sanctions then find that it produced no results while tying our

hands from taking more vigorous action. (TS)

4. Covert Action. Dr. Brzezinski introduced the two papers (Plan A

and Plan B) previously prepared by Stan Turner. Plan B was more

modest. [3 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown said that Plan B was

a logical first step toward Plan A. If we were not willing to go that

far, we were abdicating our ability to influence events. [7½ lines not

declassified] Dr. Brzezinski interpreted it to mean that we were opposed

to a Khomeini-controlled regime, without specifying what type of gov-

ernment would emerge. We want a government we can work with,

that is all. Mr. Christopher said he was prepared to support Plan B,

but he found Turner’s description somewhat difficult. The SCC

reviewed the wording of the specific proposed finding and agreed that

it should be rewritten to be more in conformance with Plan B. A meeting

would be held later with the Attorney General and OMB present to

examine the finding officially. (TS)

105.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, December 18, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran: Our Strategy for the Next Phase

I enclose the SCC minutes for today.

You will see from them that the question arose whether we are

retaining sufficient momentum. My own gut feeling, supported by

Jody and Harold, is that we are locking ourselves into a litigational

pattern which may make it more difficult for us to bring the issue to

a head and which may also cause us gradually to lose domestic support.

We could ultimately find ourselves in a position in which we may

need to escalate and yet the public may not be prepared to support us.

This is related to a more perplexing question: What does it take

to jolt Khomeini into recognition of the fact that the release of the

hostages is necessary? By moving step by step we are “inoculating”

the Iranians against the consequences of their actions, without really

frightening them. There is no doubt in my mind that your very forceful

message that was sent after the Camp David NSC had the desired

effect. Since then, however, the Iranians may have concluded that we

are so committed to a negotiated solution that they can stall the process

indefinitely.

Finally, to obtain international support, we may also need to

remind the international community that the only tangible alternative

to international solidarity is unilateral U.S. action. [less than 1 line not

declassified] we may have trouble in the UN getting support for Chapter

VII. We are more likely to obtain such support if our friends become

convinced that the only alternative to tangible international support is

unilateral U.S. action which may indirectly affect them as well.

Since next week may see a number of key people going away on

their holidays, I would recommend that you hold a strategy meeting,

(a formal NSC) to review and approve our strategy for the next two

or three weeks. The previous meetings in which you personally took

Options Identified

charge were critical to continued momentum and to keeping the initia-

tive in our hands.

(A singular example of what happens when your leadership is not

directly asserted is the U.S.-U.K. communiqué. You might remember

that I tried to get the British to support us tangibly while you were in

the Cabinet Room. This was then left to Cy and Carrington to negotiate.

Page 2 of the enclosed U.S.-U.K. communiqué indicates what was

omitted.

As I said then, we now have two options on the diplomatic front

in attempting to advance efforts for the release of our people in Tehran.

These assume continuing separate efforts on Chapter VII and military

preparations.

—The first option is to let the Iranians continue to grapple with

the problem of finding a mechanism for gaining a hearing of their

grievances and eventually expelling our people.

—The second option, recognizing that the Iranians may not be able

to develop a concrete approach, is to make a specific suggestion to

them on how the gap between their position and ours might be bridged.

The argument for the first option is that the Iranians themselves

do not know what they want and are not ready to consider serious

specific proposals. Any U.S. effort to put forward a compromise would

risk our looking as if we are weak or dissipate our effort.

The argument for the second approach is that the Iranians are

trying to devise a solution which includes parading Americans at a

tribunal, while our interest is to focus their thinking on a solution

which would get our people out first while simultaneously giving them

some assurance that their grievances can be heard.

If we are trying to develop the second option, we would need a

mechanism that brings together in the same exercise assurance of the

immediate release of our people and a beginning of establishing the

forum for airing Iran’s grievances. The precise mechanism could be a

delegation under UN auspices or a delegation which would prepare

for eventual Congressional hearings. Whatever the sponsorship, the

key point is that the delegation would go to Iran to prepare for later

hearings on the understanding that it would return to New York or

Washington with all of the hostages and continue preparations for

hearing Iran’s grievances.

Attached is a draft message to Ambassador Lang incorporating

the approach in the second option above, as we discussed it.

If this message to Lang were approved, a decision could then

be made whether to share this idea with Waldheim and whether to

communicate it to the PLO.

107.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The President

JCS

General Jones

State

Secretary Vance

The White House

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Defense

Hamilton Jordan

Secretary Brown

Jody Powell

CIA

Admiral Turner

MINUTES

Secretary Vance reported on discussions with Secretary General

Waldheim and the new Iranian delegate Mansour Farhang.

The notion is being floated that there will be no trial, but that the

hostages will have to appear before a “grand jury.” Thought is also

being given to a six-person UN delegation going to Tehran. Waldheim

is not prepared to send the group unless the hostages would be

released. Waldheim would also like more time than Thursday for the

U.S. to move on sanctions. We expect at present the U.S., U.K., France,

Norway, Portugal, Belgium, and Gabon to support us.

The UN ambassadors would prefer for Salim to go to Tehran. The

President said that we would probably get nine votes in that case and

we must not let a Soviet veto stand in the way. Sanctions must be

substantive. If that doesn’t work, we can always close the harbors. The

Secretary of State then outlined the scenario whereby we will wait

until Friday4 before going for sanctions, and if Salim goes to Tehran

we would wait for next week.

The President noted that other countries are more likely to go along

with us if they see the entire enterprise as a UN effort and not as a

U.S. effort.

Admiral Turner pointed out that Iran is Khomeini and that we are

in for a protracted process. What alternatives do we have once the

present plans have been exhausted? The Secretary of State said we

could go for partial sanctions, then make them stronger, then blockade.

The Secretary of Defense noted that a series of military steps have

been developed if the process spins out for a longer period of time.

We will need to replace the Kitty Hawk with the Nimitz. We could fly

some B–52s over the carrier group; we could fly the aircraft from the

carriers up the Straits of Hormuz or the Gulf; we could overfly Iran

with an SR–71; we could deploy a marine amphibian unit; we could

deploy F–111s into Egypt; we could also take some direct steps such

as electrical disruption or blockade.

Brzezinski noted that in the initial phase we mixed peaceful steps

with military actions. This gave us credibility. Now the impression

exists that military action is out. We need to keep the military option

and diplomacy in tandem. But what military actions would suffice

later on? We may need sufficient force to push Khomeini out of power

in order to get a solution. The Secretary of State noted that steady action

may be more effective than flashy action. In response the Secretary of

Defense cited our Vietnamese experience as “inoculating” the other

side. Jordan noted the possibility of waning public support.

The President said that we have to bring the issue to a head.

It involves not the U.S. vs. Iran but the world community vs. Iran.

Accordingly, we should

—let Waldheim5 know today that we will seek sanctions;

—announce that action on Friday and make a strong presentation

of our case to the effect that we are seeking to carry out the mandate

of the Security Council, and maybe the Secretary of State himself should

make the presentation;

Options Identified

—ask for specific sanctions probably by Wednesday of next week;6

—force the issue to a head.

In the meantime, it is OK for Salim to go as soon as he can.

There was some further discussion of disruption of shipping to

Iran (foreign ships in Iranian ports have dropped from about 50 in

November to 30 now); about the need to gradually build up our forces,

and about not letting the military option become dormant.

The Secretary of Defense then asked for approval to replace the

Kitty Hawk with the Nimitz; for E–3 flights over the Straits; and to

explore the possibility of their landing in Saudi Arabia. This was

approved.

108.

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the

President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Brzezinski)

Washington, December 19, 1979

SUBJECT

Force Posture During the Holiday Season (U)

1. (U) The purpose of this memorandum is to confirm our discus-

sions of 19 December 1979 regarding force posture and response times

during the holiday season.

2. (TS) Training for the rescue option is scheduled to be completed

with a full-scale rehearsal on 21 December 1979. Following successful

completion of this rehearsal, combined training would be suspended

until about 7 January 1980 to provide the Delta team, Ranger and

helicopter personnel with an opportunity to return to their home bases

for the holidays. Each of these groups will have a reassembly plan

which will provide us with the capability to reconstitute the rescue

force within 24 hours. As a result, our reaction time for the rescue

option would be extended by a like amount of time.

[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

Harold Brown

109.

Editorial Note

In late December 1979, Panama and Iran cooperated to establish a

new channel between Washington and Tehran for negotiations on the

hostage crisis. This channel was slow to develop, but from early on it

appeared to have the backing, on the Iranian side, of the Ayatollah

Khomeini and the active engagement of Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghot-

bzadeh. On the Panamanian side, it had the full support of President

Aristides Royo and at least the acquiescence of Panamanian Military

Leader General Omar Torrijos. Neither Secretary of State Cyrus Vance

nor President Jimmy Carter initially supported the channel. However,

creation of this channel introduced as emissaries two lawyers, Christian

Bourguet and Hector Villalon, both of whom were in close cooperation

with the Iranian revolutionary government, and who would play an

extremely visible role in hostage negotiations early in 1980.

Within days of the Shah’s December 15 move to Contadora Island

in Panama, Iran requested his extradition. Panamanian President Royo

telephoned U.S. Ambassador Ambler Moss to inform him that Kho-

meini had given his approval for an Iranian representative to travel to

Panama and negotiate a face-saving means of extraditing the Shah and

freeing the hostages. Moss, who felt the Shah would panic on hearing

this plan, wanted urgent instructions. It should be noted that, although

the telegram refers to the Iranian Prime Minister, that post was empty;

the reference is presumably to Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh. (Telegram

Foreign Policy File, P840148–2166) Royo insisted that Panama would

not agree to any extradition but wanted to help free the hostages.

(Telegram 10306 from Panama, December 18; Carter Library, National

Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 60, Panama

On December 19, Royo received a message through contacts in

France that Ghotbzadeh had also proposed a coordinating committee

Options Identified

of Iranian, Panamanian, and U.S. high-level representatives to discuss

“the manner in which the hostages might be liberated.” Royo wanted

to know what the United States thought of this proposal. (Telegram

10324 from Panama, December 19; ibid.) After consulting with Vance,

Moss informed Royo that “the proposal had all the earmarks of a

scheme to try to negotiate for the extradition of the Shah in return for

the prisoners’ release.” Vance, he told Royo, thought that the “plan

would be very counterproductive.” (Telegram 10330 from Panama,

December 19; ibid.)

However, Ghotbzadeh apparently had developed a specific plan.

He told Professor Richard Cottam on December 21 that the Revolution-

ary Council had developed “a settlement scenario in which several

things might appear simultaneously.” This involved the extradition of

the Shah, some form of examination of the Shah’s crimes and U.S.

policy toward Iran through perhaps a Senate-House Committee, and

the coincidental release of the hostages alongside this Committee’s

operation. (Memorandum for the Record, December 21; Department

of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for

Conversation) Royo told Moss that a representative of Khomeini would

be arriving in Panama December 24 and that his presence was to be

kept “completely secret.” Moss countered with the information that

Ghotbzadeh’s position was “shaky,” implying both his belief that Ghot-

bzadeh was the representative and that he would be unable to deliver

on any negotiated deal. (Telegram 10422 from Panama, December 21;

and N790010–0290)

The Iranian representatives who subsequently appeared in Panama

were Bourguet and Villalon. “The more important delegation,” Royo

told Moss, “probably would not come.” The two lawyers brought an

extradition request which Royo announced Panama would “consider,”

meaning “request and study as if it were a complaint filed in court.”

(Telegram 10540 from Panama, December 28; National Archives, RG

59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]) Royo told Moss,

Bourguet, and Villalon that Panama would “not hand over the Shah

under any circumstances but would be willing to accept and consider

an extradition request as a ‘face-saving’ device providing the GOI put

itself into conformity with international law by releasing the hostages.”

The lawyers then returned to Iran with this message. Royo, who

believed the “face-saving” concept had to be handled in person,

intended to send Marcel Salamin to Tehran. (Telegram 2 from Panama,

Moss told Royo that Salamin’s trip to Iran was “very bad news,”

and there was serious concern in Washington that the Panamian-

Iranian communications were “interfering in the processes we have in

motion to free the hostages.” Royo decided Salamin would wait in an

intermediate location until after the upcoming visit of Secretary-

General Waldheim to Iran. (Telegram 13 from Panama, January 2;

For information on Waldheim’s trip, see Document 128.

110.

Record of a Special Coordination Committee (Intelligence)

Meeting

111.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 21, 1979

SUBJECT

Iran—[less than 1 line not declassified]

[2 paragraphs (13½ lines) not declassified]

Azerbaijan has approximately 10% of the population of Iran. In

addition, approximately one-third of the entire Iranian population is

of Azerbaijani origin. This extended population dominates the bazaar

in Tehran and is heavily represented in the officer corps. Their spiritual

leader is Shariat-Madari, who provides the most potent potential sym-

bol of legitimate opposition to Khomeini in all of Iran. The Azerbaijanis

border on Turkey and are Turkic-speakers; the border is a sieve. Azer-

baijan is the acknowledged “leader” in revolutionary movements. It

led the way in 1906, and the Tabriz riots were the first major event

Options Identified

signalling the downfall of the Shah. The people tend to be politically

aware, activist, and tough fighters.

[1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified]

As we examine our options under the new finding, I recommend

that we give this strategy more attention than it has received to date.

112.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, December 21, 1979

SUBJECT

NSC Weekly Report #122

1. Opinion

Difficult Choices in Iran. Let me just add the following to our discus-

sions this morning, because I know that this matter is very much on

your mind.

(1) It may well be that Khomeini cannot be moved by economic

pressures in which case military action, which is merely an extension

of economic pressure (blockade or mining), will not move him either.

In the meantime such action could provoke widespread international

reactions against us and thus be self-defeating.

113.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy

Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)

Washington, December 24, 1979

SUBJECT

Covert Action and U.S. Military Contingency Planning (S)

The meeting with CIA, Defense, and State, on the compatibility of

our military contingency planning and our covert action planning,

took place on Saturday morning, December 22. David asked for the

following options to be developed:

[4 paragraphs (6 lines) not declassified]

5. Political consequences of seizing the oil region in the south, in

particular, what would it take to hold the oil, denying its production

and sale by Tehran and Khomeini’s government?

6. [less than 1 line not declassified]

CIA is producing a paper on five of the six points. I and Defense

were to produce something on the fifth point, holding the oil fields. (S)

Putting the Khuzestan Oil Fields in “Trust.”

Occupation of the oil producing region in the south could be done

one of four ways:

—Iraqi Invasion. This might take them away from Tehran, but the

Iraqi hand on the oil spigot would not be easy to control. The other

adverse political implications for the Persian Gulf littoral states makes

this something to be prevented, not encouraged.

—Admiral Madani Turns the Region Away from Tehran. If Admiral

114.

Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Miller to the

Special Coordinating Committee and the National Security

Council

Washington, December 22, 1979

Options Identified

115.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

The White House

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Warren Christopher

David Aaron

David Newsom

Stu Eizenstat

Harold Saunders

Lloyd Cutler

UN

Treasury

Ambassador Donald McHenry

Secretary William Miller

Robert Carswell

Defense

Anthony M. Solomon

Deputy Secretary W. Graham Claytor

NSC

JCS

Gary Sick

General David Jones

Colonel William Odom

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Justice

John Shenefield

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Economic Steps. Dr. Brzezinski relayed the President’s views that

a senior official should be prepared to travel to Europe after the holidays

or sooner to follow up on various economic steps. Mr. Solomon

reviewed the positions of the various European states at this point.

The French and British are now unanimously opposed to the default

mechanism and there is no way we can budge them since they are

convinced that they would bear legal responsibility for any losses

suffered by their banks in carrying out such government instructions.

Although the Swiss have briefed their banks to be punctilious in declar-

ing defaults, they are prohibited by law from attaching assets of the

Iranian Central Bank even if an organ of the Iranian Government

defaults, so the actual effect will be very slight. The French and British

are making a key issue over their demand that the agreed steps be

conducted with no publicity, although they are well aware that leaks

are possible. The package of technical steps, however, is now virtually

complete, and Mr. Solomon saw no requirement for a U.S. representa-

tive in Europe. The SCC discussed this and agreed that initial follow-

up on the package of economic steps could be handled by cable, but

that it would be desirable to have a senior representative in Europe to be

available for close consultations and to deal with the kinds of questions

which are certain to arise during the announcement and debate of

economic sanctions in the UN, which will start about next Wednesday.

The SCC recommended that a follow-up cable be prepared by Treasury

and State seeking final implementation of the agreed economic steps,

but that, unless circumstances warrant otherwise, we would plan to

send someone to Europe on about next Wednesday to follow through

and deal with technical questions associated with Chapter VII sanc-

tions. All agreed Mr. Solomon would be the most appropriate candi-

2. UN Sanctions. The President wants the allies to begin to impose

sanctions at the time when the sanctions are initially requested at the

UN, probably in mid-week. Secretary Vance said that the Europeans

were planning to implement the technical steps on oil, bank deposits

and the like; many of these were already being implemented. He wished

to raise with the President the broader subject of when and how our

allies can implement Charter VII sanctions. The list of the sanctions

which we would request is still not fixed. Ambassador McHenry noted

that it would be far preferable to have the UN resolution “emerge”

Options Identified

from a round of consultations so it appears to be the result of consen-

sus—even if everyone knows that the U.S. is the real author. Secretary

Vance and Ambassador McHenry intended to consult immediately

following the SCC meeting to decide on the list of specific sanctions

which we would demand. This list will be prepared and circulated

later in the day for comments before being sent to the President as an

agreed recommendation by the SCC. The ambassadors of the nations

represented on the Security Council are being called in to State today

to make a firm request for their support for our efforts in the UN. They

will not be briefed on the precise details of our proposed package,

however, since questions remain about the desirability and legality of

interrupting communications, for example. Dr. Brzezinski cautioned

the SCC that the list of sanctions should be as stringent as possible.

The President did not want us to look like a bunch of puffs. (S)

3. Iranian Diplomats. State will follow up on the President’s order

that the Iranian diplomats who have been ordered to leave the country

should get out. (C)

4. Iranian Monetary Transfers. Secretary Miller briefed the group on

a series of proposed Iranian transfers of accounts from European and

Japanese banks to alternative accounts of Libyan and Algerian banks.

Some of these alternative accounts would in fact be held in Japan or

France. It is doubtful that the allies would be willing or, in some cases,

able to interfere with this type of transaction. Nevertheless, the SCC

agreed that going to the allies on this issue would underline the fact

that we are monitoring Iranian activities closely and would keep them

alert to their commitments. It was agreed that Secretary Miller would

send a message to the appropriate finance ministers. (S)

5. Unblocking Assets. Secretary Miller circulated for SCC comments

a paper outlining procedures and options available to us in unblocking

Iranian assets should that prove necessary or desirable at some point

in the future. (S)

6. Public Posture. State will be in contact with the various clergymen

and religious groups which may be involved in visits to the hostages

over Christmas. They will be briefed to insist on seeing all the hostages,

to take their time and not rush through a visit, and to protest publicly

in Tehran if they are prohibited from fulfilling their objectives or if the

116.

Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to

President Carter

Washington, December 24, 1979

[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

4. Iran. The Swiss Ambassador in Tehran, who saw Ghotbzadeh

again Sunday, reported that Ghotbzadeh seemed not to know what

to do next. He felt we had to wait for a few days for further movement.

He confirmed arrangements for the pastoral visit to the hostages that

seem generally consistent with our other information. The Ambassa-

dor’s personal impression is that the Iranians are organizing a show

around the visiting clergymen.

The Italians have expressed on behalf of the other EC–9 countries

their concern for their communities in Iran when steps are taken in

the UN toward a sanctions resolution. They and the Japanese feel that

the Iranian Government and mobs in the street may react against any

embassies or communities that support us on the sanctions issue. We

Options Identified

will try to give these countries a timetable for our work in New York

as soon as the picture is clarified.

There are repeated rumors that two or three hostages may be

released in the next day or so. Thus far we have nothing very tangible

to give us hope on this score.

We have just had an authoritative report that Arafat has been in

touch with Khomeini by emissary. According to the emissary, the

thinking in Qom is that there will definitely be a trial of American

policy at which the hostages would be present. No harm would be

done to them and they would go home after the trial.

5. London Meeting. With respect to the secret London meeting with

associates of Khomeini and Admiral Madani which you approved

yesterday, Hal Saunders is now making plans to fly to London Thurs-

day night for a Friday meeting.

6. Australia. The Australian Cabinet agreed to support the U.S. to

the fullest extent possible on Iran, but decided to continue existing

plans for food shipments to Iran, principally wheat and mutton. Very

recently, the Iranian Government food purchasing agency asked the

AWB for an additional 400,000 tons of wheat. To try to head this off,

I am writing to Peacock stating that while we appreciate the importance

of food exports to Australia, I hope that nothing will be done that

would seem to lessen the impact of measures being taken officially

and unofficially in other countries. I pointed out to him that the U.S.

would see any substantial increase in Australia’s food exports to Iran

or the extension of government credits or insurance to underwrite such

shipments as falling in this category.

[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

8. Sanctions in the UN. Based on responses to your message to the

leaders of Security Council member states and our talks with Ambassa-

dors here, we have the following preliminary assessment of the mood

in the Council. (We will know much more after we get reactions to

our specific “operative paragraphs”.)

—Great Britain, France, Norway, Portugal: While we will get some

questioning of specific measures or language embodied in the resolu-

tion, we expect the full support of our allies.

—USSR/Czechoslovakia: We believe Brezhnev’s response6 was

designed to discourage us from proceeding with sanctions or perhaps

to cause us to whittle them down to a minimum. We do not feel the

response must be read as foretelling a Soviet veto, but we will have

to work hard on the Soviets. The Czechs will do as the Soviets do.

—China: China’s response was encouraging. We hope we will have

their affirmative vote or, at a minimum, an abstention.

—Bolivia: We have a positive response and should be able to count

on Bolivia’s support.

—Jamaica: Reaction was non-committal. Jamaicans will look to

other non-aligned on the Council before deciding whether to support

sanctions. We put them on the borderline between yes and abstain at

this point.

—Kuwait: We do not have a definitive response, but it will be

difficult to gain Kuwait’s support given their geographic location and

internal situation. We will have to work hard on them even for an

abstention.

—Bangladesh: Somewhat more favorably inclined than Kuwait.

We will be helped by the work of Bangladesh’s good ambassadors

here and in New York. But the most we can probably expect is an

abstention.

—Gabon: Initial reaction has been good. France can help us with

Gabon.

—Nigeria, Zambia: These are important non-aligned countries and

we must have their affirmative votes. We have some reason to be

encouraged, but it will take our best efforts.

Options Identified

117.

Memorandum for the Files

SUBJECT

Summary of Conversations with Clerical Delegation and Bruce Laingen

In two conversations this afternoon with the clerics and one talk

with Bruce Laingen after his two hour conversation with them the

following paragraphs summarize their activities to date.

The clerics spent five hours in the compound and in three separate

services believe they saw 43 individuals (Howard saw 21 persons,

Coffin 16, Gumbleton/Duval 6). The persons whom they saw and

whom Bruce Laingen could identify are listed in the first column of

the attached. The clerics also received from the captors 33 personal

messages. Where these messages identify other Americans, they are

listed in the second column. In our last conversation with the clergy,

they had not yet completed their analysis of the names and lists and

so the information on the attached is necessarily incomplete.

The clergy asked that we not pass any messages to dependents

about their contacts with the hostages. Instead, they would like this

information to come from the New York office of the clerical group.

The clergy also asked that we not refer to our contacts with them in

press briefings.

The clerics will attempt in subsequent contacts with the students

118.

Summary of Conclusion of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Treasury

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Anthony Solomon*

Warren Christopher

Robert Mundheim*

David Newsom

White House

Harold Saunders

Stuart Eizenstat*

Defense

Zbigniew Brzezinski

W. Graham Claytor

David Aaron

Robert Komer

NSC

JCS

Colonel William Odom

General David Jones

Gary Sick

General John Pustay

Options Identified

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Frank Carlucci

Energy

Secretary Charles Duncan*

(Justice not represented)

*Domestic issues only

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Hostages. We are confident that our list of the hostages is accurate

within one or two names. Fifty hostages is the best estimate, although

it is conceivable that there might be another private individual who

happened to be in the embassy at the time of the takeover whose name

has not yet surfaced, or even that someone escaped and is in hiding.

The clergymen visiting the embassy on Christmas had a number of

different lists of numbers of hostages actually seen, but it is certain

that they saw no more than 43 hostages, perhaps fewer. We will be

able to tie this down more firmly once they have been debriefed. A

student at the embassy last night on the telephone referred to 50 hos-

tages. State will prepare a chart showing the most recent evidence we

have about each of the hostages since the takeover occurred. It would

not be advisable to base a public initiative too heavily on the clergy-

men’s visit until we have a better understanding of what they did and

who they saw. We also wish to insure that the private nature of the

clergy visit is understood. These men were chosen by the Iranians,

they had no official status, and we have no control over what they

may say on their return. Secretary Vance will talk to the clergymen as

soon as they return. (S)

2. Economic Steps. Treasury will prepare an updated matrix for the

President showing what each of the allies has agreed to and what steps

are actually being implemented. We have full agreement on all items

of the package except government guidance to private banks about

Iranian defaults. Full implementation will begin on December 27,

although the French say they will not complete their guidance to their

banks until January 2. On the issue of public disclosure, the allies

agreed that if and when leaks occur, the government would officially

confirm that “measures of cooperation” had been implemented, with-

out being specific. In some ways, a non-specific statement is preferable

since the actions are primarily technical and would not have major

public impact. France has insisted that it wants to say only that allied

consultations were undertaken. Treasury will lean on them heavily

today and State will assist as required to bring them in line with the

others. All agreed that a backgrounder would be desirable on Friday,3

placing emphasis on the less sensitive areas of cooperation which sup-

port the dollar (paying only dollars for oil, etc.) but indicating that a

package of steps had been accepted. (S)

3. Chapter VII Sanctions. The resolutions will not be presented to the

UN before Friday or Saturday, after more consultations are completed.

Secretary Vance will make the presentation to the Security Council in

person to dramatize its importance. The SCC discussed at some length

the President’s decision that we ask the allies to begin implementing

sanctions from the moment we ask for them at the UN. The group

agreed that the allies would be extremely reluctant to take such action

without a vote in the UN, and our initiative could well be perceived

as a quick failure. By comparison, the SCC believed it would be much

better to put our allies on notice at a high level, at the time we make our

official presentation, that we would expect them to institute sanctions

if the UN should fail to act. That would give the allies a strong motiva-

tion to work hard for a successful vote in the Security Council. The

SCC agreed that, with the President’s approval, Secretary Vance will

prepare a strong Presidential message along these lines for tomorrow’s

meeting. (S)

4. Emissary to Europe. The SCC agreed that our efforts to get agree-

ment from the Europeans on technical steps had been successful and

the follow-up did not require a high-level official present in Europe.

Although the SCC had previously recommended a visit to Europe by

Tony Solomon, it now appears that the issues which will need discus-

sion with the allies relate primarily to political decisions surrounding

action on Chapter VII, rather than detailed discussions with finance

ministers. An alternative would be to send a high-level Presidential

emissary for talks with heads of state. Secretary Vance wanted to reflect

on the desirability of such a mission. He will make a recommendation

to the President this evening. (S)

5. Iranian Diplomats. The Iranian diplomats affected by our depar-

ture order have been removed from the diplomatic list. They have 30

days to take care of their personal arrangements, which are complicated

by the fact that some of them are married to American citizens or are

themselves American citizens.

Options Identified

Political-Diplomatic Issues:

today. There will be no announcement of the flight. The Egyptians now

indicate a strong interest in joint training exercises with the AWACS

on about January 4–5. Although the JCS had originally planned to send

the AWACS to Germany shortly after the flight this week, they now

propose letting the AWACS remain in Egypt for joint training in early

January, followed by a movement to Germany. After the visit to Ger-

many, the AWACS can either return to the U.S. or extend the visit,

depending on the situation at the time. (S)

2. Intelligence Actions. Admiral Turner said that the Agency is

increasing its contacts with various Iranian figures. It was still too early

to identify a group of opposition figures who might coalesce into an

effective opposition to Khomeini. Rumors about Madani’s opposition

to Khomeini are so widespread that the DCI wonders how long he

will be able to maintain his present position as governor of Khuzestan

and head of the Iranian Navy. As contacts increase, the Agency Iran

Task Force will meet with the David Aaron group to examine political

implications and possibilities of next steps. Admiral Turner empha-

sized that this process of feeling out possible opposition figures takes

time, and we should not expect results in a few days. Mr. Carlucci

added a note of caution that our push for sanctions on Chapter VII is

convincing many of the Western governments to reduce their represen-

tation in Tehran. [2½ lines not declassified]

3. Shah. The latest blood test indicates that the Shah’s health is

deteriorating. A team of doctors will fly to Panama today to examine

him and determine what the next steps should be. A transfusion is the

minimum expected, and further surgery may be required. Secretary

Vance felt that the Shah’s condition was becoming dangerous. The

Panamanians want any medical treatment to be performed in Panama-

nian hospitals, rather than U.S. facilities. The team of doctors is aware

of this and will make a recommendation. (S)

119.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 26, 1979

SUBJECT

[less than 1 line not declassified] Iran (S)

My brief acquaintance with CIA’s planning and inclination, which

occurred at David’s meeting on Saturday with CIA, State, and Defense

leaves me worried about what we are able to do and what we may

want to achieve. The meeting on covert planning and military support

had a tone of urgency, a tactical tone, [2½ lines not declassified].

[3 paragraphs (25 lines) not declassified]

120.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Justice

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Attorney General Benjamin

Warren Christopher

Civiletti*

David Newsom

John Shenefield*

Harold Saunders

Treasury

Defense

Anthony Solomon*

W. Graham Claytor

White House

Robert Komer

Lloyd Cutler*

Zbigniew Brzezinski

JCS

Admiral Thomas Hayward

NSC

General John Pustay

William Odom

Gary Sick

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Frank Carlucci

Energy

Secretary Charles Duncan*

*Domestic Issues Only

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Japan. The Japanese have requested our guidance on their forth-

coming negotiations with Iran on oil. Thus far the Japanese have held

firm at $28. per barrel, and they have indicated that they are prepared

to stay with that price for the moment if Shell and BP do the same.

The SCC agreed that we should ask the Japanese to hold firm at $28.

and that we were contacting the British to inform their companies to

do the same. Secretary Duncan felt that if this price can be sustained

for another week or ten days the market price may soften. We will

also remind all parties of the agreement to pay only dollars for oil. (C)

2. UN. Secretary Vance mentioned that he had briefed the President

this morning on the UN scenario. Plans now call for Vance to make

the formal presentation to the Security Council on Friday evening or

Saturday morning, aiming at a vote on Monday before the composition

of the Security Council changes. State is preparing talking points for

the President to use in telephone calls to heads of state of Zambia and

Nigeria, who are wavering. A strong Presidential message to other

members of the Security Council will also be available this afternoon.

One proposal which has promise is for the Security Council to vote

sanctions to take effect within ten days or so after the vote, allowing

time for Waldheim to continue his mediation efforts in the interim.

Don McHenry feels that this might buy us an extra vote or so, and the

SCC thought it was an attractive idea. Secretary Vance noted that the

timetable we have proposed may not hold, and it should not be dis-

cussed publicly. (C)

3. Economic Steps. The economic steps taken by our allies should

begin to leak within the next several days. Treasury will insure that

the leaks are accelerated without making it appear that they come from

U.S. officials, which would be a breach of faith. Once the leaks have

begun to appear, the allies are to confirm that “measures of coopera-

Options Identified

tion” have in fact been agreed upon. The French have not yet formally

agreed to this, but Vance has sent a message to Giscard3 and believes

that the French will agree. (C)

4. IMF. Mr. Solomon alerted the SCC to the possibility that the

Saudis and others may vote against us—or at least abstain—on the

question of whether or not our freeze of Iranian assets is permitted

under the IMF Charter. The reason for the Saudi and Arab position is

that Egypt made the same argument about paying interest to Saudi

Arabia after the Arab cutoff of funds. Although this may be somewhat

embarrassing to us, Mr. Solomon was certain that we have the necessary

votes to win in the IMF. (C)

5. Hostages. State has prepared a chart showing when each hostage

was seen or contacted since the takeover of the embassy. This is

extremely sensitive, since it tends to identify particular individuals as

suspect. A single copy was made to be attached to the notes of the

SCC meeting. The seven missing hostages include [less than 1 line not

declassified] four Foreign Service Officers. There is one hostage, a Mr.

Blucker who was on temporary duty to Tehran as an economist, who

has not been seen or heard from since the first day of the takeover.

The fact that the students today claim that only 49 hostages are in

custody—as opposed to our firm count of 50—is worrisome from that

perspective. Hodding Carter at the noon briefing today will make clear

that any confusion about the total number of hostages is not confusion

on our part but rather because of the poor information coming out of

the students5 and others in Tehran. Secretary Vance will meet with the

American clergymen for half an hour after their return. (S)

Political-Military Issues:

1. AWACS. Dr. Brzezinski informed the SCC that the President had

approved the proposal from the previous meeting. The AWACS flew

yesterday as scheduled and will return to the base in Egypt today. (S)

2. Intelligence Finding. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the intelligence

finding as revised and approved by the President would be sent to

the President for signature today. The finding is attached, with the

President’s comments and changes incorporated. (S)

3. Covert Action. The SCC agreed that the small covert action sub-

committee would meet on Monday7 to review options. The entire ques-

pound has now settled into a routine with demonstrations periodically

staged outside the chancery/motor pool gate on Takhte-Jamshid Blvd.

Crowd size varies from 50–75 curiosity seekers to several thousand at

lunch/prayer time or when announcements go out via the radio and

the local public address system.

(A) (TS) Security of the hostage areas is maintained by 125–150

personnel. Based on observations by a knowledgeable released hostage,

personnel within the compound are made up of several factions in

approximately the following proportions:

Actual Students

60 percent

80–90 personnel

Fatah Trained Militants

10 percent

12–15 personnel

Pasdaran

15 percent

20–25 personnel

Student Leadership Cadre (including

university/religious leaders)

5 percent

7–9 personnel

PLO Advisors

3–5 percent

5–7 personnel

Note: PLO Advisors are probably only present during the day

and in the evenings when strategy meetings are being held. The actual

B (Intelligence) JTF Oplan 1–80. An unknown hand wrote at the top of the page: “DOI:

As of late Jan 80. Drafted in late Dec 79.”

Options Identified

students function as personal guards of the hostages and as propagan-

dists and ideologues trying to indoctrinate the hostages. The PLO

function as observers, advisors, and propagandists. The Fatah trained

militants supervise security, interrogation, and document exploitation.

The Pasdaran, besides providing external security, maintain a presence

within the compound, primarily providing sentries. Within the build-

ings, the students typically carry pistols or G–3 rifles. Those on duty

outside typically are armed with G–3 rifles. Guards carrying rifles have

not been observed carrying any spare magazines for their weapons.

(B) (TS) The number of personnel present seems to vary according

to the occasion and day of the week. Other factors being equal, the

number of personnel in the compound drops on Thursday and Friday

(the Islamic weekend, when some leave to visit families). The number

rises again on Saturdays and Sundays when there are typically a lot

of meetings held, according to a released hostage. There is another

reduction when some members of the occupation force (students) leave

the compound to attend classes.

(C) (TS) Guard force distribution is estimated as follows with a

day/night duty ratio of 60/40.

Amb residence 10–14

DCM residence 8–12

Servant quarters 12–16

Consulate 8–12

Chancery 8–12

Staff cottages 18–20

Warehouse 8–12

Interior perimeter 10–12

(D) The general pattern of guard positions within a hostage location

is 1–3 guards per room. The guards seem to favor positions in doorways

vice protected corners. Outside hostage locations, single sentries walk

beats which generally parallel building walls and extend the length of

the building protected.

(E) Within the compound several defensive construction measures

have been noted. The athletic fields have been blocked to helicopter

traffic with parked cars and 6–8 foot stakes which have been driven

into the ground. Anti-helicopter stakes have also been placed on the

roof of the warehouse building. The probability exists that mines or

demolitions have been positioned around the athletic fields. One hos-

tage mentioned trip-wires connected to bells or other noise makers in

his debriefing statement, and other hostages have mentioned hearing

buzzers before people entered their area, possibly as part of a warning

system of some sort. The students have installed additional lighting

and loudspeakers in several locations. They are reportedly using some

122.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan

PARTICIPANTS

The President

JCS

General David Jones

The Vice President

White House

State

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Jody Powell

Defense

David Aaron

Secretary Harold Brown

NSC

CIA

Gary Sick (joined at 10: a.m.)

Admiral Stansfield Turner

MINUTES

The President convened the National Security Council and it was

agreed that we would begin by discussing the situation in Afghanistan

since it would be important to communicate today with our Euro-

pean Allies.

Options Identified

[Omitted here is discussion on Afghanistan and Pakistan. For por-

tions on Afghanistan and Pakistan, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,

vol. XII, Afghanistan, Document 107.]

Secretary Vance reviewed for the President what is happening with

respect to Iran. Ambassador McHenry joined the meeting. The EC–9

nations have begun a drawdown of their personnel in Iran, including

their nationals. As a whole, they believe that an affirmative vote for

sanctions in the UN will subject them and their nationals to danger in

Tehran, including a possible takeover. The UK is now removing nearly

all of its people, and the French, Germans and Italians are considering

a move. The ambassadors of the EC–9 in Tehran are going to Qom

today if they can, or else will approach the Revolutionary Council.

They will weigh in on the new circumstances in Afghanistan and try

to persuade the Iranians that the Soviet actions are the real issue. They

will argue that Iran should settle the problem with the U.S. and begin

to focus on the real danger. They will deliver this as a message from

the European Community.

Ambassador McHenry said that consultations at the UN have been

proceeding over the past several days. In addition, there will be an

informal meeting of the Council this afternoon and a formal meeting

tomorrow morning. We need to have a resolution by tomorrow if we

are to have a vote on Monday2 and avoid the change in composition

which will occur at the New Year. The present group is better since

we have long worked with them on this issue. There are potential

difficulties associated with a delay; for one thing, if the Cuba-Colombia

dispute over seating is not resolved, we could have a 14-member Coun-

cil. Although there is no question of the legality of functioning with

only 14 members, it does raise political question. We would lose the

Bolivian vote, and we would still need nine positive votes. The French

would be in the chair. It is doubtful that the Soviets, Czechs or Kuwaitis

could vote for any resolution based on Chapter VII sanctions. They

may be willing to imply such support if they can change the resolution

to a lesser first step with sanctions to follow, but he believed that this

was merely tactical and we would not in the final analysis get those

three. Indications are that the Soviets would abstain.

The Norwegians, British, Portuguese and French are prepared in

principle to be supportive, but at least the British and French have

suggested changes in the description of sanctions which are extensive

enough to require some time to work out. He did not believe this could

be worked out this month. The British changes would provide no

automatic default on existing credits, approval of credits for items, e.g.,

food, disagreement over the extra-territoriality (i.e., whether or not

U.S. laws can be applied to U.S. firms in third countries), and the

applicability of sanctions to a joint venture company in which five

tankers fly the British flag and five fly the Iranian flag.

A third group of countries are the non-aligned, who are trying to

find a two-stage approach. Instead of immediate sanctions, they would

propose formalizing the Secretary-General’s mediation efforts, calling

on him to visit Tehran and warn them that if they did not act by a

given time, the Security Council will impose sanctions. This may be

attractive to the Soviets, Czechs and Kuwaitis, but he thought not.

Bangladesh may be in the same position as the Soviets, but it is not

entirely clear. The Bangladesh ambassadors in New York and Washing-

ton have urged us to press the President of Bangladesh at a high level

to cooperate. Nevertheless, he thought that Bangladesh would abstain.

It will take a number of days to get agreement on the list of sanc-

tions, which will put us into January. With a high expenditure of

political capital, including personal intervention by the President by

telephone, he thought we could get nine votes after the first of January.

The President summarized the membership of the Security Council

as three groups composed of: (1) Soviets, Czechs and Kuwaitis who

will oppose sanctions and probably abstain; (2) the Norwegians, British,

French and Portuguese who will support us; and (3) Jamaica, Bangla-

desh, Gabon, Bolivia, Nigeria, China and Zambia.

Ambassador McHenry said after January 1, Nigeria will be replaced

by Nigeria [Niger], Gabon by Tunisia, Kuwait by the Philippines,

Czechs by East Germany and Bolivia by an empty chair.

Dr. Brzezinski thought that we would come out about the same.

Ambassador McHenry thought he could possibly get more votes

by going to a two-stage process in which we would continue to get

sanctions while also meeting desires for an interim period. The resolu-

tion would deplore the failure of Iran to comply with the UN, direct

Waldheim to go to Iran by a given date, and state that if the hostages

had not been released by a certain date the Security Council would

in any event to negotiate sanctions, and this would put that period

to use.

Secretary Vance said the British had dumped these changes on us

suddenly yesterday.

The President wondered if we could get them to back off?

Options Identified

Ambassador McHenry said the British first called and said they

had some “minor changes,” but when he saw them later he realized

they were not minor at all. They subsequently indicated that they

could not support sanctions unless all three of the changes outlined

previously were included in the resolution.

The President thought that would be good, but it should not delay

our preparation of the second vote on sanctions. We need to get the

British and French on board.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered how sure we were of getting a favorable

second vote.

Ambassador McHenry said it would still require a Presidential

effort.

The President said he was ready for that.

Dr. Brzezinski said he was worried about the public perception.

We had planned to ask our Allies to impose sanctions even if the vote

failed at the UN. Would it not be better to go for sanctions and at the

same time to make an approach to the Iranians about the Afghan

situation. He did not think the U.S. public expected a vote immediately.

Mr. Powell disagreed. He said a vote was expected very soon and

this would be seen as a classic case of legislative impotence if we could

not deliver.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered still if we would be better off to go for

sanctions directly.

The President said he thought it was more important to get some-

thing before January. He noted that the Iranians had in any event

refused to meet with Waldheim.

Ambassador McHenry agreed and noted that a two-stage process

was a way of getting around the red herring that somehow Waldheim

could produce a solution. Waldheim had called him at midnight the

night before about a call he had received from the Pakistani Ambassa-

dor relaying a message from the Pakistani Foreign Minister in Tehran.

The Iranians had reiterated the view that they did not want to see the

Secretary General right now. The Pakistanis wanted his reaction to

a proposal that the Secretary General go to Iran with the advance

understanding that nothing would come of it. Would that help, defuse

the situation? Ambassador McHenry had told Waldheim that we would

not buy that, and Waldheim agreed that it did not sound like a

good idea.

The President said he was not embarrassed to get a positive vote

on Monday which would give Waldheim a week to arrange release of

the hostages and provided that at the end of that time the Security

Council would be committed to act on articles 39 and 41.

Mr. Powell observed that the story would still be that we did it

because we did not have the votes to win.

The President said it was a rational approach, not a great victory.

The Vice President said there was a great deal of feeling in the UN

that the Secretary General approach should be played out.

Ambassador McHenry said that the West has often used this very

same approach on many other issues. The only difference in this case

would be the commitment to a vote and specification of a date.

The President asked how sure he was of getting twelve votes.

Ambassador McHenry said he would have to work hard, but he

thought we could get it. Maybe even the Soviets would be embarrassed

enough to vote for it.

The Vice President agreed that was the way to go.

Mr. Powell said that if we get down to a week or two and cannot

get what we want this way, we will get great pressure to act unilaterally.

The difference is between getting the pressure in one week or two.

The President said he had watched what Beheshti said on TV. He

was under the impression that Beheshti was one of the more reasonable

members of the Revolutionary Council. He said flat out that there

would be a trial of the United States, not the hostages, and that the

hostages would be released whether guilty or not. If we had to face

public pressure for strong unilateral action, he would rather face it on

January 6 rather than January 1. He noted that when we talked to

Giscard on the phone yesterday, he had been quite evasive when asked

if France would impose sanctions in the event sanctions were voted

down in the Security Council.

Secretary Brown noted that they were all getting more cautious as

they listen to their bureaucracies.

The President said he hated to shift gears and start working on

Niger and others that had not previously been involved.

Admiral Turner said he did not believe that sanctions would get

the hostages back. There are three groups we are working with: the

Revolutionary Council; the kidnappers; and Khomeini. We had had

some success in getting our message through to the Revolutionary

Council. There is no way to get through to the kidnappers. He still

thought that Khomeini could work his will on the students, so the

question was how to impact on him. He wondered if the correct

Options Identified

approach would not be a combination, playing off the Afghan theme

and offering some kind of concession at the same time.

The President said that the concessions we had drafted previously

were still available. He thought Dr. Brzezinski was right—Khomeini

would like to see all Western influence in Iran ended. Any military

action by us would simply play into his hands. He would say, “We

would have a great situation here in Iran if it were not for the American

mining, or bombing or whatever.” He guessed that Shariat-Madari and

Beheshti and perhaps others have influence on Khomeini as potential

alternatives to his rule. Khomeini is not so solidly in power as to be

able to ignore the Revolutionary Council entirely. As far as he knew,

Bani Sadr was the only officially announced candidate for President

of Iran.

Secretary Vance said there were some indications that the Iranian

Government was more coherent now with the Revolutionary Council

under Beheshti. He has shown himself to be careful and strong. He

has never put himself in the position of having his position immedi-

ately reversed.

The President noted that the students are now reported to be form-

ing a coordination committee with the Revolutionary Council. On the

UN resolution, he would like the triggering device to be the release or

non-release of the hostages. We need a vote by the first of January. If

Secretary Vance did not mind, would he please go up to New York.

The President was prepared to help.

Secretary Vance said the real problem for the British was the ques-

tion of the five ships with Iranian flags. The extra-territoriality question

is one that we will not be able to resolve. It has been a problem for years.

The President wondered if we could not find language which

would permit the operation of those ships.

Secretary Vance said we should be able to come up with something.

He noted that the British were backing away from their position on

credit because of the position taken by their Treasury.

The President said the British were the only obstacle.

Ambassador McHenry said he would want to study the proposals

the French had put to us only this morning. (Ambassador McHenry

then left the meeting.)

U.S. position should any of the hostages be sentenced or imprisoned and proposed that

sanctions be applied on concrete acts rather than across the board. (National Archives,

123.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Rev. William Sloane Coffin

Rev. Howard

Bishop Gumbleton

Under Secretary Newsom

Assistant Secretary Saunders

Deputy Assistant Secretary Constable

Henry Precht

SUBJECT

Meeting with Clergymen Who Visited the Hostages

The clergy briefed the Secretary for an hour on their Christmas

visit to the hostages in the compound. They found the hostages physi-

cally well although some were under obvious stress. The students

holding the compound were rigid, obsessed with the crimes of the

Shah, and unyielding on all points, both procedural and substantive.

In their other contacts with Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh and some

religious leaders, the clergy found an almost universal insistence on

the return of the Shah and deep emotion over the injustices suffered

during the Shah’s regime. Ghotbzadeh and other Western-trained Ira-

nian officials were more flexible but experiencing obvious difficulties

Options Identified

in finding a solution acceptable to Khomeini and the students. Reverend

Coffin was critical of American policy and urged statements which

would “transcend” the present stalemate and respond to the Iranian

need for understanding of their grievances. Reverend Howard did not

believe that any dramatic proposals by the U.S. would yield results.

All three agreed that additional U.S. pressures through sanctions would

only harden the Iranian position.

I. The Hostages: The three clergymen believe they saw 43 hostages:

were not allowed to take any notes and therefore have had to work

on identification from memory and scanning of pictures. They found

the hostages in good physical condition but some were showing

obvious signs of stress. The two women were in especially good spirits

and were very pleased to see each other after a month’s separation.

Some remarks by various hostages led the clergy to believe that they

were resisting or defying their captors in small ways. The presentation

of the message read by Plotkin was obviously staged and two of the

hostages took pains to tell Bishop Gumbleton so. One hostage, Joe Hall,

came in rubbing his wrists and seemed almost disoriented, although

his spirits picked up during the evening. Ode was described as “cranky”

and complained about the lack of fruit, all of which Coffin interpreted

as a sign of psychological health. One hostage noted that while they

had been treated well they were subjected to “a lot of interrogation.”

Coffin noted that captivity was particularly tough on the Marines who

were supposed to be guards rather than guarded. Golacinski noted to

one of the clergy that the hostages were being “treated like animals.”

The clergy believed that the experience of the Christmas service was

a tremendous lift for the hostages and the results were worth the

manipulation which accompanied it.

II. The Students: Coffin described the students as in complete con-

trol, intelligent, tough, with a religious conviction best described in

terms of fervor and intensity, not charity. Coffin compared them to

American students of the 60’s but felt they were more personally con-

trolled and had a greater sense of purpose than their American counter-

parts. Coffin said he had argued that their holding of the hostages was

in complete contradiction to their stated purpose of defeating Carter

and would only result in his re-election. He found it impossible to put

that kind of message across to them. They were totally absorbed with

the Shah’s crimes and with their conviction that the U.S. could extradite

him. Their organization was thorough, and they noted that even police

were disarmed before they were allowed to come in the compound.

The clergy described the difficulties they had in arranging services as

they desired. They found the students absolutely rigid and unwilling

to negotiate any changes in their pre-arranged plans, which they justi-

fied in terms of decisions made by the “security committee.” The cap-

tors whom they met all appeared to be genuine students, although

some of them, particularly the numerous armed guards, appeared to be

very young. Coffin described one as a student of electrical engineering

named Mohammad. He was deeply moved by the Christmas services

and even took notes on Coffin’s sermon. Bishop Gumbleton thought

that the students did not occupy quite as commanding a role as Coffin

ascribed to them. He said that the students had not wanted the clergy

to come and that Ghotbzadeh had arranged this through Khomeini.

He also noted that, in the controversy over the numbers, Ghotbzadeh

after talking to the clergy may have played a role in persuading the

students to acknowledge that some hostages had not been seen.

III. Other Meetings: The clergy had a long meeting with Ghotbzadeh

and found him genuinely interested in finding a solution. He and

others whom they talked with seemed to feel that the holding of the

hostages was an embarrassment, but nevertheless felt very strongly

about the Shah’s crimes and the need for the U.S. to recognize their

grievances. The clergy also met with a group of religious figures where

they again found very deep feelings about the Shah’s crimes and an

insistence that the U.S. could easily arrange the Shah’s extradition

from Panama.

IV. U.S. Policy and Outlook for the Hostages: Reverend Howard was

persuaded that, barring some unforeseen development, the hostages

might be there a very long time. All three believed that the U.S. and

Iran are approaching the problem from totally different perspectives

and seem unlikely to find common ground. Howard also noted the

problem of reaching Khomeini and the students. He noted that it meant

nothing to the students when the clergy argued with them that they

would look bad in the eyes of the world if the clergy did not hold the

services. Their ideas were fixed and rigid. Reverend Coffin argued that

the U.S. needs to find ways to hear the legitimate grievances of the

Iranians who had suffered under the Shah. All three clergy believed

that economic sanctions against Iran would only harden the position

of Iranians and make matters worse. Howard said it will “move them

to martyrdom.” Howard also argued in contrast to Coffin’s position

that any dramatic proposal offered by the U.S. would only lead the

Iranians to believe that the holding of hostages was yielding results

and would not lead to their release. Without specifying a specific

formula, Howard felt that we should look for some way to make small

gestures from our side which might produce a change in Iranian

thinking.

V. Public Statements on the Hostages: After considerable discussion,

the clergy appeared to agree that they would only release the names

of the hostages if the families agreed to their doing so. Coffin appeared

124.

Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff

(Lake) to Secretary of State Vance

Washington, December 28, 1979

This memorandum suggests possible steps to be taken on Iran,

covering the three tracks we have been pursuing:

—pressures on Iran;

—public statements on our position; and

—private approaches.

It draws on a number of thoughts suggested by Dave Newsom,

and is based on a meeting he held with Iran experts from various

bureaus and with Dr. [name not declassified]

It does not look at Iran in the context of our concerns on Afghani-

stan. We should, however, in making decisions on our military pos-

ture—and on our longer term relations with Iran—bear the Afghanistan

angle in mind.

The course we have been pursuing in Iran has positioned us very

well, both domestically and in international opinion. We have shown

the right combination of firmness and discipline. We have made Iran

an international issue. Going for UN sanctions is logical and potentially

the most effective next step.

As you are all too aware, however, our national strategy has thus

far foundered on the rocks of Khomeini’s personality and the near

anarchy in Iran.

In thinking about next steps, therefore, it is important that we keep

looking at the situation not only in terms of what makes sense to us (and

our public and friends abroad), but also what might move Khomeini.

I always find it easy to slip into assumptions and reasoning based on

what we would do were we in his shoes.

Experience of past weeks suggests that:

—Actions and statements conveying strength are respected. But

threats and signs of impatience do not help.

—The prospect of physical attack on Iran or Khomeini himself

tends to make him more obdurate. He is vitally concerned, however,

about the future of the revolution and Iran’s integrity as a nation. Good

relations with the U.S. are not an important factor for him. But his and

his circle’s concerns about U.S. mischief making in Iran are probably

sincerely felt. The Revolutionary Council, but not Khomeini, is con-

cerned about international opinion.

—We are not in a “negotiation,” and most likely cannot enter into

one with Khomeini. We should not think of strategy in those terms. Our

concessions will simply be pocketed and taken as signs of weakness,

not taken as signs of good faith or reciprocated.

—The hope has to be that, at some point, he will simply make the

decision that conditions require the release of the hostages, and order/

persuade the compound captors to do so.

—Our double task is thus a complex one:

a) to create the kinds of pressures that have meaning for him and

will make him look for such an out; and

b) without seeming to plead or concede, make it clear that if the hostages

were released, some of his concerns could be met.

As suggested below, I believe we are doing better in the first task

than in the second.

I. Pressures

We continue to have a range of external pressures we can exert with

increasing force against Iran, although we will soon have undertaken

most of those on our earlier list.

Options Identified

A. Diplomatic: We can progressively restrict Iranian diplomatic and

consular activity in the U.S. through closing some or all of the consulates,

concluding by breaking relations. The continued Iranian diplomatic

presence in the U.S. has two major roles: to provide assistance to Iranian

students in the U.S.; and to communicate public and private views and

messages both to Iranian officials and to the hostages. While closing

the consulates and/or severing diplomatic ties may effectively signal

our growing impatience to Iranian moderates and to Khomeini, break-

ing relations also could cut off one communication channel, could

aggravate the student captors and could undermine the efforts of Ira-

nian moderates.

A break in diplomatic relations could be important symbolically.

We might want to use it later, however, if there is a worsening of the

hostages’ situation and at a time when we may want other governments

to intensify their pressure through a parallel severing of diplomatic

ties. Severing diplomatic ties now or in the immediate future could

also deprive Iran of one element of a face-saver in the final resolution

of the crisis. At this point in the stalemate we may instead want to

advise Agah to look for a protecting power, without giving him a

deadline. This move would underscore our growing impatience with-

out incurring the costs of an actual break in relations.

We could send a visible emissary to Iraq to consult on regional

developments. This may serve to increase Iran’s concern about its own

security and feed the reservations of those in the Revolutionary Council

and around Khomeini as to the impact on Iran and on the revolution

of Khomeini’s policies. Our interests would in any event be served by

a further effort to strengthen our dialogue with Iraq, even if this does

not lead to normalization of relations.

B. Economic: Beyond the economic measures we are now taking

with our allies, and beyond limited UN sanctions, we could:

1. Move to intensify pressure on Iranians in the U.S. by eliminating

the present assets freeze exemption for students. This might be welcomed

by the public but may also be open to challenge in the courts. Indigent

students might be forced to stay in the U.S. and fall back on local

welfare programs, becoming an increased burden on domestic pro-

gram budgets.

2. A comprehensive U.S. embargo on food to Iran would signal a further

toughening of U.S. policy but may have a relatively minor impact on

Iran at this time. Iran appears to have found alternate sources for much

of the food we had been providing, although the cost to Iran of relying

on alternative supplies is likely to be high. U.S. success in persuading

other countries (Western Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Thailand

and Japan) to halt food shipments in the absence of UN sanctions

relating to food would be uncertain. A food embargo would also hit

poor Iranians and could lead to retaliation against the hostages—both

physically and in denial of adequate food.

3. Alternatively, we could ourselves, or perhaps through the UN,

impose a selective food embargo, focusing on items such as meat (25%

imported), edible oil (80% imported) and sugar (50% imported) which

would impact primarily on the middle class, not the poor, and would

thus be easier to defend; would emphasize the decline in living stand-

ards for a major component of Khomeini’s support, the Bazaar mer-

chants; and would be relatively easy to monitor in view of the limited

sources of supply of these goods (except for sugar). The U.S. has been

the principal supplier of edible oil; Australia, New Zealand, and the

Bloc provide meat, and sugar comes from a variety of sources (but not

4. We could also ask the Security Council to impose the widest range of

economic sanctions against Iran, including food and medicine exports

to Iran and all exports from Iran except oil. While such a boycott on

trade would bring severe pressure to bear on Khomeini, we are unlikely

to get such extensive sanctions through the Security Council.

5. We could impose an indemnity on Iran of some large amount of

money per hostage per day, as long as they are held. We could seek

such an indemnity either in the next few weeks as part of a campaign

of increasing pressure on Iran, or we could wait until the hostages

were released and impose the indemnity as a punitive measure.

Seeking the indemnity payment from blocked assets as part of a

pressure campaign has certain advantages: it would receive widespread

U.S. public support and it would place direct financial pressure on

Iran which would mount as long as the hostages were kept; it is a

highly visible step which is easily publicized through the media, includ-

ing VOA. On the other hand, Khomeini and the students so far seem

unmoved by the various financial measures we’ve taken and may thus

be unmoved by the imposition of an indemnity payment.

6. An international boycott of Iranian oil would severely impair

Iranian sources of funds. The consequent shutting down of most of

Iran’s oil pumping capacity might in some instances permanently dam-

Options Identified

age Iran’s oil production capacity. The impact on the Iranian economy

and the future recovery of Iran would be serious. This might bring

home to Khomeini and the students the costs to the revolution of the

present policies; but it would also be damaging to the international

economy. An international oil surplus in the next two months might

make possible a reallocation of crude oil and facilitate gaining interna-

tional support for a boycott, but it would be very difficult to achieve

under any circumstances. Success would depend on the cooperation

of other major OPEC producers in not shutting down production or

increasing prices. If Iran decided to sell its oil below the general market

price in an effort to break a boycott, it would be difficult to sustain

any common front we might manage to create and severe tensions

could be created in relations with several of our key allies and third

world states.

7. A naval embargo of shipments to and from Iran would enforce

not only an oil boycott but all trade sanctions and intensify economic

pressures on Iran. It would provide visible evidence of U.S. power

which could have a major impact in Iran—both in reminding the ordi-

nary Iranian of U.S. strength and in emboldening those who oppose

Khomeini’s policies, including the military, to attempt more direct

action. An embargo would probably be welcomed in the U.S. At the

same time, it could be difficult to enforce, given the heavy commercial

traffic in the Gulf and Arabian Sea; could result in tense exchanges

with other countries whose commerce was affected; and potentially

could lead to a military confrontation with Iranian or other naval forces

which might attempt to force a blockade. It might also galvanize Iranian

nationalism against the U.S., including the military.

While I cannot judge this in technical terms, there are a number

of advantages to mining the harbors and perhaps channels rather than

imposing a blockade with our ships.

C. Political

1. We could intensify current efforts to convey the message that Iran

is being weakened by its present policies. Aside from VOA, we could

ask cooperating governments, particularly those in Middle Eastern

countries and Europe, to include this theme in radio broadcasts in

Persian and Arabic. The object would be to strengthen internal doubts

in Iran as to the wisdom of holding the hostages and confronting the

international community. We could urge all cooperating governments

and groups to seek to convey the same message directly to Khomeini

through every channel of communication available.

[1 paragraph (18 lines) not declassified]

D. Military: Finally, there are the whole range of military options

which are not reviewed here. One early measure could be a display of

force but without the actual use of weapons. This could include high-

level, high-speed reconnaissance aircraft (such as the SR–71) which

would be audible and reflect a U.S. presence to citizens of Tehran; or

a fly-over of Iranian territory by a large number of naval aircraft to

symbolize U.S. power. The display of force could imply an imminent

U.S. intention to use force and thus jeopardize the safety of the hostages.

It could also increase Khomeini’s intransigence. It could, however,

bring home to the Revolutionary Council that the U.S. has enormous

power and that U.S. patience is wearing thin, and thus reinforce the

views of those in Iran who are urging Khomeini to find a quick face-

saving way out. The display of power would be welcomed domestically

but, if we did nothing more, it could actually add to an impression of

impotence.

II. Conditions for Release

Out of a proper concern that we stand firm on principle and avoid

making concessions that convey weakness, we have not been able to

give the Iranians a very clear notion of what would happen if the

hostages were released.

Iran (primarily the students and Khomeini) has made three basic

demands: the return of the Shah, the return of his assets, and a condem-

nation of the Shah and the United States for past “crimes” against Iran.

Two other issues are also raised: U.S. intervention in the current affairs

of Iran and whether U.S. policy after the hostages are released will be

one of reconciliation or retribution.

Except to say that the Shah will not be returned, the United States

has not tried to answer these demands with any specificity. We have

said that the courts are available to address the question of the Shah’s

assets and that we will not stand in the way of an airing of Iran’s

grievances, once the hostages are released. Our fundamental position

remains that the hostages are the issue and their release must precede

any discussions. We have avoided commenting on post-hostage policy,

except by inference in our accepting language on restraint in both the

UNSC and ICJ resolutions.

Now is a good time to convey a fuller message. The Revolutionary

Council seems to be moving towards a consensus on the need to resolve

the crisis. Khomeini himself may have made encouraging noises to

McBride. And if there is a gap between a Security Council vote and the

time sanctions come into force, the Iranians should know our position

as they ponder their course of action.

Options Identified

If we decide to address Iranian concerns more fully we need to

a) define our position and b) find a way of conveying it that does not

also convey a weakening of our position.

Bearing in mind the concerns listed on page two, I suggest you

consider the following approach.

A. Our Position

We cannot, in any way, condone the involuntary return of the

Shah, from Panama or elsewhere.

This leaves five issues:

—A hearing on the “sins” of the Shah and the U.S.;

—Trials of the hostages;

—The Shah’s assets;

—U.S. intervention in current Iranian affairs; and,

—Our future relations.

On the first three, we must not appear to accept the principle of

hostage trials or our culpability for past events in Iran. Nor should we

imply that, once the hostages are released, we can wipe the slate clean

in our relations with Iran.

Within these constraints, however, the following message could

be passed to Khomeini and members of the Revolutionary Council:

“—No one should doubt American unity and resolve on this issue.

—But the elements of a resolution of the crisis are available. It is

certain that if the hostages were released, the U.S. would:

• Cooperate with the Secretary General in the simultaneous forma-

tion of, and subsequent work of, an international commission ‘to inves-

tigate allegations of grave violations of human rights and other illegal

acts in Iran’ under the Shah. (Note: Ideally the commission should also

investigate violations under Khomeini, but this is a non-starter.)

• Also cooperate with Congressional hearings on U.S. relations

with Iran. The U.S. would grant visas to representatives of Iran who

wished to present their case at such hearings.

• Continue to recognize the right of the Government of Iran to

assert in U.S. courts its claims to assets which, in Iran’s view, have

been illegally taken out of Iran by those connected with the former

regime, as well as Iran’s claims to all other such assets as might later

be transferred to the United States. The U.S. would not interfere with

this process and would to the extent possible support it by providing

information in accordance with U.S. laws under the Freedom of Infor-

mation Act. The U.S. would not interfere with an attachment of funds

but would indicate, if requested by the court, that such a measure was

appropriate. The U.S. would also assist with accounting actions in other

countries as appropriate.

• When the hostages have been released, the U.S. would lift its

freeze on all Iranian assets held overseas by U.S. entities and all assets

in this country with the exception of central bank funds. The latter

would remain frozen pending settlement of claims between the Govern-

ments of the United States and Iran.

• Assuming the Government of Iran would likewise agree, the U.S.

would abide strictly by the provisions of the Declaration of Principles

of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation

among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and

by the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

• [Flatly guarantee that the U.S. will not intervene in Iran’s internal

affairs.] Guarantee that there will be no military reprisals if the hos-

tages are released.

• Agree to meet with Iranian officials in any appropriate forum

to seek a resolution of all issues between us. It would be clear that

while the U.S. would be prepared to hear Iran’s grievances, the United

States would present its grievances as well. U.S. relations with Iran

will inevitably suffer from the events that have taken place. The U.S.

and Iran can try to limit the damage and perhaps begin to build for a

better future, once the hostages are released.

• [The U.S. would not maintain formal diplomatic relations with

Iran, but would agree to the establishment of a joint commission with

Iran under the auspices of a protecting power. The joint commission

would review bilateral differences, including such issues as settlement

of claims, disposition of the ICJ action, spare parts for military equip-

ment purchased by Iran, commercial relations, etc.]

—This is an opportunity Khomeini should seize. It is unclear

whether, more weeks down the road, this would still be the U.S.

position.

—Every day that the crisis continues, and the situation in Iran

erodes, foreign perceptions of the revolution in Iran erode as well.”

The method of conveying such a position is as important as the

position itself. If portrayed as concessions in advance of knowledge

the hostages would be released, the hands of the Revolutionary Council

might be strengthened, but Khomeini would still be likely simply to

conclude that we were weakening.

However, a combination of carefully drawn public statements and

direct approaches would have a chance of getting to him.

B. Private Approaches

The purpose of an approach would be to get across to Khomeini

the point that there is a way out for him, if he seizes it. It need not be

to initiate a negotiation. And, to avoid giving Khomeini an impression

of the U.S. as demandeur, I believe the message should not be directly

from us.

Options Identified

I would suggest, therefore, that a non-American of standing in

Iranian eyes (McBride? al Madhi?) be asked by Waldheim (not by us)

to see Khomeini, Beheshti, and other leading members of the Revolu-

tionary Council. He should make it clear that he has an important

message for Khomeini himself. Of course, if Waldheim himself goes

to Iran, he could convey such a message.

Alternatively, an American with standing in Iranian eyes, either a

clergyman or a prominent private citizen, could deliver such a message.

The advantages of having an American transmit our views would be

that the message would have greater credibility in Khomeini’s eyes.

(Khomeini is more likely to be responsive to a clergyman than to a

private citizen.) The disadvantage of having an American deliver our

message is that the more the message is specifically American, the

more we appear to be the demandeur. For this reason, I believe a non-

American is far preferable.

To support such an approach, we could make a greater effort to

ask concerned Europeans to seek out their own channels to Iran and

especially Khomeini to emphasize, on their part, the grave danger to

Iran and to the peace of the area of the prolongation of this conflict. The

French, for example, might approach Benjadid to suggest a renewed

Algerian/Muslim/Arab effort to talk with Khomeini. Now is the time

for us to pull out all stops in getting to all the members of the Revolu-

tionary Council that we can, with a special focus on Beheshti.

We could also make a special effort to encourage Islamic represent-

atives to get to Khomeini or those about him. The emphasis in such

messages should be on the damage Khomeini is doing to his own

revolution and the opportunities he is providing for the left.

C. Public Statements

Such a private approach could be reinforced by a calculated series

of public statements by US officials.

These public statements should not concede any points in advance

of a decision that the hostages will be released—for example, by simply

ruling out interference in Iran’s internal affairs. They should avoid

specific threats as well as characterizations of the Iranian position on

specific issues, which almost automatically produce denials. And, while

never in any way granting the legitimacy of trials or tribunals, they

should not focus primary attention on the kinds of general “investiga-

tions” the Iranians are hinting at. To do so may only lock the Iranians

in. I believe it is better, tactically, to focus our pressures on the main

issue of release, and to belittle non-trial “investigations” as charades.

Our statements could emphasize themes of strength and the

implicit advantages of release, along the following lines:

—The holding of hostages is the central issue; there cannot be a

resolution of other issues without their release.

—This is far more than an issue between the United States and

Iran. A principle of deep concern to every nation is involved. But the

United States reserves the legal right, and indeed responsibility, to take

necessary unilateral actions in defense of its citizens and interna-

tional principles.

—The United States is prepared to seek a resolution of all issues

between it and Iran, once the hostages are released.

—With the hostages’ release, the way will be clear for Iran to

present simultaneously its grievances in any appropriate interna-

tional forum.

—The restraint of any nation cannot be limitless when its people

are held captive and humiliated. The U.S. will continue pressures

against Iran and continue to expect international support for those

pressures until the hostages are released.

—The United States does not exclude restoring good relations with

Iran. Our relations with Iran will inevitably suffer from the events that

have taken place. But we can try to build a better future, once the

hostages are released.

CONCLUSION

Strictly in terms of the hostage situation, the best policy might

be one of very slowly escalating pressures while events within Iran

demonstrated to Khomeini that the hostage situation diverts from

rather than assists the process of consolidating his revolution. But we

do not have that kind of time. The effect of Iran on other issues including

SALT; the danger that the international community could get used to

the idea of the hostages’ being held there; the onset of the primary

season here; and the well-being of the hostages . . . all argue for trying

to resolve the situation more quickly.

I therefore believe we should move relatively soon after Security

Council action to further pressures, perhaps including:

—Advising Agah to look for a protecting power (now);

—Seeking to send an emissary to Iraq (now);

—Studying now a selective food embargo (for use in ten days to

two weeks); and

—Intensifying efforts (now) to convey the message that the revolu-

tion is being weakened. This should be coupled with emphasis on the

dangers to Islam of the Russian action in Afghanistan.

I also believe that we should convey now the kind of message

outlined above. It might not work. Rational calculations are difficult

Options Identified

about an irrational situation. But, if conveyed in the manner suggested,

I don’t think we would lose anything by trying. And whatever happens,

we might later feel remiss not to have made such a move at about

this stage.

125.

Handwritten Note From Director of Central Intelligence

Turner to Secretary of State Vance

Washington, December 29, 1979

Cy—

Because the imposition of sanctions appears to be such a watershed,

I did some brainstorming with our analysts on other approaches to

securing release of the hostages. Attached is a 1¼ page think piece—

it’s all policy and your business—accordingly I drop it with you and

let it go at that—

Stan

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated

Breaking the Logjam

Objective:

• Secure timely release of all hostages.

Means:

• Secret negotiations with key Revolutionary Council members

(Beheshti and/or Ghotbzadeh). This meeting to take place with fore-

knowledge of Khomeini.

• Use individual with acceptable credentials (e.g., Prof. Richard

Cottam).

US Position:

Emissary to go with the understood authority to propose a solution.

• Opening

—US not enemy of Islam or Iran

—Note that recent Soviet invasion of Afghanistan makes it more

imperative for both US and Iran to resolve crisis

—Iran needs to be in a position to stand up to the USSR, and to

possible Soviet subversion among the Kurds, Azerbaijanis, and other

minorities

—The US wants to be in a position to help—but cannot while US

diplomats are held hostage

—We recognize that Iran may feel committed to some sort of trial

or tribunal. Obviously the US cannot welcome, approve, or condone

any such Iranian action. But if it can be completed quickly and all

hostages pardoned and released immediately, the US is willing to:

—defer final action on UN sanctions

—make no attempt to block the holding of a trial or tribunal

• US would agree to the following:

—US prepared to issue a statement along the following lines:

—US reiterates respect for Iranian sovereignty and the right of the

Iranian people to determine their own destiny

—US recognizes the right of the Iranian government to attempt to

recover property it claims in accordance with American legal

procedures

—US recognizes the Islamic Republic of Iran as the sole legitimate

representative of the Iranian people and accepts the decision by the

Iranian people to end the rule of the Pahlavi dynasty

—US refer to former Shah only as Mohammed Reza Pahlavi

—US willing to delay seeking of sanctions, which are not to the

benefit of the world community, if there is prospect for speedy resolu-

tion of crisis

—Suspend deportation of Iranian students

—Not stand in way of International Tribunal to review record

of Shah

—After the release of the hostages the US will seek arrangements

whereby Iran can secure spare parts through third parties to allow

Iran’s military to defend Iran from armed threats to the Islamic Repub-

lic. In this regard the US takes particular notice of recent Soviet activities

in Afghanistan.

Sought from Iran:

• Speedily convene Tribunal

• Release of all hostages and guaranteed safe exit

• Agreement to enter into dialogue to determine US-Iran future

relationship

Options Identified

126.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, December 29, 1979

Under Secretary Newsom met with Swiss Political Counselor

Simonin at noon on December 29. Mr. Newsom gave Mr. Simonin a

message for Swiss Ambassador Lang in Tehran. Mr. Simonin in turn

provided Mr. Newsom with a copy of a cable from Ambassador Lang.

Mr. Newsom reviewed with Mr. Simonin the message for Ambassa-

dor Lang. Mr. Newsom pointed out that in regard to Ghotbzadeh’s

complaint that the U.S. was not publicly responding to “positive”

127.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 30, 1979

SUBJECT

CIA Paper

On December 12, 1979, you sent CIA a series of questions about

Soviet actions in Iran and the Middle East. I find little of substance

that is not included in other reporting and analysis. You may wish to

skim the first 15 pages. The estimative answers to questions beginning

on p. 16 are worth reading. They clearly conclude that the Soviets are

unlikely to intervene directly unless there is a complete disintegration

of Iran or the emergence of an anti-Soviet central regime.

Options Identified

128.

Editorial Note

On December 29, 1979, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance addressed

the United Nations Security Council, asking that it adopt the U.S. draft

resolution for economic sanctions against Iran. (Department of State

by 11–0 votes, with Bangladesh, Czechoslovakia, Kuwait, and the USSR

abstaining. The resolution deplored the continued detention of the

for their immediate release. The Council took note of Secretary-General

Kurt Waldheim’s readiness to go to Iran, and the resolution requested

him to intensify his efforts and report back before the Council met

again on January 7, at which time it would review the situation and

decide, “in the event of non-compliance with the present resolution,

to adopt effective measures under Articles 39 and 41 of the Charter of

the United Nations.” For a summary of the Security Council’s proceed-

ings and the text of Resolution 461, see Yearbook of the United Nations,

Earlier that day, Waldheim met with Assistant Secretary of State

for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold Saunders, who pre-

sented him with a five-point statement approved by President Jimmy

Carter and Vance. The five points were: 1) the release of all hostages

prior to the convening any international tribunal; 2) U.S. agreement to

work out in advance of the hostage release an arrangement for Iranian

airing of grievances; 3) no U.S. objections to any Iranian suits in U.S.

courts to recover the Shah’s assets; 4) U.S. acceptance of the current

Iranian state and non-interference; and 5) U.S. willingness to solve all

differences between the two states once the hostages are released.

Waldheim was to take the points with him on his trip to Iran. (Saunders,

“Diplomacy and Pressure, November 1979–May 1980,” American Hos-

copy of the five-point statement has been found.

Khomeini “reluctantly agreed” to Waldheim’s visit. Iran would

not invite him but would acquiesce to his visit. (Telegram 334170 to

the Secretary’s delegation in New York and the White House, December

Waldheim left for Iran on January 1, 1980.

129.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 1, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran—Next Steps

The SCC on January 2 will need to examine the covert action

program being worked up by CIA and the diplomatic/economic strat-

egy we intend to pursue over the coming weeks. The first objective of

the SCC meeting—and the NSC meeting to follow—should be the

establishment of a policy framework with clear objectives which are

agreed at the highest level. The second objective should be to insure that

the package of proposed overt and covert actions are mutually reinforcing

and consistent with the policy objectives.

U.S. Objectives

We have two principal objectives: (1) the release and safe return

of the hostages; and (2) “to encourage the establishment of a responsible

and democratic regime in Iran.”

Although we have tended to regard these as separate, in fact they

are two sides of the same coin. Khomeini is not going to accept the

political costs of giving up the hostages until he is persuaded that

continued holding of the hostages is more costly to him than giving

them up. That means that Khomeini must see his internal power base

eroding, with the risk of losing control over the revolution. No other

argument or scheme is going to tempt him to change his mind.

Our strategy, therefore, must concentrate on making the present

situation as costly politically as possible for Khomeini and his followers.

We can do that by maintaining maximum pressure on Iran through a

diplomatic-economic offensive, combined with a vigorous covert action

program which undermines Khomeini’s effective control.

We should beware of various proposals which would have us make

a new set of offers or concessions to Khomeini as a face-saving device.

These will not work and could make things worse, rather than better.

Negotiating Channels

Khomeini has all the face-saving devices he needs, and he will use

them when he decides to pay the political price. He can use Waldheim,

the PLO, Syria, Algeria, or any number of other intermediaries who

are waiting anxiously in the wings with visions of being tapped as the

“savior” of the hostages. He has no shortage of strategems available

to him domestically, including the possibility of a quick trial and expul-

sion of the hostages, or any number of other schemes combining maxi-

mum U.S. humiliation with the freeing of the hostages. What is lacking

is the will to use one or more of these possibilities.

We should not underestimate the effectiveness of the steps we have

taken to date. Despite the brave rhetoric of Khomeini and the Iranian

media, the leadership and much of the population is aware of the

isolation of Iran, the damage to the reputation of the revolution, the

economic complications for Iranian companies and individuals, the

threat of shortages of key parts and basic necessities, the stagnation of

the economy, and even the danger of U.S. military intervention. None

of these is so severe that it is likely to reverse the course of events in

the immediate future, but the cumulative effect is visible in the high-

level infighting among Khomeini’s followers, the increasing readiness

of individuals to criticize the present leadership, and outright insurrec-

tion in key areas of the country. We must not permit ourselves to

become victims of Iranian propaganda. Our most effective weapon is

holding firmly to a course of steady and persistent pressure.

That course may be frustrating to us when it fails to yield immediate

results, but it is the only realistic option available to us which is likely

to produce the desired outcome. We must grit our teeth and persevere.

Diplomatic/Economic Options

The following is a list of actions available to us at present:

1. Sanctions. We must continue to press with all our resources for

a UN vote on sanctions and effective implementation of its provisions.

The sharp reaction to the threat of sanctions in Tehran is the best

indicator of their unwillingness to be only the second nation in recent

history to have been branded an international outlaw. The fact that

the economic effects will be slow in coming should not mislead us

about the psychological impact. The practical complications for ordi-

nary Iranians in terms of travel, credit, imports and routine communica-

tions should also not be underestimated.

2. Drawdown of Foreign Personnel. There is considerable alarm in

Tehran today as word spreads about the withdrawal of personnel

from foreign embassies and commercial representatives. We should

encourage this and try to accelerate it. A limited military show of force,

e.g. overflights, could be quite effective in helping some nations make

up their minds.

3. Boycott of Iranian Products. A unilateral U.S. boycott of all Iranian

products, e.g. carpet and agricultural goods, could be helpful in keeping

world public attention focused on our seriousness of intent and could

raise more public concern in Iran about our ultimate intentions.

4. Break Relations. We may be approaching the moment when this

would be an effective gesture. Announcement of a break in relations

on January 7 as we approach the next UN vote could help dramatize

our seriousness.

Covert Action

CIA will present a paper to the SCC summarizing their views. It

will focus on the following basic questions:

1. Should we focus on maintaining the territorial integrity of Iran

or should we stimulate regional/tribal opposition to Khomeini? The

paper recommends that our strategic objective should be to preserve

Iran’s territorial integrity, but that tactically we must capitalize on

regional and tribal opposition. This means walking a narrow line, but

it is not impossible. In our contacts with opposition groups, we should

make clear our interest in a united Iran.

2. Should we choose a single opposition leader or cooperate with

a variety of possible leaders? In fact, there is no single leader in sight

at the present time capable of overthrowing or replacing Khomeini.

We must keep a number of lines out and capitalize on developments.

3. What groups or leaders appear most promising? The CIA paper

examines the obvious candidates. [9½ lines not declassified]

4. What is the impact of a covert action program on the fate of the

hostages? The more effective pressure we bring to bear on the regime

in Tehran, the quicker they are likely to come to the conclusion that

the hostage issue is an unproductive sideshow which must be ended.

In addition, the CIA presentation will consider the value of possible

military or paramilitary action in promoting political change. The

following six areas of interest were identified by David Aaron’s group:

4. Direct cooperation with Iraq. The Iraqis do not like Khomeini, but

they also wish to avoid a return of U.S. influence in Iran. They have

been very coy thus far. If we are to get their cooperation, we will have

to offer them something more substantial than the promise of “talks”

or emissaries. This needs more study. Could David’s group examine

this in greater detail and report back to the SCC?

6. How can a limited military action, e.g. a blockade, be made to work

for us, rather than uniting the country against us? The elements of such

130.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Warren Christopher

David Aaron (from 9: a.m.)

Defense

NSC

Secretary Harold Brown

Colonel William Odom

W. Graham Claytor

Gary Sick

JCS

Admiral Thomas Hayward

CIA

Frank Carlucci

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

A restricted meeting of the SCC was called to discuss covert action

with respect to Iran. Mr. Carlucci opened the meeting by circulating

a paper entitled “Covert Action in Iran,” which is attached to these

notes as Tab A. The SCC discussed the following elements of the paper:

1. Maintaining the territorial integrity of Iran versus stimulating opposi-

tion [less than 1 line not declassified]. The SCC recognized the danger of

cooperating with and assisting regional separatist groups while aiming

at preserving the territorial integrity of Iran. [1½ lines not declassified].

Dr. Brzezinski noted that the continued rule of Khomeini would in

any event lead to the division of the country and a takeover by the

left. We prefer a unified, anti-Soviet Iran; but a divided Iran is preferable

to a unified, pro-Soviet Iran. All agreed with the formulation developed

in the paper [2 lines not declassified] making clear that our objective is

not separatism. (S)

2. All agreed with the paper that there is not a single leader identifi-

able at present and that we should continue to work with all potentially

viable opposition groups. (S)

3. [7 lines not declassified] Secretary Vance wondered about the status

of Shariatmadari—was he under house arrest in Qom? [5½ lines not

declassified] Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we should encourage Shariat-

madari to move. Secretary Vance said we want to have him safe. He

would certainly be safer in Tabriz or in Najaf than in Qom. Ideally,

Shariatmadari could announce a pilgrimage to Najaf; but thus far he

has avoided such direct actions in opposition to Khomeini. Mr. Carlucci

said [4½ lines not declassified]. SCC concurred. (S)

4. Impact on the hostage situation. Mr. Carlucci said that stimulating

opposition groups served to distract Khomeini from the hostage issue.

Negotiating Channels

It was a close judgment call whether this helped or hurt the hostage

situation. He tended to believe that it may make it worse. However,

we should recognize that Khomeini is already convinced that we are

supporting Bakhtiar and others—on the basis of information captured

at the embassy, among other things. So our efforts in this regard do

not really change his perspective of our role. Secretary Vance noted

that we should tell Bakhtiar either to shut up or have his water cut

off. [1½ lines not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski noted the tremendous impact

of government support on emigre organizations—they place great

importance even on limited shows of support. Mr. Carlucci agreed that

it is a dilemma; however, we do want to achieve the psychological

effect of stimulating their action through our support. Mr. Carlucci

added that we will “not be dealing with boy scouts” in this operation.

[5 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown noted that the magnitude of

our efforts should be governed by what we really know about what

we are trying to do. At the moment, we are only starting and do not

have as much information as we would like. We must wait and see

how it goes. Dr. Brzezinski asked if we were in touch with Iranian

military leaders; do we have an inventory of the military leaders who

remain from the previous regime? Secretary Vance said we would be

in touch today with someone in New York who is reputedly in contact

with Admiral Madani. Mr. Carlucci noted that [less than 1 line not

declassified]. We do not have an inventory of present military leadership.

Our information is scanty, but we are trying to build it up. Secretary

Brown said he had directed contact with a group of Iranian naval

officers who are in this country as a purchasing mission, but he was

not aware of what had come of this. Mr. Christopher said we should

be focusing on the labor organizations in the oil fields. Mr. Sick noted

that Hassan Nazih, former head of the NIOC, was now out of the

country, and we should have contact with him soon. He probably has

the best understanding of the possibilities there. [5½ lines not declassified]

Secretary Vance agreed that we need more information before moving

to that stage. (TS)

The SCC then turned to the second CIA paper (Tab B) which

addresses various options developed by the small subcommittee

chaired by David Aaron. Mr. Carlucci noted that operations such as

those discussed in this paper were of a different order of magnitude

from the political action options discussed above and would require

substantially more resources. Mr. Aaron noted that these had been

identified as possible contingent actions for consideration. This was

not an action proposal at this point, although we may wish to take

some preliminary steps to develop such a capability. The following

elements of the paper were discussed:

1. [less than 1 line not declassified] Secretary Brown wondered if this

did not represent a second or third step to follow the political action

program. He noted that we were starting from zero [7 lines not declassi-

fied] Secretary Vance said he wanted to register a major reservation

about the desirability of such operations. He did not think it was

feasible, and the American people’s reaction would be split. [2 lines

not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski said that such action was certainly prema-

ture at this point. [12 lines not declassified] Mr. Aaron agreed that there

was a question of the money and time needed to develop such a

capability. [2 lines not declassified] Secretary Vance said he would not

object to building up our stocks of military and other equipment which

we can provide in support of covert action programs, [1 line not declassi-

fied]. Secretary Brown disagreed; we should start building it up and not

deny ourselves the capability to act at some future stage. Dr. Brzezinski

noted that the alternative to this kind of capability may be direct U.S.

military involvement. We may need this option. The SCC agreed that

the minutes should reflect a unanimous view that the first option in

the paper was premature and that views were divided on [1½ lines not

declassified]. The President would want to reflect on this question. (TS)

2. [less than 1 line not declassified]. Dr. Brzezinski noted that options

could be combined with a blockade for maximum effectiveness. Dr.

Brzezinski urged that a plan be developed along these lines. A blockade

would be the last U.S. option short of bloodshed, and this could help

make it more effective. Secretary Vance wondered whether we are

talking here about building up a capability or actually taking a decision

to proceed with this option. Mr. Aaron said that his group had been

tasked to develop options relating to possible military involvement.

Option 2 in this paper was seen as a potential alternative to a direct

U.S. military strike against Iranian targets. Although he agreed that 2

and 5 could be combined, [less than 1 line not declassified] could also be

useful as a means of demonstrating loss of political control, even if

there were no blockade. Mr. Carlucci said that we presently [1½ lines

not declassified]. Our available assets are fully committed to the Delta

operation. If we changed their mission and began working toward

this objective, perhaps something could be put together within several

weeks. [1½ lines not declassified] Developing such a capability [less than

1 line not declassified] would be a longer term proposition, and [less than

Negotiating Channels

1 line not declassified] which are only now beginning are the necessary

first step in any event. Secretary Vance noted that there is no require-

ment to [less than 1 line not declassified] in order to proceed with this

option. The SCC agreed that pursuing [less than 1 line not declassified]

was the appropriate action for the moment. (TS)

3. Contacts with Iraq. All agreed that this was already being pur-

4. Seizure of oil fields. Mr. Aaron noted that the objective of this

option was to examine [5½ lines not declassified]. The SCC noted that

the examination revealed that such an effort would require direct action

either by us or the Iraqis, and the prospect of Iraqi control of the oil

fields was not significantly more attractive than Khomeini’s control.

Secretary Vance suggested that this option be put on hold.

5. Blockade. Dr. Brzezinski noted that this had been covered in the

discussion of option 2 and that we should go ahead with planning. (S)

The SCC then took up a series of brief items:

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

7. Strategy. Dr. Brzezinski noted that Iran will be the first topic on

the agenda of the NSC meeting this afternoon. At that time, the Presi-

dent will want an update on our present status and the items discussed

here this morning. However, the central question will be how we can

continue to exert pressure on Iran after we get sanctions (or do not get

sanctions) next week. (S)

131.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran, Christopher Mission to Afghanistan, SALT and Brown Trip to China

PARTICIPANTS

The President

CIA

The Vice President

Deputy Director Carlucci

State

White House

Secretary Vance

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Deputy Secretary Christopher

Hamilton Jordan

Lloyd Cutler

Defense

Jody Powell

Secretary Brown

David Aaron

Deputy Secretary Claytor

MINUTES

The President began by saying that the NSC would first discuss

Iran and Pakistan and then reduce the membership to the statutory

members for a more private session.

Dr. Brzezinski said that the Secretary of State would update the

Council on the Iranian hostage situation and, time permitting, there

should be a discussion of our longer term strategy towards the Iranian

Government.

The Secretary of State said that we had a successful vote on Monday

in the UN Security Council2 and that since that time we have been

working with others to clear up the language of the resolution on

sanctions. He thought this would be completed by the end of the day.

The President asked what the prospects were for the approval of

the sanctions resolution. The Secretary of State replied that he could

not guarantee nine votes. He said that we had eight certain votes, but

not nine. The Secretary of Defense pointed out that there will be new

members on the Council. The Secretary of State responded that we

would gain the vote of the Philippines who were coming on the Council,

Negotiating Channels

but we would lose Gabon. Niger will replace Nigeria and he thought

that we will probably have their support if the French will help us.

He said we will lose a vote on Bolivia since there is still an impasse

over whether Cuba or Colombia will get that seat. He added that the

Eastern Europeans, East Germany and Czechoslovakia, will, of course,

be of no help.

With the Europeans and ourselves, we have five votes. If you add

Niger, that is six; the Philippines, that is seven. He said Zambia is

questionable; however, Manley will stick with us and that will make

eight votes. However, we could not be certain until we have the text

of the sanctions resolution in front of the delegates.

The Secretary of State thought the big question was whether the

Chinese would stay with us. In his judgment, if we have nine votes,

China will join us; but if China is to be the ninth vote, we could have

some difficulties.

The Secretary of Defense asked what the chances were that Secre-

tary General Waldheim would say that we should keep negotiating

rather than voting sanctions. The Secretary of State responded that

Waldheim is likely to say that there has been some progress and that

there should be a few more days permitted to see if diplomacy could

achieve more substantial progress. The Secretary of State confirmed

the Secretary of Defense’s assessment that therefore the vote on sanc-

tions might stretch a few days further, but not for several weeks.

The President asked whether there had been a report from Wald-

heim. The Secretary of State said no. Indeed, we still do not know if

he will be seeing Khomeini. In any event, he did not believe that much

would come out of the Waldheim visit.

The President agreed. He doubted whether the Iranians wanted

to resolve the crisis at this stage.

The Secretary of State said that he believed the Afghan situation

is the only thing that might change the attitude of the Iranian authori-

ties. The Iranian Government has made two statements critical of the

Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and they have indicated that this is

supposed to be a signal of the congruence of their view with that of

our own.

The Secretary of State noted that the Saudis were interested in

putting together an Islamic Foreign Ministers meeting and the Secretary

of State said that he had encouraged the Saudi Foreign Minister in that

regard. He concluded by saying that it is clear that the Iranians see

the Soviet move into Afghanistan as a threat. This is where we must

place the weight of our argument.

In response to a question as to the contacts we have with the

Iranians on this, the Secretary of State said that we were in contact

with them through the Swiss.

132.

Telegram From the U.S. Mission to the United Nations to

the Department of State

49. Urgent for Secretary Vance from McHenry. Subject: Iran: Con-

versation With Waldheim on his Visit to Tehran.

(Secret–Entire text)

1. Waldheim asked to see me after this morning’s (Jan 5) Security

Council meeting2 to discuss his visit to Iran. As Waldheim left the

Negotiating Channels

Council chamber for his office he engaged in a highly emotional

exchange with Amb Naik (Pakistan). Waldheim was still worked up

when we began our conversation. Probably only Mrs. Waldheim would

believe how emotional and angry he was.

2. Waldheim began with sharp criticism of Naik, Pakistan FM Shahi

and all others who offered him advice without knowing what they

were talking about and with only the objective of getting a piece of

the action. Shahi had misled him, had told him that he would be

welcome and received by the Revolutionary Council and Khomeini.

Instead of a welcome he had barely managed to escape with his life.

3. Waldheim then went on to describe the harrowing scene at the

cemetery. He recalled that for a brief period he [was] left alone in the

car with an angry mob outside and made it to the waiting helicopter

by directing the non-English speaking driver down a sidewalk and

between rows of tombstones. In Waldheim’s view the demonstration

was not accidental [and] consisted of hystericals who had been bussed

to the cemetery even though his appearance was unexpected (the visit,

although previously scheduled, had been publicly cancelled after an

assassination plot was discovered.)

4. On his visit to the Revolutionary Council, Waldheim said he

was forced to walk 200 yards in darkness through a threatening mob.

On his departure the mob knocked Ghotbzadeh to the ground while

pushing Waldheim ahead alone.

5. With regard to his discussions, Waldheim said he spent most of

his time listening to Iranian charges against the United States. He said

he found an unreasoning hatred against the United States and against

the United Nations, which the Iranians believe to be under Ameri-

can control.

6. Waldheim said that all of the familiar names were present at

the Revolutionary Council meeting. The Council was made up of well-

meaning but naive and powerless men. Only Khomeini exercised

power; but Khomeini’s power was certain only if he took no action

which might meet with the opposition of the “students” at the Embassy.

The “students” were “a state within a state.” Khomeini is a weak fanatic

who refuses to do what he can to save his country from an abyss.

7. Waldheim said that he saw no hope for progress toward release

of the hostages and, given the chaos in Iran, was concerned for their

safety. In the circumstances, President Carter had an extremely difficult

decision to make. Sanctions would have no effect and were even wel-

comed by Ghotbzadeh—who Waldheim thought genuinely sought a

settlement.

8. Waldheim said that he had discussed a commission of enquiry

but the Iranians were naive about such a commission. They expected

it to be appointed next week, to submit its conclusions within one

week and have the General Assembly or the Security Council order

implementation of the conclusion. Only then, presumably if they agreed

with the conclusions, would the hostages be released. In Waldheim’s

view this was an impossible approach and even if acceptable, contained

no guarantee that the “students” would agree to release the hostages.

9. With regard to his report Waldheim said he would state that

Iran was not prepared to release the hostages at the present time;

however a commission of enquiry may help to defuse the situation,

while the search for a peaceful solution continues. (We are datafaxing

to IO bootleg—rpt bootleg—draft of Waldheim report.)

McHenry

on January 6 and repeated much of this information. Carter told Waldheim that he

would neither accept an international tribunal, try the Shah, nor allow Iranians to receive

funds before the hostages were freed. He also insisted that he did not want to delay

economic sanctions. (Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran,

No official record of the meeting has been found.

133.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 7, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran

I spent Sunday afternoon2 in New York for a four-hour meeting

with my Iranian contact. One part of the discussion involved various

operational matters which I have already dealt with through Frank

Carlucci’s shop. Specifically, [name not declassified] is to meet with Bani

Ahmad in Paris tomorrow morning. This will be our first direct opera-

tional contact with the Shariatmadari organization, and if it is successful

it can lead us to a series of contacts with people who are engaged in

more than talk. I am particularly hopeful that [name not declassified]

will soon establish contact with Hassan Nazih. Nazih is apparently

considering returning to Iran in the near future. Moghadem Maragei,

the other key Azerbaijani leader, is now reported to be in Kurdestan

in hiding, after his office was ransacked by Khomeini followers.

Most of the time was spent in an exchange of views on the general

political situation and a discussion of the ideas he is putting together on

a possible long-range strategy. The essence of his concept is as follows:

—It is pointless to try to pretend that Khomeini never happened.

Rather, it is essential to accept the positive accomplishments he has

made (given dignity and sense of purpose to lower classes; reversed

trend toward materialism; injected sense of moral values; given sense

of purpose to Shia Islam; reduced expectations of Iranian society) and

build on those while rejecting the many negative aspects.

—We should do nothing to interfere with Khomeini’s self-discredit-

ing actions. We must avoid making him into a martyr at all costs.

—Among the various groupings that now exist, there is no likely

leader who can replace Khomeini. In fact, to search for a single leader

is an error. Shariatmadari carries his own “Islamic” baggage which

would be troublesome in a post-Khomeini Iran. A military dictatorship,

in a replay of 1953, will only set the stage for another round of repres-

sion, revenge, and collapse. Bakhtiar is hopeless. At the present time,

the great weakness of opposition politics is that each one of them sees

himself as the future President/Prime Minister and all of their actions

are related to that vision. Hence, no cooperation.

—The alternative is to articulate a set of broader principles on

which all these groups can agree—at least in part. The objective is to

define the shape of the Iran of the future in terms which Khomeini

cannot reject out of hand but which are recognized as very differ-

ent from a narrow Seventh Century Islamic state which Khomeini

represents.

—He believes that such a set of principles could be built around

the concepts of national sovereignty, rule by law as provided under

the 1906 Constitution, and a willingness to face problems directly rather

than sweeping them under the rug. The objective should be a political

system which is responsive to the people, a social system which lets

national groups and religious minorities live “more comfortably”

within the society, and an economic system which promotes more

equitable distribution of national wealth and its products. He believes

that the concept of a constitutional monarchy should not be discounted,

although that certainly does not mean the return of the Shah. He notes

that the Iranian people throughout their history have killed 126 kings,

but they always come back to the need for the institution. They are

now doing to Khomeini what they did to the Shah.

—As a first step, he would discuss privately with key opposition

leaders some of these ideas and see whether they could be persuaded

to accept some or all of them as their own. Ideally, he would like to

have these same general ideas appear as spontaneously as possible

from a number of different political sources.

—Later, after the basic ideas have been introduced, he is putting

together a list of about 200 Iranians inside and outside the country

who could jointly sponsor a new political movement based on these

principles. If the moment can be captured, he believes that this will

propel the political situation in a new direction and outflank the left

in two ways: (1) by providing an alternative to a leftist-dominated

program; and (2) by coopting many of the leftists’ most appealing

arguments.

—This new political movement could provide a rallying point

for the various opposition groups in which they could express their

particular concepts within the context of a political system, rather than

referring everything to specific individuals.

He is confident that he can identify 200 individuals from various

interest groups who will be absolutely clean. I encouraged him to

proceed with constructing such a list and to try his hand at a political

manifesto which would summarize the basic principles he wishes to

Negotiating Channels

promote. I suggested that he take the Iranian New Year (Now Ruz)

on March 21 as a hypothetical starting point for such a movement and

work backwards to see what steps would be required operationally to

set such a process in motion. I suggested that Now Ruz would not be

a bad name for such a political movement. He thought that was a

good idea.

This man is not an idle dreamer. He is a hardheaded, even ruthless,

pragmatist. But what he is developing in a careful and systematic way

is nothing less than a new structure of Iranian politics. In its breadth

of vision, it is far more attractive than the traditional games being

played by Bakhtiar, Oveissi and company.

The bottom line, of course, is whether or not he can deliver. He

has demonstrated convincingly that he has excellent connections with

the various key opposition groups. He has personally provided us with

the best contacts we have with Madani and Shariatmadari. I suspect

that his list of 200 key individuals will be imaginative and useful.

It is increasingly clear that he sees himself as the key element in

preparing such a program, selling it to the various opposition groups,

and organizing the new movement. In order to do so, he will have to

come out of his closet of security and involve himself directly with the

various political groups and leaders. He says that he has no ambition

for political office and that he intends never to return to Iran. I take

that with a large grain of salt. Even if he believes it now, the appeal

to someone as dynamic as he is would become almost irresistible if

such a movement caught fire.

If and when he comes out of the closet and begins serious organiza-

tional efforts, he will increasingly come to rely on us for security and

direct support. At this point, I see no reason not to encourage him to

develop his ideas. The kind of list he proposes would in itself be

invaluable for us. But he is a shrewd bargainer, and we must expect

to start hearing more explicitly what the price will be for us. That

moment may not be far away.

134.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran/Pakistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

Treasury

Warren Christopher

Secretary William Miller*

David Newsom

Robert Mundheim*

Defense

OMB

W. Graham Claytor

James McIntyre*

Robert Murray*

White House

JCS

Jody Powell*

General David Jones

Lloyd Cutler*

General John Pustay*

Hedley Donovan*

Zbigniew Brzezinski

CIA

Henry Owen*

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Frank Carlucci

NSC

William Odom

Justice

Gary Sick

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti*

Thomas Thornton*

John Shenefield*

Energy

John Sawhill*

*Not present for discussion of intelligence items

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

135.

Letter From H. Ross Perot to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Dallas, January 8, 1980

Dr. Brzezinski:

My associate has returned after spending thirty-six days in Tehran.

The situation surrounding the hostages is unstable and unpredicta-

ble. Anything can happen. Theories, opinions and estimates about what

is most likely to happen have little value.

Turmoil and confusion in Tehran make it feasible to infiltrate and

maintain an unconventional rescue team inside the city, as we did

last February.

Vehicles, weapons, and other equipment can be acquired in the city.

My associate is willing to go back in to assist the team. Other

reliable Iranians can still be recruited to assist the operation. There is

the possibility of getting aid from dissident groups of Iranians—but

only if the team is in Tehran to organize such activity through carefully

selected Iranians.

The cornerstone of our presentation to the CIA and Department

of Defense on the seventh day of capture was to put a rescue team

into position in Tehran—

—A U. S. based rescue team is of no value.

—A rescue team located in a nearby country is of some value.

—A team in Tehran is of great value. It can react quickly to events,

an important asset, since most events are outside our control. The

only delay would be the short time required to send aircraft to a

pickup point.

While waiting in the city, the team members will get an invaluable

first hand feel for the actual conditions in which they will have to

operate. The rescue plan will be improved as a result of experience on

the streets.

I am told that the team and its leaders are superb—this is all that

matters. As I reflect upon the capabilities of this team, the present

conditions in the city, and contrast this team to our inexperienced

Negotiating Channels

group of amateurs, I am convinced that the team will succeed, if we

will—

—Give the team leader the resources, responsibility and authority

to get the job done.

—Give the team a clear mission, without a list of restrictions, that

effectively limit or freeze the plan.

—Give the leader on the ground the freedom to alter the plan,

based on actual conditions, since the situation is changing daily, or

even hourly.

—Get the team into position quickly.

—Resist the temptation to over-control the team from Washington.

Some senior people are overreacting to the possibility of failure.

Guessing at the odds of success is meaningless, except to make other

senior people comfortable enough to approve the mission. Preparation,

positioning, judgement, timing, execution and good luck will determine

the outcome.

For those who require an indication of the probabilities of success—

there is only one way to get a meaningful forecast. Talk with the team

leaders who will be going in on the ground. No one is more sensitive

about success than the men who are going to be shot at. If they believe

the mission plan is sound, and if they are free to use good judgement

in executing it, that is the best advance indication we can have.

The organization weaknesses we discussed in our first meeting

still remain. Everyone working on this project should report to one

person. Departmental jealousies, arguments over roles and missions,

turf disputes, etc. should be dealt with firmly. A large part of the total

effort on this project is still wasted in these nonproductive areas. This

is inexcusable when you consider that fifty lives, plus the lives of the

rescue team members, are at stake.

The United States has completed its peaceful efforts to free the

hostages through the U.N., World Court, Waldheim visit, and interme-

diaries from other countries, all without success. The Russians have

taken Afghanistan, further destabilizing the Middle East. Today, Kho-

meini announced that he is going into seclusion for fifteen days. If he

isolates himself from contact with the students at the compound, this

introduces a number of new variables for consideration.

The probabilities of using the rescue team are increasing, and yet

a team is not in place in Tehran, or in a nearby country. In contrast,

we put a team into Tehran in twelve days after first consideration, and

kept it hidden for thirty-five days.

The real test of advice on a mission involving possible loss of

human life is—are the advisers willing to go on the mission? I will

repeat the offer I made five days after the hostages were taken—“If

our government feels it should not field a rescue team, because of the

problems throughout the Middle East, our group will, if requested by

the United States—

—organize a rescue team

—put it into position while negotiations continue

—wait for an opportunity

—rescue the hostages, if necessary, and escort them to safety.

Please consider this letter personal, and safeguard it from any

disclosure to the public, Defense, State, CIA, or other members of your

staff. The contents are yours to use as you see fit, without revealing

the source.

Let me know if I can be of assistance to you.

You have my support and best wishes.

Sincerely,

Ross Perot

136.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 9, 1980

SUBJECT

Formal U.S. Position on Iran

You may have the information at Tabs A and B, but if not you

should be aware of it. At Tab A is a spread sheet prepared by State

and discussed on January 4 with the President. It lays out the positions

taken or recommended by the various real or would-be interlocutors

Negotiating Channels

with Iran. The key item is the fourth column which expanded the

previous U.S. position to be more forthcoming. That position was

approved by the President and was prepared in a paper at Tab B. The

position paper was given to Waldheim on January 7 and has also been

sent to Sadiq al-Mahdi in London for his possible use.

The present channels of contacts being pursued by State are the

following:

1. Waldheim. He is authorized to use Tab B in whatever efforts he

may wish to undertake.

2. Hashemi. He is reputed to be the intermediary for a Reza Pasimdi-

deh who is said to be the son of Khomeini’s older brother. Hal Saunders

recently met Hashemi in New York, and he has agreed to try to set

up a meeting between Hal and Pasimdideh. Reportedly, Khomeini’s

brother has sent the Ayatollah a note asking his blessing on this, and

all concerned are waiting for the reply before going ahead.

3. Sadiq al-Mahdi. He recently visited Tehran. As a highly respected

137.

Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff

138.

Memorandum for the Record by Director of Central

Intelligence Turner

Washington, January 11, 1980

SUBJECT

Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 9 January 1980 [portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

4. I then delivered my paper on possible resolution of the hostage

issue. I emphasized that the main line of action in it that was somewhat

different was an approach to Muslim authorities. I pointed out that I

had orally raised this with Secretary Vance just after New Year’s. I

mentioned the two points in the memo that [less than 1 line not declassi-

fied] had both said similar things. Dr. Brzezinski generally agreed with

this but asked how we identified the leaders we should approach. I

said that we could not really identify them; we should have a shotgun

approach and send somebody like Hal Saunders on a major tour to

explain:

a. Our estimate of what happened in Afghanistan;

b. Our policy of patience with respect to Iran and the hostages; and

c. The fact that there were limits on our patience and that military

action might eventually ensue.

Dr. Brzezinski asked me to be ready to raise this at the SCC in the

morning. [portion marking not declassified]

5. With respect to the hostages, I also recommended that we renew

the public relations campaign that he had once organized whereby a

major US figure tackled a different topic almost every day. I said access

to the hostages was a very important one at this time and one that we

should not have let drop completely. He agreed with me and again

asked that I be ready to raise this in the SCC tomorrow morning. I

also stressed the importance of getting access to the prisoners by any

group of people in order to gain more intelligence about their location.

[portion marking not declassified]

6. I then reviewed [1 line not declassified] the collection effort we

had made against the hostages and their environment [less than 1 line

not declassified].

7. With respect to the rescue operation, I told him I thought a 50

percent probability of success was optimistic. I thought the use of the

carrier was the only way to improve the surprise element. If we were

going to do that, we should start flying carrier aircraft sorties up into

the Gulf now and then in a short time send the carrier a little way into

the Gulf, withdraw it, and then a number of days before any effort

send it all the way up in the Gulf so as not to tip our hand. I further

said that I thought the 25th was too early a date and that the plan

around Naim was too fuzzy and they needed more time to sort that

one out properly. He asked me to get together with Dave Jones and

3 [Names not declassified] agreed with Turner’s position that the United States should

try to influence Khomeini through Islamic leaders chosen by a “shotgun approach.” (Ibid.)

139.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran/Pakistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

Commerce

Warren Christopher

Secretary Phillip Klutznick

Harold Saunders

Homer Moyer*

Richard Cooper*

OMB

Defense

W. Graham Claytor

James McIntyre*

Robert Murray

White House

JCS

Lloyd Cutler**

General David Jones

Hedley Donovan

General John Pustay

Zbigniew Brzezinski

David Aaron

CIA

Henry Owen*

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Vice President’s Office

Justice

Denis Clift*

John Shenefield*

NSC

Energy

Colonel William Odom

John Sawhill*

Gary Sick

Treasury

Thomas Thornton

Robert Carswell*

*Domestic Issues Only

**Domestic Issues and Shah

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Emissary. Richard Cooper will depart for Europe by this weekend

and be prepared to begin discussions with the Europeans on Monday.

Some of the preparations for these discussions are dependent on the

outcome of the sanctions vote on Iran in the Security Council. Specifi-

cally, we must decide whether to ask the allies to impose the full body

of sanctions3 defined in the resolution. A number of them lack the legal

basis for taking such action in the absence of UN authorization. (S)

2. Sanctions on Iran. Dr. Brzezinski expressed his concern that our

economic/diplomatic approach against Iran is running out of steam.

Even if sanctions are approved by the UNSC, how will they be applied,

how will they affect the Iranians, and what effect if any will they have

in getting the hostages released? If we do not get the sanctions, the

allies will be reluctant to impose sanctions unilaterally and the Iranians

will conclude that the international leverage against them has been

reduced. How much time would it take for economic sanctions to have

an effect? There is little time left on the political side, where our efforts

are being perceived to have failed. (S)

Negotiating Channels

Mr. Christopher said it would be difficult to get the nine votes.

The key nations are Zambia, Tunisia and China. Calls are going out

from the President this morning. If we get the nine votes, there is no

certainty whether or not the Soviets will veto. The chances of a Soviet

veto have noticeably increased. However, if we get sanctions, we should

press ahead with implementation. If we fail, it will be a blow, and we

must work hard to get our allies to assist us in keeping up the pressure.

Economic pressures, withholding of spare parts and the like have an

effect on the Revolutionary Council, but they do not have much effect

on the students4 or Khomeini. (S)

The present state of the Iranian economy is rather pitiful. The

imposition of sanctions would be felt immediately in terms of its psy-

chological and political impact. Some say it will merely stiffen their

backs, but that is far from certain. The economic effects will be slower

in coming, but will impact on their ability to maintain their military

forces. Admiral Turner added that it will also affect the oil sector and

manufacturing due to lack of spares which are running down. CIA

has examined the effects of sanctions, but they would take another

more detailed look at the implications. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski noted the ability of the Rhodesian whites to with-

stand sanctions for ten years. Even if sanctions are voted, this precedent

will be cited to undermine our public credibility. We need the means

to counter this. Admiral Turner said that a study would not provide the

kind of ammunition which could effectively counter those arguments.

Secretary Klutznick observed that there was also a question of how

many nations would choose to impose sanctions, even if voted. Mr.

Cooper replied that our first priority would be the major Western

European allies plus Japan and Canada. That covers most of the com-

mercial relations and spare parts on which Iran relies. Our second

priority would be the smaller European states, and third priority would

be the Third World—largely for show. (S)

Mr. Christopher agreed that we need to have a contingency plan

on how to proceed if there is a veto. It will require a lot of arm-twisting

on our allies. Perhaps we will need a team of emissaries to go out to

the major nations. State will start work on developing such a team,

possibly including prestigious private individuals, and directed at

Western Europe, Japan, Australia, Canada and the ASEAN nations.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered if it might be desirable to take some dramatic

act, e.g. having the President appear before the General Assembly. He

was concerned that we have done nothing serious to intimidate the

Iranians since late November when we did intimidate them. They now

discount our efforts. Khomeini must be brought face to face with the

unpalatable alternatives. Mr. Christopher said they had looked at the

General Assembly option, but we would want to be certain we could

get two-thirds before we tried it. Also the UNGA has no enforcement

authority. (S)

3. Iranian Students. Mr. Claytor outlined the present situation. There

are 227 Iranian trainees in this country, 216 of whom are in flight

training. Another large group is in ROTC at various universities. Our

objective has been to maintain their good will toward the West, but

the lack of actual flying is having the reverse effect. Morale is going

down and the Air Force is worried about possible incidents. The British

have the same problem and are following our lead. The Congress will

probably raise this again when they reconvene. He proposed a deadline

of February 1 or the end of the semester, as appropriate, for terminating

training. The students would have the choice of seeking asylum if they

wished to remain. The political attitudes of these students have not

been systematically surveyed. Many of them are afraid to talk. We

know that many of them were pro-Shah, that many are anti-Khomeini,

and a few of them are pro-revolution. Dr. Brzezinski noted that facing

them with this choice forced them to burn their bridges and could

make them return to Iran bitter with the U.S. He thought that would

eliminate a possible useful asset. At some point it might be useful for

them to return to Iran in uniform as a group. If this is not a domestic

issue, which it does not appear to be at present, and if their presence

has no bearing on the fate of the hostages, he would prefer no change.

General Jones said that on training grounds it made no sense to keep

them here, but if there was a political judgment that it was useful, they

could continue. All agreed that the students should stay put for the

4. Iranian Assets. Mr. Carswell noted that private companies are

beginning to attach the new funds which we licensed to be brought in

to pay salaries and operating expenses of the staffs of NIOC, Iran Air

and other Iranian companies with personnel in this country. The staffs

are a mix of Iranians and Americans. Unless we take action to prevent

these attachments, these organizations will close up and return home.

Is this what we want? Mr. Sawhill noted that the NIOC personnel have

continued to maintain a dialogue with us and he thought it was useful

Negotiating Channels

to have them here. All agreed that we did not have to take a decision

on this until after we see what happens with sanctions at the UN.

Depending on that vote, this action might be included as part of a

package. The issue will be reviewed again on Monday. (C)

Political-Military Issues:

1. Shah. We have reports that he wants us to locate a different

country of residence for him. What are our responsibilities? Mr. Chris-

topher noted that the complaint was registered by the Shah’s staff,

specifically Armao, who has been plagued by poor relations with the

Panamanians. It was not clear whether this request came from the Shah

or from Armao and others. The Shah may want to move off the island,

and he might be happier doing that, or perhaps he would feel less

bilked by the Panamanians. Our information indicates that relations

with Royo and Torrijos are at least superficially good. We need to take

a hard line. Until the hostages are released, we have no capability to

find another residence. The Shah is going to have to learn to live in a

country where he is not king. He was unhappy in Morocco, in the

Bahamas, in Mexico and now in Panama. We have no alternatives

available. It was agreed that Lloyd Cutler and Mr. Christopher will

talk to Armao when he comes to Washington this weekend and see

what can be worked out. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the Shah might

pick up on the President’s statement to congressional leaders that, in

the event of a threat of extradition, the President would accept the

Shah back to the United States. However, this situation appeared to

be more of a case of being dissatisfied with his accommodations. (S)

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

4. Senate Select Committee. Mr. Aaron noted that there are reports

that the SSC on Intelligence had requested declassification of the CIA

analysis on the effects of permitting the Shah to return to the United

States. Admiral Turner said he was unaware of this, but no action

would be taken without a high level review. (S)

a long list of difficulties faced by the Shah and his entourage in Panama. He wanted

Jordan’s and Cutler’s assistance in moving the Shah from Panama as soon as possible.

Moss recommended no U.S. involvement, not least because the Shah “has no where else

to go.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box

140.

Editorial Note

In December 1979, the Carter administration ordered the prepara-

tion of three documents on Iran during the hostage crisis, referred to

in combination as the “White Paper.” (See Document 91.) The first

document is a mostly unclassified Department of State study prepared

by the Office of the Historian, “A Brief History of United States Policy

Toward Iran, 1941–1979.” This study was presented to the Deputy

Director of the Policy Planning Staff Paul Kreisberg under a December

15 covering memorandum from Historian David F. Trask. (Carter

Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,

Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, forwarded

the study to President Jimmy Carter on January 10, noting that it was

“factual,” and “without either justification or analysis of key policy

judgments.” Carter wrote at the top of this memorandum, “Zbig—This

is not very helpful to me. I need our decisions recapitulated—i.e.,

options given to Shah, Huyser’s function, etc. J.” (Carter Library,

National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30,

Presidential Envoy to Iran, January 1979.

The second document is a 70-page January 10 classified paper, “A

Brief Overview of the Iranian-U.S. Relationship, 1941–1979,” prepared

by an interagency working group. It was cleared by the Director of

the Policy Planning Staff Anthony Lake, Assistant Secretary of State

for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold Saunders, and the

Iran Desk Officer Henry Precht. (Department of State, Records of David

D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files,

The third document is a summary of the major documents on 20

important issues, “Survey of U.S.-Iranian Relations,” transmitted to

Brzezinski in a January 29 covering memorandum from Lake. Lake

noted that the summary “includes most of the materials we would

need in preparing to present our case on what has happened in Iran

to the Congress, our public, or others, if and when we decided to do

so.” He also noted that the work on the White Paper was not complete

due to lack of access to the documents of major government agencies

and from previous administrations. (Department of State, Executive

Secretariat FOI Files, Lot 88D276, Binder, and memorandum from Tarn-

off to Christopher, February 21; Department of State, Records of the

Feb/Mar 1980)

Negotiating Channels

141.

Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of

State

1142. For Secretary From Ambassador. Subject: French Ambassa-

dor’s Conversation With Ghotbzadeh.

1. (Secret–Entire text)

2. Foreign Minister Francois-Poncet called me to say he wanted to

show me a report of a conversation his Ambassador in Tehran had

had with Ghotbzadeh. The report is classified for the President and

142.

Telegram From the U.S. Mission to the United Nations to

the Department of State

124. Subject: Iranian Approach on Hostages Question.

1. (S–Entire text).

2. In telephone conversation with Amb McHenry (arranged on

confidential basis and placed by Bangladesh Amb Kaiser) at 5: pm

Jan 11, Iranian Amb Farhang urged a delay in the SC vote on sanctions

until a commission could go to Tehran and work out package deal that

would result in release of hostages.

3. After apologizing for “playing hide and seek” with McHenry,

Farhang said he had shortly before had a good conversation with his

FonMin who had met with Khomeini and discussed the possibility of

a package that would involve a commission going to Iran. Ghotbzadeh

reported that Khomeini had approved completely, and Farhang said

that Ghotbzadeh sounded more optimistic than he had ever heard him.

Negotiating Channels

4. Farhang described the proposal as follows: A commission would

be formed and sent to Iran; meanwhile action in the SC would be

postponed. The Commission would return after a week in Iran and

there would be a “symbolic” resolution adopted by the General Assem-

bly that would “recognize” the Iranian grievances and claims to assets

removed from Iran by the Shah. Once this resolution were adopted,

the hostages would be released. Farhang expressed the view that the

situation in Iran was more favorable for a solution than ever before.

It was important to delay any action in the SC on sanctions, as there

were elements in Iran that wished to exploit it. It was a war of nerves.

5. Amb McHenry pointed out that the proposal was vague and

did not guarantee immediate release of the hostages. Moreover, there

were procedural problems, as the GA was not in regular session and

could not be convened easily. The current emergency session, he noted,

had been called under a very special procedure following a veto in

the SC. He saw other practical problems. Once the commission were

formed it would have to arrive at conclusions regarding the claims to

assets. Moreover, in order to delay action in the SC on the basis of

such a proposal it was necessary to have confidence in the authority

of those making the proposal. He was afraid the FonMin did not have

the necessary authority. It appeared to us that only Khomeini and/or

the group holding the hostages had the necessary authority.

6. McHenry suggested that it would be useful for Farhang to work

out a package proposal with the SYG and then have it announced as

having been approved by Khomeini. In the absence of something tangi-

ble we could not pull back from our sanctions proposal. Otherwise

those in Iran who opposed the GOI policy and had been predicting its

adverse effects would be undercut. Pointing out that he had in the past

several times persuaded his govt to delay action, McHenry said he had

difficulty now in convincing himself personally that further delay was

warranted.

7. McHenry said he would inform Secretary Vance of the proposal

and fully protect the confidentiality of Farhang’s direct approach to

him. He repeated that he saw both substantive and procedural prob-

lems with the proposal, however. Moreover, if the commission idea

Iran would release the hostages as soon as the UN recognized the legitimacy of Iranian

demands for the return of the Shah and his assets. Waldheim suggested to Farhang that

a UN Commission of Inquiry might be the vehicle to achieve this end. (Carter Library,

143.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 12, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran

[1 paragraph (1½ lines not declassified]

—We have just seen the first blink from the Iranian side. The

“blink” is not the arrangement proposed to Waldheim, but the fact

that Khomeini has for the first time apparently engaged himself in

searching for a way out of the crisis. [2 lines not declassified]

—Whatever plan Ghotbzadeh may have discussed with Khomeini

probably did not focus primarily on the United Nations as the key

element. [5½ lines not declassified]

—[1 paragraph (7 lines not declassified]

Negotiating Channels

—Another possible channel [less than 1 line not declassified] is the

PLO and Arafat. Arafat is expected to visit Tehran in the near future

but has been waiting until he had some indication that his visit would

result in something substantial.

—The “new plan” which was conveyed to Waldheim by Farhang

was in fact nothing more than a clarification of what Waldheim had

been told in Tehran. Specifically, it provides that a Commission of

Enquiry be formed by the UN, that it travel to Iran for investigation

of the Shah’s crimes, after hearings of several weeks it should return

to the UN and report to the Security Council and/or the General

Assembly. Following that, the SC or GA are to vote a resolution express-

ing the legitimacy of Iran’s grievances. At that point, Iran would be

prepared to “start” releasing the hostages, before the resolution had

been implemented. The only new element in all of this is the fact that

Khomeini has apparently blessed it. However, the fact that Ghotbzadeh

was unwilling to put it in writing may mean that Khomeini’s approval

is less than absolute.

Despite the brave rhetoric in Iran, I believe they are beginning to

feel the many pressures on them. Kurdestan is very close to declaring

its independence, the tribal areas in the south are in turmoil, and the

situation in Azerbaijan is assuming the proportions of a major revolt

which is dangerously close to civil war. At the same time, Khomeini

and others are probably much more troubled by the Soviet invasion

of Afghanistan than they are willing to show in public. The prospect

of being branded an international outlaw by the UN is unattractive,

and this has been made much more striking in the minds of those in

Tehran recently by the series of messages they have received from

Third World nations pleading with them to change their position.

In my view, the moment is coming soon when they will conclude

that the hostages are a liability rather than a benefit. One possible

signal to that effect was the visit of the students to Qom several days

ago. There has been absolutely no mention of the results of that meeting

in any public media in Iran, which suggests to me that the students

and the Ayatollah were not entirely in agreement or that they could

not establish a common plan for next steps.

I expect the real movement, when it comes, through some channel

other than the United Nations. I think in the UN they are merely

playing for time, trying to avoid imposition of sanctions. I suspect that

the real bargaining—which may not be too distant—will be accom-

plished through the PLO or some other channel which is untainted.

I strongly believe we should press ahead with the vote on sanctions.

If we start a process of delaying at every new report which emanates

from Tehran, we will lose credibility, and our support will start fading.

We could, however, proceed with the vote on the understanding that

144.

Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

to President Carter, Secretary of State Vance, and the

President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Brzezinski)

Washington, undated

Please find attached summary notes on my discussions today with

the Panamanians. Also, several documents which I had translated per-

taining to the extradition of the Shah from Panama.

There are no other copies of this document.

Attachment

Summary Prepared by the White House Chief of Staff

(Jordan)

Washington, undated

Summary of Notes from Trip

Warren Christopher called me early Saturday morning to advise

me that the President thought that the trip to consult with the Panama-

Negotiating Channels

nians at the request of General Torrijos was worth while. I returned

to Washington, was briefed by Henry Precht on the status of our

negotiations with the Iranians through the Secretary General and pre-

pared to take off for Panama City to see Torrijos.

I called Torrijos to tell him of my plans but was informed that after

a night’s sleep and some additional thought, the General was worried

that my coming to Panama might be noticed and alarm the Shah as

there was a large press contingent covering the country since the Shah’s

arrival there. For that reason he said that it would be better for him

to meet me halfway or to send a “personal representative” who could

convey to me “the very important message” that had prompted his

Friday night call to me. He said that he was also worried that his

absence from the country might be noticed so that he was generally

inclined not to go himself. We agreed to meet at 3 o’clock at Homestead

AFB. I got there by three, checked in with Warren to see if there were

any new developments, made a few calls to Iowa and spent some time

reviewing the materials that the State Department had given me.

The Panamanians arrived about 4:30. There were three persons in

the group: my old friend Gabriel Lewis, the Panamanian Ambassador

to the United Nations5 who hardly spoke during the three hours we

spent together and Marcel Saliman (sp?) who was the person who did

most of the talking. At the outset Gabriel pulled me aside and said

that Marcel was very close to Torrijos and very shrewd. Gabriel said

that while he is “too much of a leftist for me” that he had great credibil-

ity among the students in Panama and had been instrumental in repre-

senting Torrijos with the Sandinistas.

I stated at the outset the posture that I was in—that I had conveyed

to the President the request of General Torrijos that I fly immediately

to Panama to receive some news about the hostages. That because of

the President’s friendship and respect for General Torrijos, he was

anxious to honor his request that I come to Panama. I also told them

that I was involved only on the periphery of our foreign policy process

as related to Iran and the hostages and had been even less involved

in recent weeks due to the pressures of the campaign. I told them

that I was authorized by the President only to listen and report back

immediately the information that they had and that I could neither

speak for the President nor make decisions. I told them that I intended

to listen, ask questions and take very careful notes, and that the essence

of what was said would be passed on directly to the three of you.

They began by presenting me with the English version of the formal

request of extradition for the Shah from the Iranian government. They

said that now it was publicly known that such a request had been

made, and in spite of their public statements that they did not intend

to extradite the Shah, they had a legal process which could not be

ignored; that if they attempted to ignore it, it would only play into the

hands of the students and leftists in Panama who were using the Shah’s

presence in Panama to try to bring down the government and Torrijos.

I prepared myself for a long discussion about the Shah and the

problems that he was causing the Panamanians, but from that point

on the entire conversation focused on the hostage situation and their

hope that this new information might be helpful to their early release.

Marcel began by giving me a detailed chronology of the past couple

of weeks. He said that in late December two men presented themselves

in Panama as representatives of the Iranian government. They pre-

sented letters from the Foreign Minister requesting the formal extradi-

tion of the Shah from Panama. They also issued a verbal invitation for

the Panamanians to send back to Iran with them a personal representa-

tive to meet with the Foreign Minister. The Panamanians sent Marcel

and Romulo Escobar back to Iran with them.

The two men—who I will call Mr. X and Mr. Y7—now live in

France and are longtime friends of Mr. Ghotbzadeh. Mr. X has known

the Ayatollah Khomeini for ten years. He practices law in France.

Mr. Y is an Argentinian who was formerly associated with the Peron

government. He also is a longtime friend of the Foreign Minister.

Traveling with these two men, the Panamanians traveled to Iran,

arriving last weekend. They had four separate meetings with the

Foreign Minister. The other two men accompanied the Panamanians

to these meetings and seemed to Marcel to be on very close terms with

Ghotbzadeh. Their meetings with the Foreign Minister took place right

after the Waldheim visit so Marcel has some information and reports

on Ghotbzadeh’s attitude that are interesting and possibly relevant.

They met with the Foreign Minister on Sunday, January 6th from

p.m. On Monday, January 7th, they met with the Foreign Minister from

p.m. They made much of showing me their schedules, appointment

books, etc., to convince me that they had seen the Foreign Minister

and had spent this much time with him. Based on all that I saw and

heard, I believe that they did. Marcel also took copious notes of those

Negotiating Channels

meetings and read from them to me, saying that “Ghotbzadeh said

. . .” and “the Foreign Minister told me . . .”

Instead of trying to retrace chronologically what was said at each

meeting, I will try to relate the essence of their meetings and discussions

with the Foreign Minister. I made comments throughout the presenta-

tion in an attempt to clarify different things that were said to the

Panamanians and also to draw Marcel out.

Marcel said that at the beginning of the first meeting the Foreign

Minister said that he wanted to explain to them the background on

the embassy takeover. He said that the plot to overthrow the American

Embassy was an “American conspiracy” involving Rockefeller, Kissin-

ger and others who had a dual purpose: First, to create an international

crisis that would undermine the Ayatollah’s efforts to establish an

effective and strong Islamic Republic; and second, to create a crisis of

great magnitude for President Carter that would lead to his political

defeat and would result in the election of a Republican that was con-

trolled by Kissinger and Rockefeller who would work to have the Shah

reinstated as the leader of the Iranian people.

The Foreign Minister said that because of the “American plot”,

everyone was now in a very difficult position. He said that the Panama-

nians were respected throughout Latin America and the Third World,

but their acceptance of the “criminal Shah” at the insistence of the

United States had done great damage to their image in the world. He

said that President Carter was in danger of losing his Presidency if he

did not successfully resolve the hostage situation. He said that the

Ayatollah was in a very difficult position in Iran—he said that while

he and Khomeini had no hope or desire to recover the Shah, that the

students had become an increasingly powerful and difficult group with

which to deal and that some way had to be found to resolve the crisis

that did not make it appear that Khomeini had given in to U.S. pressure.

He said that the Ayatollah had resorted to trying to substitute students

totally loyal to him for the “regulars” holding the hostages, but that

once inside the compound they all behaved the same way.

Ghotbzadeh talked quite frankly about his own political plans, but

often invoked Khomeini’s name to suggest that the future of the Islamic

Republic was in the hands of both men, not just Khomeini. He said

the greatest threat to their “moderate” position was the sanctions vote

which was presently before the Security Council. He said that if the

vote was taken and the United States was successful in obtaining the

necessary nine votes, that this would make it much more difficult to

resolve the hostage situation at an early date. Also, he said that the

Soviet veto which was anticipated on the sanctions vote would be

a tremendous propaganda victory for “Communist elements in the

compound and in Iran”. (I interrupted here to point out to Marcel that

there was a tremendous difference in the unsuccessful attempt of the

Security Council to impose sanctions and the actual imposition of

sanctions. Marcel said that he understood and had pointed this out to

Ghotbzadeh whose response was that it was the “political action of

the vote itself” which would be troublesome for he and Khomeini to

deal with.)

Ghotbzadeh went on to talk about the importance of trying to

find some solution before the elections on the 25th of January. Marcel

reported that he expressed repeatedly his concern about this date and

that the only conclusion he could draw was that it was perceived by

the Foreign Minister as something that was critical to his own chances

of being elected President.

The Foreign Minister said that there were three ways to resolve

the present crisis: the death of the “criminal” Shah, the potential of the

Waldheim channel or the potential of a new channel of negotiation

with the Panamanians.

The Shah’s Death. Ghotbzadeh said that before the Waldheim mis-

sion, it was widely believed by Khomeini and many members of the

Revolutionary Council that the Shah’s illness had been exaggerated.

He said that no one could understand the paranoia that existed in Iran

about the Shah’s being returned and reinstated by the United States.

He said that Waldheim had brought a medical report (Marcel had the

impression that it was a written medical file) that convinced the key

people on the Council that the Shah was a “dying man”. He said that

the Shah would not die quick enough to satisfy he and Khomeini, but

that the Shah’s death was a certain way to break the impasse.

The “Waldheim Channel”. The Foreign Minister said that “more was

accomplished by the Secretary-General than is known publicly” and

that there were problems but that the Waldheim visit had been “worth-

while”. He said that with the consent of the United States, the Secretary-

General could put together a package which contained three basic

elements important to he and Khomeini. First, that Sean McBride would

have to be involved in whatever tribunal was established to investigate

the crimes of the Shah. Secondly, that while they did not want or expect

the Shah back in Iran, the General Assembly had to recognize the

right of the Iranians to seek the legal extradition of the Shah from

Panama. And finally, that once the tribunal with McBride was set up

Negotiating Channels

and the right of Iran to seek extradition was recognized, the American

hostages would be released.

The “New Panamanian Channel”. He said that the third possibility

was the “Panamanian channel” which was opened by the visit of the

Panamanians to Iran. He said that they recognized the great pressure

that Panama was under from the United States to accept and protect

the Shah. He said that he and Khomeini realized that it would be

impossible for them to extradite the Shah. He said that his own lawyers

had researched the Panamanian law and found six separate legal argu-

ments that would prevent the Panamanians from actually extraditing

the Shah. But, Ghotbzadeh argued that it was the “principle of extradi-

tion” that was important to he and the Ayatollah. And that if the

Panamanians could begin the legal process of extradition, that would

be enough for the Ayatollah to go [to] the students and insist that they

release the hostages.

Ghotbzadeh said that he wanted to go to Panama to personally

deliver the papers of extradition. He said also that he wanted to meet

with me (Jordan) secretly as I had two of the three important relation-

ships—a relationship with President Carter and General Torrijos, but

not with him (Ghotbzadeh). He said because of the Waldheim trip and

the upcoming elections, he did not know if there was time for such a

mission now.

It is late—almost 4: a.m.—and I need to wrap this up and give

you some thoughts and recommendations.

I was skeptical at the outset about Marcel and his visit to Iran, but

the more I heard the more realistic and plausible it all sounded. Specific

things that Ghotbzadeh said to him all seem to reinforce things that

we had heard through other channels.

The larger question relates to the fact that for better or worse, the Iranians

have opened a channel of communication with the Panamanians.

At best, I think you could argue that the Iranians did this con-

sciously to have a second channel open to them to pursue in a serious

way negotiations leading to the release to the hostages and/or to rein-

force the contacts that they are having with Waldheim. At worst, and

much more likely, the Iranians have made contact with the Panamani-

ans to see if they can use the leverage of the unrest in Panama and

their (Torrijos’) relationship with us to soften our negotiating posture

on the critical questions. You might speculate that while the UN channel

might be producing enough for Ghotbzadeh to live with, it was not

enough for the Ayatollah, and the Foreign Minister is hoping to move

the thing further along with the Panamanians.

This contact between the Panamanians and the Foreign Minister

is both an opportunity and a potential problem. To the extent that we

can coordinate between the Waldheim channel and the Panamanians,

we can reinforce the UN package on the critical question of “the right

of the Iranians to seek legal extradition”. If we fail to coordinate with

the Panamanians, we risk their taking some unilateral action that under-

mines the UN effort, destroys our bargaining posture with Ghotbzadeh

and scares the Shah to death.

Now that the Panamanians are involved in this process, we have

little choice but to treat them seriously and keep them generally

informed. If this present negotiation appears to have a real chance for

success, it is equally important that we brief the Shah, as he will become

nervous as stories about his “extradition” appear in the Panamanian

and international press. It seems that at the point and time that our

latest position is seriously considered by the Iranians, Lloyd Cutler

and/or myself should fly to Panama to reassure the Shah. Or, to quote

Gabriel Lewis, “he should be a part of this conspiracy”.

When I returned tonight, I contacted Harold Saunders and was

debriefed by him. He said that one thing that we might do to involve

and also utilize the Panamanians would be to give them tomorrow a

general report on the recent proposal that was sent to Iran, and that

since a critical element of it involved the principle of Iran being able

to “seek the legal extradition of the Shah”, we might encourage them

tomorrow to contact Ghotbzadeh directly, tell him that they are ready

to play a role in the resolution of the crisis and ask him to accept the

most recent UN proposal which contains the language on extradition

that is important to them.

Mr. President, there is a lot more I could tell you, but believe that

this covers the major points. I will be at home tomorrow and will be

glad to help further in any way possible.

proposal the United States provided to Waldheim on December 12, which the Secretary-

General conveyed to Farhang. The proposal suggested a three-step process for ending

the crisis: adoption of a Security Council resolution which recognized the legitimate

right of Iran to seek extradition and the return of the Shah’s assets, the establishment

of an international Committee of Inquiry to investigate allegations of human rights

abuses under the Shah’s former regime, and the simultaneous Iranian release of all

officials drafted the proposal language in an effort to more precisely define the sequence

and timing of the included elements, which Iranian officials recently had suggested to

Waldheim. (David Andelman, “Security Council Again Delays Vote on Iran Sanctions:

Negotiating Channels

145.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 13, 1980

SUBJECT

Cottam/Ghotbzadeh Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Henry Precht, IWG

Richard Cottam, University of Pittsburgh

Cottam reached Ghotbzadeh early this morning after considerable

difficulty. The conversation was hard to follow as Ghotbzadeh insisted

on speaking in “code.”

Ghotbzadeh insisted that it was possible to reach a settlement

before the Iranian presidential elections. In fact, he thinks a settlement

would assure him of victory. He believes he has Khomeini’s backing

in reaching a settlement. In the past, “85 different people” in Qom

were telling Khomeini how to handle the crisis. Now he (Ghotbzadeh)

is “in control.” Cottam interprets this to mean that Khomeini nods

affirmatively when Ghotbzadeh puts an idea to him.

Ghotbzadeh’s principal point was that he had great confidence in

Waldheim and was anxious that we allow Waldheim to set the pace

for a settlement. Our pressure for sanctions was making it very hard

for Ghotbzadeh to maneuver. We should listen to Waldheim, the Irani-

ans were taking their lead from him. Cottam said he had the impression

that Waldheim was developing proposals which included a delay on

the vote on sanctions but we were not listening to Waldheim and the

effect was to restrict Ghotbzadeh’s freedom of maneuver. Ghotbzadeh

said he had complete confidence in Farhang who spoke for him.

A second principal point was Ghotbzadeh’s emphasis on extradi-

tion from Panama. Cottam said he questioned him sharply asking him

whether extradition was a realistic consideration or just something in

Ghotbzadeh’s mind. Ghotbzadeh replied that he was very confident

of what he was saying because he had spoken directly to Panamanian

leaders. Nevertheless it was not clear to Cottam whether Ghotbzadeh

was talking about extradition or an extradition trial. Ghotbzadeh made

two comments to Cottam on Panama. First, all the Americans have to do

“is to give Panama the green light and they will go ahead as planned.”

146.

Letter from the Chairman of the Senate Select Committee

on Intelligence (Bayh) and the Vice Chairman of the

Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (Goldwater) to

President Carter

Washington, January 14, 1980

Dear Mr. President:

On January 9, the Select Committee on Intelligence met to discuss

with the Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, Mr. Frank

Carlucci, the purposes and details of two covert action programs for

Iran and Afghanistan which you had approved on December 27 and

Negotiating Channels

during a recess because of the urgent nature of these programs and

their far-reaching consequences.

As a result of the meeting, the Committee is of the view that the

decisions to seek an alternative government in Iran and to send

increased support to the Afghan tribal groups in Afghanistan, in differ-

ent ways, mark a crucial turning point in U.S. foreign policy.

The Committee decided that it is necessary to understand the over-

all strategy of the United States before a fully reasoned judgment

can be made concerning the wisdom or efficacy of the covert action

programs for Iran and Afghanistan. Some members were of the view

that they did not understand how these programs fitted into an overall

strategy. Indeed, the political action program was described by the

CIA as only a part of a larger policy on Iran. It is clear, however, that

such a significant decision to seek an alternative to Khomeini will set

forces in motion which the United States will not be able to control

fully. Although there is no present intention of supporting opposition

groups with military assistance or in any way encouraging the use of

violence, both of these may result because of movements now under-

way. Because of these concerns, the Committee intends to invite Secre-

tary of State Vance and Secretary of Defense Brown to meet with the

Committee in the near future to discuss with the Committee how these

covert action programs in Iran and Afghanistan fit in with our broader

foreign policy.

All of the members of the Committee, without exception, fully

support the desire of the Executive branch to work for a stable, pro-

Western, democratic Iran. The Committee is cognizant of and sympa-

thetic with the Administration’s frustration in dealing with the Revolu-

tionary Council and the Ayatollah Khomeini. The Committee is, of

course, fully in support of efforts to obtain the release of American

hostages held by Iranian students at the American Embassy in Teheran.

Some members, however, were concerned that the risks attendant to

this covert action program could place the hostages in greater jeopardy.

[1 paragraph (27 lines) not declassified]

Another point of view which was expressed, urged the develop-

ment of stable long-term alternatives to the Khomeini government

through friendly third parties such as Turkey. It was argued that Turkey

and the United States have a number of common interests in working

towards a more stable friendly Iran. Further, it was argued involving

Turkey in such an effort could lead to more support from Congress,

to better, more stable relations between the U.S. and Turkey, as well

as a stronger Turkish government.

The Committee requested the Intelligence Community to keep it

advised of the steps taken in this project. It is the particular desire of

the Committee that it should be advised of the principal figures and

groupings that are being considered for such a future government and

wishes to be assured that the Secretary of State and the Secretary of

Defense, as well as those with long experience in the political affairs

of Iran, have been consulted. Also, that you and your principal advisors

have carefully reviewed the nature of contacts, any obligations entered

into, and the long-term consequences of such relationships.

The covert action Finding regarding Afghanistan was developed

before the Soviet invasion and overthrow of the Amin government,

although final action on the Finding was not completed until after those

events. Members of the Committee noted that the level of assistance

envisaged in December was not likely to suffice in the face of Soviet

arms. If the Afghan rebels are to hold out successfully then it would

seem necessary to provide more arms appropriate for use against Soviet

helicopter gunships, if not against jet fighters. On the other hand, if it

is in the interest of resistance groups over the long run, they may be

better served by refraining from premature offensives against Soviet

troops rather than giving more arms to disorganized and independent

groups which may only invite their tragic slaughter.

Some members of the Committee suggested that the United States

pursue a policy of overt support for the Afghan resistance groups

emphasizing regional cooperation and involvement. The extremely

delicate relations between India and Pakistan were discussed. Some

members emphasized the need for the United States to show in a public

manner its ability to take useful action in the interests of Moslem states.

On the other hand, the Committee understands the problem posed by

the reluctance of Pakistan and other Moslem states to be publicly

identified with the United States or to provide the Soviet Union with

explicit confirmation of their role in support of the Afghan rebels.

In conclusion, the Committee is of the firm view that covert action

may be an adjunct but is not a substitute for coherent U.S. policy and

strategy toward the Middle East, South Asia or the Soviet Union. There

is a deep concern that covert action should not be relied upon to salvage

almost impossible situations, for this often results in operations which

are themselves unlikely either to succeed or to remain covert. It is for

these reasons that the Committee believes it should closely follow the

development of these programs.

The Committee valued the opportunity to discuss with the CIA

the details and consequences of these two crucial programs. The Com-

mittee is mindful that the Congress has undertaken to share responsibil-

ity for such programs. This responsibility is most effectively met when

the full facts and circumstances are considered in a season when consul-

tation and advice can be exchanged. The Committee recognizes that

we have entered into a very dangerous time and we want to assure you

147.

Editorial Note

On January 13, 1980, the United Nations Security Council voted

on the U.S. draft resolution proposing economic sanctions on Iran

(Resolution S/13735) that the United States believed was required by

Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union), and 2 abstentions (Bangla-

desh and Mexico). China did not participate. The resolution thus failed

due to the Soviet veto.

U.S. Ambassador to the UN Donald McHenry stated that the Soviet

veto was “a cynical and irresponsible exercise of its veto power. The

motive behind it is transparent. The Soviets hope that, by blocking

sanctions, they can divert attention from their subjugation of Afghani-

stan and curry favor with the Government and people of Iran, who

are among those most directly affected by the Afghan invasion.”

McHenry added that the United States “has already instituted

measures designed to exert economic pressure on Iran, as envisaged

in the vetoed resolution,” and that these measures would be applied

“firmly and vigorously” until the hostages were released. McHenry

then urged member states to join the United States in the “application

of meaningful measures against the continued holding of the hostages

in defiance of international law.” The text of the draft resolution and

McHenry’s statement are printed in Department of State Bulletin, Febru-

A January 14 White House statement reiterated that the Soviet veto

was an “act of political cynicism.” “The Soviet Union can keep the

Security Council from acting now on Iran—but they cannot block the

determination of members of the international community that terror-

ism and lawlessness must be dealt with firmly. Over the next several

days, we will be working with other nations who uphold the principles

148.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Treasury

David Newsom

William Miller

Dean Hinton

Robert Carswell

Harold Saunders

Agriculture

Defense

Robert Bergland

W. Graham Claytor

White House

Robert Murray

Hamilton Jordan

JCS

Jody Powell

General David Jones

Stuart Eizenstat

General John Pustay

Lloyd Cutler

Negotiating Channels

CIA

Vice President’s Office

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Denis Clift

Justice

NSC

Benjamin Civiletti

David Aaron

Colonel William Odom

Energy

Gary Sick

John Sawhill

Tom Thornton

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Cooperation with Allies. Mr. Newsom reviewed the results of Mr.

Christopher’s consultations in Europe thus far. In general, the prospects

of imposing sanctions on Iran do not look promising. The British are

taking a firm line that they lack the legal authority to do it, and it is

also evident that they do not believe politically that the sanctions will

be effective. State is working on a spread sheet of what the allies are

doing and what they are likely to do—both on Iran and with regard

to the Soviet Union. (S)

Treasury will circulate today draft regulations on our own legal

steps on sanctions. Mr. Christopher believes that publication of our

own regulations could be marginally helpful to him in his efforts with

the Europeans. The group discussed the desirability of including extra-

territorial scope in our own regulations. This is a sensitive point with

the Europeans and is likely to bring us into direct conflict with them

if we attempt to extend our own regulations to cover the activities of

U.S. subsidiaries abroad. A committee composed of Treasury, State,

Commerce and Agriculture will meet today to analyze the effects of

actions by U.S. subsidiaries on sanctions and the steps we can best

take to increase the effectiveness of our own actions. (C)

The SCC generally believed that our best approach would be to

call in the principal companies and inform them that it is U.S. policy

to deny shipments to Iran and that we will publicize activities by U.S.

subsidiaries which are not consistent with that policy. Mr. Claytor felt

that this would be 90 percent effective and would avoid the confronta-

tional aspects of attempting to extend the reach of our domestic regula-

Secretary Miller noted that the sanctions are showing results in at

least some cases. He cited a request from the National Iranian Gas

Company which is “desperate” to purchase $3. million in equipment

which is necessary to keep a $1. billion project going. We are, of course,

not going to agree, but Treasury is asking for additional information

to try to identify the project and the precise type of equipment which

is needed. (C)

2. Economic Warfare. Mr. Aaron noted that Henry Owen is heading

a small group to do an analysis of how we are equipped to conduct

economic warfare. We need more coordination in this area. The group

will be in touch with the various agencies, with the objective of having

some results which can be presented to the President within the

Secretary Bergland agreed that it would be useful to call in the

major U.S. grain traders and warn them about cooperating in trading

activities in third countries which would circumvent our policy. He

said that this would only be effective if he could threaten to publicize

any untoward activity on their part. The SCC agreed that publicizing

such activity would be entirely consistent with our policy and he should

not hesitate to so inform the grain traders. (S)

3. Congressional Strategy. With Congress coming back next week,

the public attention to our actions on Iran and Afghanistan will increase

sharply. Mr. Aaron asked that State complete the work on the aid

package for Pakistan and have it ready to go at the first of the week.

By the end of this week, we should begin a systematic briefing of

returning members of congress and key staff aides. State and NSC

will work closely together on this. (C)

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

6. Public Posture. The working group which met yesterday under

Jerry Schecter to examine possible themes to use in our public positions

has tasked several areas of research. CIA is preparing a paper on the

background and identities of some of the student kidnappers which

can be used publicly. State and CIA are also doing a paper on the

vulnerability and isolation of Iran and their deteriorating economic

situation in the face of economic sanctions. CIA is doing a paper which

149.

Memorandum by the Executive Assistant to the Deputy

Secretary of State (Oxman)

Washington, January 15, 1980

SUBJECT

MEETING WITH SHAH’S REPRESENTATIVES

1. Lloyd Cutler and I met today at the Metropolitan Club with

Robert Armao, advisor to the former Shah of Iran, and William Jackson,

the former Shah’s attorney. Armao and Jackson had requested the

meeting for the purpose of discussing certain aspects of the Shah’s stay

had been there with the Shah continuously since the Shah’s arrival in

mas. Two of Armao’s assistants—Mr. Mark Morse and Mr. John

McMurray—have also been in Panama for most or all of the period

since December 15.

3. Armao began by complaining that Ambler Moss’ cable reporting

Armao’s recent meeting with Moss, had been leaked, and had led to

unfortunate press stories about the Shah’s dissatisfaction with condi-

tions in Panama. Armao claimed that an ABC representative, who was

in Panama in connection with the David Frost interview of the Shah,3

told him that the cable had leaked to ABC’s bureau in Washington.

Armao said the Shah was very upset by the news stories that resulted

from this alleged leak. Armao requested that our meeting today be

kept completely confidential.

4. Lloyd responded that he doubted very much that the cable had

been leaked and that of course our meeting today would be kept

confidential.

5. Armao asserted that the conditions under which the Shah and

his party were living in are generally unsatisfactory. He said all of

their phone calls are listened to by Panamanian security personnel.

(The phone system the U.S. Government had helped install is still in

place, Armao said, but it is a VHF radio phone and therefore is not

secure). Further, Armao complained that the bills that have been pre-

sented to him by the Panamanian security personnel are excessively

high and that when he complained about them, the security personnel

have, in general, rudely rejected his questions and requests. He asserted

the security personnel, from the lowest to the highest levels, have

been “nasty” to him and the other Americans in the Shah’s party.

He conceded that the Shah and his wife have been treated extremely

cordially in all respects by all of the involved Panamanians.

6. Armao seemed particularly upset that the Panamanians had

recently prevailed upon the Shah to travel to Panama City at 10: pm

at night for the purpose of staying overnight at the Panama Hilton

before looking at houses around Panama City the next day. Armao

claimed he had insisted on accompanying the Shah but that his request

had been rejected. He conceded that the Shah ultimately decided that

he would go alone.

7. Armao claimed that Col. Noriega, the head of the Intelligence

Service in Panama, had complained to the Shah about Armao and his

two assistants. They were agents of the State Department, were disloyal,

were security risks, and ought to be asked to leave. Armao asserted

that Noriega has been trying to drive a wedge probably because he

Negotiating Channels

thinks that with Armao out of the way no one at the Shah’s party will

complain about the bills and other financial issues. Armao said the

Shah told Noriega that he could not do without Armao. Noriega then

dropped the issue, according to Armao.

8. Armao’s other complaints included the following:

—the hotel bills for the security personnel are inflated and these

personnel are charging various luxuries to the Shah’s account;

—a large number of expensive items (such as silver flatware) have

been ordered for the house, without consultation with Armao or the

Shah, and the bills have been presented to Armao;

—the hotel bill has included a charge of $10,000 for two small

“shacks” on the property where the Shah is staying (Gabriel Lewis

property), even though these structures have no apparent connection

with the hotel;

—Armao’s access to the Shah has been impeded.

9. Bill Jackson said that in addition to these annoying “local prob-

lems” on Contadora, there was the more troubling issue of whether

Torrijos intended to extradite the Shah.

10. Lloyd said that as to the “local problems” it would make sense

for the Shah to raise them with Torrijos or President Royo, since his

relations with them, according to Armao, are excellent.

11. Armao interjected that the local problems seem to have gotten

very much better in recent days after he had brought some of his

complaints to the attention of General Torrijos’ doctor (whom Torrijos

had made available to the Shah for medical consultation). Moreover,

Armao went on, now that he has left Panama and intends to stay in

New York for some weeks, he thinks the friction with Noriega and his

personnel will diminish considerably.

12. On the issue of extradition, Lloyd stated that we do not see

any risk of Torrijos allowing extradition to occur. Not only is it not

legally possible, in view of the absence of an Extradition Treaty between

Panama and Iran, but it would be contrary to the assurances we

received before the Shah left for Panama. Lloyd noted that President

Carter had recently said publicly that he would not permit the extradi-

tion of the Shah. Armao conceded that Royo had told the Shah that

Panama would deal with the Iranian extradition request in accordance

with Panamanian legal procedures, and would then deny the request.

13. The larger problem, Armao said, is that “we simply cannot

trust Torrijos”. Jackson said he agreed, that the situation was “insecure”

and that “somehow there has got to be another place” Armao com-

plained that of the 80 security personnel assigned to the Shah, the

overwhelming majority are blacks who are not literate. Lloyd noted

that our original understanding was that the Panamanians would pro-

vide all three rings of security at the outset, but that the Shah was free

to bring in his own private security personnel as the inner ring when-

ever he wished. Armao said Col. Giambini (the Iranian Colonel who

is the Shah’s principal security advisor) has advised against doing this,

since the private personnel would be Americans and there would be

friction between them and the Panamanians.

14. I said that the problems troubling Armao seemed to arise for

the most part from an excess of security caution by the Panamanian

security personnel. I said it is understandable that they do not want

to run any risks with respect to the Shah’s safety. Armao conceded

that “the security is excellent”.

15. Armao said there is another major problem on the horizon. He

explained that in three weeks the Shah must go into a hospital for

tests. General Torrijos’ doctor had said it would not be politically

acceptable in Panama if the Shah were to go to the American Military

Hospital (Gorgas) rather than the leading Panamanian hospital in Pan-

ama City (Piatilla). Armao said Gorgas is clearly preferable, with supe-

rior facilities and staff. I asked whether there are objective reasons why

the Shah’s doctors from New York would be able to function more

efficiently and effectively at Gorgas. Armao said there were such rea-

sons, and I urged that these reasons be used in discussion with the

Panamanians so as not to injure their pride. Lloyd suggested the possi-

bility of dividing the tests between the two hospitals or some similar

approach.

16. With respect to the Shah’s medical condition, Armao says the

size of the Shah’s spleen has diminished somewhat and that his “blood

count” is holding reasonably stable. He said that the prognosis for the

Shah is that his cancer could at anytime metastasize and lead quickly

to death. The doctors’ best guess, Armao said, is that the Shah has

perhaps another two to three years, but they readily concede that the

period could be much less.

17. Armao said that the Shah’s wife is extremely unhappy in Pan-

ama. He noted that the visit of the Shah’s children over the Christmas

vacation went extremely well and thanked us for assisting on the travel

arrangements.

18. Armao asked whether the Afghanistan crisis may have led to

a change in Chancellor Kreisky’s unwillingness to accept the Shah.

Lloyd said he would guess not. Jackson asked whether there is another

country to which the Shah could go. Lloyd said we knew of none and

that we had certainly checked throughout the world. Jackson said,

“we want to get the Shah out of Panama as soon as possible”, but

acknowledged that no other possibilities appear ripe at this time.

19. Armao reiterated that he did not trust Torrijos. He said that

deep down, he worries that “they’re trying to get their hands on the

150.

Memorandum for the Record by Henry Precht, Iran Working

Group

SUBJECT

Richard Cottom Conversation with Farhang and Ghotbzadeh

I asked Cottam to explore with Farhang and Ghotbzadeh whether

they thought there were still opportunities to move towards a settle-

ment in the light of the vote on sanctions and the presidential campaign

in Tehran.

Farhang was very pessimistic. He told Cottam that the improved

atmosphere that had been created with Waldheim’s visit was smashed

by the vote on sanctions and would have to be recreated. Perhaps if

an investigating team were to go to Tehran the atmosphere could begin

to improve.

Farhang said that the American problem was that we were rational.

An additional complication was Waldheim who shared our views and

was not forceful in presenting the Iranian point of view.

Another difficulty was our failure to understand that a “package

deal” was not possible. We would simply not be able to devise a

complete agreement and present it to Khomeini for approval. Khomeini

doesn’t think in terms of trade-offs or bargaining. Cottam agreed with

me that we might be able to work out a package deal with the Revolu-

tionary Council, but in doing so we would have no assurance that

Khomeini would buy it as a package. It might have to be presented to

him by the Council in stages.

Farhang thought that nothing could be accomplished in Iran until

after the elections. Bani-Sadr was the front runner and he would be

prepared to seek a solution. During the period until the elections the

only useful thing the US could do was to reduce the level of rhetoric

and try to control the press. The ejection of the U.S. press from Iran

would be helpful.

Farhang said that a French and an Argentinian lawyer were work-

ing on extradition in Panama. The Iranians were clearly thinking of

Negotiating Channels

a trial, not actual extradition. They hoped the U.S. would not block

their plans. He offered to give Cottam further details later.

Farhang summed up saying that U.S. impatience on sanctions had

destroyed the atmosphere. The issue of the timing of release of hostages

and the wording of a resolution could have been worked out if Wald-

heim had been more forceful in presenting Iranian views. Those two

issues should not have proved to be obstacles in reaching a settlement.

The U.S. must realize, however, that in any deal there would be a large

element of risk that it might be rejected by Khomeini.

Ghotbzadeh’s mood was completely different from Farhang’s. He

told Cottam that the crisis could be solved in one week. It would not

be solved at one swoop, but there would have to be movement day

by day. Cottam said it was clear that Ghotbzadeh was counting on a

settlement to advance his own presidential ambitions. Cottam asked

what the U.S. should do. Ghotbzadeh replied that he was sending

letters to European countries. He hoped the U.S. would help assure

that the replies were favorable. Cottam speculated that the letters might

request the Europeans to hold off on sanctions. If the Europeans agreed

to do so there might be another opportunity for pushing for a settlement

with Ghotbzadeh.

Cottam asked Ghotbzadeh about plans for Panama extradition.

Ghotbzadeh merely said we are “continuing with that.” He did not

seem particularly interested in Panama in this conversation. The con-

versation, which had taken Ghotbzadeh out of one meeting, ended

when he was called away to something more urgent. He clearly wanted

to continue with Cottam and said he would telephone him later.

COMMENT: Cottam and I speculated that presidential politics may

influence the views of Farhang and Ghotbzadeh. Ghotbzadeh seems

to be counting on a settlement to the crisis on his terms to advance his

fortunes. Farhang, who strongly dislikes Ghotbzadeh, may be just as

happy to see the opportunity for a settlement deferred until his favorite,

Bani-Sadr, is elected president.

151.

Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

to President Carter

Washington, January 15, 1980

RE

SITUATION WITH THE HOSTAGES

I didn’t really state to you in a completely frank way either my

own assessment of the situation as relates to Panamanian involvement

in the hostage negotiations or all of the things that were said to me.

I understated what was said to me because I questioned whether it

was true and it sounded too self-serving.

Let me give it to you straight. Ghotbzedeh made no bones about

the fact that he wanted to go to Panama to “act out the extradition

charade” as soon as possible. He said that he had two specific motives:

to obtain some good publicity for himself before the national elections

and also to meet with me (secretly of course) on the subject of the

hostages.

I discounted in my own thinking and in the report that I sent you

a lot of what was said to me about both my own role in this matter

and the significance of the contact between the Panamanians and the

Foreign Minister. I attributed a lot of this to Ghotbzedeh’s despair that

his own campaign is not going well and he is looking for some way

to dominate the news and get favorable attention this last week before

his national election. And, of course, we don’t know if this talk of going

to Panama and meeting secretly with me is something that he wants/

hopes to do unilaterally or something about which Khomeini has gen-

eral knowledge. Also, when told about all of this and particularly

the “critical role” that the Panamanians described to me, I strongly

suspected that they were simply trying to flatter me.

So, my inclination to discount quite a bit all that I heard as relates

to my own role in this and Ghotbzedeh’s desire to meet with me

personally was offset by Hal Saunders’ attitude and by the memcon

of Richard Cottam’s conversation with the Foreign Minister3 in which

he confirmed that he had seen the Panamanians, that he thought that

they were an important channel and that we should send the “same

Negotiating Channels

man” down there. At that point, I began to take all that I had heard

about the Panamanians and even my own role in this a bit more

seriously. Both Hal Saunders and I agree that we have no choice but

to keep the Panamanian channel open and nurture it. As he says,

the UN channel could close up or something could develop in the

Panamanian channel—“we have pursued vigorously and seriously

leads that were on the surface much less substantial than this one”.

Probably Ghotbzedeh will not be elected and we will be dealing

with an entire new cast of characters. Even if he fails to win the election,

there is always the chance that Khomeini will insist that he continue

as Foreign Minister and/or as the person to try to resolve the hos-

tage situation.

Even if we assume on the frontend that nothing will come of the

Panamanian channel, it is in our own interest to keep them generally

informed and involved as they have one very critical piece of the

puzzle—the Shah.

The few times that I have been actively involved in foreign policy

matters—the Panama Canal Treaty, the Mideast arms package, the

Middle East, etc.—I have bent overboard to operate in tandem with

the State Department, usually with Warren Christopher. But I got the

distinct impression from Cy on my latest trip that the Panamanian

contact was not serious, that he is suspicious of Torrijos and that the

whole thing was resented because it had been done out of here and

by me. In reaction to that, I got Ambler Moss involved, passing a

message from you to Torrijos through him. Cy insisted that I restate

in that message the fact that we assumed that we continued to have

their firm commitment not to extradite the Shah.

My only point in telling you all of this is that there is absolutely

nothing to be lost by keeping the Panamanians generally informed and

involved in this process. I don’t have the time or inclination to fool

with this, but it is going to require someone at a high level treating it

in a serious way. To date, that has not happened.

I have spent a lot of time in the past few days thinking about the

hostage situation. I really haven’t given it much thought in human

terms for the past few weeks. I know that it is a heavy personal burden

for you and Cy. I have no wife or children, and should the time come

that you needed someone to take considerable personal risks in pursu-

152.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran and Pakistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

Energy

Secretary Cyrus Vance

John Sawhill

David Newsom

Justice

Dean Hinton

John Shenefield

Defense

Agriculture

Secretary Harold Brown

James Williams (Deputy Secretary)

Graham Claytor

White House

CIA

Jody Powell

Frank Carlucci

Lloyd Cutler

JCS

Hedley Donovan

General David Jones

Zbigniew Brzezinski

General John Pustay

NSC

Treasury

William Odom

Secretary William Miller

Gary Sick

Robert Carswell

Thomas Thornton

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Iran Sanctions. The President approved the recommendations of

the SCC on January 14 to issue a declaration on U.S. sanctions to be

adopted against Iran, drawing authority both from the UNSC vote and

the emergency economic powers. Treasury said they were prepared to

issue the regulations immediately, but had held up at Mr. Christopher’s

Negotiating Channels

request that the regulations not be issued until after his return from

Europe this evening. The SCC agreed that it would review the regula-

tions and the declaration at the meeting tomorrow, probably for issu-

ance later in the day. The one remaining issue of contention within

the government is the extent of extraterritoriality to be built into the

regulations. (C)

2. Iranian Assets. The President also approved the SCC recommen-

dation that Treasury be permitted to immunize from attachment new

Iranian funds brought into the country to cover the obligations of

companies such as Iran Air, NIOC and the Iranian Shipping Company.

Treasury will proceed. (U)

3. Economic Warfare. Dr. Brzezinski noted that he had asked Henry

Owen to head a small group to examine what is required to carry out

the kind of economic warfare in which we are increasingly engaged.

The group will be asked to make its initial report to the SCC on Fri-

4. Cooperation by Allies. Secretary Vance circulated a spread sheet

showing the various actions in the economic sphere which we have

taken, what we have requested of our allies, and what their response

has been. The paper is attached. At this time, the foreign response

must be treated as preliminary since it does not have the benefit of

Warren Christopher’s talks in Europe except for the indications we

have received from message reporting. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the U.S. should do something more

dramatic to galvanize the allies into action. Secretary Brown observed

that, in his view, the Europeans might take actions together but not

separately. Their public opinion was out ahead of the governments

themselves, and we could perhaps shame them into doing more. He

cautioned, however, that taking some public action without an assur-

ance of results could hurt more than it helps by dramatizing the absence

of European cooperation. This could then be exploited by the Soviets.

Dr. Brzezinski agreed that this should be the number one item7 on

the agenda of the SCC tomorrow, once we have the benefit of Mr.

Christopher’s report. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski added that the French are uncharacteristically apolo-

getic about their position, while the British seem prepared to be cooper-

ative on the Soviet issue. Secretary Brown wondered if we could ask

their cooperation on Indian Ocean security measures. Secretary Vance

noted that we have had some indications of interest, but that the British

would not wish to make any decisions on this until Lord Carrington

returns from his visit to the Gulf. (S)

Secretary Vance felt that nothing which was currently under way

on the negotiating front should prohibit us from pressing ahead with

economic sanctions. He noted that a recent message from Bruce Laingen

via one of the ambassadors in Tehran argued the same way. It was

the judgment of the group that there was merit in keeping up the

pressure on the economic side. However, Secretary Miller noted that

the Iranian Central Bank has now gotten its house in order and is being

punctilious in its interest payments, so the prospects of loan default

provisions have, in fact, been overcome. The Iranians need no new

credits because of their substantial oil revenues, so our pressure on

credits is also having little or no effect. We must be realistic in under-

standing that our own embargo efforts will have very little practical

effect unless we get the cooperation of at least the major industrialized

states. Secretary Vance said that we had understood from the outset

that the psychological impact of sanctions would be more important

than the economic impact. Secretary Miller observed that the psycho-

logical impact is likely to be reversed if and when the story gets out

that Iran is proceeding on a business-as-usual basis. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski reported the President’s comment on the notes of

yesterday’s meeting that we should be aggressive and that the Europe-

ans need U.S. pressure. Secretary Miller noted that he will be meeting

with five of the European finance ministers in the near future, but it

Negotiating Channels

was only a high, political-level decision which would have any real

effect. Dr. Brzezinski observed that, on the basis of some talks he had

yesterday, the one thing which seems to get their attention is the risk

of U.S. unilateral action. We can also publicize instances in which U.S.

companies and perhaps other countries are evading or circumventing

our policy. He noted that the President had concurred with the SCC

recommendation to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to publicize

offenders, noting that we should “block other sources if possible” on

grain transfers. Mr. Cutler noted that Luther Hodges was conducting

a survey of major U.S. companies to see what their overseas operations

were likely to be and to make our policy position clear. Secretary

Miller felt that we would find most American companies already in

compliance with the policy and prepared to be cooperative. Secretary

Vance cautioned that we should be very careful about publicizing

unhelpful actions by other countries since we could create the impres-

sion that our policy is not working. (S)

5. Implementation Group. Dr. Brzezinski noted that much of the

effort of the SCC recently had been occupied with questions of imple-

mentation of economic policies. It was essential to have close coordina-

tion on these issues, but in the meantime we should also be thinking

about our longer term strategy and next steps. He proposed that a

separate Implementation Coordination Group be formed which would

meet in parallel with the SCC. This group could look at public posture,

the nature of the sanctions, and how to put teeth into our efforts. The

group should include State (Warren Christopher), Defense (Graham

Claytor), Treasury, CIA, and NSC (Henry Owen). Secretary Miller

offered to host the meetings at Treasury. (It was subsequently decided

that the first meeting should be held at the White House.) (C)

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran.]

153.

Memorandum From the Deputy Executive Secretary of the

Department of State (Bremer) to Secretary of State Vance

Washington, January 17, 1980

SUBJECT

Your Breakfast with the President Friday, January 18, 1980

[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

6. Iran.

(a) Status of Sanctions. Chris and Dick2 found two causes for the

European reaction on sanctions: (1) With varying degrees of emphasis,

they argued they could not impose sanctions under their existing law

and that going to parliaments would be difficult; (2) they questioned

the efficacy of economic sanctions at the present time and the advantage

this might give the Soviets. All indicated, however, they would continue

informal financial and oil measures. And Genscher has now told us that

the Germans have decided to impose on their own a range of sanctions.

Dick Cooper recommends we should not press for full implementa-

tion of the UN sanctions resolution. In the end, we will not succeed;

and we could generate considerable ill will in the process, at a time in

which we need to reinforce and demonstrate our solidarity. Dick also

believes, however, we can enlist European cooperation in an embargo

on exports of manufactured goods (excluding those related to outstand-

ing contracts) if we are willing to push hard enough. If we decide to

push ahead with this, we will need to mount a major negotiating effort

encompassing Japan, Canada and the smaller European countries as

well as the major European countries, and encompassing for political

reasons some Third World countries as well. The last point is especially

important to the French.

(b) Study of Soviet/U.S. Options. You may wish to tell the President

that the Department has begun an urgent, but extremely close-hold,

study of possible Soviet options for intervention, political and military,

in the upper right corner reads: “CV.”

154.

Record of a Special Coordination Committee

Implementation/Coordination Group Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

State

Energy

Warren Christopher

John Sawhill

Richard Cooper

Justice

Deane Hinton

John Shenefield

OSD

Nelson Dong

W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

Larry Simms

William Perry

Agriculture

Joint Chiefs

Jim Williams

Lt. Gen. Pustay

Howard Hjort

Treasury

White House

Robert Carswell

David Aaron

Henry Owen

Commerce

Lloyd Cutler

Homer Meyer

Barbara Bergman

David Rubenstein

[name not declassified]

NSC

[name not declassified]

Tim Deal

Christopher reported on his recent consultations in Europe.

[Omitted here is material on Christopher’s consultation on

Afghanistan.]

On Iran, Christopher said on the whole he was disappointed. The

UK will continue to halt all military sales. The British do not accept

our proposal that we should proceed “as if” the UN had voted sanc-

tions. They simply don’t have the legal authority. But they will continue

to do what they have in the past, including informal measures in

the banking [sector?] about the desirability of sanctions. The British

Embassy in Tehran questions their utility. The Italians will follow the

other Europeans, are sympathetic to our position, but concerned about

their people. Schmidt understands our “as if” concept and is inclined

to cooperate on trade and banking measures if Germany has the legal

authority. But the Germans doubt the efficacy of sanctions. The French

will not be helpful publicly, but are likely to continue banking measures

and to prevent military sales. The other allies will not do more than

they have in the past. Enforcement of sanctions will only be possible

Negotiating Channels

on an informal basis. Our efforts on Afghanistan have to some extent

eclipsed those on Iran. (S)

Cooper summarized: the UK and France have juridical problems.

They needed the UN sanctions in order to take national action. The

allies generally doubt both the efficacy and political wisdom of sanc-

tions. They will continue to cooperate on an informal basis, and, if

pressed, might institute a selective trade embargo. The EC mechanism

might furnish the juridical umbrella they all need; the French do not

favor this approach. (S)

Christopher noted that his trip was untimely in that it coincided

with the UN vote. Still the allies were reviewing their laws. We should

continue our efforts but try to keep the debate private. Aaron stressed

the President’s desire that we emphasize to the allies the importance

we attach to these issues. We should stick to the line that our allies

are considering appropriate measures, that we are in continuing consul-

tation, and that we are urging them to do what they can. He said that

the President was unhappy with European efforts to date. He wants

us to push them to the limit, even if uncomfortable and costly. Further,

the Japanese must understand that we are upset by their lack of cooper-

ation. We should communicate that point to them before it becomes a

domestic political issue. (S)

[Omitted here is material on Pakistan.]

The group then briefly discussed procedures for future meetings.

It was agreed to meet daily at 10: a.m. (U)

155.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher

Jody Powell

David Newsom

Stu Eizenstat*

Denis Clift**

Defense

Deputy Secretary Graham Claytor

NSC

David Aaron

CIA

Gary Sick

Frank Carlucci

William Odom

JCS

Thomas Thornton**

General David Jones

General John Pustay

* Present for Items 1 and 2 only.

** Not present for final item.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The meeting was largely devoted to a review of where we stand

on Iran at the present time and what immediate options are available

to us.

1. Elections. At the moment, Bani Sadr and Madani appear to be

the two strongest candidates. CIA does not believe that Ghotbzadeh

has any significant support or national appeal. It is still very possible

that Khomeini will identify some other candidate as his personal choice

or that the election date will be delayed or both. The signs of in-fighting

and chaos within the ruling group are not abating. Much of the apparent

“movement” in recent days is probably due only to Ghotbzadeh’s effort

to bolster his personal position by a public relations coup of some

2. Sanctions. Mr. Christopher felt strongly that nothing which is

happening in Iran provides any basis for us to relax our pressure on

the Europeans and others to institute effective economic sanctions. We

may only be able to get 50–70% of what we would like, but that

would still be helpful. The German announcement of support today

Negotiating Channels

was helpful and should lend support to our efforts. The stories (e.g.,

Gwertzman in the New York Times) which suggest that sanctions are

a lost cause should be corrected. Secretary Vance will be seeing the

British Ambassador today, and a message from Vance to Carrington

may be required to keep up the pressure on the British. The Japanese

are primarily concerned about the security of their oil supply, and they

are asking again for access to Alaska crude. The Implementation group

will look into this, recognizing that we were previously unsuccessful

on the Hill. (S)

3. Military Options. Mr. Aaron suggested that it might be useful to

increase our military activity enough to make the point that we still

have other options. This could give the allies an incentive to look harder

at economic sanctions as the lesser of two evils. The SCC discussed

possibly increasing the level of our naval patrols in the Persian Gulf,

possible flights by carrier aircraft into the Persian Gulf, and possible

SR–71 overflights of Iran. Mr. Newsom said that any military activity

which appeared to be directed against Iran would be a mistake in this

period just prior to the elections since it would only tend to heighten

the anti-US feeling and unite people behind Khomeini. Instead, he

thought it would be preferable to conduct some kind of military opera-

tion which could be explained and understood in the Afghanistan

context but which would also send a signal to Iran. (S)

General Jones suggested that a B–52 flight into the Indian Ocean

to surveil Soviet naval units might be appropriate. The aircraft could

fly out of Guam on a long round-robin trip without landing in the

area. They could surveil Soviet units and could also link up with the

carrier forces in the region. Such a mission could be flown on Sunday

and become known on Monday. The only obstacle would be the

request for overflight clearance from Thailand. In order to avoid prema-

ture announcement of the flight, the clearance request would be submit-

ted as a C–5; however, we would go privately to the Thais through

our Ambassador and inform them of our intentions and get their

approval at the political level. Such a flight would be seen as a major

new development by the nations in the region. The Indian reaction

would be negative, but the strength of their feeling would depend on

how close the aircraft came to their shores.

The SCC unanimously recommended a flight by two B–52s, and

the JCS began work immediately to get the clearances in the event the

flight was approved. State checked with Secretary Vance immediately

after the meeting, and he supported the recommendation, on condition

that the Thais were informed in advance and approved. (TS)

Approve a flight by two B–52s to the Indian Ocean on

Sunday, January 20, conditional on prior approval by Thailand and

staying a good distance away from India.

Disapprove

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

8. Covert Action. A restricted group heard a brief report from Mr.

Carlucci [less than 1 line not declassified]. Some new meetings have been

held in the past several days, but no report was available yet. Mr.

Newsom summarized the questions which are expected in the House

Committee next week. They are interested in the timing of the decision

to provide lethal weapons to the insurgents and whether it predated

the Soviet invasion. Mr. Carlucci said the date of the Finding6 came

after the Soviet invasion and we do not discuss with them the details

of our decision-making process. There will be questions about the

amount of money involved, the nature of the Huyser mission, and

whether the elections in Iran may make any covert action program

unnecessary. Mr. Carlucci and Mr. Saunders will work together closely,

and in general Mr. Carlucci will lead in responding to the questions

in order to avoid getting drawn into a lengthy discussion of policy

issues which are outside the purview of the Intelligence Committee.

(TS)

156.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 18, 1980

SUBJECT

U.S. Reaction to Possible Soviet Military Intervention in Iran

I see possibly three strategies for dealing with a Soviet military

move into Iran in the near future; none of them are very attractive:

1. Rapid Escalation to a “CRICON” (Crisis Confrontation).

We can follow the traditional pattern of 1962 and 1973 of escalating

rapidly to the nuclear level and then negotiating de-escalation to a

status quo ante-CRICON. You will recall that Kissinger told Sam Hun-

tington and you in the early days of this Administration that we can

no longer follow this strategy in light of the Soviet strategic force

buildup. The Soviets are in much better shape to maintain domestic

cohesion and implement mobilization and civil defense measures

required for a credible crisis posture. I find it extremely painful to admit,

but we are forced to recognize the strategic and political implications

of the new military balance. The PRM–10 CRICON paper, in retrospect,

is sharply to the point.

2. Contain the Conflict within the Region.

This strategy would require some upgrading of strategic forces

alert levels, but its major military component would be projection of

U.S. ground forces and air forces into the region. The only feasible

deployment would be as a defense of the Saudi Arabian peninsula.

That is what we are “organized” to do and therefore most likely to do

successfully. We would have to evoke a Saudi invitation. The next

steps would involve combining military efforts with other states such

as Pakistan, Iraq, Turkey, Egypt, and Israel, if they were willing. By

remaining on the western side of the Persian Gulf, we would avoid

an early direct engagement between U.S. and Soviet ground forces in

which we would be defeated. To make our deployment credible in the

weeks and months to follow, a major conventional force mobilization

in the U.S. would have to occur. Follow-on deployments up to field

army in size, i.e., several corps, might soon be required.

The response of our allies in Europe and Japan would be critical.

They might abandon us.

This strategy could lead to at least four outcomes which are unat-

tractive. First, a stalemate and a prolonged period—years—of large

U.S. force deployments in the region facing Soviet forces in Iran. Second,

a stalemate followed by erosion and forced withdrawal. We could

find ourselves with large forces deployed in an environment which is

politically hostile, i.e., our allies are equivocating in Europe and our

allies in the region prefer accommodation to the Soviets than war

together with us against the Soviets. Third, direct conflicts between

U.S. and Soviet forces in the Euphrates Valley could lead to a general

war, including Europe (Berlin, a Soviet limited offensive into Germany

with peace overtures to France, et alia.) Fourth, a direct U.S.-Soviet

ground force conflict in which the U.S. is defeated and unable to sustain

a regional presence.

3. A Strategic Retirement followed by a Major Long-Term U.S. Buildup.

We would not project U.S. ground forces into the region. We would

encourage local ground forces, i.e., Iraqi, Pakistani, and any other vol-

unteers, to move into southern Iran to establish a defensive line north

of the oil-producing areas. We would provide some sea- and land-

based air to deter or defeat Soviet air. We would be prepared to retreat

if the regional forces could not hold. Meanwhile, we would begin a

major military reconstruction program at home and a long-term

buildup. We would ask the same of our allies in Europe and the Far East.

Some version of the second alternative is the maximum strategy

we could prudently pursue. We would put less strain on the Alliance

and improve the long-term buildup possibilities by some version of

the third strategy.

The course of action which is both feasible and probably most attrac-

tive to you is a rapid U.S. force deployment (possibly including some

NATO forces) into the Saudi Arabian peninsula with the aim of divid-

ing the region down the Euphrates and the Persian Gulf without combat

between U.S. and Soviet forces.

157.

Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the

Department of State and the White House

1314. Eyes Only for the President, Secretary Vance, Dr. Brzezinski

From Jordan and Saunders. Subject: Meeting With Panamanians.

1. Secret–Entire text.

2. Summary. We met all morning with our Panamanian contacts

and one of the French lawyers with whom the Panamanians have been

dealing and all afternoon also with the second who had just arrived

mid-day from Tehran. The morning conversation focused on the

dynamics of the present situation in Iran. The afternoon talk concen-

trated on efforts to find a resolution. Both seemed straightforward in

stating the authority for their talk—the concurrence of Ghotbzadeh

and three other members of the Revolutionary Council but not of the

Council as a body. We explained clearly why it is necessary to have a

scenario that begins with release of the hostages. They explained why

the political situation in Iran makes it possible only to proceed in stages

so as to prepare public opinion. Privately we concluded that some

scenario combining some elements of both approaches—including

early release of the hostages—might be necessary, but we told them

we had no authority to go beyond our present position. They had no

authority to present any new position from Tehran. On the basis of

our conversation, they called Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh from the

residence. He clearly regarded our coming here as a significant signal

and recognized the need to demonstrate Iran’s own seriousness. Our

two French contacts decided to return to Tehran and, at our urging,

to tell Ghotbzadeh that the most serious signal he could send would

be to designate someone to negotiate directly with us. End summary.

3. Following are the most interesting points that came out in the

conversation.

4. The two lawyers involved had been close to the Iranian exile

group for some time, particularly to the Khomeini group in Paris during

the revolution. One is himself a political exile from Argentina. The

other is a lawyer with human rights interests. He is a partner of Charon,

with whom we were in touch earlier, and has been associated earlier

with Amnesty International. Both probably have financial interests

with the Iranian Government. The one who had just come from Tehran

said he had seen Ghotbzadeh and Habibi (spokesman for the Revolu-

tionary Council). He says what he presented is also backed by Chamran

and Tabatabai. Ghotbzadeh did not see, but spoke to Khomeini’s son

(Ahmad) and son-in-law. The Frenchman believed Khomeini is aware

of the contact. He said he could not repeat not say the Revolution-

ary Council as a body was aware of our meeting, although some mem-

bers are. We believe he had these contacts, but it is apparent that

he is mainly representing a small group of individuals including

Ghotbzadeh.

5. The discussion focused in almost separate segments on two main

elements of a possible settlement.

A. On extradition, the lawyer just in from Tehran began by saying

that the release of the hostages would have to await a final decision

in the Panamanian courts on the extradition of the Shah. When the

Panamanians present made clear the Shah would not be extradited

and when we eventually turned to other elements of a settlement, he

indicated that it might be enough if progress was being made on the

other track (below) and for the extradition proceedings to have begun.

But he never fully retreated from his initial description of Iran’s posi-

tion. (He did state that the Council did not expect or want the Shah

back.) In this discussion, the Panamanians made it clear they would

cooperate on extradition only to the extent that beginning extradition

proceedings might contribute to creating an atmosphere in which the

hostages could be released.

B. On the formation of an international commission, Ghotbzadeh

has either misunderstood or misrepresented what they “agreed” with

Waldheim when he was in Tehran. The Iranians apparently chose to

believe that the international commission would be formed shortly

after Waldheim’s return to New York. They say they are still waiting.

Ghotbzadeh’s version of what they told Waldheim is this: Waldheim

would form the commission, and the Iranians would respond by saying

they accept the principle of releasing the hostages. After the commission

reports, the hostages could be released. We explained our position that

the hostages should be released simultaneously with the appointment

of the commission but our recognition that there might have to be a

series of steps by which each side tested the other’s readiness to move

toward a settlement.

Negotiating Channels

6. Following our conversation, they called Ghotbzadeh from the

residence. The Foreign Minister was reluctant to have a direct conversa-

tion but realized the need for him to demonstrate their seriousness.

The two lawyers are going to Tehran Sunday. We said that it would

be useful for Ghotbzadeh to say publicly that the Iranian Government

wants an early peaceful resolution of the hostage problem but more

important it would be a sign of seriousness if he would designate

someone to negotiate directly with a U.S. representative. They agreed

to urge continuation of the dialogue in this way. If that is impossible,

we said contact through a third party is better than no contact at all.

If they decide to designate a negotiator, they will send his name through

today’s channel and have him contact Hal.

7. Among the interesting points of general information raised

were these:

A. Ghotbzadeh reports that a decision is now being considered on

delaying the date of the Presidential election, and a decision will be

made by Sunday night. One reason is that, with Farsi dropping out of

the race, the Islamic Party wants a chance for a new candidate to have

time to campaign.

B. The central political contest in Iran is between the religious

elements and what they called the “European group,” i.e. those like

Ghotbzadeh who were with Khomeini in Europe. They described the

takeover of our Embassy as designed by Ayatollah Khalkhali and his

followers to force the revolution toward the religious right. Khomeini

had countered by introducing all political elements into the compound

to the point where even Khalkhali no longer saw advantage in keeping

the hostages.

C. The Frenchmen reported that in the recent meeting between

Khomeini and representatives of the captors, Khomeini told them that

Laingen would not be turned over to them and that they had to begin

preparing themselves for resolution of the hostage problem. Khomeini

is reported to have told them he did not want anyone hurt because

the honor of their nation is at stake.

8. The general and specific information provided by the two French-

men either reinforced our own analysis and information or shed new

light on some dimension of the problem in Iran. And while there is good

reason to believe that the Frenchmen’s primary personal relationship

is with Ghotbzadeh, their political and financial interests and their

history of working with the group that had been in exile with Khomeini

would leave them in the posture of wanting to help resolve the crisis

regardless of who is elected President. If someone other than Ghotbza-

158.

Memorandum From Robert Blackwill of the National

Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 20, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran, Afghanistan and the Allies (S)

At a moment when the need for American leadership and Allied

solidarity has seldom been more manifest, we are in danger of convinc-

ing the Europeans and the Japanese that in these dangerous times our

Kamikaze instinct is more refined than our strategic acuity:

—We threaten to take military action against Iran when we have

no evidence it would help free the hostages, and when it would do

much to get the Soviets off the Afghanistan hook with the Moslems.

(Can you imagine the Security Council and General Assembly debates

after we dropped the mines?)

—We continue to press for Allied sanctions against Iran as if we

believed that after the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan an even more

destabilized situation in Iran would be in our interests and not in

Moscow’s.

—We minimize to European dismay the effects of an Iranian oil

boycott of Europe on our Allies and on the world economy.

—In short, we give every sign that the 50 hostages are more impor-

tant to us (and to the President’s reelection prospects) than effective

resistance to Soviet imperialism in Southwest Asia and beyond. (S)

The effect of this in Europe has been to breed cynicism and to

revive doubts at the highest level about the capacity of the Carter

Administration to protect Western interests and to meet the Soviet

challenge. In my judgment, Warren Christopher’s obvious inability to

respond to these concerns in Europe last week was an embarrassment

to him and to the Administration. Schmidt tells the Spanish the U.S.

does not understand the Middle East. Thatcher snaps at Christopher

Negotiating Channels

and Carrington tells the Turks sanctions against Iran will not work.

As a piece in the German press said on Friday, “even though he publicly

calls him his friend, Schmidt’s doubt in the leadership qualities of the

most powerful man in the Western world have increased rather than

declined. On this point, Schmidt sees eye to eye with French President

Giscard d’Estaing.” (S)

Much of this on the Europeans’ part is sharply self serving. They

are dependent on Iranian oil. Schmidt does want to protect FRG

relations with the East. Giscard does want to maintain an independent

stance and France’s special relationship with Moscow. Thatcher does

think she understands the Soviets far better than Jimmy Carter, and

the Tory banking community in Britain is opposed to sanctions against

Iran. Nonetheless, our inherently conflicting objectives—to weaken Iran

and to strengthen regional opposition to the Soviets—give the Europe-

ans the perfect excuse to dismiss our entreaties for coordinated action

against the Soviets. (S)

What to do. First, we should not publicly rule out the use of force

against Iran because that threat may have some utility in the Revolu-

tionary Council. But we should send the most private Cabinet Line

messages to Thatcher, Schmidt and Giscard telling them that we have

drawn the proper strategic conclusions about the relationship between

the hostages and Afghanistan, and that as long as our people in Tehran

are not harmed, we will not use military force against Iran because we

recognize that this would gravely undermine Western efforts to make

the Soviets pay for the invasion of Afghanistan. And, although we

cannot suddenly reverse ourselves on Allied sanctions against Iran,

we should certainly not get into a fight with the Europeans over this,

a fight which would lessen the likelihood we can get them to address

the strategic implications of Afghanistan. (S)

My Sunday paper has just hit the porch and I read John Goshko’s

story2 that we are privately softening our position on Iran because of

Afghanistan. Perhaps somebody should tell Warren Christopher and

the Allies. In my judgment, the President’s comment on Meet the Press

yesterday that Afghanistan and Iran are interrelated3 was not specific

159.

Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

to President Carter

Washington, January 22, 1980

In the next several months, you will shape, define and execute a

new American foreign policy that will not only set the tone for U.S.-

Soviet relations for the next twenty years, but will largely determine

whether or not our country will play an effective role as the leader of

the Free World and, in that way, diminish the possibility of nuclear

confrontation. We live in a more dangerous world today than it seems

we have lived in since the Cuban missile crisis.

For you to pursue this new policy and to execute the decisions

that you must make, it seems to me that you have to be relatively

unrestrained both politically and substantively. For that reason, it

seems that we must have two very high priorities over the next 30–

45 days.

First, we need to eliminate Kennedy from the political race so

that you will not be preoccupied with the campaign nor restrained

politically from doing whatever is necessary to meet the Soviet chal-

lenge. You will need to have the time to focus on this problem and

the flexibility to make decisions that will be unpopular with some of

the elements of the Democratic Party—the registration decision is a

good case in point. Also, if we wrap up the nomination, it will give

us more time to prepare for the general election and pull the party

together for a tough general election campaign.

Negotiating Channels

This means that we need to make an all-out effort to beat Kennedy

in both Maine and New Hampshire. I will be working with Kraft and

Strauss2 on this. It will not be easy but can be done.

Secondly, and a much more difficult goal is to find some way to

resolve the hostage situation in the next 30–45 days so that we can

begin to build a relationship—however tenuous—with the Iranian gov-

ernment that undermines Soviet influence in the country and discour-

ages Soviet military intervention.

I would not want to imply in any way that you, Cy, Zbig or the

excellent team that has been working on this matter have not done

everything humanly possible to obtain the safe release of the hostages.

Our position which was developed at the Camp David meeting3 was

correct both substantively and politically. Based on my own recent

involvement in this matter and discussions with both the French con-

tacts and with Professor Cottam, I have concluded that the situation

does not exist now nor will it exist in the near future whereby the

hostages are released simultaneously with the other steps we are willing

to take. For that reason, it seems to me that we have to at least consider

taking some risks in obtaining their release that were neither feasible

or advisable before the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. This is not to

suggest that we have to abandon any of our basic principles, but that

we are going to have to consider modifying our tactics.

The substantive gap between the Iranians and ourselves is signifi-

cant. The internal political situation is so fragile and fluid that no

present or future leader of the civilian government will be able to agree

in advance to the simultaneous release of the hostages. Rightly or

wrongly, they will argue that to create the proper political atmosphere

for obtaining Khomeini’s blessing for the release of the hostages, there

must be some actions taken that can be used with Khomeini and by

Khomeini as evidence that he has won the battle with “the U.S.

imperialists.”

If this analysis is correct, it would mean that we would need to

develop a scenario that included the early release of the hostages after

some steps that tested each other’s seriousness of purpose. I doubt

very much if Ghotbzadeh or the future leadership of the government

would be able to agree in advance to a scenario that had Khomeini’s

blessing. Professor Cottam says that Khomeini does not think or operate

in that way.

This would mean that through direct or indirect channels we would

have to develop a joint scenario with the risk that it would not be

successful and presumed on the front end that the steps that we took

would create the proper atmosphere for Ghotbzadeh, or Bani Sadr or

Beheshti to go to the Ayatollah and say that, “we have won, and it is

time to let the hostages go”. The great risk would be that Khomeini

would reject their plea and we would be back at square one having

used up most of our bargaining chips.

Such a scenario would only be useful if we had good reason to

believe that Khomeini himself is looking for a way out. If he is not,

then the risks would not be worth taking.

If this was done, it would have to be done in a way that did not

appear to Khomeini or to the others in the Revolutionary Council as a

sign of U.S. weakness that could then only invite a possibly harder line.

If you are interested in pursuing this possible course of action, it

would require you, Cy, Zbig, the Vice-President and others addressing

several questions.

1. What would be the best scenario we could develop that did not

undermine our nation’s principles, but at the same time sends a positive

signal to the moderates in the Revolutionary Council that could be

used effectively with the Ayatollah for the release of the hostages?

Let me give you an example of the kind of scenario that might be

developed:

Step 1. Statement by President Carter that “beyond the resolution

of the hostage crisis, the United States desires to have a friendly relation-

ship with the people and government of Iran”.

Step 2. Iran responds with a statement by either the Foreign Minister

or new President that “the early release of the hostages is a goal of the

Revolutionary Council”.

Step 3. UN resolution is introduced with U.S. support establishing

a commission of inquiry.

Step 4. Statement from Iranian official that at the time that the

commission completes its report, it will release the hostages.

Step 5. If step 4 takes place, U.S. supports UN resolution. If it does

not, U.S. vetoes resolution in the Security Council.

Step 6. Commission of Inquiry is set up with a ten day limit on its

activities. Travels to Iran to receive testimony.

Step 7. Commission completes report and on agreed upon date,

issues report simultaneous with announcement from Iran that the hos-

tages will be released within twenty-four hours.

Step 8. At the time the hostages are put on plane, the Panamanian

government announces that it has received formal request of extradi-

Negotiating Channels

tion and that it will be referred to their Attorney General in accordance

with Panamanian law.

As I wrote this, I was just thinking out loud. It would probably be

better to use the Panamanian “card” earlier and also to build in addi-

tional steps and gestures to safeguard this process. But, it is my opinion

that some scenario like this will have to be worked out before our

people are freed. I believe that U.S. public opinion would support our

taking such a chance although it would look bad if we failed.

2. If such a scenario is developed, what is the best way to present

it—through Waldheim, the PLO, direct contact or other means? Since

there are several parties involved—the Panamanians, the United

Nations, etc., it seems that we would have to make a decision as to

how to present this.

3. Thirdly, and of critical importance, when would we present this?

A basic decision would have to be made as to whether or not it

would be best to pursue this during the run-off or after the election

of a new President.

Assuming that Ghotbzadeh does not make the run-off—and you

can see from the attached “Memcon” that he no longer thinks that he

will—a critical question would be whether or not the contacts that we

have had with him could be transferred to the new leadership. We

should do what we can to encourage Ghotbzadeh to transfer these

contacts to the new leadership. This could also be a way that he could

keep himself involved and possibly ingratiate himself with the new

leadership.

Another thought is that if Ghotbzadeh is a lame duck, possibly he

and/or Khomeini would be willing for him to take the heat for resolving

the hostage situation.

I am just thinking out loud, but it seems after your State of the

Union Address, you should spend some time with Zbig, Cy and his

excellent team talking these things through. I strongly believe that we

do need a new approach that is inherently risky for both our country

and for you politically.

Also, you should review the attached “memcon”. Our trip was

taken seriously. I hope that we are not undercutting Waldheim’s credi-

160.

Telegram From the Embassy in Panama to the Department

of State

678. Dept Please Pass to White House for Hamilton Jordan. For

Secretary, Deputy Secretary and Asst Sec Saunders. Subject: Iranian-

Panamanian Contacts.

1. (C–Entire text)

2. Summary: President Royo, with concurrence of General Torrijos,

promised Ghotbzadeh this evening2 that early tomorrow morning he

would send the GOI a cable agreeing to receive formal extradition

request from GOI, stating that the Shah was “under the care of the

Government of Panama and that his movements are subject to prior

approval by the security forces of the country” (i.e., stopping short of

the words “under arrest”). Royo will add a paragraph stating that now

it is up to the GOI to comply with international law and to release

the hostages. The decision to take these steps was made following

indications received through the Panamanian Ambassador in Paris that

they would aid in the release of the hostages. Gabriel Lewis and “Rory”

Gonzalez, recently back from Paris, concur that the calculated risk was

worth taking. The Shah will be briefed tomorrow morning and assured

that he will not be handed over. Royo and Torrijos asked that I visit

the Shah to indicate that we are aware of the plans. End summary.

President Royo, V.P. De la Espriella, Gabriel Lewis, “Rory” Gonzalez,

and Col. Noriega (Intelligence Chief) were meeting. They explained

that at 3 this afternoon Ghotbzadeh telephoned Lewis saying that he

wished to speak to Royo to request that Panama take certain measures,

Negotiating Channels

i.e., to arrest the Shah and to initiate the extradition process, Lewis

said he would call back in three hours as he had to locate Royo. He

asked Ghotbzadeh that, if Royo were to agree, would this help in the

release of the hostages, and Ghotbzadeh replied affirmatively.

4. Following this call, Col. Noriega spoke with the PN Ambassador

in Paris, who had been in communication with Tehran and had been

told that such steps were necessary “to prepare the Revolutionary

Council” (ie, for release of hostages). He also reported that Ghotbzadeh

was sending an “intermediary” to Paris early Wednesday morning,3

who could then travel to Panama at the right moment.

5. Following this conversation, the PN Ambassador to Paris called

Ghotbzadeh and said that Royo was presently in a meeting with his

top advisers considering the matter.

6. Royo called Ghotbzadeh at approximately 6 p.m. (I heard the

tape which was made of the conversation, held in English; Ghotbza-

deh’s voice was not always intelligible.) Royo said he agreed to receive

the request for extradition of the ex-Shah. He said the GOP would

initiate procedures for extradition when it received the formal docu-

ments required by Panamanian law, i.e., copy of the Iranian order

for arrest, documents evidencing crimes, and applicable laws of Iran.

Ghotbzadeh asked repeatedly whether Shah would be arrested,

whether he could say order for arrest was issued, etc., and Royo ducked

the question each time. Royo stated only that the Shah was “in a safe

place,” that he was “well protected by our security forces,” etc. He

promised to send Ghotbzadeh a telex early Wednesday a.m. confirming

the agreement. Ghotbzadeh indicated he would make such communica-

tion public and said: “I believe what you are doing (word missed)

toward a peaceful solution to the problem.” Royo said: “I hope our

response under international law can be a help.”

7. Royo and Torrijos discussed the telex Royo should send early

Wednesday (Royo promised Ghotbzadeh it would be sent by 7: a.m.).

He said that it would consist of three paragraphs: in the first he would

state that the Shah was under the “protection and care” of the GOP

and that “his movements were subject to previous authorization of the

security forces of the country.” The second para would state that the

GOP was prepared to receive the formal extradition request, and would

describe the documents required under PN law. The third paragraph

would appeal to the GOI to release the hostages and say, in effect, that

he hoped the example of Panama’s fulfilment of the law would help

the GOI take measures to free the hostages and bring about respect

for international law. The implication at least would be that the GOI’s

compliance with international law would determine Panama’s further

action, Royo said.

8. Torrijos said that Col. Noriega would go to Contadora to brief

the Shah on these developments. He and Royo asked that I go to

Contadora later in the morning to let the Shah know that we were

familiar with the Panamanian plans.

9. I pointed out that Panama was giving away the only two cards

in its hand without any assurance of results. My argument did not

prevail, however, in the face of all those present who insisted that it

was the right moment for a calculated risk. They seemed to have

confidence that Ghotbzadeh would perform and that even if he were

not elected President, that he was in such high favor with Khomeini

that he would wield great power.

10. In a post-meeting phone conversation with Lewis, I said I

thought it unfortunate that Royo had given in so quickly without

putting together the whole deal and coordinating with us. Lewis gave

a verbal shrug of the shoulders and said it was important now to make

sure Royo’s telex was carefully drafted so that it did not make any

commitments as to the arrest and that it show clearly that Panama’s

intention is to work to free the hostages. He agreed that he would not

have committed himself to send the cable but felt it was too late in

view of Royo’s promises.

and that he would not send the cable prior to such time, so I could

advise him of any information received from Washington tonight.

very concerned about timing and felt Royo’s telex would be a great

mistake. He said to tell Royo that as a result of the weekend trip,

President Carter had ordered a complete review of our negotiating

posture and had said we should work with the Panamanians. He asked

that I try to stop the telex to Ghotbzadeh and get Royo’s represent-

atives to Washington. He said to tell Royo that Ghotbzadeh was on

his way out politically, had told a contact of ours he could not win the

election, and had made many unkept promises to us. Perhaps the telex

was a good idea for later, but we had to coordinate. I said that if

necessary I would call him from Royo’s office.

learned that the French intermediary had not yet arrived from Tehran

but would be in shortly. Lewis asked that the intermediary call him

no later than 5 a.m. Panama time so that we could have his overall

assessment prior to my meeting with Royo. Lewis quoted the intermedi-

161.

Minutes of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Justice

Peter Tarnoff

John Shenefield

Defense

OMB

Robert Komer

John White

JCS

White House

General John Pustay

David Aaron

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

MINUTES

David Aaron chaired the SCC meeting which was briefed by Admi-

ral Turner on the operation to exfiltrate a half-dozen Americans from

Tehran. Admiral Turner noted that, since this was not an intelligence

collection operation, a Finding was necessary under Hughes-Ryan.

Mr. Aaron noted that it would be our intention not to inform the

Committees until we had concluded that there was minimal risk from

any leak. Thus, we would not inform them in advance as has been our

practice under the requirement to provide “timely” notification.

Mr. Aaron also noted that the Finding would provide authority

for the CIA to be helpful in effecting the departure from Iran of our

hostages at the U.S. Embassy. He noted that this was not presently

contemplated but that we should have this authority should swift

action be required at some future point.

The members of the SCC concurred in the Finding. The Justice

Department, in particular, agreed with its terms.

The Committee then discussed how the exfiltrated Americans will

be handled so as to minimize the possibility of leaks which could

adversely affect the hostages or the Canadian Government which has

cooperated in their safekeeping until now.

General Pustay agreed to ascertain a military base in the United

States to which the Americans could be sent following a few days’

R&R in Zurich. Relatives of the Americans could be permitted to have

telephone contact and perhaps even visits. However, all these arrange-

ments will have to be worked out once the Americans have been gotten

out of Iran, since their views will obviously have to be taken into

consideration.

162.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 24, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran

We are approaching a new point in our relationship with Iran

where some fundamental choices must be faced. Our basic dilemma

can be defined as follows:

—With the Soviet threat to Iran growing more explicit (and given

our new level of commitment in the area) we will have a greater interest

in propping up any anti-communist regime in Tehran, and there will

be a growing inclination to try to fashion a cooperative relationship

with the Khomeini regime after a new president is elected;

—But the very presence of the Khomeini regime lends itself to

continued collapse of the society, the danger of civil war, and the

very real risk that the left will capitalize on the foibles of the present

leadership to strengthen its position for a takeover from within.

The questions we must ask ourselves at this point are:

1. Is the Khomeini regime salvageable? Is it capable of evolving

over time into a government which provides even the minimal level

of internal stability and self-defense capability?

2. Is the risk of a communist takeover in Iran greater from an

actual Soviet intervention, or is the greater risk an internal growth of

leftist power?

3. How can we simultaneously seek to get the hostages back, bolster

an anti-communist regime, and strengthen Iran’s capability to resist a

possible Soviet intervention?

In my view, the regime in Iran is perilously close to total collapse.

Khomeini is committed to an unrealistic vision of a pure Islamic society,

but he is leaving the organizational work to God. He is an old man,

physically unwell, and totally lacking in any practical sense of how to

manage anything, let alone a major nation. The people of Iran were

thrilled at his leadership in bringing down the Shah, but fundamentally

they do not share his vision. As time goes on, the gap between his

image and the reality of governmental chaos have become increasingly

apparent, and his support is waning. His hospitalization will reinforce

the sense of uncertainty and drift. It will remind everyone of his mortal-

ity and the absence of any structure to provide continuity if he is

incapacitated.

The process of seeking alternative to Khomeini’s leadership was

already well underway, and it is gaining momentum daily. The Kurds

will not be reconciled with him. They have learned they cannot trust

him and they are naturally inclined to grasp such moments to assert

their own nationalistic aspirations. Azerbaijan is simmering just below

the level of full scale rebellion. It is only the uncertainty of Shariatma-

dari’s status—and the possibility that he might be harmed—which

restrains them from even more overt opposition. Khomeini has met

their demands with naked force and contempt. They are not going

to be wooed back into his fold. The other tribes—Qashqai, Baluchi,

Khuzistan Arabs—recognize weakness when they see it, and their open

opposition to the central regime is the best evidence of how they view

the prospects of the present regime.

The regime itself is a collection of second-rate, venal, power hungry,

self-centered, inexperienced and disreputable individuals. There is not

a good mind or a good idea in the lot. The power struggles which at

first were hidden beneath a superficial unity have now emerged into

public view. One of the current rumors in Tehran is that the Forgan

assassination group2 in fact does not exist at all—it is the invention of

the ruling mullahs for their own political assassinations. No one in

Tehran today believes that Ayatollah Taleghani died a natural death.

Rather, he is considered to have been too much of a rival to Khomeini

and was quietly dispensed with. The fact that these rumors have credi-

bility is unmistakable evidence of the decay of the revolutionary elite.

People have seen mullah rule, and they are appalled. Khomeini’s

son-in-law is rumored to be exporting large amounts of money to Swiss

accounts. The level of bribery and corruption extends from the lowest

level (where the local mullahs and komiteh members “borrow” cars,

furnishings and bank accounts of their opponents) to the very top.

Nothing in the performance of the present regime has given any basis

for encouragement about the future.

Khomeini insists on retaining all power to himself. He makes pro-

nouncements and expects them to be carried out according to his vision.

When things go wrong, he fires those most directly involved—or those

who have been fingered by the members of his court. As a result,

Negotiating Channels

everyone shuns responsibility and all the “officials” of the government

and the Revolutionary Council spend all their waking hours (and prob-

ably their nightmares as well) scheming about how to maintain Kho-

meini’s personal support. This is about the best we can expect so long

as Khomeini is alive. Ironically, if he dies, the game will return to

square one and it will be every man for himself.

In the meantime, the left is organizing itself. The Tudeh Party

expects Khomeini’s imminent collapse and is positioning itself to inherit

as much of the wreckage as possible. If the present chaos drags on,

the left will continue to ingratiate itself with Khomeini as one of the

few reliable bastions of support, and he will be forced to rely on them

more and more heavily.

The presidential elections will probably change very little. The

election will be boycotted by major sections of the population, and the

remainder will probably split according to personalities. Any president,

even if elected by a genuine majority, will find himself in the same

position as poor old Bazargan—and the new president’s fate is likely

to be about the same. Khomeini will not brook real independence, so

the new president will either have to be a total rubber stamp or he

will have to set about building an independent power base. The latter

is more likely, but it is also dangerous to the health—politically and

otherwise.

The threat of internal collapse and the emergence of the left as the

dominant power strikes me as much more imminent and likely than

an actual Soviet military intervention. Any prolongation of Khomeini’s

faltering regime only increases that risk. Our objective should be to

hasten the downfall of the present regime. We need not do much

actively, for it is falling of its own weight. But we should beware of

taking tactical steps in the context of the Soviet invasion which artifi-

cially breathe new life into the present leadership and give the Iranian

public the false impression that there may be more there than meets

the eye.

They are troubled by sanctions. We should use that weapon, and

reinforce it with some hype and propaganda. It undercuts the credibil-

ity of the mullah rule and it puts pressure on them where they feel

it—in their domestic support.

We should continue with our contacts with dissident groups. Our

objective should be to encourage those groups who have real influ-

ence—particularly those in Azerbaijan which stand between Tehran

and the USSR and who have the manpower, talent and political deter-

mination to provide some kind of alternative regime. They also have

an invaluable religious asset in Shariatmadari, and a network of fellow

Azeris in key positions throughout the country, including the military.

We need not delude ourselves into thinking that we can master-

mind a countercoup. That would be both infeasible and historically

163.

Summary of a Special Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran Strategy

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President

White House

Hamilton Jordan

State

Secretary Cyrus Vance

NSC

Harold Saunders

David Aaron

Gary Sick

Defense

Secretary Harold Brown*

Graham Claytor

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

*Only present for first few minutes

Negotiating Channels

SUMMARY

Per your instructions, we met to review our Iran strategy. We

reviewed the key channels which are now being used: the United

Nations; the PLO, which may be useful again in the future; the Sudanese

Sadiq al-Mahdi; Professor Richard Cottam who talks directly with

Ghotbzadeh; Swiss Ambassador Lang in Tehran, who has access to

key individuals for relaying messages; the Egyptian journalist Heikal;

and the French lawyers who will see Ham and Hal Saunders again

tomorrow. All agreed that we should keep all of these channels open

and exploit any others which may become available. However, none

of them have any immediate prospects of producing significant move-

ment toward release of the hostages.

The key problem remains that we do not have an authoritative

individual with whom we can negotiate. The elections this weekend

may produce someone who will be willing and able to take more direct

action. Some believe that once the new President is elected, Khomeini

will accept a less active role and turn over greater authority. However,

this may not occur until after the legislative elections in late February,

and there is considerable skepticism that it will happen at all. The

French lawyers told Ham that a new President will immediately be

faced with a challenge from the clerical elements on the Revolutionary

Council and will be unable to take independent action. The French

lawyers felt that the runoff period after the preliminary balloting this

weekend may provide the most promising window for a U.S. initiative,

by approaching opposing candidates with a U.S. plan.

Three basic strategies were examined, which are not mutually

exclusive:

1. Accept a high-risk strategy in which we agree to take a series

of steps unilaterally, with some corresponding steps by the Iranians

to confirm acceptance at each point. This would mean we would have

to give up our present position of demanding release of the hostages

as a starting point. We would have to be willing to play some cards

without real assurance that the hostages would be released at the end

of the procedure. The objective would be to give moderate elements

sufficient ammunition to go to Khomeini and try to persuade him that

the Americans had been defeated and the time had come to release

the hostages. The French lawyers and Cottam believe this is the only

strategy which will pay off.

2. Focus our attention on getting the hostages out of the embassy

and out of the custody of the militants. If successful, this would under-

cut the militants’ political leverage and eventually make it easier for

the government to decide to release the hostages. Our tactics would

be to focus on the condition of the hostages and the need to move

them to more adequate quarters with better care, for humanitarian

reasons. They have shown themselves to be sensitive to such arguments

in the past.

3. Focus primarily on the Islamic Conference and the Islamic states

as a means of getting through to Khomeini.

There are mixed views about the usefulness of pursuing sanctions

aggressively. Some believe that the threat of sanctions merely stiffens

the back of the regime and weakens the bargaining position of the

moderates. Others think that the sanctions are taken very seriously in

Iran and that they create domestic political pressure to find a settlement.

All agreed, however, that pushing sanctions before the election and

before the Islamic Conference meeting would be counterproductive.

We recommend proceeding as follows:

—First, we will focus on the forthcoming Islamic Conference as a

means of getting our views across to the Iranians from a group of states

and leaders who would be credible in their eyes. State is actively

pursuing this.

—Second, State will develop a series of alternative negotiating

strategies which we might use after the Islamic Conference and after

the initial balloting for President. These will be reviewed at a subse-

quent meeting.

—Third, we will collect and examine names of private individuals

who might be able to organize a global effort drawing attention to

the plight of the hostages on purely humanitarian grounds. A non-

American with leftist credentials would probably be ideal, if we can

find such a person and persuade him to undertake the effort.

164.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, undated

SUBJECT

Meeting with B and V—the French-based lawyers Friday, January 25 in Hamilton

Jordan’s office

V said he and B had been very impressed with the seriousness and

honesty of the presentation by Jordan and Saunders in London. This

allowed V and B convincingly and strongly to defend the U.S. position

in Tehran. They had argued that while Iran’s point of view had to be

listened to, international standards of human rights came first. V and

B asked for a sign of similar seriousness and honesty from the Iranian

side. (Ghotbzadeh had Richard Cottam call Hamilton Jordan to endorse

the talks V and B would have with us.)

V said that on arriving in Tehran they had a four hour meeting

with Ghotbzadeh, which was adjourned to allow him to report to the

Revolutionary Council. They reconvened with him at midnight to hear

the Council’s reaction. There were three decisions:

—Henceforth the only negotiator for Iran would be the Foreign

Minister. All information on the crisis should be conveyed to the Minis-

ter, not to members of the Council. (In effect the Council is taking itself

out of the decision chain.)

—The Foreign Minister will immediately report all developments

to Khomeini and keep him thoroughly informed in a timely fashion.

—The two leading candidates for the Presidency—Bani Sadr and

Habibi—would be kept fully informed of developments by the Foreign

Minister until the runoff elections were held. B had later briefed each

of them.

Subsequently, V and B were informed of other decisions by the

Council.

—The militants will no longer be allowed to express their views

to the press. This decision was taken on the evening of January 24.

Thus far we are not able to confirm whether or not it has been effectively

implemented.

—The Council guaranteed absolutely the security of the hostages.

The Council would take further steps to assure that the hostages would

not be harmed. (This decision was taken because V had raised the

possibility that some disgruntled militant might try to deepen the crisis

by harming one of the hostages.)

—The U.S. should attempt to prevent Iranian students in this coun-

try from making statements which damage prospects of a settlement.

For example, some students had said that whatever happened to the

Shah the U.S. itself was the real enemy. (We commented that the Iranian

Embassy in Washington was more troublesome than students and

perhaps the Foreign Minister could direct the Chargé to cease harmful

propaganda activities. B agreed to do so.)

—Finally, because Ghotbzadeh believed that the U.S. wanted some

American correspondents to be allowed to return to Iran, the Iranian

government would soon permit on a selective basis the return of corre-

spondents who would not be “biased.” These correspondents would

be asked to pledge that they would not interview the militants.

V and B gave us their analysis of the Iranian political situation,

which they said was shared by Ghotbzadeh and members of the Revo-

lutionary Council: The seizure of the Embassy had been a move by

the religious extreme right—somehow backed by the Soviet Union—

to provoke a crisis. They had, in fact, succeeded in bringing down the

Bazargan Government and in later forcing out Bani Sadr. But within

forty hours of the seizure Khomeini had moved to thwart their plans.

He had dispatched the Ayatollah Khoeni a loyal supporter plus contin-

gents of Palestinians, Kurds, Libyans, left-wing Iranian youth and also

other religious students to dilute the authority of the group that had

organized the seizure. Subsequently, these groups left the compound.

(We doubt the involvement of these groups. The significance is that

the Revolutionary Council believes that the militants are hostile to the

Khomeini regime and that Khomeini recognized this and moved to take

charge of the operation on the compound by inserting his own people.)

Negotiating Channels

The next move of the religious right was to try to manipulate the

elections in their way. Khomeini, whom B described as a master political

leader, had again thwarted the hard-liners by eliminating their candi-

date, Farsi, as well as the candidate of the extreme left, Rajavi. The

students had then eliminated Admiral Madani. That left two candidates

trusted by Khomeini in the field, Bani Sadr and Habibi. B, who knew

all of the Iranian revolutionaries in Paris, had the highest regard for

Habibi. He described him as very solid, a man of principle, culture,

moderation and dedication—a man without enemies and probably

Khomeini’s favorite. Because the religious right had lost their candidate

they were forced to back Habibi. That assured him a victory but would

not make him beholden to them. It was Khomeini’s plan to take the

position of “religious guide,” dealing only with general policy ques-

tions and leaving the details of running the country to the President.

B anticipated that the next stage of the struggle for power after the

Presidential election would be a fight between the religious right and

the secularists for the control of the Majlis and the Prime Ministry and

cabinet positions.

In an aside B described how Habibi had been the principal author

of the draft constitution which Khomeini had accepted. Later Khomeini

agreed to submit the draft to a constitutional assembly when Bazargan

demanded that as part of the democratic process. As Khomeini feared,

the religious right dominated the assembly and redrafted key articles

of the constitution to their liking—seeking to impose the theocracy

which Khomeini did not want.

The scenario for ending the hostage crisis which Ghotbzadeh and

possibly the Revolutionary Council appeared to have worked out with

B and V follows:

Waldheim acting on his own authority will appoint a commission

of inquiry, chaired by someone like Sean McBride. The U.S. will oppose

the commission on technical grounds. Our opposition is essential, if

the commission is to be accepted in Iran, particularly by the militants.

The commission will have as its purposes the inquiry into Iranian

grievances and, secondly, into the conditions of the hostages. After a

week’s investigation the commission will report its findings to the

Iranian government. The findings concerning the hostages will describe

their inhumane treatment and the commission will recommend the

hostages be released. This part of the report will be transmitted to

Khomeini who will recognize that, although the taking of hostages

was an acceptable form of pressure on the United States by Iran, the

conditions under which the hostages are held are not acceptable in

terms of Islamic standards. Khomeini will then order the hostages

released to the Iranian government which may remove them to a prison.

V believes it essential that there be an intermediate stage in which the

hostages are held by the Iranian government; he does not think the

militants will agree to release them to us. It will also be important for

Iran to make a clear distinction and disassociate the militants from the

government.

The commission’s report on Iran’s grievances will be communi-

cated to the world at large and presumably to the UN. This portion

was not clear to B and V. It was not certain whether Iran would require

a resolution by the General Assembly or some other formal action.

Ghotbzadeh said no resolution was necessary but that is in doubt.

Sean McBride would have an additional role as the negotiator of

the precise stages for ending the crisis. He would help settle the bilateral

problems such as the freeze of assets, form of relations, recovery of

the Shah’s assets, etc. The Iranians shared our view that a high-level

contact between us was necessary, but could not have direct links

during the very sensitive period of the next 30 days before the new

government is in place.

The hostages would be released on the eve of a religious ceremony

which the Iranians will organize in Tehran to mark the 1500th anniver-

sary of Islam. V and B could not specify the exact holiday that would

be used for this commemoration, but they thought it was in the latter

part of February. They thought they could give us the date Saturday.

Khomeini’s act of releasing the hostages would thus be a religious

gesture witnessed by the many religious figures who would be invited

to the ceremony.

V said it was agreed in Iran that the hostage issue should be settled

within the next thirty days before a new government took office. It

was anticipated that Ghotbzadeh would remain as Foreign Minister and

would be charged with handling the hostage crisis during this period.

Meanwhile, the Panama track would be proceeding along pre-

determined lines. B and V intended to go to Panama in the next day

or so to appoint a Panamanian lawyer to represent Iran in pressing

the extradition case. The Panamanian government will be asked to

issue a formal order to the Shah to place himself “at the disposal” of

the government during a 60-day period in which the extradition evi-

dence from Iran might be presented. V thought that this would be an

easy matter to arrange with the Panamanians.

In general B and V described themselves as “almost very optimis-

tic” in dealing with an extremely difficult situation.

165.

Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

to President Carter

Washington, undated

As I told you, Secretary Vance has taken the position that he does

not want to hear the tape of the Waldheim meeting with the Revolution-

ary Council2 or hear [read] the transcript. You may want to defer reading

the transcript until you confer with him.

I believe that even if you don’t read it, it is important that you

know what actually happened.

Let me begin by saying that I know that the Secretary-General

was trying to identify with the Iranians, appear neutral in his role as

Secretary-General and create an atmosphere that might result in

progress on the hostage issue. He also was under a certain amount of

pressure due to the fact that his life was in danger several times.

Having said that, let me make these observations:

1. The Secretary-General did not present on behalf of the world

community the view that Iran was in violation of international law.

This should have been stated in a tactful way during his meeting with

the Revolutionary Council.

2. He tried to identify with the Iranians at the expense of represent-

ing the world community.

3. Because he did not clearly state the U.S. or United Nations

position on the situation, the members of the Revolutionary Council

were left to draw their own conclusions about where things stood.

4. The tone of Waldheim’s remarks was apologetic, defensive and

at points obsequious. There is no way that the Council—particularly

the religious, non-secular members—could have concluded that they

were dealing with either a strong man or a strong organization.

Consequently, while recognizing the critical role that the United

Nations and the Secretary-General have to play in resolving the crisis,

I believe that you should consider reading the transcript just so that

we will not be dependent on Waldheim doing any heavy negotiating

for us.

My French friends and Cottam have said a number of times that

the Foreign Minister was frustrated and disappointed that nothing had

happened as a result of Waldheim’s trip. That must be because he left

the impression that he was sympathetic to their cause and imprecise

about what would have to happen on both sides. As a result, Waldheim

probably has less credibility with them because they will have con-

cluded that Waldheim left Iran convinced of the justice of their own

cause and was blocked by the U.S. from following through.

Enough on that, but I hope that you will keep my harsh com-

ments private.

Because the issue that we are dealing with is so important and

sensitive, I want to make a few points:

1. Absolute confidentiality is essential. Most of the inter-govern-

mental communications on this should be oral and limited to a very

tight group.

2. My personal involvement on a continuing basis is important

and essential in a couple of ways. First, it has been a signal of our

willingness and seriousness to negotiate in a respectful manner. Sec-

ondly, it is important that someone with a political sense of things here

and [in] Iran be involved on a continuing basis.

3. Hal Saunders and I should work on this as a team. He and I

complement one another—he has an understanding of the area, the

personalities, is an excellent draftsman and represents the Secretary

well.

4. If we are able to put this thing together, it is going to be like

one of those trick billiards shots where you have to hit five sides before

the ball goes in the pocket. For this reason, we are going to need to

put together the UN, Panamanian, etc., pieces together. For that reason,

I will need to be involved in every part of the discussion and negotia-

tions. This should not take much of my time, but is essential in terms

of tying this thing all together. Right now, Hal Saunders and I are the

only two people in the government who have a precise sense of both

how this thing can be done and also how difficult and sensitive it will be.

So, at the risk of appearing immodest, I would suggest that you

say sometime during the meeting today4 if we decide to go ahead that

you want Hal Saunders and I to work as a team and that you want

me involved in every dimension of the discussions to both keep you

informed and to measure domestic political impact.

166.

Memorandum From the Director for Operations, Joint Chiefs

of Staff (Shutler), to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of

Staff (Jones)

Washington, January 28, 1980

SUBJECT

Conditions for Hostage Rescue Attempt

1. (TS) The attached paper by the JTF explores the factors affecting

a decision to rescue the hostages. The summary on page 8 gives a good

thumbnail sketch of the analysis.

2. (TS) It appears to me that three external conditions can apply:

a. Hostages secure. Negotiations continuing as at present.

b. Hostages gravely threatened by current captors, other competing

politically oriented terrorist organizations, or mob action during chaos.

c. One or more hostages injured or killed.

30% possibility of disruption) do not appear to be high enough to

warrant an attempt under current conditions. If we wait until hostages

have been injured or killed, the pressure to act will be so high, and

the situation in Iran so uncertain, that the odds for success would

certainly be drastically reduced. The hard part will be to recognize a

time of increased danger and to act accordingly. The team is continuing

to refine plans to deploy, in particular to get to the shortest response

time consistent with operational security. [4 lines not declassified]

Very respectfully,

Philip D. Shutler

Lieutenant General, USMC

Director for Operations

Records of J–3 DDSO, Box 1, DOD Intel Experience (Iran Hostage Rescue). Top Secret;

Eyes Only.

167.

Paper Prepared by the Joint Task Force

Washington, January 25, 1980

HOSTAGE RESCUE

[Omitted here is the body of the paper (7 pages).]

6. Summary: The US team of men and machines is capable of

performing the mission. Two important facilities remain undetermined:

the drop-off point for Delta and a holding area for Delta in Tehran.

168.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to

President Carter

Washington, undated

SUBJECT

Iran—Alternative Negotiating Strategies

Over the next month a new political situation will evolve in Iran.

The purpose of this memo is to take a look at a fresh approach to

negotiating the release of our hostages in that period.

Negotiating Channels

The Time Frame

The time frame is set by the series of elections which began with

the first round of the Presidential elections on January 25. Bani Sadr

appears to be the winner. The Assembly elections are scheduled for

February 15 but may be delayed until later in the month. The next step

will be appointment of a Prime Minister by the President and the

selection of a Cabinet by the Prime Minister, but none of them will

have authority until approved by the newly elected Assembly.

During this transitional period, a major religious celebration is

scheduled the week of February 10 to commemorate the 15th centennial

of Islam and the anniversary of the Revolution. These dates could

provide an occasion for releasing the hostages if the way is paved.

The new government will take office only when the Assembly

sits and gives it a vote of confidence, presumably around the end

of February.

Analysis of the Present Negotiating Situation

We have been frustrated until now by the absence in Iran of a firm

decision to resolve the crisis and negotiating partners who could with

authority negotiate with us directly or designate a particular intermedi-

ary to negotiate for them.

If the word brought by our French contacts is correct, Ghotbzadeh

and the President-elect may now be receptive negotiating partners.

We are told by our visiting French contacts that, before the election,

Khomeini and the Revolutionary Council placed the hostage problem

in the hands of Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh, who was to keep the

President-elect and Khomeini informed. (A summary of the January

changed with Bani Sadr’s landslide victory. He may well decide to

take full charge of the hostage crisis and impose his own views which

may differ from the ideas of Ghotbzadeh. Therefore, our first task is

to check with him any ideas on procedures and on a scenario.

In addition to our French contacts, other potential intermediaries

are waiting in the wings.

Alternative Approaches

There are two views of how the release of the hostages might be

negotiated:

Approach 1: The first is reflected in our approach to date and in

the position given to the Iranians by Waldheim on January 12

(Attachment 2). Until now we have concentrated on ending the crisis

by seeking to arrange a package in which (1) all elements of the package

would be firmly agreed in advance and (2) release of all hostages would

take place simultaneous with initial gestures toward the Iranians.

Approach 2: More and more, we are hearing from the Iranians that

Khomeini’s way of operating makes it impossible to agree in advance

on all elements of a scenario. They say it will be necessary to take

several steps to begin changing the climate in Iran and then to go to

Khomeini for agreement to release the hostages. They admit that he

may reject that step; there is no way of assuring a positive decision in

advance, so this approach would involve risks on our side. The Iranians

would like the maximum in gestures toward them before beginning

release of the hostages—for instance, completion of an international

inquiry and the acceptance of its report. Our French contacts feel we

should begin with the early steps in a scenario fully agreed but leave

the later steps to be worked out in detail as we proceed. At the outset,

we would aim only at a general understanding of the later steps.

If we are to consider seriously moving to an approach like the

second above, the issues for us are: (1) how far we can proceed before

insisting on release of the hostages; (2) what means we can build into

a scenario for testing at each stage the Iranians’ ability to respond to

our moves so we don’t give away too much without a response; and

(3) how we can justify each step to the American public since this

approach would alter some of the strong positions we have taken

previously.

Channels for Communicating

Our French contacts have suggested agreeing on an international

figure, for example Sean McBride, to play the dual role as head of a

commission of inquiry and as intermediary. They recognize that Sean

McBride may not be acceptable to us and are prepared to try out other

suggestions on the Iranians. In my view, Sean McBride is not the right

person because he is too committed to his own ideas and is not likely

to listen well to our concerns. I will be talking to Waldheim about

other possibilities. The French contacts would be willing to assist in

implementing the scenario.

The full range of potentially active channels includes the following:

—The Panamanians and their French lawyers. The Panamanians com-

plicate this channel and have stumbled badly, but they have wisely

taken themselves out of our most recent discussions. We probably can

decouple them to a substantial degree from our talks with the French-

based lawyers. The Frenchmen have two advantages. They have access

Negotiating Channels

to Ghotbzadeh and Bani-Sadr and they are trusted by the Iranians.

Although we cannot be entirely sure they are trustworthy, they have

already provided evidence that Ghotbzadeh is willing to deal with

them. They are workmanlike, and one of them from a human rights

background seems to have a genuine personal interest in a solution

and in the long-term success of Iran’s Revolution.

—The PLO. There are two lines: (1) through Arafat and (2) through

a senior official close to the PLO representative in Tehran who has

offered mediation. The PLO has excellent access to Khomeini, but they

are hesitant to commit themselves until the conditions for settlement

are almost perfect. They are now talking of February 15. They are also

very self-interested and slow in communicating results of discussions.

We do not know the extent of their influence with key Revolutionary

Council members.

—Richard Cottam, Professor at Pittsburgh, is excellent in learning

Ghotbzadeh’s views and in communicating ideas from us. But commu-

nications via telephone and Ghotbzadeh’s “code” are not efficient for

active negotiations.

—Waldheim is not entirely trusted by the Iranians. He will inevitably

play a role in implementing and possibly in working out the final

details of a settlement because there seems to be a growing consensus

that the commission of inquiry will be appointed by the Secretary

General.

—Mohammed Heykal, renowned Egyptian journalist who is writing

a book on Khomeini, is in London awaiting word from Hosain Kho-

meini (grandson) on a date to come to Tehran. He has received one

message from Khomeini inviting him to come as soon as Khomeini

leaves the hospital.

—Sadiq al Mahdi is a religious leader and the former Sudanese

Prime Minister who visited Iran in the late fall and is ready to go back

when told by the Iranians that the time is ripe.

—Mansour Farhang, Iranian Ambassador at the UN, is apparently

trusted by Ghotbzadeh but said to have better ties with the chief presi-

dential candidates. He is not above putting his own interpretation into

the negotiations.

—Delegation from the Islamic Conference. We hope they will act to

persuade the Iranians but we cannot expect them to negotiate on

our behalf.

—Swiss Ambassador Lang has been excellent at communicating with

the Iranians in a timely fashion, but using him as a negotiating channel

might jeopardize his usefulness in humanitarian support.

A Possible Scenario

The substance of our negotiating position remains as you approved

how to construct a series of steps which can lead to the release of the

hostages and to a resolution of those U.S.-Iranian issues which must

be resolved.

We would operate on the assumption that it continues to be desir-

able to have a variety of approaches to the Iranians, especially Khomeini

if he is well enough. A number of contacts tell us that no one can ask

Khomeini to do something; it is necessary to create a situation which

he analyzes as ripe for a certain step. Several prominent figures are

already planning visits to Tehran. As part of this process, various

visitors to Iran would concentrate on two points: (1) the need for a

decision to release the hostages or at least to remove them to more

humane conditions in custody of responsible authorities; (2) the need

to help publicly in Iran to change the climate of opinion. These people

would not have a mandate to negotiate on our behalf. Most of them

are already in the process of trying to go to Tehran. They would include:

—Any representatives of the Islamic Conference who decide to

approach the Iranians.

—Mohammed Heykal can meet with Khomeini if he is well enough

and the captors in our compound as well as with Bani Sadr.

—Andy Young could also presumably see both.

—Sadiq al Mahdi would go with significant Islamic credentials

and can see Khomeini.

The following steps are an elaboration of Approach 2 above, taking

into account suggestions made by our French contacts. They are devel-

oped as a controlled set of steps so each step contains a move by each

side and the process can be stopped before the next step begins if Iran

does not do its part.

—Step 1 would be a combination of moves designed to confirm

with President-elect Bani Sadr as well as with Ghotbzadeh that an

agreed channel for managing a scenario exists and that a decision has

been made on both sides to make a series of reciprocal moves that could

lead to a resolution of the current problem:

—Ghotbzadeh has responded to the Jordan/Saunders trip to Lon-

don by sending the French lawyers to Washington with tangible evi-

Negotiating Channels

dence of good faith. The Iranians also regard your written message to

Congress as a positive step on our side.

—To establish the channel, at least in the next stage, we could send

a message via Cottam to Ghotbzadeh from Hamilton that we have

taken the Washington talks with the Frenchmen seriously and are

sending a message to Tehran with them. They could also carry a letter

from Hamilton.

—To establish the procedure we could send a message via the

Frenchmen to both Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh that we are prepared

to begin a series of reciprocal moves. We would start by removing

our objection to Waldheim’s appointment of a commission of inquiry

provided Ghotbzadeh (a) will ask Waldheim for a commission “to hear

Iran’s grievances and to help achieve an early end to the crisis between

the U.S. and Iran” and (b) will assure Waldheim in writing that the

commission will, in the course of its investigation, meet with each of

the hostages.

—Since we would be changing our position to allow the commis-

sion to go to Tehran and begin work before release of the hostages,

we would need to be able to say publicly that the commission is going

on a fact-finding mission to Tehran to hear Iran’s concerns, to meet

with each of the hostages, and to report on the present situation to the

Secretary General. We would object publicly to any contact with the

hostages for interrogation in connection with the inquiry. We would

say it remains important for us to determine the well-being of each of

the hostages. The Iranians, of course, would play the appointment as

a victory and the visit to the hostages as part of the inquiry into Iran’s

grievances.

—We would need to assure ourselves that Waldheim is prepared

to cooperate with us on this basis. I would send Hal Saunders to see

Rafi Ahmed and perhaps go to talk with Waldheim myself. We would

need to assure that Waldheim puts a responsible person in charge of

the commission and that Waldheim has some agreed control over the

limits within which the commission will operate. We would want to

work with him on its terms of reference. Because the Iranians have

stressed that U.S. objections on technical grounds to the creation of the

commission would enhance its credibility in Iran, we would have to

work this out with Waldheim.

—Step 2 would bring the commission of inquiry into being only

when the Iranians had made their formal request to Waldheim under

Step 1:

—Waldheim would announce appointment of the commission. He

would act using his good offices authority and referring to his talks

Carter’s written message is presumably to Carter’s January 21 State of the Union message

to Congress. In it, Carter wrote that the United States had “no basic quarrel” with the

Iranian revolution and that the threat to Iran came not from the United States but from

Soviet action in the region. He also wrote: “We are prepared to work with the government

of Iran to develop a new and mutually beneficial relationship” once the hostages are

in Tehran and to the Iranian request. Before making his announcement,

he would have to select a chairperson and agree on the timing of the

commission’s report and its terms of reference. The mandate would

insure that the commission would remain a fact-finding mission as

contrasted to a judicial tribunal.

—Iranian authorities would announce in the name of the Imam

(with assurance that the captors in the compound will acquiesce) that

the commission will have Iran’s cooperation in seeking a resolution of

the crisis and will meet with all the hostages individually.

—The commission would not leave New York until the Iranian

announcement had been made.

—Step 3 could involve consolidating and restraining Panama’s

position on the extradition proceedings. This is already underway.

Since this was Ghotbzadeh’s ploy, Bani Sadr may not be interested.

We have no interest in it. But if some movement is necessary, the

following moves may serve Iranian needs and limit the risks:

—Iranian authorities would state that they will seek extradition

within the framework of Panamanian law.

—Iran would appoint a Panamanian attorney to participate in the

extradition proceedings.

—The Government of Panama would ask the Shah to “place himself

at the disposal of the Panamanian government.” The Shah would not

be arrested.

—The legal proceedings would then drag out without result.

—Step 4 would focus on the commission’s work in Tehran:

—While the commission’s movements will be public, the commis-

sion would hold discussions privately in Tehran. It would go to the

compound as early as possible to review evidence with the captors

and to meet with each of the hostages privately, ostensibly as part of

the inquiry but primarily to determine the condition of their confine-

ment and their health.

—The commission (1) would announce that it is ready to return

to New York with its report to the Secretary General on Iran’s griev-

ances and (2) would report to the Revolutionary Council, which would

pass the report to Khomeini privately, that the conditions of the hos-

tages’ confinement are inhumane and that no report to the Secretary

General will have credibility if these conditions are not changed.

—Khomeini would have the hostages transferred to a hospital

under the shared custody of Iranian authorities and representatives of

the commission.

—The commission would not take its report to New York until the

hostages had been transferred from the compound.

—Step 5: report and release.

—The Commission would report to the Secretary General two days

before Iran’s religious celebration, which is scheduled the week of

February 10.

—The commission could recommend that the U.S. and Iran form

a joint U.S.-Iranian Commission to resolve outstanding issues between

169.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 28, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran—Next Steps

The strategy developed by Hal Saunders and Ham Jordan2 is an

intelligent and cautious outline of an approach intended to maximize

our very limited access and leverage. It is unlikely in the extreme that

the scenario will in fact play out in the way it is supposed to, but the

key is not the validity of the scenario, it is the fact that we have concrete

proposals to put before Bani Sadr (and Ghotbzadeh) which will draw

them into a substantive negotiation process. We are justified in taking

some calculated risks to get such a process going, but we should do so

with our eyes open. So let me start by listing the grounds for skepticism:

—The political analysis by the two Frenchmen was dead wrong.

They expected Habibi to win the election as a result of maneuvering

by the “master political leader” Khomeini. This was their view as

late as last Friday. There is a persistent element of wishful thinking

throughout their analysis. I suspect that their scenario is cut from the

same cloth.

—If the Frenchmen were right that Khomeini intended Habibi to

win, then how is he likely to react to Bani Sadr’s triumph? Probably

by cutting him down to size as quickly as possible. If, on the other

hand, the election went as scheduled, then our Frenchmen are not

nearly as well plugged in as they would have us believe. Are they

really in a position to work with Bani Sadr?

—The time scale is totally unrealistic. Step One (establishing the

channel) must take at least a week. Step Two (setting up a commission

of inquiry by the UN) can not be done in less than a week or ten

days, knowing the speed of the UN and all the consultations and

Negotiating Channels

preparations—including terms of reference—which would have to pre-

cede it. Step Three (the game with the Panamanians) is irrelevant. Step

Four (hearings by the commission in Tehran) is allotted a week, but

almost certainly could be accomplished no faster than two weeks or

more. Step Five (commission report to the UN with a simultaneous

resolution and release of the hostages) would add at least another

week, which almost certainly puts us into March. Yet Step Five is

supposed to take place during the week of February 10. That is simply

impossible.

—The scenario being proposed sets up Ghotbzadeh as the goat.

He is designated as the sole negotiator or point man. That probably

suits his amour propre, but it also leaves him increasingly exposed as

the logical fall guy when the knives come out in Tehran—as they will.

It bothers me not at all to contemplate Ghotbzadeh’s sacrifice in a noble

cause, but I doubt if he will stand still for it. He is crafty and very

much concerned with his political skin. He is not going to give Bani

Sadr the perfect excuse to fire him after first destroying his relationship

with Khomeini. A double cross is virtually inevitable at some point.

With those cautionary notes in mind, I believe this strategy is worth

pursuing, but with some precautionary modifications:

—We should view Step One as the process of smoking out the

new political relationships in the post-election environment. Therefore,

we should establish a concrete test which will require a real decision

from Tehran without tipping our entire hand from the start.

—The memo indicates that “key Iranians would know the entire

proposed scenario,” presumably from the start. I do not believe we

should spell out the entire scenario at the beginning, but only indicate

that we are prepared to proceed with a series of concrete steps (unspeci-

fied) once a reliable channel of communication has been established.

—In Step One, we should ask that a reliable interlocutor from our

side be established in Tehran—or near Tehran if that is preferred—

before we can proceed. We should identify an American (Cottam?) or

a third country national to establish himself in the Swiss Embassy or

some other location with good and reliable communications to pursue

the negotiations. They may wish to suggest an individual, and we

should be flexible.

—If both Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh can agree on this, we would

have some indication that the process had promise. If they cannot

agree, we would have a better idea of what to expect.

—Only after a mutually agreed interlocutor was in place should

we undertake detailed discussion of a scenario. By then we would have

some tangible evidence that practical decision-making was possible on

the Iranian side, and we would have removed the negotiations from

the hands of well-meaning (but possibly naive) intermediaries. They

would have committed themselves to no specific concessions, but we

would be assured at least of direct control of our own side of the talks.

With that modification, I think we should proceed as soon as prac-

ticable to open the dialogue.

170.

Letter From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to

Christian Bourguet and Hector Villalon

Washington, January 30, 1980

171.

Memorandum for the Record by Director of Central

Intelligence Turner

Washington, January 30, 1980

SUBJECT

Conversation of 29 January 1980

1. We talked about the Canadian Six operation2 and I gave some

details on how that went. There was obvious pleasure at the success

of this operation. [portion marking not declassified]

2. I discussed the other hostages and, in connection with this, [less

than 1 line not declassified] I urged more attention be given to the plight

of the hostages in our public releases. [portion marking not declassified]

3. I then expressed my concern that, despite our hopes, Bani Sadr’s

election did not necessarily mean that he would be able to take charge

and work a release for the hostages. I felt that we needed to have a

rescue operation capability on standby for situations such as the killing

of some hostages, a prolonged stalemate for all of them, or the release

of most but continued detention of the others for an indefinite period

of time. I said that the key risk in the present operational plan was

loss of surprise. I had rather good confidence once the rescue force

reached the walls of the Embassy compound. The weak points were

the number of aircraft that had to surreptitiously enter Iran and the

capture of the airfield at Nain. I pointed out that’s why we wanted to

fly our aircraft to look for a substitute landing place. I thought the

probability of discovery was low, with the highest risk being danger

of crackup on landing. That is one reason we want to do it in full

moonlight. Our next opportunity, then, would be the end of February.

[portion marking not declassified]

I urged that we continue to plan for this and that the Defense

Department be encouraged to continue their planning. I pointed out

that our exploratory flight, among other things, might just prod the

Defense Department into finding still some different solution to this

part of the problem. There was agreement that we should continue

and the Defense Department should continue, and that there would

be a Jones/Turner briefing on this sometime in a couple of weeks—

well before a decision on the TWIN OTTER operation for the end of

the month had to be made. [portion marking not declassified]

Stansfield Turner

172.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Commerce

Warren Christopher

Secretary Philip Klutznick

Harold Saunders

Homer Moyers

Richard Cooper

White House

Defense

Zbigniew Brzezinski**

W. Graham Claytor

David Aaron***

William Perry

Joseph Onek*

Hedley Donovan

Negotiating Channels

JCS

Stuart Eizenstat*

General John Pustay

Henry Owen*

CIA

NSC

Frank Carlucci

Colonel William Odom

Treasury

Gary Sick

Secretary William Miller*

Thomas Thornton

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti*

Energy

John Sawhill*

Agriculture

James Williams*

*Domestic Issues Only

**Departed at 9: a.m.

***Chaired from 9: a.m.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Domestic Issues:

1. Sanctions. Dr. Brzezinski reported that the President will sign

the Executive Order on sanctions against Iran. It will be handled

without fanfare and simply published in the Federal Register. We will

inform the allies and ask them for acts of solidarity. We will not twist

their arms.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

Secretary Miller noted that the regulations as now drafted call for

U.S. subsidiaries abroad to be included in the Iran sanctions. He thought

this would create problems with a number of our friends who are

concerned with the extraterritoriality question. For example, Ambassa-

dor Brewster in London reported yesterday that the extraterritoriality

issue would cause problems with the UK. There was some discussion

about the pros and cons, and the SCC agreed unanimously that the

provisions should be removed from the regulations and that this would

be consistent with the President’s decision not to expend political capi-

173.

Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

Tehran, February 1, 1980

1. I asked this morning for a brief meeting with Ghotbzadeh which

was immediately granted, although my colleagues have waited several

weeks for an appointment. (I think that he values these contacts because

they are businesslike and always brief.) Ghotbzadeh received me with

a somber and detached air that eloquently expressed his miserable

Negotiating Channels

2. Having read the message (our appeal to limit the reaction to the

Canadian affair), he erupted, saying that the conduct of the Canadian

Government was scandalous and that the affair risked blowing every-

thing up at a time that he was making slow but sure progress. Not

only did they commit illegal acts, but, moreover, they claimed victory

and the government sent congratulations to the Canadian diplomats.

This affair is going to have disastrous consequences for the hostages.

(His remarks correspond more or less to the press conference that he

gave yesterday morning. Swiss journalist Hottinger was there.) I told

him that the affair was unfortunately exploited by the mass media.

Ghotbzadeh immediately contradicted me, saying that it was not true.

The Canadian Government had exploited the affair for reasons of inter-

nal politics. There had been a declaration by the Prime Minister and

the Minister of Foreign Affairs. I gave him some information then to

show him how the press had behaved reasonably, quite differently

from what he believed.

He remarked that if only there had not been this publicity and

these governmental declarations that obliged him to make a violent

counterattack.

3. While agreeing completely with him on the need for discretion

and silence that was broken by the mass media, I put to him some

arguments recalling what he had said in his press conference. What

would he have done in the place of the Canadian Ambassador if he

were faced with the following questions? What was the status of the

six in Iran? Clearly, they were diplomats living on Iranian territory

with the agreement of the Iranian Government and therefore enjoying

privileges and immunities which would permit them to leave the coun-

try. What would you have wanted them to do? That they should go

politely to ask the students on the compound with whom Ghotbzadeh

himself has had little evidence of cooperation? Would anyone have

given them passports and their personal effects? Should the Canadian

Department asked Laingen to inform Ghotbzadeh that the United States was “concerned

that the press story could be misinterpreted by those occupying our Embassy and that

it could have adverse consequences in Tehran for a speedy resolution to the crisis.

Therefore, we hope that the Government of Iran will take whatever steps possible to

minimize adverse publicity and reaction in Iran that might negatively affect the prospects

for an end to the crisis.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Ambassador have asked for a meeting with the Revolutionary Council

to request exit visas for the six to leave the country inasmuch as he

did not have their papers? What would have been the position of

Ghotbzadeh or the Revolutionary Council in terms of internal politics

if the request had been made? An impossible situation, a true dilemma

that the Canadian Ambassador and probably every Ambassador would

want to avoid. It was necessary to find a way out which I imagine

required creating identities which did not correspond to reality. But

Ghotbzadeh himself and other Iranians pursued by Savak, didn’t they

benefit from Syrian, Algerian and other passports which did not corre-

spond to reality? What was the answer to this problem? Ghotbzadeh

did not, of course, respond directly to my questions but said, “But at

least they should not have made publicity and cries of victory over

there.” In that he is, this time, completely right.

The American telegram is in this sense very good but the evil has

been done. It is necessary, however, to avoid from the American side

all expressions of joy and of victory. They should be restrained and

the six should take into account that the 50 and Laingen and his two

colleagues remain in Tehran.

Ghotbzadeh was as always very correct and agreeable with me. I

asked him how he saw the development of the situation, knowing well

that the political campaign had absorbed him. “I can’t see it very

clearly,” he said. It is necessary to wait to see what will be the reaction

of the Canadian affair. (In this connection, we note that the students

on the compound have been much more restrained and cool than

Ghotbzadeh who might intend to use the affair for political reasons,

while the students have said that the treatment of the hostages will

not be harsher because of the affair.) On the results of the campaign,

Ghotbzadeh said that he had not been able to do anything because he

had dedicated himself completely to the question of the hostages. (In

other words, he said that the U.S. is responsible for his defeat.)

Negotiating Channels

174.

Draft Message From the Department of State to the Swiss

Ambassador to Iran (Lang)

Washington, February 3, 1980

1. We would be grateful if Ambassador Lang could deliver the

two separate messages contained in this telegram to Foreign Minister

Ghotbzadeh and to President-elect Bani-Sadr or his associate, Salama-

tian. We very much hope this will give Ambassador Lang occasion for

direct meeting with Bani-Sadr himself.

2. The first message is a statement of the U.S. position which was

communicated to Secretary-General Waldheim by Secretary Vance for

Ambassador Farhang early in January. We are uncertain whether the

statement reached Tehran. The last point in the statement would appear

to be responsive to Iranian desires for an expression of the attitude of

the U.S. towards the revolutionary government. (In the meeting with

Bani-Sadr, Ambassador Lang might make specific reference to para-

graph 6 in relation to Bani-Sadr’s call for a U.S. expression of views

towards Iran during his American TV interview on February 3.) Begin

text: (insert from attachment) End text.

3. The second message presents information on Soviet military

deployments relating to Iran. Begin text: In the current circumstances

of tension in the Middle East and combat in Afghanistan, the American

Government has tried to keep thoroughly abreast of the disposition of

Soviet forces in the region. Besides following Soviet moves related to

Afghanistan, there has been high interest in the status of Soviet ground

and air forces adjacent to Turkey and Iran.

Until January, Soviet units in the Transcaucasus were essentially

quiet with no change in their normal state of very low readiness for

action. During January this changed.

Steps have been started to raise manpower and readiness levels

for all of the approximately one dozen Soviet divisions stretched out

between Tbilisi and Baku. A number of these units have begun training

exercises and elements of almost all of them seem to be out of their

regular garrison areas. Air force units and the one airborne division

in the Transcauscasus seem to be in a normal state. The same appears

true for naval units in the Caspian Sea.

These Soviet moves should probably be interpreted as preparations

for contingencies, rather than as signs of any decision in Moscow to

undertake operations in the next months against Iran. However, the

USSR remains worried about instability on its borders, especially now

when it is engaged in war in nearby Afghanistan. It probably wants

to be ready to take any action that it deems necessary in the light of

future developments in northern Iran or in the Persian Gulf region.

There have been reports that the Soviets have not been willing to accept

Iran’s renunciation of those parts of the 1921 Iran-USSR treaty which

give to the USSR certain rights of military intervention in Iran. Can

the GOI confirm these reports, and if so, how does Iran interpret the

Soviet position? End text.

4. We would like Ambassador Lang to deliver the following two-

point message only to Bani-Sadr, or, if it is impossible to see him,

Salamatian. First, we have seen the recent article by the Egyptian jour-

nalist Heikal. We would appreciate knowing whether Bani-Sadr has

been in recent touch with Heikal and whether what Heikal has to

say coincides with Bani-Sadr’s views. Second, we listened with great

interest to the Bani-Sadr television interview.

We earnestly hope that we can move with great speed to resolve

it; further delay serves the interests of neither Iran nor the United States

and will make a solution more difficult.

175.

Message From Iranian President Bani-Sadr Transmitted

Through Egyptian Journalist Mohammed Heykal

Heykal left London 2 Feb for Cairo where will remain until shortly

before 26 Feb when will go Tehran to cover Iranian parliamentary

election. Heykal remains willing act as go between USG and Khomeini.

2. Heykal has received following message from Bani-Sadr and

Ahmad Khomeini, Ayatollah Khomeini’s son. Bani-Sadr and Ahmad

Khomeini understand that this message is for the USG, in fact Bani-Sadr

asks that it be given directly to the President. According to Marwan,

this message was delivered to Heykal in London by personal messenger

from Tehran.

A. The U.S. hostage situation will be the first order of business

after the new Iranian Government is formed on 26 February. (When

asked why this could not take place sooner, Bani-Sadr said he could

do nothing until Acting Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghotbzadeh has been

removed from this job and given another. He said Ayatollah Khomeini

has agreed to this removal.)

B. The condition of the hostages has greatly improved since the

Iranian election. An Iranian medical doctor has been assigned to stay

with them and care for them on orders direct from Khomeini.

C. Very shortly after 26 February, Asghar Moussavi-Khoeini, the

link between the “students” and Khomeini, will make a public

announcement that all of the U.S. hostages are henceforth under the

direct control of Ayatollah Khomeini. (They are, of course, now; but

this public statement will facilitate later negotiations.)

D. Within a very few days after Khoeini makes this announcement,

the hostages will be removed from the Embassy and located in some

unspecified neutral place in Tehran where U.S. medical doctors will

be allowed access to them. Meanwhile, Khomeini will officially turn

over negotiations on the hostages to Bani-Sadr.

E. The hostages will be allowed to leave Iran after the committee

UN Secretary Waldheim appoints has met. Bani-Sadr insists, however,

that this committee be “political” and not “administrative.” That is, its

members must be official representatives of their governments and not

just individuals appointed by Waldheim. Bani-Sadr understands and

accepts that the Shah will not come to Iran nor appear directly before

the Waldheim committee.

F. Bani-Sadr appreciates the statements and actions of the President

and the administration over the past two weeks, although he feels

there have been too many different channels involved. He requests

that the President continue not to apply sanctions and particularly

requests that the administration and the U.S. media not depict him as

a “moderate” and as having views which conflict with those of the

“students.” He says to “forget about” his being a moderate.

3. Marwan said Heykal is optimistic that the hostages will be

released in March. He thinks Bani-Sadr and others have a clear appreci-

ation of the Soviet threat to Iran as a result of the Afghanistan invasion.

Marwan also told [less than 1 line not declassified], although he (Marwan)

was not supposed to pass this on, Heykal’s Sunday Times piece (ref

B) was written at the direct request of Bani-Sadr.

4. Marwan will be in London through 6 Feb. (We have his onward

schedule.) Pls advise what you wish transmitted back to Heykal by

this route.

5. [Omission is in the original.]

End of message.

176.

Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

to President Carter

Washington, February 4, 1980

I hope that you will have a chance to review this before our 2:00

meeting on the hostage situation. It may be a bit disjointed, but ana-

lyzes frankly the situation that we face.

Our objective continues to be to get the hostages out safely at the

earliest possible date without having to take risks that are unacceptable.

If anything, our objective has been modified since the Afghanistan

invasion to include, “and in a way that does not jeopardize the possibil-

ity of a reconciliation of US-Iranian relations”. Politically, I believe

that we continue to have some flexibility on what we are able to do in

the course of working toward the release of the hostages. The American

people will tolerate a good deal more now than they would have before

the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan IF we have the successful resolution

of the hostage situation.

Let me review briefly what we know for a fact and those things

that we are not sure of:

1. That in the final analysis, only Khomeini can insure the safe release

of the hostages. It is doubtful that Bani-Sadr can get the militants to

release them and very, very doubtful that Ghotbzadeh can get them

released.

2. That a large number of the Revolutionary Council—possibly

all—see the need to resolve the hostage situation, and that this includes

the clerics as well as the “European group”.

3. That at least among the European group and other members of

the Revolutionary Council, a clear consensus is emerging as to how the

situation should be resolved. It recognizes that the Shah will not be

returned, but places special emphasis on the international tribunal, the

right of Iran to seek extradition of the Shah, to seek the legal recovery

of his “stolen monies” and public statements from the United States

that suggest that we are willing to develop a relationship which

acknowledges both the “equality” of Iran and is based on “mutual

respect”.

4. That political factors and personal animosity between Ghotbza-

deh and Bani-Sadr have possibly resulted in a situation whereby

although there is general consensus as to “how”, there is not a consen-

sus as to “who” or “when”. Ghotbzadeh wants to do it quickly and

be personally involved for obvious reasons, and Bani-Sadr prefers to

wait until after he takes power (at least that is the message from the

Egyptian which we need to confirm).

5. That although Ghotbzadeh is personally unpopular, he probably

has the support of Beheshti and other members of the Revolutionary

Council who are against Bani-Sadr for other reasons. It is impossible

to discern as to whether the support for Ghotbzadeh reflects a desire

to resolve the situation quickly or whether they simply want to deprive

Bani-Sadr of the personal satisfaction of resolving it when he takes over.

6. That while Bani-Sadr might not like Ghotbzadeh, he has let us

know through two very direct channels—Mrs. Nobari and Ambassador

Lang that we were to continue to deal with Ghotbzadeh, but that he

wanted to be kept informed. He probably recognizes the reality of the

situation, and while not liking it is reconciled to it.

7. That while the Foreign Minister is disliked by almost everyone,

those same people recognize that he has a personal relationship with

Khomeini that cannot be ignored or taken lightly.

It seems to me that the following is and should be our posture:

—That we should continue to pursue an early release of the hos-

tages through Ghotbzadeh, but not at the expense of our relationship

with Bani-Sadr.

—That we should keep Bani-Sadr informed of our activities.

—That if it ever became a choice of having to choose between

Ghotbzadeh and Bani-Sadr, we would have to go with Bani-Sadr.

—That we should work to try to avoid that choice by a reconcilia-

tion of their views, in this respect the French contacts are invaluable.

—That to put Ghotbzadeh on “hold” now has a number of prob-

lems for us:

Negotiating Channels

1. We cannot make a conscious decision to wait until after Bani-

Sadr takes office in late February to try to resolve the present crisis.

2. The delay also risks the chance that something could happen to

Khomeini, who by all accounts will have to be personally involved in

freeing the hostages from the compound.

3. That Bani-Sadr does not know what the political situation will

be when he takes office. It could very well be that resolving the hostage

situation will be more difficult for him then than it is for Ghotbza-

deh now.

It might be possible through the French contacts and the political

leverage of the Revolutionary Council to create a situation where Bani-

Sadr has no choice but to tolerate/actively cooperate in pursuing a

strategy of early release. In fairness to Bani-Sadr, he may think that

only he will have the muscle and the influence to resolve the crisis,

and that it is less a matter of who gets the credit but more a matter of

who can pull it off.

Finally, you should read the enclosed Memcon from Cottam. Cot-

tam says that Ghotbzadeh could not risk direct contact with us without

the knowledge of Bani-Sadr, the Revolutionary Council and even Kho-

meini. He says that if we had an opportunity for direct contact, we

would have to take advantage of it.

One final comment about our French contacts, particularly Mr. B.

They are not the stooges of Ghotbzadeh. One preferred Habibi for

President and the other Bani-Sadr. They have been dealing with the

Foreign Minister because they have been told to by the Revolutionary

Council and by Ghotbzadeh. They told me last weekend that if Ghot-

bzadeh tried to block them from seeing Bani-Sadr or the other members

of the Revolutionary Council, they would “wash their hands of this

matter”.

The Iranian experts at the State Department who have seen a flurry

of stories and hints coming out of Tehran and the UN think strongly

that the French proposal which we were involved in has been seen

and is being discussed and debated by different members of the Revolu-

tionary Council. They assume that Bani-Sadr would have to be a part

of any such discussion. All of the various stories coming out which

contain precise details are generally compatible with the scenario that

we jointly evolved.

Attachment

Press Guidance

Washington, undated

PRESS GUIDANCE

Steps Toward Release of the Hostages

Present situation: Iranians State Decision to Form a Commission

Iran:

Revolutionary Council has decided that a

commission of inquiry should be formed.

NOTE:

The scenario is not triggered until Iran sends pre-

arranged request to SYG Waldheim. The SYG

therefore has control over launching the scenario.

—No Iranian decision has been communicated to

us nor, as far as we know, to the UN.

—If a proposal is made, we will state our position.

Provides no substantive response until a formal

Iranian request along agreed lines is received.

Step II—1 and 2: Iranian Request that a Commission be formed.

Iran requests SYG Waldheim establish a Commission of Inquiry

“to hear Iran’s grievances and to allow an early solution to the crisis

between Iran and the United States” and states Iran’s desire to have

the Commission speak to each of the hostages.

Alternatively:

“. . . to investigate the grievances of both sides.”

NOTE:

This would trigger the scenario.

—The U.S. will discuss the Iranian request with the

Secretary General. We will reserve our comments

until we know what the terms of reference of the

Commission will be.

—You have heard our position many times before. I

need not repeat it.

—We support any steps by the UN that might lead

to the release of the hostages while protecting

essential international principles.

Negotiating Channels

177.

Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

to President Carter

Washington, February 6, 1980

178.

Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

to President Carter

Washington, February 8, 1980

Based on both events of the past three days2 and also the informa-

tion that has been developed by our French friends, I believe that you

can conclude that Bani-Sadr is taking on the militants for one or both

of the following reasons:

—He cannot let their challenge to him go unanswered. If he did,

whatever hope he has to be a strong and effective ruler of Iran would

be sacrificed.

—“Taking on the students” has the support of the vast majority

of the Iranian people. He probably considers his election victory a

mandate for resolving the hostage crisis.

Because of political circumstances there and Bani-Sadr’s own per-

sonality (he is known for being impetuous), it could easily develop

179.

Telegram From the British Embassy in the United States to

the Department of State

Please pass following to Iran Task Force, Operations Centre, State

Dept. Following received from British Embassy Tehran. Begins:

Secret. Fm: Tehran 100805Z Feb 80. To: Immediate FCO. Telegram

Number 146 of 10 February. Info Immediate Washington.

MIPT: US Embassy—Laingen.

1. The Danish Ambassador was telephoned on Friday, and again

yesterday afternoon2 by Howland, one of Laingen’s companions in the

MFA. Howland was hurried and furtive and was clearly making the

call clandestinely. He said that Laingen had been told officially that

all his contacts with the outside world (but the Danish Ambassador is

not sure if this includes newspapers and radio) were being cut in

Negotiating Channels

retaliation for the Canadian affair. He would be allowed no letters,

telex, telephone calls or visitors. Laingen asked in the first call that the

US administration should protest against this treatment and, in the

second call, that they should authorise him to request formally to be

permitted to leave Iran.

2. The Danish Ambassador is naturally passing this on to the Ameri-

cans through his channels (but not, I think, to other community col-

leagues here) and it is not for us to intervene. Nevertheless he and I

have discussed the question. We wonder whether it would in fact be

wise to make an oral protest. There is the problem of how the US

authorities would have come by the knowledge on which the protest

was based (though their own direct telex and telephone links with

Laingen have presumably been cut off, which might be enough). It

would be tempting, and perhaps more effective, to place restrictions

on the Iranian Chargé and staff in Washington without explanation,

except reciprocity. Nor are we sure what Laingen has in mind in making

his second request, since it seems out of character for him to be ready

to abandon his staff in the Embassy. We can only presume that he

wishes to put the Iranian Government in the position of refusing his

departure, thereby making clear that he is a prisoner. (Ghotbzadeh

referred to him the other day after the Canadian affair as a hostage,

drawing a distinction between him and the six Americans who escaped,

a change from the MFA’s earlier claim that he was a guest who was

free to leave, although his safety outside the MFA could not be assured).

If that is Laingen’s intention he may have in mind that such clarification

would strengthen the grounds for protest or, as a pure speculation, he

might regard it as releasing him from his de facto (underlined) parole

and freeing him to attempt an escape. Alternatively he might be court-

ing removal from the MFA to the Embassy to join his staff.

3. I suspect that these restrictions are a piece of spite by Ghotbzadeh

who, when he saw the press after the Canadian affair, was clearly very

angry. If they were to be effective as retaliation, he would surely have

to publicise them but he has not. Ghotbzadeh may well also have

seen ill-judged and, I presume, untrue accounts in Time magazine and

Newsweek suggesting that the Canadian Ambassador used visits to the

MFA to study its visa and passport procedures. However Ghotbzadeh

may well not last long under Bani-Sadr. It might be as well to wait a

bit to see.

Graham

Ends.

180.

Telegram From the Embassy in Switzerland to the

Department of State

781. Eyes only for President, Secretaries Vance and Christopher, Dr.

Brzezinski from Jordan and Saunders. Subject: Scenario for Resolving

Hostage Crisis.

1. S–Entire text.

2. We met our contacts two hours Saturday midnight and all day

Sunday. As a result, we believe we have an acceptable revised scenario

(text below). The main lines are as you earlier approved3 with one

addition—statements by Presidents Carter and Bani-Sadr. The changes

primarily develop a more exact schedule of steps for establishing the

Commission and a more precise description of events surrounding the

end of the Commission’s work and the release of the hostages. Although

the exact time it will take to play out this scenario cannot be determined

now, we have stressed that the period must be short, and it looks to

us as if the scenario should be completed in something less than three

weeks from today.

3. One important proposal outside the scenario below is that Jordan

(with Saunders) meet secretly with Ghotbzadeh in Paris next Sunday.

He is taking a trip to Athens, Rome, and Paris on official Iranian

business of various kinds. The purposes of the meeting would be (a)

to demonstrate good faith on both sides; (b) to confirm or refine the

last stages of the scenario, hopefully to get Ghotbzadeh’s agreement

to direct release of the hostages rather than going through the interme-

diate stage of moving them to a hospital in Tehran; (c) to reach under-

standing on the contents of the two Presidential statements now added

to the scenario; (d) to review any details on the remainder of the

scenario. We recognize there are risks in such a meeting because it

Negotiating Channels

may leak, but we recommend that it take place in order to assure

ourselves on the release of our people. It will be in the mutual interest

of both parties to keep this secret. Since we have asked for direct contact

and they have responded positively, it might be a setback if we shied

away now.

4. We propose the following immediate steps:

—Jordan and Saunders would arrive in New York by 0900 Monday

and see Waldheim as early as possible, with Secretary Vance if at all

possible. (If this is approved, we hope the Secretary might call Wald-

heim Sunday and arrange this appointment secretly at Waldheim’s

residence.)

—Precht and interpreter would move to Paris as point of communi-

cation with our French contacts throughout the week and to arrange

the Sunday meeting. Our contacts will be on the phone to Tehran from

Paris daily, and direct communication may be essential in keeping this

scenario on the tracks.

—It would be extremely helpful if Hamilton could call around

midnight here (1800 Washington time) to determine whether or not to

proceed on the basis of this message.

5. We want to emphasize that it is essential to do everything possi-

ble to limit knowledge on our side about the meeting next Sunday.

6. Begin text.

Revised Scenario

I. Principles and Procedures (no change from earlier draft)

The United States and Iran agree:

1. To accept the principle of the establishment of a scenario, the

first stages of which would be defined precisely, and the subsequent

stages would be defined in detail as events evolve;

2. To manage this scenario with the help of persons agreed to by

both sides;

3. To proceed, within the framework of this scenario, by stages

each involving reciprocal actions to be defined in advance;

4. That these points are intended to allow the earliest possible

resolution of the present crisis by peaceful means.

II. Establishment of a Commission of Inquiry (changes show

detailed sequence of events—all times below are New York time)

1. It is agreed in the approval of this scenario that the Secretary-

General of the United Nations should establish a Commission of

Inquiry to hear Iran’s grievances and to allow an early solution of the

crisis between Iran and the U.S. and that Iran desires to have the

Commission speak to each of the hostages.

2. Monday night: Secretary-General Waldheim sends a message to

Ghotbzadeh confirming his readiness to send to Iran within a week

the Commission of 5–7 members which he discussed in Tehran early

in January “to hear Iran’s grievances and to allow an early solution of

the crisis between Iran and the U.S.”

3. Tuesday: Ghotbzadeh would respond by agreeing that the Com-

mission should come to Tehran within a week and stating Iran’s desire

to have the Commission speak to each of the hostages.

4. Tuesday night: The U.S. would remove its objections to the

establishment of this Commission by a direct private communication

to the Secretary-General. In that communication, the U.S. would state

importance that Commission look into the grievances of both sides

and work for early release of the hostages. At this time, the U.S. would

take the following position publicly: The U.S. will discuss with the

Secretary-General the concept of a Commission. The U.S. will reserve

its comment until it knows what the terms of reference of the Commis-

sion will be. The U.S. has stated its position many times before and

need not repeat it. While we have opposed the formation of a Commis-

sion under past conditions, we would support any steps by the UN

that might lead to the release of the hostages while protecting essential

international principles.

5. Tuesday night: Secretary-General Waldheim sends a second mes-

sage to Ghotbzadeh which would (a) state briefly the purpose of

Negotiating Channels

the Commission as a fact-finding mission (not a tribunal) to help end the

crisis and (b) recommend the membership of 5–7 for the Commission.

In proposing the membership, the Secretary-General would propose

(UNESCO Director), (2) Bedjaoui (Algerian PermRep at UN), (3) Petitti

(former head of Paris Bar Association and Association of Catholic

Jurists), (4) Martin Ennals (Amnesty International Secretary-General),

(5) Abu Sayeed Chowdhury (former President of Bangladesh), (6)

Daoudi (Advisor to President Assad of Syria) or Sabah el Rikabi (Head

of Union of Syrian Bar Associations). If any of the proposed members

is not acceptable to Iran, Iran could suggest that one or two be dropped.

6. Between Tuesday and Friday: Either Bani-Sadr himself would

confirm by phone to the Secretary-General or the Imam would issue

a statement that he has authorized the Revolutionary Council to resolve

the crisis. The Secretary-General would not proceed until he has

received confirmation in one of these forms from Iran.

7. Friday at 1600 hours: The Secretary-General would announce

establishment of the Commission and its purposes, including Iran’s

desire to have the Commission speak to each of the hostages.

8. After SYG Waldheim’s announcement: The President of Iran

would publicly present the establishment of the Commission of Inquiry

as a success of Iranian diplomacy, would interpret the visit to the

hostages as one of the elements in the investigation into Iranian griev-

ances, and would state the desire of the Imam to see the Commission

conclude its work rapidly. The Iranian President would instruct govern-

ment administrations to place their documents at the disposal of the

Commission.

9. After the Iranian statement: The U.S. would state that the Com-

mission is going on a fact-finding mission to Tehran, to hear the griev-

ances of both sides, to meet with each of the hostages, and to report

to the Secretary-General. The U.S. would object publicly to having the

2. The Commission would hold its meetings in private and will

receive evidence and documents to be submitted to it by Iranian

authorities.

3. The Commission would visit the Embassy as soon as possible

to meet with the hostages.

4. As soon as the Commission has concluded its work and drafted

its report, it: (a) would tell the Revolutionary Council that the credibility

of its report would be seriously limited unless the hostages are released

immediately or at least moved from the compound to a hospital;

(b) would inform the Revolutionary Council that it is ready to return

to New York to submit its report to the Secretary-General.

IV. Final Stages:

1. Transfer of the hostages to the protection of the Government of

Iran either in a hospital or in the Embassy compound after the “stu-

dents” have left the premises. (Day number 1.)

3. Submission to the Secretary-General of the Commission’s report

which will contain findings and recommendations. Publication of the

report as a UN document. The report would express inter alia the

following principle as a recommendation to all governments:

—Governments should respect and facilitate within the framework

of their internal laws the right of Iran:

(a) to file suits against the Shah, his family or associates on the basis

of the grave presumption of any serious crimes set forth in the report;

(b) to file suits to recover assets which in the report are presumed to

have been illegally taken from Iran by the Shah, his family or associates.

(Day 1 plus 2)

4. Release of the hostages and their departure from Iran. (Day 1

plus 3).

5. One hour after their departure, the SYG will release statements

by President Bani-Sadr and President Carter both previously agreed

by Iran and the U.S. and, before the Commission left Iran, deposited

privately with the SYG.

(a) The Iranian statement will admit the moral wrong of holding

hostages, express regret, promise to respect international law and affirm

a desire to establish normal relations based on mutual respect, equality

and international law.

181.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, February 13, 1980

SUBJECT

Our Options if the Soviets Intervene in Iran

I want to provide you with some anticipatory thoughts on our

options for reaction if the Soviets intervene in Iran.

Soviet activity and capabilities.

[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified] (TS)

Some capability factors are useful to hold in mind:

Approaches. [3½ lines not declassified] (see Tab A for a map). (TS)

Timing. [1½ lines not declassified]

[3 paragraphs (4½ lines) not declassified]

Conclusion. [5 lines not declassified] (TS)

U.S. Options.

There are three major choices in response to a Soviet move into Iran:

1. [5 lines not declassified]

2. [7 lines not declassified]

3. [3 lines not declassified]

—Fight in Iran. [10 lines not declassified]

—[5½ lines not declassified]

[3 paragraphs (15 lines) not declassified]

committees on the global military balance, emphasizing the growing Soviet ability to

project power in the Persian Gulf region. Jones urged Congressmen to approve Carter’s

proposed military budget, which would give the United States the capability of rapid

deployment of American forces into the region, including Iran and the Persian Gulf oil

fields. Both Jones and Brown emphasized that this projection of U.S. military power

could offset the Soviet advantage of proximity. (Norman Kempster, “Peril of Clash With

Bacon, “Defense Department Tries To Allay Doubt on Capacity To Defend Mideast Oil

Negotiating Channels 477

Tab A

Map of Iran°

> Secret.

183.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)

Washington, February 14, 1980

SUBJECT

Conversation of 14 February 1980 [portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

5. We then discussed the Iran finding. I showed the list of the

people we were building contacts with and described the idea of a

substitute national front. I pointed out that this clearly did have some

risk for the hostage negotiations but that was the nature of political

action. We had to deal covertly with people who were unacceptable

to the establishment which the government was dealing with overtly.

We can’t turn these people on and off like a spigot. There was recogni-

tion of this. I pointed out we were slowing things down. Though there

was some risk that Bakhtiar was dealing with the Iraqis, we didn’t

think he was ready to move nor would any of them be ready to move

without our energizing it. I pointed out that we needed to keep the

overall effort going, however, because of the danger that a power

vacuum would develop if Bani Sadr could not take hold.

There was a comment about how good relations with Bani Sadr

had been, how he had lived up to what he had said thus far. I poured

some cold water, however, on what the prospects were for Bani Sadr

in the long run, especially with regard to the economy. [portion marking

not declassified]

6. I then raised the possibility of the hostage negotiations going

afoul for one of three reasons: (a) Khomeini would not come along;

(b) Khomeini and Bani Sadr would demand more than the country

could afford to give; and (c) left-wing militants would do harm to one

of our hostages in the process of resisting their release. [portion marking

not declassified]

7. I therefore indicated we ought to keep the rescue operation

option open and recommended that despite the risks we proceed with

an SOG operation at the end of the month in support of this. I said I

would have to have a decision this week. I recommended we have a

meeting with Dave Jones tomorrow. I was asked if there were proce-

dures for periodic reviews of the status of our covert actions of this sort

with NSC and State. I said we kept very close with State in particular

on this and that we would set up procedures for some kind of periodic

reviews as we went along. [portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

Stansfield Turner

3 [name not declassified] signed above Turner’s typed signature.

Negotiating Channels

184.

Handwritten Memorandum From the White House Chief of

Staff (Jordan) to President Carter

Undated

I will try to divide this report into several sections:

1) Meeting with Mr. S

2) Future relations with Iran

3) Report on Scenario/Implementation

4) Draft statement

5) Where do we go from here?

Meeting with Mr. S:

Prior to my meeting, I asked that our French contacts meet with

me to discuss how to handle Mr. S. We spent a couple of hours on

this subject. Their joint recommendation was that I should regard his

desire for such a meeting as an opportunity for Mr. S. to convey directly

to the President the thoughts and feelings of the Imam. He said that

Mr. S.’s presumption was that Carter did not understand the meaning

of their revolution and that his meeting with me was a way to penetrate

the “wall of people” responsible for the past 30 years of U.S. policy.

Conversely, they suggested to me that I convey back to the Imam

thru this man a sense of understanding and a desire to have a better

relationship.

I showed them the letter addressed to me from the President con-

taining the assurance on the scenario2 and said that this would be very

helpful with Bani-Sadr and Mr. S. as it could be used as a written

promise to follow the scenario if an early release seemed desirable/

feasible.

I met alone with Mr. S. for 3½ hours, during which we had a

leisurely dinner. We started off by exchanging pleasantries. I kidded

him that his face was better known in the United States than Walter

Cronkite. He laughed and responded that while his face was well

known, he was unable to accomplish anything. “Your situation is the

opposite, Mr. Jordan, you are never seen publicly, but everyone knows

that you guide the President in every decision.”

I quickly felt at ease with him. I told him that I was honored

to be able to meet with him and that I recognized the risk that he

was taking.

He said, “if this meeting is known to the Communists in Iran, I

will lose my job at least and possibly my head.”

I told him that while great difficulties remained between our two

countries, that I thought that it was important that we look to the

future to determine how and when the U.S. and Iran could begin to

build a new relationship based on the “new realities” of Iran and a

better understanding of the past.

I told him that it would be terribly helpful for me and President

Carter to understand better the origins of the revolution and the present

situation. That while we had the desire to learn and to understand, we

lacked a clear and direct presentation of their case and their view of

U.S.-Iranian relations in a historical context.

This approach hit a responsive chord.

Mr. S. said, “Mr. Jordan, for the past three months and the past

three days (his trip to Greece, Italy and France) all that I have heard

about is the American hostages. I realize that the taking of the hostages

was both a mistake for Iran and a violation of international law, but

the great frustration of my people is that no one cares to investigate

the circumstances leading to that action. I know that the hostages are

of great personal concern to you and your country, but your desire to

understand our revolution and grievances is a very encouraging sign

to me and will be conveyed by me to the Imam.”

He then, encouraged by me, launched into a 45 minute review of

the history of U.S.-Iranian relations. He divided his discourse into

in Tehran to the present.

Although certain things that he said were colorful and/or amusing,

his litany of allegations was predictable. I was impressed by both the

passion of his presentation and the sincerity with which he spoke, both

about “the revolution” and the “Imam.” His dedication to the Imam

exceeds loyalty and approaches a mystical reverence difficult for me

to comprehend. There is no question in my mind that it is real.

He was neither abusive or accusatory in his recital of Iran’s griev-

ances, but said it with a sense of sadness and regret that things between

us had gone so far and were in such a mess.

At one point in the conversation, I asked him, “How do you evalu-

ate President Carter? Do you see him in the tradition of American

Presidents anxious to intervene in the affairs of other countries?”

Negotiating Channels

He responded, “I believe that President Carter is a good man and

well intentioned President who does not understand our history or

our revolution. His sending you here is the first indication we have

had that he wants to understand.”

I then presented our case. I said that President Carter is the first

American President in a generation who understands both the influence

we have in the world, but also understands our country’s limitations.

I said that he was not an “interventionist” in the worst sense of that

word, indeed, that he had resisted intervention and military action

both during the time of the revolution and since the seizure of the

Embassy. I told him that there were many people inside and outside

of government who wanted the President to take unilateral action in

late ’78 and early ’79, ranging from urging the Shah to “crack down” to

direct U.S. military intervention. I told him that you rejected such ideas.

I told him that at the time of the capture of the embassy, public

opinion supported extreme measures, including punitive military

action, but that you had shaped and sustained a mood of restraint.

He acknowledged that these were sound arguments and said that

as counterproductive as the sanctions had been, any type of military

action or blockade would have resulted in the death of our people.

He then said, “Now, let’s talk about the hostages, and I’m in a

better mood to talk about them since you have heard our case.”

He went on to say “President Carter wants the hostages out for

the sake of those people and so that he can be re-elected—I want

them out so that we can turn our full anger and attention toward the

Soviet Union.”

He then made some philosophical comments about the United

States and Soviet Union. “While you have a better country, with certain

values and a democratic system for your people, the Soviet Union does

a much better job of marketing their ideology. I oppose communism

because it is an ideology that lacks a moral basis. But the bottom line

for Iran is that we will not be the pawn of the U.S. or the Soviet Union.

If I am killed fighting for my country, I do not care whether it is a

communist bullet or a capitalist bullet—either way I am dead.” More

on this in person.

We then got into a discussion of the scenario for release of the

hostages.

Point #1. I’ll tell you about in person.

#2. He believes that if we follow the scenario, they should be out

in 2–3 weeks. More on this later.

#3. He went into great detail describing for me all the work that

he would have to do with Bani-Sadr, the Imam and the Revolutionary

Council to obtain their release.

#4. He has “complete faith” in our French contacts. They have his

“power of attorney” in this matter although they would dispute that

as overstating their influence.

#5. He claims that all 50 are alive. I questioned him specifically

about Mr. M. He claimed no knowledge of this particular person but

said that “All are alive.” More on this in person.

#6. We talked at length about the problem of obtaining release of

the hostages from the compound. He said that he and Bani-Sadr “had

a plan” which would work, but would probably have to involve the

Imam personally. I told him that we had heard very specific rumors

about suicide pacts among the militants which were of great concern

to us. I asked him was he aware of these rumors and plans, and he

laughed and said, “Mr. Jordan, don’t worry. We will get every one of

your people out safely—we have more friends in the compound than

you realize.”

I pressed him to explain, but he would not talk about it anymore.

I gave him the letter (which he asked me to entrust to Bourguet)

and pressed him on early release of the hostages. He told me that he

would “go back to Tehran, see the Imam and redouble his efforts” but

that he thought it was more realistic to expedite the agreed upon plan

than to hope to short-circuit it. He said that should they decide to

move early on the hostages, they were “equipped” with President

Carter’s written promise. He said, “tell President Carter that I will do

my best.”

Future Relations with United States

As directed, I raised the subject of our relationship beyond the

crisis. I told him that we would be anxious to try to build a new

relationship but that the evolution of that relationship would be largely

determined by Iran’s attitude. I told him after our hostages were

released, that we could move quickly to solve problems such as freezing

of assets, etc., but what kind of relationship did he envisage and at

what speed could it evolve?

He replied that he had personally persuaded the Imam not to break

diplomatic relations with the U.S. He said that it is easy to break

Negotiating Channels

relations, but very, very difficult to re-establish them. He mentioned

Cuba as an example.

He said that within 6–9 months after the hostages are released, he

would hope that a small group of U.S. diplomats could return to Iran.

I mentioned here that it was going to be a very difficult decision for

us to send people back to Iran given the present crisis. He said that

he understood, but that our political presence was needed to counter

Soviet activities. He said that he was anxious to use the excuse of

a small U.S. diplomatic presence to reduce the Soviet embassy to a

comparable size.

He talked about our future relationship almost exclusively in the

context of the U.S. counterbalancing Soviet presence in Iran. At some

point, I gave him (on a plain white sheet of paper) our most recent

summary of Soviet buildup on the NW Iranian border. He loved it.

He said, “I will wave this paper at the next meeting of the Council

and tell everyone to get off their asses and prepare for attempted Soviet

domination of Iran.”

I made most/all of the points in the paper prepared for me by

Hal. I will report orally on them.

To summarize, Mr. S.’s attitude in talking with me about future

U.S.-Iranian relations seemed to be that now they have proven the

strength of the Revolution to the United States, they are willing and

anxious to teach the Soviet Union a lesson. He said that the Soviet

Ambassador complained to him recently about his anti-Soviet state-

ments and that he told him, “Don’t complain to me while you have

stolen Afghanistan and are assembling troops on our own borders.

You will not have to fight us on the borders, but in every house and

in every street in Iran, and we will prevail.”

After our meeting, I commented to one of our French friends that

while very pleased with the meeting, I was not certain that I had moved

the process on time for release of the hostages forward at all. He said,

“You are wrong. If he considered it a good meeting it will help you

more than you will ever know.”

He offered two interesting observations.

First, he said that Mr. S. will see and use this meeting as a “psycho-

logical victory” with the Imam. He says that he will go to the Imam

and say, “I met one of Carter’s top men. I convinced them of the evils

of their past policies and taught them about our revolution. You have

humbled the Americans.” According to my friend, this will score points

for Mr. S. with the Imam and also help soften his attitude.

Secondly, by having established a “secret” relationship with an

American official, his desire to end the crisis and his large ego will be

reinforced. Also, he is a “rug merchant” who loves to bargain and

trade. He says if he wants to do something for you, he will describe

in great detail how difficult it will be to accomplish, then go off and

do it quicker or better than you had anticipated.

I hope this is true as relates to the release of the hostages, because

he told me in great detail all of the problems, but also saying that “only

I can solve this.” We’ll see.

The final thing he told me was this:

“Please tell President Carter that I appreciate his sending you to

meet with me. I will report to the Imam your attitude of friendship

and your desire to build a new relationship.

Also tell President Carter that I hope he understands that the things

I have said personally about him were said either in frustration with

the U.S. or for domestic political purposes. I hope he understands.

Tell him that the strength and success of the Revolution will be a

better ally against Soviet aggression than the Shah ever was.

And, finally, tell him that I will return to Tehran and redouble my

efforts to obtain a quick release of the hostages.”

Conclusion

At best, Mr. S. is a deeply committed revolutionary, dedicated to

the survival of that revolution and to the integrity and independence

of Iran. His ego is enormous, but his devotion to the Imam is genuine.

His commitment to the revolution makes the Soviet threat the dominant

political concern in his life.

At worst, Mr. S. is a devious person whose only source of power

is the Imam. Now that the Imam’s health is in question, he is engaged

in a number of activities (hostage negotiation, anti-Soviet rhetoric, etc.)

that he perceives as being in his own self-interest.

The truth about Mr. S. is probably somewhere in between, but

either way, we should use his present attitudes to our own benefit.

Report on Scenario/Implementation

After four hours sleep, I awoke to what was supposed to be a brief

review session with our French friends on the scenario.

Negotiating Channels

It was the most difficult but also the most honest and possibly the

most successful session that we have had to date.

I opened by saying that I had grown increasingly concerned during

the week with some of Bani-Sadr’s claims that President Carter had to

“apologize,” “admit the mistakes of the past” and enter a period of

“self-criticism.”

I said that we were prepared to do what we had promised to do

last weekend in Switzerland, nothing more and nothing less. I told

them that President Carter had personally authorized that we supple-

ment his statement with certain things that he wanted to say, but I

said that there should be no illusions on anyone’s part as to what we

would say and would not say. I said that President Bani-Sadr should

know that we would not “apologize,” that we would not “admit mis-

takes” nor do other things which we would consider a violation of

principle. I told our French friends that we had taken seriously Bani-

Sadr’s private statement that he had no desire to “humiliate us.” I told

our French friends for us to say the kinds of things he had been calling

for publicly would be humiliating and would not be said by Presi-

dent Carter.

I told them that as much as we cared about the hostages, the honor

of our country was even more important. And that the hostages could

stay in Iran another two months or ten months before we would agree

to a scenario “apologizing” or admitting “guilt.”

Our French friends argued that Bani-Sadr, while endorsing the

scenario, had created a tremendous problem for himself and conse-

quently for us all by claiming that the U.S. would apologize. They said

that they felt certain that he would have to have some knowledge of

what would be in the U.S. statement before he moved to free the

hostages. We all agreed that exchange of statements in advance was a

bad idea as was the deposit of advance statements with Waldheim. A

possible compromise would be an informal arrangement whereby our

French friends informally reviewed the proposed statements by each

side to insure that they conformed with the principles agreed upon

at Berne.

185.

Memorandum From Jasper Welch of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, February 19, 1980

SUBJECT

Soviet Union Moves into Iran

Last Friday Bill Odom asked me to meet with him, Marshall, and

Fritz to review our thoughts on U.S. responses to Soviet moves into

Iran. Our conversation reached two conclusions with regard to current

intelligence:

186.

Memorandum Prepared by the Iran Task Force, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, February 19, 1980

SUBJECT

CIA Views on The Release Of The Hostages

If President Bani-Sadr orders the militants occupying the US

Embassy to release the hostages we believe the militants will refuse to

do so. The militants have repeatedly stated that they do not believe

he has the authority or the right to make decisions regarding the hostage

issue. In our judgment, only a direct order from Ayatollah Khomeini—

probably in public—will persuade the militants to give up the hostages.

[portion marking not declassified]

Even if Khomeini orders the hostages’ release, there is some

chance—probably less than 50 percent—that some of the militants will

refuse to obey. [less than 1 line not declassified] there are some leftists

among the Islamic fundamentalists holding the hostages. Bani-Sadr

reportedly told a visiting Algerian delegation this month that he is

concerned that one or more of the “Communist” captors will take

precipitous action if the government orders the hostages released. [por-

tion marking not declassified]

Information Package. Top Secret; [handling restriction not declassified] A February 20

covering memorandum from Major General James B. Vaught, attached to Tabs A–E,

papers prepared in CIA, DIA, and JTF, states that these agencies had separately come

to the same conclusion—that it is unlikely that the hostages would be transferred peace-

fully in the near future. Vaught stated that Carter should see the reports.

Government Forces

Bani-Sadr has said on several occasions that he would not use force

to attain the release of the hostages. In his new role as commander-in-

chief of the military the president has theoretical authority over a large

number of forces in Tehran, however, that could be used against the

militants. None are entirely loyal to Bani-Sadr and none are trained in

the tactics necessary to storm the Embassy compound against deter-

mined resistance and free the hostages unharmed. [portion marking not

declassified]

—Military units in Tehran consist of an under-strength infantry

division, two armored brigades, a special forces brigade and one artil-

lery group. At full strength this would amount to about 25,000 men

but the actual strength is probably about half that figure. None of

these units is garrisoned in the immediate vicinity of the US Embassy,

although some military transport units and depots are located in the

area. An armored brigade equipped with over 100 tanks is approxi-

mately eight kilometers from the Embassy. [portion marking not

declassified]

—Revolutionary Guard forces in Tehran number approximately

garrisoned at the Sultanatabad barracks in the northwest part of the

city and 1,000 are located near the Majles building in the bazaar. The

degree of loyalty of the Guards to Bani-Sadr probably varies from

unit to unit. Some sources have reported that there are Revolutionary

Guardsmen inside the Embassy compound cooperating with the mili-

tants. [portion marking not declassified]

—Police and gendarmerie units in Tehran have been extensively

purged since the revolution. There are apparently only headquarters

personnel from the gendarmerie in the city. Police are patrolling the

streets but reportedly their morale and effectiveness is low. Few police-

men would probably be willing to take the risk of participating in an

attack on the militants. [portion marking not declassified]

We believe Bani-Sadr would resort to using these forces only in

extremis—perhaps after an order from Khomeini had failed to effect

the release of the hostages. [portion marking not declassified]

Bani-Sadr’s most attractive option in this case would be to try to

infiltrate loyal forces into the compound gradually in order to avoid

a direct confrontation with the militants. Some press reports from Arab

sources in Tehran have indicated that the government may already

have begun this process, but we doubt that it has had much success

to date. [portion marking not declassified]

We would expect the militants to resist forcibly a sudden govern-

ment attempt to seize the Embassy in the absence of an order from

Khomeini. At least some of the militants are probably sincerely pre-

pared to be martyrs for the revolution. If Bani-Sadr decided to pursue

a more gradual approach of cordoning off the compound, starving out

the militants and gradually infiltrating their ranks, his ability to effect

187.

Memorandum of Conversation

MEMORANDUM OF MEETING BETWEEN

MINISTER FRANCOIS-PONCET AND SECRETARY VANCE

France

United States

Jean Francois-Poncet

Cyrus R. Vance

Foreign Minister

Secretary of State

Gabriel Robin

Arthur A. Hartman

Political Director

US Ambassador to France

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

Vance said that he would like to discuss Iran for a moment. He

said we had thought until the last couple of days that the hostages

place at the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Drafted on February 26, presumably

by Hartman.

might be out in a couple of weeks, but some slippages are beginning

to develop and it might stretch out. For the moment, he is assuming

we will get the hostages out. If we do, what should our relationship

with Iran be? He said in his own view he thought several things ought

to happen. First, we ought to begin with a lifting of the freeze on assets

and even that should begin in the overseas branches of American banks.

We would allow that to proceed and then perhaps have a joint US-

Iran commission unwind the remaining economic and assets problems.

Second, we might then think of sending some military spare parts to

them. Third, we would have to look at the whole economic relationship

beyond that. It is in our interest to see that their oil operations continue.

And, therefore, in a post-hostage situation, we probably ought to do

something to help them with the resumption of drilling. And we might

also wish to do something in technical assistance in agriculture. But,

he said, as far as he is concerned, he would recommend that we take

all our people out because he did not think that unless things changed

seriously in the country, it would be safe to keep them there.

Francois-Poncet said that he would like to mention to the Secretary

some aspects of his conversation with Ghotbzadeh. He said he had

given me the rundown on the conversation for use by my guest, but

that there were several other things which occurred which might be

of interest to the Secretary. Francois-Poncet said that he had begun

with Ghotbzadeh by making a very strong pitch on getting rid of the

hostages as a problem and freeing them in order that a more balanced

relationship could be built with all the countries of the West. He assured

Ghotbzadeh that until that happened, there would not be any relation-

ship. They then went on to discuss the situation in the surrounding

area and Ghotbzadeh said that he was very worried about what the

Soviets were up to. He said his two greatest fears were that with

Soviet help, the Tudeh Party was making headway and that the Soviets

intended to make Baluchistan into a separate state. He then went on

to say that Iran was determined to help get the Soviets out of Afghani-

stan and is already funding an effort to make Afghanistan a real hell

for the Soviets. He said that there could be no reprisal that will stop

Iran from doing this. On the other hand, they don’t exclude some

moves into the north by the Soviets. He apparently talked about pulling

back, fighting separately in the villages and in the end saying Iran will

be the same kind of hell for them that Afghanistan is.

Negotiating Channels

188.

Letter From H. Ross Perot to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Dallas, February 21, 1980

189.

Editorial Note

In a February 20, 1980, message, the Iranians, in accordance with

Step 8 of the scenario developed in Bern (see Document 180), sent a

message to Secretary-General of the United Nations Kurt Waldheim

agreeing to the Commission of Inquiry. The message deviated from

the previously agreed-upon language. The message stated: “Now that

the wish of the Imam and the people of Iran regarding a study and

investigation into the past interferences of the U.S. into the internal

affairs of Iran through the regime of the deposed shah and with a

view to establishing a tribunal to determine their treason, crimes and

corruption has been accepted” the Commission was accepted. (Saun-

ders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran, page 129)

As Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian

Affairs Harold Saunders later recalled, Waldheim’s Chef de Cabinet

Iranian message and to alert the Carter administration to the deviation

from the agreed-upon text. Saunders then called Acting Secretary of

State Warren Christopher, who consulted by telephone with Secretary

of State Cyrus Vance in Bonn. Vance urged that the United States

require Iran to stick scrupulously to the script. Saunders and Christo-

pher relayed this information to President Jimmy Carter at a 5 a.m.

meeting in the Oval Office at the White House. (Sick, All Fall Down,

page 310; Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in

Iran, page 129; Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary) Saunders

recalled that Carter decided that the United States would accept the

Iranian message and the Commission (Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pres-

sure,” American Hostages in Iran, page 129) The original language, how-

ever, was reiterated in a White House statement, in which the United

States agreed to the fact-finding Commission of Inquiry to hear Iran’s

grievances, to allow an early solution of the crisis, and to speak with

The appointed members of the Commission of Inquiry were

Mohammed Bedjaoui, the Algerian Permanent Representative to the

United Nations and former Minister of Justice; Andres Aguilar, the

Venezuelan Ambassador to the United States, Permanent Representa-

tive to the United Nations, and former Justice Minister; Adib Daoudi,

former Syrian Ambassador to India and the Benelux and key political

adviser to Syrian President Hafez al-Assad; Louis-Edmond Petitti of

France, a member of the International Commission of Jurists and a

judge of the European Court of Human Rights; and Harry Jayewardene,

member of the United Nations Subcomission on the Prevention of

Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities and close adviser to his

brother, Sri Lankan President J.R. Jayewardene. Bedjaoui and Aguilar

served as co-chairmen. (The UN Commission of Inquiry on Iran, Febru-

ary 29; Carter Library, White House Office of Counsel to the President,

Lloyd Cutler’s Files, Box 2)

The Commission members gathered in Geneva where they

remained for 3 days as Iranian Minister of Foreign Affairs Sadegh

Ghotbzadeh sorted out technical arrangements. They arrived in Tehran

February 23. Meanwhile, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini proclaimed

Negotiating Channels

his staunch support for the students holding the hostages and

announced that release of the hostages would be determined by the

National Assembly in April after the scheduled February elections.

(Telegram 49316 to all diplomatic and consular posts, February 23;

Hamilton Jordan recalled that he and Carter, Vance, Saunders, and

Henry Precht consulted by telephone to determine what Khomeini’s

remarks meant for the Commission’s success. Jordan and Saunders

both wondered if Khomeini was even aware of the carefully constructed

scenario. Later that day, Jordan received a message from Christian

Bourguet, one of the French negotiators who helped develop the sce-

nario, to convey that Khomeini could change his mind at any moment,

to encourage optimism, and to allow the Commission do its work. As

Jordan wrote in his memoir, Carter agreed “because we really had no

choice.” (Crisis, pages 179–181)

The Commission remained in Tehran from February 23 until March

11. Its members met with Ghotbzadeh, Bani-Sadr, and other members

of the Revolutionary Council and visited revolutionary shrines and

took testimony from SAVAK victims, Iranian jurists, human rights

respectively; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

and

respectively) The students regularly rejected any visits by Commission

members to the hostages or the Embassy compound. (Telegram 52956

to all diplomatic and consular posts, February 28; National Archives,

On February 28, Revolutionary Council member Hajatolislam

Akbar Hashimi Rafsanjani, speaking from the Tehran hospital where

Ayatollah Khomeini was being treated for a heart condition, told the

press that the Commission would visit the hostages within hours,

accompanied by a senior Iranian official appointed by President Abol

Hassan Bani-Sadr. (Telegram 53028 to all diplomatic and consular

posts, February 28, National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy

File, D800103–0027) The students prevented this visit over disagree-

ments about how many Commissioners would make the trip to the

compound and how many hostages the Commissioners could see.

(Telegram 56992 to all diplomatic and consular posts, March 2; National

3 message, Swiss Ambassador to Iran Erik Lang reported that, accord-

ing to French lawyer Hector Villalon, Khomeini “has indeed given the

order that the visit should take place, but if I understand correctly he

gave the order to the Revolutionary Council, to be executed by the

Revolutionary Council, therefore he did not give the order directly to

190.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, February 25, 1980

SUBJECT

Passive Displays

Some time ago I briefed you about a possibility that Ben Huberman

and I were pursuing to create a large ominous cloud which could be

deployed as a psychological display, possibly in connection with the

use of carbon fibers or other techniques under development. With

your approval, DOD has conducted some initial tests which show that

the creation of a large, stable cloud of foam particles is feasible.

191.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of

State Vance

Washington, February 27, 1980

SUBJECT

Contacts with the Lawyers in Iran

Attached are two memcons reporting (1) a lengthy conversation

with Villalon this morning and (2) the translation of a cable from

Ambassador Lang.

Some extracts from today’s conversation follow:

—Because of Ghotbzadeh’s inability to get along with the Commis-

sion’s co-Chairman, the two lawyers have been given a middleman

role. They do not like this assignment and are attempting to get out

of it. It is clear from our contacts with the UN that the co-Chairman

would like to see them out of the process.

—The lawyers have criticized the Commission for its apparent

rigidity in not yielding to Iranian requests to move around the city,

i.e., to give the appearance of a more active investigatory effort. Appar-

ently the lawyers persuaded the Commission to split up and for sepa-

rate members to take different assignments.

—As we know, the Revolutionary Council two days ago approved

a visit by the Commission to the compound. Ghotbzadeh has experi-

enced trouble in dealing with the captors. They offered to allow the

Commission to see only some of the hostages. Ghotbzadeh today gave

them an ultimatum demanding that all of the hostages be seen. If the

captors refuse, the Revolutionary Council will send an open letter of

protest to the Imam. The lawyers suspect that possibly 20 of the hos-

tages are not being held in the compound.

—The Commission met with Bruce Laingen and his two colleagues

today secretly. We have confirmation of this from the British.

—The transfer of the hostages to a hospital or other place has

been approved “at the highest level.” Two intervening stages will be

necessary, i.e., a visit to the compound and a partial report by the

Commission (both steps envisaged in the scenario).

—Beheshti is described as making serious trouble for Bani-Sadr

(this is contradicted by the apparent support of Beheshti on the Revolu-

tionary Council for the scenario).

—Bani-Sadr is said to have persuaded Khomeini to give authority

over the hostages to the new Parliament because Bani-Sadr and Kho-

meini were upset that Waldheim jumped the gun in announcing the

Commission, and thus deprived Iran of the opportunity to declare a

diplomatic success.

—The two lawyers are fully aware of our concerns about the lack

of tangible progress. They continue to feel there is a strong commitment

in the Iranian leadership to the scenario and Bani-Sadr as having told

the Commission that he would adhere to the scenario “point by point.”

—Because of their role as intermediaries between the Iranians and

the Commission, the lawyers are hesitant to promise that they can

leave Iran for a meeting with us. They prefer to await developments

over the next 24 hours. They suggest that possibly one of them could

meet with one of us outside Iran.

The Lang telegram covers much of the same ground as the tele-

phone conversation. In the cable, Lang is asked by the lawyers to urge

“grave confrontation” existed between the Revolutionary Council and the students, but

the visit to the hostages was assured.

192.

Summary of a Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence

and Research

Washington, undated

IRANIAN AND U.S. POLICY AFTER THE HOSTAGE CRISIS

The attached paper, prepared by INR, discusses Iranian foreign

policy in the post-hostage period. Its conclusions, assuming safe release

of the hostages, are as follows:

—Regardless of whether President Bani-Sadr or one of his rivals

eventually triumphs, the shape and content of Iran’s foreign policy

will be the same.

—Iranian foreign policy goals include non-alignment, economic

self-sufficiency, the elimination of Super Power influence, and influenc-

ing governments in the region towards Iran’s Islamic, populist and

non-aligned outlook.

—Both Super Powers are viewed as malevolent forces bent on

exploiting the region. The U.S., however, is still seen as the most danger-

ous threat to Iran, despite the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

—Iran will probably not give significant material support to foreign

liberation groups in the immediate future. It will, however, encourage

such groups to follow Iran’s example.

—Iran’s revolutionary ideas have unleashed a potentially signifi-

cant force which could impair U.S. strategic interests. Those ideas

should be considered in reaching any decision about how to protect

U.S. influence in the region.

—The impact of Iran in the region will be conditioned by the ability

of Bani-Sadr and his government to bring political coherence to the

revolution, control dissident ethnic groups, and make some progress

in economic recovery.

—An anarchic Iran will increase the danger of coup attempts and be

a tempting target for external intervention and subversion, particularly

from the Soviet Union and Iraq.

U.S. Objectives in Post-Hostage Iran

—Establishing the foundations for gradual movement towards an

improved bilateral relationship.

—The preservation of an independent Iran with the ability to main-

tain its territorial integrity.

—Strengthened economic and political relations between Iran and

the West.

—Containment of the Iranian revolution within its own borders.

—Increased Iranian differentiation in its perceptions of the relative

U.S. and Soviet threats, and understanding of U.S. actions in the area

to meet the Soviet threat.

—Stable relationships between Iran and Iraq.

Post-hostage Iran, as the paper suggests, will be extremely difficult

for the U.S. to deal with. Even if the U.S. is able to overcome the

domestic obstacles to rebuilding a relationship with Iran, the revolu-

tionary government will continue to pursue policies vis-à-vis the U.S.

bilaterally and regionally in the area which will impinge on our own

strategic interests, e.g., clearing the area of all foreign presence, pressur-

ing Pakistan to steer clear of a security relationship with the U.S., and

reduced oil production.

In pursuing our objectives in Iran, we should work both bilaterally

and through third parties, which may have to carry much of the freight,

given the bilateral strains which are likely to persist. The bilateral

relationship will be strongly affected by the degree to which the U.S.

can be forthcoming on issues of importance to Iran, e.g., supply of

Negotiating Channels

spare parts for military equipment, settling claims and attachments

after assets are unfrozen, Iran’s efforts to repatriate the Shah’s assets,

U.S. visas for Iranians (particularly students) and by the perception of

U.S. policies in the region, e.g., Arab-Israel, defense relationships and

the U.S.-USSR confrontation. Underlying these issues will be the ques-

tion of “acceptance of the Iranian revolution”—an Iranian psychological

need which we are unlikely to satisfy in the near term.

Steps the U.S. and Others Can Take

—Open a dialogue with Iran on outstanding bilateral issues, ini-

tially through the operation of a Joint Commission or indirect contacts.

—Work closely with the Congress and the press to create a climate

in the U.S. which recognizes the strategic importance of Iran and en-

ables the U.S. to disentangle post-hostage issues such as assets and

release of previously purchased spare parts with a minimum of friction.

—Use the Joint Commission as a forum for a political dialogue on

the Soviet threat and U.S. responses to it in the area, including our

activities in the Gulf and with Pakistan. Exchange intelligence assess-

ments on area problems such as Afghanistan.

—Encourage our allies to take a forthcoming approach to Iran on

economic and political ties with Iran, including provision of military

equipment and oil field technology.

—Make clear to the Soviets our interest in Iran’s integrity and in

non-intervention by external powers.

—Develop a dialogue with Iraq, either directly or through others,

which emphasizes our mutual interest in a stable and secure Iran.

—Strengthen our relations with Gulf states in ways that lessen

their vulnerability to revolutionary waves from Iran (e.g., dealing with

corruption, meeting legitimate needs of ethnic minorities).

—Maintain discreet relationships with a variety of Iranians who

might provide future leadership in Iran without encouraging their anti-

revolutionary activity. Avoid contact with émigré groups that have

little or no political future in Iran.

—Encourage the development of democratic forces in Iran that

will permit groups favorable to us to survive.

These last points will have a critical impact on improvement in

bilateral relations. It is important that we maintain access to possible

alternatives to the present revolutionary structure in Iran. However,

to the extent that the Iranian authorities believe that we are supporting

these dissidents or potential dissidents, it will be virtually impossible

to build a constructive relationship with the revolutionary government

193.

Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Secretary of

State (Raphel) to Secretary of State Vance and the Deputy

Secretary of State (Christopher)

Washington, February 29, 1980

SUBJECT

The Shah and Panama

and I met with Armao and Bill Jackson to discuss the Shah and Panama.

Armao had requested the meeting and began with the usual list of

complaints about the Panamanian treatment of Armao, his associates

and the Shah’s party. Armao offered considerable detail about what

he purported to be pay-offs made to Panamanians, and various exam-

ples of how the Shah’s stay was made exceedingly uncomfortable. He

and Jackson also highlighted what they saw as the Shah’s real fears of

extradition to Iran. His presentation ended with the statement that the

Shah, his family and he have decided the Shah has to leave Panama

immediately and what would we do to assist.

Negotiating Channels

In response to the question whether the Shah had other possible

havens, Jackson replied that none seemed available. During the past

three weeks, Jackson has tried Austria and Switzerland, both of which

replied not now, and South Africa which said no. Armao asked what

would happen if, hypothetically, some country offered the Shah asylum

and he left Panama on his own before the hostages were released. We

noted that the decision would obviously be his, but that any travel by

the Shah before the hostages are released could considerably complicate

our attempts to achieve their freedom.

After further discussion, it was agreed that we faced two immediate

problems—discomfort at the hands of the Panamanians and the Shah’s

concerns about extradition. On extradition, we noted that we fully

believed the Panamanian statements that he would not be extradited

and we had no reason to think otherwise. On Panamanian actions

inimical to the Shah’s party, we offered to raise this issue in an appropri-

ate way with the GOP, if the Shah so wished.

Hamilton then made the following offer: He would be ready to

travel to Panama secretly next week to meet Torrijos. He is prepared

to discuss two issues. 1. He will ask Torrijos again for reassurances

the Shah will not be extradited. Hamilton noted this is likely to disturb

Torrijos, but he would do it if it would make the Shah more comfortable.

2. If the Shah wants, Bill Jackson should send Hamilton a letter giving

specific examples of cases of extortion, bribery and other kinds of

mistreatment of the Shah’s party. Hamilton will, without giving the

letter to Torrijos, discuss the Shah’s specific concerns with the General.

At the conclusion of the meeting, it was understood that Jackson

or Armao will be in touch with Hamilton on whether a trip to Panama

was desirable. If so, Hamilton will go and raise the extradition issue

and, if the Shah wishes, also the question of alleged Panamanian mis-

treatment of the party.

At the beginning of the conversation, Armao repeated his threat

to go public and criticize Panama and Torrijos. By the conclusion of

the meeting, he had backed off and seemed willing to let the hostage

scenario play itself out for several more weeks before saying anything

publicly. Hamilton’s offer to meet with Torrijos also helped mollify

Armao.

194.

Message from the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

Tehran, March 3, 1980

Analysis of Political Situation

I have taken advantage of V’s visit to compare my ideas and what

I have learned about the situation with his to allow you to judge the

situation and estimate possibilities for solving the crisis and consolidat-

ing the country.

1. We are unanimous on the following conclusion: there is no

government. Legitimacy and the institutionalization of power which

were slightly strengthened over the last few weeks are again in the

process of being called into question by a combination of opposing

and parallel forces.

2. By way of example, I would like to cite the discussion that my

translator had a few days ago at the compound. It is instructive in

more ways than one. His interlocutors (the “kids”) told him that they

would do everything they could to see to it that power did not become

centralized, that power did not become stronger. It is thanks to the

fact that there are many parallel forces (he said specifically about 20)

in Iran that imperialism can no longer exert pressure on the country

(that went especially for the United States but also for the Soviet Union).

Look, they said, if Carter wants to pressure us, he can, what good does

it do him to pressure Bani-Sadr, he only has a minute fraction of the

power. If Carter wants to make a deal he will have to have the agree-

ment of all 20 and that will be very difficult.

3. Such a vision is not merely that of the fundamentalists: the

radical left, the Communists, the ethnic minorities all have an interest

in this fragmentation of power which ensues from some endless de-

stabilization which will allow the necessary conditions for bringing

about the second revolution, whereas for others it means a chance to

live under de facto local autonomy in the absence of any central power.

4. V, in his discussions with Bani-Sadr on the outcome of the

elections, still observes optimism, but tempered optimism. Bani-Sadr

realizes that he has very little chance of winning the kind of victory

he did in the Presidential election, and foresees the religious fundamen-

talists winning quite a few seats. But he has worked out a new tactic

to get together with the more powerful candidates to get their support

Negotiating Channels

if elected and even to support some of them himself. Thus it can be

expected that the parliament will not be as manageable as might have

been thought at first. The fact still remains that the future cabinet will

at least have the advantage of not being a dead weight, frightened,

bogged down by inertia like the Revolutionary Council.

5. B and V have observed as we did long ago that the economy is

increasingly paralyzed and that the country is literally living off its oil

and according to what V has observed is not even selling it well. There

is nothing on the horizon to trigger a takeoff of the economy. The crisis

is responsible to a large extent but bogeymen and incompetents are

also responsible. So the authorities, even Bani-Sadr, trumpet that it is

the fault of the West, the West which is strangling Iran, is not sending

it enough foodstuffs or spare parts. B and V are trying to dramatize

this situation to wake up Bani-Sadr, Moinfar, and anyone else who has

some understanding.

Let us not forget one important fact. Although Bani-Sadr is moder-

ate in the political field, he will be less so in the economic field where

he wants to apply theses which, to say the very least, have never been

tried by fire.

6. The Imam, who is getting stronger, sometimes appears to regret

having given Bani-Sadr too much power (df. the demonstration) and

seems to be playing a role which runs counter to national stabilization,

by favoring the opposition forces in order to strike a balance. In this

context, B and V are wondering whether Ahmed Khomeini, the son,

might not be playing a two-faced game and while pretending to help

Bani-Sadr isn’t really playing the fundamentalists’ game.

The Imam has really never given his total confidence to anyone.

Recent history gives us several examples of this: elimination of Yazdi,

then Bani-Sadr, benefitting Ghotbzadeh, etc., etc. The person who seems

to have his greatest confidence—by his very nature!—is Ghotbzadeh.

This is a happy circumstance to the extent that Ghotbzadeh has given

himself body and soul to reaching a solution. V’s question is how far

will he go if he feels that the sands are shifting too much. To this

jealousy and sensitivity must be added the aspect of the “folqar” which

is now replacing the role of the “fu¨hrer” that the Iman used to play.

7. Bani-Sadr now realizes that after having dreamed of overturning

the imperial regime for more than ten years, the leadership obtained

power without fighting, but especially without being prepared to take

it. Aside from the unanimity on the question of overturning the imperial

regime, there is total disagreement regarding the kind of system to be

created, and this again adds to the total lack of structural organization.

8. Likewise, Bani-Sadr’s method of government and work does not

favor a change in the direction of strong leadership. Bani-Sadr is a

thinker, a loner, who, like the Imam, does not trust anyone entirely. It

is really difficult to see how his relationships with the Ministers of his

future cabinet will work. He prefers to surround himself with very

young people whom, according to V, he treats very harshly even in

the case of very competent people like Nobari of the Markazi Bank or

the Bank’s Vice Governor. Delegation of power is very poor as is the

transmission of information and briefings in both directions. Bani-Sadr

tends to entrust one question to Peter, another one to Paul, but Paul

is not supposed to know what Peter is doing. This secrecy assumes

incredible proportions. V found out very little and by accident that

while dossiers were being prepared against the Shah by the Ministry

of Justice or by the Markazi Bank, Bani-Sadr had organized a team

which was secretly drawing up dossiers on the very same subject.

Like Bazargan, Bani-Sadr allows himself to be overwhelmed by a

mob of supplicants, a kind of populism which is a luxury which the

country really cannot afford under present circumstances.

Public opinion which did after all support Bani-Sadr rather mas-

sively did so without enthusiasm or fervor—you have to take into

account abstentions and fall back votes which would have been given

to a candidate like Radjavi. There are many members of the intelli-

gentsia who consider that he won’t last long, whence this attitude of

“reserve” on the part of people who should be committing themselves.

This is one more reason why the country still hasn’t gotten off the

ground.

9. Like ancient tragedy, the Imam is always playing the role of the

deux ex machina, which means that so far a solution has always been

found to the various impasses in which the country has found itself.

The Imam is still the only one who can rally quasi general consent,

since the opposition is still too weak to make its voice heard.

But this will last only as long as the Imam lives and is mentally

sound—the day he dies if power has not been sufficiently consolidated,

which is now the case as we have seen, chaos will surely ensue. Chaos

indeed, although parenthetically in the Iranian brand of chaos a certain

normalcy comes about by the force of circumstances, a trait which can

be observed at a higher stage of development in Italy.

10. Conclusion. As can be seen this situation is more unsettled than

ever. The approaching elections as well as the climate surrounding the

attempt to solve the hostage crisis both are increasing this tendency

even more. So far the President has been able to maneuver adequately

but the question is not whether he will continue to maneuver well but

rather whether the parallel powers will let him.

Negotiating Channels

195.

Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

Tehran, March 4, 1980

of an extremely grave development.

2. This morning as scheduled the “students” were at the Foreign

Ministry at 10 o’clock. As scheduled, the two Commission members

Bedjaouni and Davoudi arrived at 11 o’clock.

2.a. As a dramatic gesture the students refused to meet the Commis-

sion members.

2.b. The students refused also to give a date for the Commission’s

visit. Thus we have a test of strength.

3. The Revolutionary Council is meeting in extraordinary session

this evening at 5:30.

4. Ghotbzadeh, with the agreement of Bani-Sadr, is going to pro-

pose in these conditions that the visit take place this evening or tomor-

row morning in order to force the students to accept the Council’s

ruling.

5. If the Revolutionary Council should refuse to go to a test of

strength with the students then Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh jointly will

propose that the Council submit its resignation to the Imam and all of

the members should go to the Imam to tell him that it is either the

students or us.

6. B and V are working hard this afternoon because if the test of

strength takes place we should profit from it and after having forced

open the door of the compound for the visit, we should move immedi-

ately to the transfer of the hostages as the intermediate stage.

7. B and V will insist strongly on this aspect.

196.

Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

Tehran, March 4, 1980

197.

Memorandum From the White House Counsel (Cutler) to the

White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

Washington, March 5, 1980

SUBJECT

The Shah

198.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Rafi Ahmed, Special Assistant to Secretary General Waldheim

Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State, NEA

According to his counterpart in Tehran, Ghotbzadeh after this

morning’s meeting with the UN Commission stated that the Commis-

sion had successfully completed its work on the first part of its mandate.

The second part of the mandate requires a meeting with the hostages.

Because the Government had met resistance on this point, Ghotbzadeh

had asked the Commission to stay in Tehran another 2–3 days.

Ghotbzadeh at that point said he could say no more. Very privately,

however, he must have briefed someone in the UN entourage along

the following lines with strong emphasis on total secrecy: The hostages

will remain where they are. The turnover will take place tonight. The

Revolutionary Council will meet late today to discuss details.

Our two lawyers apparently told someone in the UN group that

it would be better for the Commission not to go to the Compound

before Sunday3 because the students might “leave something behind”

(presumably booby traps). Nevertheless, the UN group is talking about

a visit to the Compound on Sunday, partly because Pettiti is going to

Paris and will be back Saturday. When and if they go to see the hostages,

a team of doctors will accompany them.

Negotiating Channels

Apparently Bani Sadr got approval from Khomeini for the Commis-

sion to visit the Compound. The reaction of the occupiers of the

Compound was to issue this morning’s statement.

Ahmed asked his counterpart how the U.S. should react publicly.

The advice from Tehran was that the U.S. should not comment. The

U.S. should avoid referring in any substantial way to the statement by

the occupiers.

meini gave his approval to Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh on the evening of March 4, but

the students sought verification. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

199.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, March 5, 1980

SUBJECT

Post-Hostage Iran

This issue is scheduled to be discussed this afternoon at the SCC

Meeting on Security Framework. The State INR paper2 provided for

the meeting focuses very heavily on foreign policy of Iran. It takes

the present political situation in Tehran as its starting point and then

extrapolates what would happen if the hostage situation were removed

as a consideration. In that sense, it is an accurate reflection of the

current conventional wisdom. However, it does not pose the serious

questions in a form which is sharp enough to permit policy decisions.

In fact, the foreign policy of Iran in the post-hostage period will be

determined almost exclusively by internal developments in Iran. This may

not be the moment for a high-level review of the sensitive and difficult

policy choices which we will face, but the following is an attempt to

spell out very briefly the kinds of approaches we might consider, the

kind of operational decisions which we may be required to make, and

some of the larger strategic issues which we will wish to consider.

Evolution vs. Activism

The State paper explicitly adopts an evolutionary approach. It takes

the present system, structure, and personalities as its starting point and

then considers how we can nurse it along toward our desired objectives of:

—A reasonably stable and unified Iran which is

—Strongly resistant to pro-Soviet subversion and external threats,

—Accessible to the West for political dialogue and economic

development,

—Willing to maintain mutually beneficial contact with the U.S. on

issues of concern to both countries, and

—Continued production of significant quantities of oil.

[1 paragraph (8½ lines) not declassified]

Negotiating Channels

Short Term Policy Issues

The following list attempts to identify the specific policy issues

which will require decisions soon after the hostages are released. For

purposes of discussion at the SCC, these could be regarded as areas for

possible contingency planning by the various agencies.

Diplomatic Relations. State has already done quite a bit of work in

preparation for the Swiss to take over as protecting power for us in

Tehran, on the assumption that we will maintain diplomatic relations

but no physical presence in Tehran. Alternatively, we could break

diplomatic relations. Will we continue to grant student visas? Should

we explore the possibility for direct contacts with the Iranian leadership

on neutral territory? What does State mean by a “Joint Commission”

which is mentioned in the paper?

Spare Parts. Will we continue to embargo the supply of spare parts?

If this is not part of a hostage release package, what is our asking price

to lift the embargo? Can we realistically expect our allies to continue

the embargo once the hostages are out?

Oil. Will we be prepared to make spare parts and technical expertise

available to Iran? Could we prevent it if we tried? Can we bargain our

supply of parts and expertise in return for access to Iranian oil ports

by U.S. tankers? Are we interested in attempting to resume purchase

of Iranian oil?

Allied Projects. Will we acquiesce in a return to business as usual

on the part of our allies? Could we prevent it if we tried? Is it in our

interest to encourage the allies to rebuild a Western commercial

presence?

Assets. How do we manage the unfreezing of Iranian assets? What

problems do we foresee? How long will it take? What steps can we

take in advance to facilitate management of this very complex problem?

Intelligence. [2 lines not declassified]

[1 paragraph (7½ lines) not declassified]

Longer Term Policy Issues

The following is intended as a thumbnail sketch of the kind of

policy issues which we will have to address in terms of our basic

foreign policy goals once the hostage crisis is off our backs.

CENTO Redux. A combination of mutual need and common vulner-

ability will tend to drive Turkey, Iran and Pakistan together. We will

want to consider how we can best encourage that natural tendency

and how we might best exploit it for our own interests. This will have

to be seen as an important component of our relations with Turkey

in particular.

Iraq will be a key factor, particularly if the tendency to intervene

in the oil fields evolves into outright Iraqi expansionism.

200.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran/Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Henry Owen (Chairman)

Warren Christopher

Jody Powell

David Newsom

Lloyd Cutler

Peter Constable

Hedley Donovan

Nelson Ledsky

NSC

OSD

Gary Sick

W. Graham Claytor

William Odom

Jerrold Schecter

Negotiating Channels

JCS

General David Jones

Lt. Gen. John Pustay

Justice

John Shenefield

Treasury

Robert Carswell

Energy

John Sawhill

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Iran Developments. Secretary Vance informed the group that the

U.S. public reaction to the reports that the hostages were to be turned

over to the Revolutionary Council would be: “We have noted what

has been said in Tehran and we are waiting to see what happens.” No

one should go beyond that statement. All agreed. (C)

2. Iran Sanctions. The SCC reviewed the status of sanctions on Iran

as follows:

Military Spares. State and Defense reported that the embargo on

sale of military spare parts was holding. [3 lines not declassified] In

general, the anxiety on the part of the Iranians to find spares is evidence

that the embargo is working. We are staying alert for efforts to circum-

vent the restrictions. (S)

Assets Freeze. Treasury reported that the freeze is holding. The

Iranians are considering a counter-attachment of U.S. assets in Swiss

banks, and we have retained counsel to attempt to block them. The

situation will have to be played day by day. In France, a hearing on

our freeze of assets in French banks is scheduled for March 17, but we

are seeking a month delay. If and when the hearing is held, it is likely

to go against us. [12 lines not declassified] Otherwise, Treasury noted

that there are a number of tactical situations around the world which

are being watched, and we are holding fast. Iran is putting pressure

on Finland to repay $38 million oil payment which was caught in the

freeze. The World Bank is asking us to license payment of an Iranian

loan which is coming due. In the UK, seven Iranian counter suits have

been consolidated but will probably not be heard before summer or

fall. There are 160 suits pending in the U.S., but consolidation proceed-

ings insure that they will not be held for at least a month or longer. (TS)

Oil. Iranian production has been holding at just above 2 mbd. There

has been a slight decline in exports in the early part of 1980, but that

is probably due more to difficulties in contracting than to the floods,

sabotage, breakdowns, and labor problems NIOC has been experienc-

ing. Over time, these problems, including the lack of new drilling, will

cause a decline in oil production, but it is not likely to be steep. The

gas pipeline with the USSR is totally closed down, which may be an

Iranian ploy in forthcoming price negotiations with the Soviets. (S)

Immigration. A total of 56,000 Iranian students were registered;

8,000 failed to register and are being pursued. Overall, since the restric-

tions were imposed, about 12,000 Iranians have left the U.S., including

about 3,000 students. Approximately the same number of Iranians have

entered the country during the same period since we decided not to

prevent immigration. (C)

Overall Effect. Admiral Turner said that the sanctions have had only

a marginal effect on the Iranian economic disarray, and keeping the

sanctions in effect would continue to have a marginal effect. Secretary

Vance said he was more optimistic. Although the economic effects of

the sanctions had not been great, the psychological effect had been

real, as demonstrated by the lengths Iran went to prevent sanctions

being voted in the UN. Mr. Claytor agreed that knowledgeable people

were worried about the effect of the sanctions in the long run. The

short term effect was minimal, but over the period of a year there

would be a significant impact in terms of spare parts and production

capacity. Energy agreed. Mr. Cutler noted that Iran had gone from an

excellent credit rating to one of the lowest, although that was due in

large part to their own actions and economic disarray. (C)

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

Negotiating Channels

201.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

202.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)

Washington, March 10, 1980

SUBJECT:

Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 7 March 1980 [portion marking not declassified]

1. I discussed my draft paper2 for use in the Presidential briefing

next week on needing to keep covert action, political action, and mili-

tary action pressures available in Iran. He thought it was a reasonable

thing to present to the President, but that if the negotiations were going

exceptionally well it might be a good idea to postpone it. [portion

marking not declassified]

2. I discussed what we were doing in the Iranian covert action

with respect to Bakhtiar. I gave him my estimate that we had a number

of months in which we could drag this out without much problem.

He agreed with the way in which we were proceeding and recom-

mended that we not take too many details of these tactics up with the

President until it became a “strategic decision.” I told him that at some

point in the next month and one-half we were probably going to have

to put up some more money to Bakhtiar for his organizational purposes,

not for a coup. Brzezinski agreed that at that point we would need to

go back to the President. [portion marking not declassified]

3. Let’s discuss. [portion marking not declassified]

Stansfield Turner

203.

Editorial Note

The activities of the United Nations Commission of Inquiry in

10: a.m., lawyer Hector Villalon notified Henry Precht, Director of

the Office of Iranian Affairs, that the hostages would be transferred to

the control of the Revolutionary Council on March 8. (Carter Library,

Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran

following scenario: After the transfer of the hostages that night, the

Commission would visit them on Sunday, March 9, at the Embassy

compound (where they would remain temporarily). A team of physi-

cians would see them immediately after the transfer, and the Commis-

sion would then make an official visit to the Foreign Ministry. “Some-

time soon” thereafter the hostages would be moved from the Embassy

compound to a government guest house. The Commission would leave

Tehran on March 10. (Memorandum for the Record, March 6; ibid.)

As noted in Iran Sitrep #245, this scenario did not guarantee the depar-

ture of the hostages from Iran. (Telegram 61042 to all diplomatic and

consular posts, March 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign

Policy File, D800117–0370)

The next day, March 8, Ghotbzadeh announced his intent to put

this scenario into operation: As a representative of the Revolutionary

Council, and acting under the Ayatollah Khomeini’s orders, he would

take charge of the hostages and the compound and move the hostages

to a secret location for questioning by the Commission members. The

students in turn announced that they would turn over the hostages

Negotiating Channels

after their physicals, but intended to remain in control of the compound

in order to safeguard documents and files to prove Iran’s case against

the United States. Later that day the students, calling Ghotbzadeh a

“liar,” demanded that someone other than he represent the Revolution-

ary Council. (Telegram 62650 to all diplomatic and consular posts,

March 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Meanwhile, Christian Bourguet and Villalon informed the Depart-

ment that the Iranians insisted on establishing the joint U.S.-Iranian

Commission, the last step of the agreed-upon scenario (see Document

180) before the complete liberation of the hostages. The Iranians also

wanted to establish the principles of the Commission and an outline

of its work, expecting it to meet in Switzerland. (Unnumbered telegram,

March 9; Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confiden-

44 of the hostages and informed the Department that physically the

hostages were fine but that their mental condition was “not good.”

(Memorandum from Constable to Vance, Christopher, and Newsom,

March 12; Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom,

Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update

Mar 1980) As Sick later recalled, President Abol Hassan Bani-Sadr

sent a personal message to President Jimmy Carter pledging that the

hostages would be transferred to the custody of the government 15

days after the Majles election (March 14). (Sick, All Fall Down, page 318)

The next day, Sunday, March 9, the students announced that the

hostages were ready for delivery to a representative of the Revolution-

him an official order from the Council.” They rejected any visit by

Commission members. The Revolutionary Council responded that the

Commission “can meet the hostages, unless the students continue to

oppose such a meeting, in which case, as they proposed, the hostages

should be handed over and the Foreign Ministry should then be respon-

sible for the procedure.” Khomeini announced that he would not make

a statement on the situation. (Telegram 63666 to all diplomatic and

consular posts, March 9; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign

Policy File, D800121–0876)

By March 10, no Commission visit had taken place, none was

scheduled, and the hostages had not been transferred. Ghotbzadeh

publicly expressed his anger at the students and demanded they “make

a final decision” within 24 hours on the transfer of the hostages. (Tele-

gram 63683 to all diplomatic and consular posts, March 10; National

ing Khomeini met with the Revolutionary Council and the Council

of Ministers (without Bani-Sadr) and announced afterwards that the

students should make their documents available to the Commission,

that “the meeting with the hostages involved in compiling the dossier

on the crimes committed by the Shah and the United States can take

place for the purpose of their interrogation,” and that if the Commission

announced its views in Tehran about the Shah’s crimes and U.S. inter-

ference in Iran’s affairs, “then a meeting with the hostages can take

place.” Within hours the students withdrew their offer to transfer the

hostages. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-

is in FBIS 31, March 10. (Ibid.) See also Sick, All Fall Down, pages

Given the turn of events, Carter met on March 10 with senior-level

advisers and congressional leadership. As related by historian Richard

Cottam to Ghotbzadeh, the administration’s mood was “pessimistic”

but determined to pursue negotiations and keep the Commission of

Inquiry in being. Ghotbzadeh agreed to keep Iranian statements from

complicating efforts to keep the Commission operating. (Memorandum

of conversation, March 11; Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff,

Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 35, Iran, Ghotbzadeh, Cottam) The

meeting with congressional leadership is recorded in a handwritten

memorandum of conversation, March 10. (Carter Library, National

Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 99, Meeting File,

In his memoir, Carter wrote that the “deranged” Khomeini had

overridden the government and aborted resolution of the crisis. Carter

found Khomeini’s demands to be “obviously unacceptable.” Quoting

from the March 10 entry in his personal diary, Carter wrote:

“It [events] shows that the UN commission must return. And it

also shows that there is no government in Iran other than the fanatics.

. . . We’ll hold off breaking diplomatic relationships. We’ll impose

economic sanctions as soon as the commission is clear of Iran. We’ll

investigate the possibility of confiscating Iranian assets in addition to

just impounding them. We should not attack Bani-Sadr and Ghotbsa-

deh, because they have indeed been the ones who have tried hardest

to get the hostages out.

“. . . Vance called during lunch to say that the UN commission

had been asked by Bani-Sadr to stay over until tomorrow night to meet

with the Revolutionary Council to receive a proposal for a simultaneous

statement on American and Shah abuse and an announcement that the

hostages could all be visited by the commission. I told Cy, ’Absolutely

not!’ This was unacceptable to me. There’s no way to trust the Iranian

government officials, because they can’t speak with any authority.”

(Carter, Keeping Faith, pages 498–499)

The Commission of Inquiry left Iran on March 11, 1980.

204.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President*

State

White House

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Warren Christopher

David Aaron

Harold Saunders

Lloyd Cutler

Hedley Donovan

OSD

Jody Powell

Secretary Harold Brown

Henry Owen

W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

NSC

JCS

Col. William Odom

General David Jones

Gary Sick

Lt. General John Pustay

Jerrold Schecter

Justice

Thomas Thornton

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Treasury

Robert Mundheim

*Present briefly at beginning of meeting

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by reporting the President’s

views that we should undertake a public relations campaign against

Iran, that we should impose sanctions, and we should build worldwide

support for our position. The SCC reviewed the following next steps

on Iran:

1. Return to the Security Council. Secretary Vance reported that

Ambassador McHenry was doing a formal paper which would be

available in the next 48 hours concerning the pros and cons of raising

the Iranian issue in the UNSC. We need a report from the Commission

to the SC which would report on their reasons for breaking off their

efforts. It would not deal with the substance of the charges against the

Shah, etc. The report could be done in either closed or open session.

The Secretary General probably prefers a closed session report, at least

initially. Secretary Vance will go to New York, probably on Wednes-

day, to meet with the co-chairmen of the Commission. We will also

be in touch through intermediaries on Wednesday for an evaluation

of the situation after the departure of the Commission. In Vance’s view,

the Commission idea is not dead yet, and going to the Security Council

at this stage would only worsen the chances that it can be resuscitated.

He recommended that we wait until we have been in touch with the

co-chairmen, until we have had a report through the intermediaries,

and perhaps until the election is held in Iran on Friday before taking

any action. All agreed that we had about a week to ten days before

public opinion would begin to demand action, and we should use that

time to explore whether the Commission can be revived. (S)

The SCC recommended that we proceed with the report of the

Commission to the SC, looking to the Secretary General in the first

instance whether this should be in open or closed session. Based on

that report and other contacts during the rest of the week, a decision

would be taken whether to introduce a new initiative in the UNSC. In

the meantime, Ambassador McHenry would submit a memorandum

to the President concerning the nature, timing and advisability of such

an approach. (S)

Approve the above approach.

Expedite an approach to the SC.

2. World Court. Oral arguments are scheduled to be presented to

the ICJ on March 17, leading to a formal decision by the Court condemn-

ing Iran’s seizure of the hostages and ordering their return. The SCC

agreed that the oral arguments should proceed as scheduled. This

would be seen as some pressure on Iran but would not be the kind of

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

high-profile pressure which would be likely to upset efforts to put the

Commission back on track. (C)

Approve proceeding with oral arguments as scheduled.

Postpone oral arguments for two weeks or more.

3. Break Diplomatic Relations with Iran. State is preparing a paper

which examines the pros and cons of a formal break in diplomatic

relations. This paper will also consider intermediate steps which we

could take to restrict the presence and/or activities of Iranian diplomats

in the U.S. The paper will be considered at the SCC meeting on Thurs-

day morning. (C)

4. Impose Formal Economic Sanctions on Iran. Mr. Cutler had prepared

and circulated a draft of the sanctions which the President could

impose. Secretary Vance felt that immediate imposition of sanctions

could interfere with the contacts which are under way, and he recom-

mended that it be withheld until after we had been in touch with the

intermediaries on Wednesday. The Attorney General and Treasury

noted that the formal imposition of sanctions was essentially a symbolic

gesture, since the regulations already in effect have shut off all economic

relations with Iran. Dr. Brzezinski said that he would prefer taking a

number of steps at once, rather than dribbling it out over time, so he

would prefer holding the announcement of sanctions until we were

prepared to take steps on diplomatic relations, resort to the SC, and

other possible steps. The SCC recommended holding off on any action

at this time. (C)

Approve holding off announcement for now.

Proceed with announcement of formal sanctions.

5. Message to Allies. State was in the process of revising the Presiden-

tial message which had been prepared the night before, based on the

announcements which the U.S. and the UN had issued last night.

The message will be available later today and will inform the allies

that we are considering the imposition of sanctions and other steps

and asking them to cooperate by holding fast on the informal measures

embargoing military spare parts and other economic measures. (C)

6. Confiscation of Iranian Assets. Secretary Vance had grave doubts

about taking this step, which was a major step toward a declaration

of war and very difficult to reverse later. Henry Owen noted that it

would be extremely sensitive for the oil-producing states. Dr. Brzezin-

ski said that it would imply a degree of fatalism; the families of the

hostages would no doubt see it as a declaration that we had confiscated

Iran’s assets while they had confiscated our diplomats. It implied that

the process was over. The SCC agreed that Justice, Treasury and State

would do a brief paper analyzing the steps which we could take and

their implications, for consideration at the meeting on Thursday. (S)

7. Other Measures. Dr. Brzezinski asked the group to consider what

will happen if the negotiating route using the UN Commission takes

us nowhere. In effect, we are back to where we were six weeks ago. We

are about to resume the strategy of pressure which we were following

at that time. He wondered what effect our pressure had had thus far

and what would be the advisability or effectiveness of more vigorous

action, including a blockade of Iranian ports. Admiral Turner said that

a blockade would not bring Iran to its knees unless we were prepared

to block exports as well as imports. Secretary Vance agreed, noting

that a total blockade would bring severe opposition from all of our

allies since it would stop the flow of oil on which they are dependent.

It would also increase the tensions in the area and the likelihood of

renewed attacks on Westerners. The allies had shown great concern

about this in his talks with them. Finally, a blockade would risk driving

the Iranians into the arms of the Soviets, since that would become their

major source of supplies. Consequently, he had grave doubts about

that course of action. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski recognized the validity of these points, but noted

that a blockade could also get the allies to line up with us more effec-

tively in bringing pressure on the Iranians. It might be useful for them

to recognize that there are unpleasant consequences in the event the

crisis is not resolved. He was also concerned about driving the Iranians

toward the Soviets, but there are many in Iran who would not want

to see Iran move toward the USSR, and this might energize them to

resolve the crisis. Under the present circumstances, they can have it

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

both ways and are not required to choose between us and the Soviets.

If we can simply sit it out and get a resolution of the problem, fine;

but he was worried that the Iranians were not willing to give up the

hostages unless they face some difficult consequences. (S)

Henry Owen noted that the effect of cutting off Iran’s 2 mbd. of

oil would drive up prices, add to inflation, and create gas lines. Admiral

Turner wondered exactly what we hoped to accomplish by our pres-

sure. In the past several days, Iranian behavior had been vintage Kho-

meini, i.e. total unwillingness to compromise. The objectives which

Khomeini takes seriously are: (1) to get the Shah back to Iran; and

(2) to avoid seeing his dream of an Islamic Republic crumble out from

under him. Secretary Brown observed that the most imminent danger

to the survival of the Islamic Republic was a Soviet takeover, and he

was unwilling to take that risk in order to scare Khomeini. Dr. Brzezin-

ski noted that assertive U.S. action in the past had achieved results,

and he wondered if the kind of lesser steps we were considering would

have any real effect. (S)

Mr. Cutler noted that military action would be counterproductive

by driving the Iranians closer together. Dr. Brzezinski said he did not

agree that that would necessarily be the result. Being forced toward the

USSR would be something they would regard as unpleasant. Secretary

Vance said he agreed with Mr. Cutler and noted that the risks of

any military action were very high. Admiral Turner said that Iranian

reaction would be different to a passive form of military action, e.g. a

blockade, as compared to the kind of reaction which could be expected

from a destructive action such as bombing. (S)

The SCC agreed that a systematic assessment of the potential effects

of a blockade was desirable on a very closely held basis. It was agreed

that a paper would be prepared, with circulation only to principals,

for consideration at the meeting one week from Thursday, i.e. March

20. CIA will examine the respective impact of a limited blockade and

a total blockade on the Iranian economy. The NSC will examine the

impact of a blockade on Western Europe and Japan. State will look at

the effects on the Islamic world, on the allies, and the Soviets. Defense

will examine the military risks. All understood the dangers of leaks,

which could have a disruptive effect on our efforts over the next week,

and this examination should be held as tightly as possible. (TS)

8. Public Posture. Secretary Vance will be backgrounding the press

today. All agreed that we should take the position that serious problems

have arisen but that we are not ready to write off the UN Commission

ment 214.

205.

Paper Prepared in the National Foreign Assessment Center,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 1980

Iran: Exporting the Revolution [portion marking not declassified]

An Intelligence Assessment

Key Judgments

Iranian leaders, including Ayatollah Khomeini and President Bani-

Sadr, are ideologically committed to aiding other Islamic revolutionar-

ies. The Iranians see their revolution as an example for other

“oppressed” peoples and believe that the organizational and ideologi-

cal techniques they developed to topple the Shah can be used by others.

Internal problems have thus far forced Tehran to limit its official

support for other revolutionaries largely to propaganda. Even this

rhetoric, however, has greatly alarmed some of Iran’s neighbors, espe-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

cially those with significant Shia Muslim populations, such as Iraq and

Saudi Arabia.

Tehran’s efforts to export its revolution have been complicated by

the confusion that has marked all facets of Iranian politics since the

fall of the Shah. Iranian leaders and groups often have acted inde-

pendently of the government and have embarrassed the Foreign Minis-

try’s efforts to maintain correct relations with Iran’s neighbors.

If Iran’s internal problems ease in the next year, Tehran probably

will step up efforts to destabilize its neighbors. Bani-Sadr appears to

be taking steps to increase support for unrest in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Iranian support to Afghan insurgents could give the Soviets an excuse

to intervene in Iran.

Iran’s efforts to export its revolution are a threat to key US interests.

US allies in the area would have reason to be nervous if the Iranians

were to play a more active role. Iranian-supported unrest could lead

to sabotage and strikes by oil workers, since Shias inhabit many of the

oil-producing areas of the Persian Gulf states.

One year after the fall of the Shah, Iran’s leaders appear more

determined than ever to export their Islamic revolution to other coun-

tries in the Near East and South Asia. Although internal problems

continue to limit Iran’s ability to export the revolution, Tehran radio

broadcasts a steady stream of propaganda every day to Iran’s neigh-

bors. The country’s leaders—including Ayatollah Khomeini and Presi-

dent Bani-Sadr—often express their commitment to the liberation of

oppressed peoples throughout the Muslim world. Khomeini, for exam-

ple, said on 20 February:

I hope that (Iran) will become a model for all the meek and Muslim

nations in the world and that this century will become the century for smashing

great idols . . . O meek of the world, rise and rescue yourselves from the talons

of nefarious oppressors; O zealous Muslims in various countries of the world,

wake from your sleep of neglect and liberate Islam and the Islamic countries

from the clutches of the colonialists and those subservient to them.

Bani-Sadr was quoted on 4 February:

Our revolution will not win unless it is exported. We are going to create

a new order in which deprived people will not always be deprived. As long

as our brothers in Palestine, Afghanistan, the Philippines, and all over the

world have not been liberated, we Iranians will not put down our arms. We

give our hand to deprived people all over the world. [portion marking not

declassified]

Iran’s revolutionary rhetoric and its actions in the last year have

greatly alarmed its neighbors. The Arab states of the Persian Gulf region

have been the most visibly disturbed. Iraq has initiated a program of

aid to dissidents inside Iran in order to weaken the Khomeini regime

and prevent it from actively subverting Iraq’s majority Shia Muslim

population. [4 lines not declassified]

Ideological Basis

The leaders of Iran have consistently believed that their revolution

should be a model for other countries in the region. Former Foreign

Minister Yazdi commented right after the fall of the Shah’s government

in February 1979 that the monarchy’s collapse signaled a “new era

of Islamic struggle triggered by our revolution.” [portion marking not

declassified]

Khomeini, Bani-Sadr, Yazdi, and other Iranian leaders believe that

their revolution was a triumph of Islamic values over the decadence

of a corrupt, repressive, Westernized regime. They stress that the revo-

lution was based on Islamic idealism—a spiritual awakening—which

in turn led to the polarization of society between the enlightened masses

and the corrupt elite. As a result Tehran’s revolutionary lessons are

not exclusively Iranian but common to all Muslim countries and even

all Third World countries. [portion marking not declassified]

Iran’s leaders argue—with some justice—that their revolution is

unique in the modern history of the Middle East. Rather than seizing

power through a military coup, they achieved their goal through the

mass mobilization of society. Their people are first reminded of the

virtues of Islam, which alienates them from their corrupt rulers. Armed

with faith in Allah and the justice of their cause, this argument goes

on, the people as a whole are ready to confront the regime. [portion

marking not declassified]

PLO chief Yasser Arafat, Ayatollah Khomeini’s son Ahmad, and President

Bani-Sadr expressing solidarity with the world’s “oppressed” at the celebra-

tions marking the first anniversary of the Iranian revolution.

The revolutionary leadership believes that if Iran fails to export its

revolution, the country will be isolated in an unfriendly environment

of hostile regimes. Most of these leaders are preoccupied with the

example of Prime Minister Mossadegh’s government in 1953, which,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

they believe fell because it lacked allies against the United States and

the United Kingdom. The survival of the Islamic Republic is closely

tied, in this view, to the overthrow of pro-Western regimes in the

Middle East. [portion marking not declassified]

Moreover, many Iranian leaders spent years in exile as leaders of

the anti-Shah opposition during which they developed close ties with

a broad range of Middle Eastern radical movements. Khomeini, for

example, was one of the earliest supporters of Yasir Arafat’s Fatah

movement, and Bani-Sadr has long had close ties with the radical

Lebanese Shia movement formerly led by Imam Musa Sadr. The Irani-

ans clearly feel obligated to support their fellow revolutionaries. [portion

marking not declassified]

Although the Iranians claim that their revolution should be a model

for all Islamic peoples, actual support has been primarily given to other

Shia Muslims in Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Afghanistan. This reflects

Tehran’s sympathy for its Shia brethern and the continuing potency

of Shia-Sunni differences. [portion marking not declassified]

Most Iranian leaders, including Khomeini and Bani-Sadr, have been

careful to say in public that Tehran has no intention of interfering in the

internal affairs of its neighbors and that since a revolution is primarily

a spiritual awakening, it must begin in the hearts and minds of the

oppressed. As such it cannot be simply exported by Iran, and no quan-

tity of external aid can act as a substitute for the mobilization of each

nation’s own internal forces. Nonetheless, the Iranians believe that they

can teach other Islamic peoples the necessary revolutionary techniques

and organizational theory. [portion marking not declassified]

Iran so far has provided mostly rhetoric and propaganda to other

revolutionaries, safe haven for foreign dissidents, and a meeting place

for radicals. In part, this reflects the ideological basis of their world

view. It also reflects, however, the weakness of the central government

in Tehran which has been preoccupied with consolidating its power

and lacks the means to more actively export revolution. [portion marking

not declassified]

Confusion and Ambiguity in Tehran

Although there is a broad consensus in principle among Iranian

leaders favoring support for other revolutionaries in the area, some

have argued that Iran should devote its attention primarily to its own

problems and should not waste energy and resources on exporting the

revolution at this time. Former Prime Minister Bazargan was often

identified with this argument, while Iran’s clerical leadership has gener-

ally been far more militant. [portion marking not declassified]

The collapse of the Bazargan government last November largely—

but not entirely—removed the ambiguity in Iranian attitudes. Bazar-

gan’s successors in Tehran including President Bani-Sadr and Foreign

Minister Ghotbzadeh are far more inclined to aid other revolutionaries

than was Bazargan. They have spent years in exile working with other

radicals, and their own political beliefs are much more radical than

Bazargan’s. [portion marking not declassified]

These differences in emphasis have been accompanied by uncoordi-

nated actions typical of the confusion that has plagued Iran since the fall

of the Shah. Iran’s support for foreign revolutionaries has occasionally

appeared to be less the work of the government than of individual

Iranian leaders and groups. The militants who seized the US Embassy

in November, for example, held a conference of liberation groups at

the Embassy in January without the explicit backing of the government

but with the support of Ayatollah Khomeini. One Iranian cleric last

December recruited several hundred volunteers on behalf of the Pales-

tine Liberation Organization without any authorization by the Tehran

government. [portion marking not declassified]

But the government, inspired by revolutionary fervor, has progres-

sively expanded Iranian contacts with a wide variety of revolution-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

minded groups in the Middle East. Tehran’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs

has established an Office of National Liberation Movements, headed

by Sodebeh Sodeifi, to identify revolutionary groups worthy of Iranian

support. In late February, for example, Sodeifi visited Algeria and

extended Iran’s diplomatic recognition to the Saharan Democratic Arab

Republic, the political wing of the Polisario Front. Tehran also has

established contacts with dissidents in most Persian Gulf states, the

Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, and the Palestine Liberation Organiza-

tion. [portion marking not declassified]

Iranian policy in the future is likely to put more emphasis on

exporting the revolution. Some traditionalist Foreign Ministry officials

and diplomats will argue for maintaining correct relations with Iran’s

neighbors, but their voices are not likely to have much resonance in

Tehran. [portion marking not declassified]

In any case, Iran’s militant Shia clergy will continue to press for

exporting the revolution. Individual clergymen will support their

favorite foreign causes. Given its weaknesses, the Tehran government

has little ability to curb the clergy’s activities, which have already

included providing guerrilla training and some arms for foreign radi-

cals inside Iran. [portion marking not declassified]

US Policy Implications

If the internal chaos in Iran persists in the near term—as seems

likely—Iranian support for groups and causes inimicable to US policies

and interests will continue to be limited primarily to propaganda and

perhaps some increased financial backing. One press report indicates

that Iran plans to provide $14 million to liberation movements this

year. [portion marking not declassified]

Even limited Iranian support and propaganda will unnerve US

allies in the area and complicate US efforts to improve ties with Tehran.

If Iran continues to find an audience among Shias in oil-producing

countries like Saudi Arabia and Iraq, the chances for sabotage and

strikes by oil workers will be great. [portion marking not declassified]

If Iranian leaders succeed in consolidating their hold on the country

in the next year, the threat to neighboring regimes—especially pro-US

regimes—is likely to increase. Iran could then devote more attention

and resources to sponsoring subversion. [portion marking not declassified]

Iran’s efforts to destabilize its Iraqi and Afghan neighbors also

pose dangers for US interests. Increased tensions between Tehran and

Baghdad threaten to disrupt oil production in the area, since many of

both countries’ facilities are located close to the border. If Iran succeeds

in promoting increased Shia unrest in Iraq—the strongest Arab country

in the Gulf—the threat to other countries in the area, especially Saudi

Arabia, would be greatly increased. [portion marking not declassified]

A deterioration in Afghan-Iranian relations also could pose prob-

lems for the United States. While the United States might benefit from

further deterioration in Tehran’s already strained ties with Moscow,

widespread Iranian support for the Afghan insurgency might give the

Soviets an excuse to intervene in Iran. [portion marking not declassified]

Appendix

Country Case Studies

Iraq: The Baathist Target

Tehran believes Iraq is its most promising target for subversion in

the Arab world. Shias constitute approximately 55 percent of Iraq’s

population, but they traditionally have been ruled by Sunni Arabs who

Shias are concentrated in southern Iraq. Major oil pipelines, strategic

installations such as the port of Basrah, and the Persian Gulf oil termi-

nals are located in this area, and the southern oilfields depend heavily

on Shia labor. [portion marking not declassified]

Iran has long had close ties with the Iraqi Shias. About 250,000

Shias of Iranian ancestry reside in Iraq, most near the two Shia holy

cities of Karbala and Najaf. One of Iran’s most respected clerical leaders,

Ayatollah Khoi, resides in Najaf, and Ayatollah Khomeini spent 13

years in exile there. [portion marking not declassified]

The Iranian leadership sees the Baathist regime in Baghdad as a

militarist regime devoid of popular legitimacy and insufficiently

Islamic. Khomeini doubtless recalls with some bitterness that Iraqi

leaders ousted him from his Najaf exile in October 1978 because of

their desire to keep relations with the Shah on an even keel. [portion

marking not declassified]

Moreover, Tehran views the Iraqi Government as a threat to the

Islamic Republic. Tehran is well aware that the Iraqis are supporting

dissident groups in Iran, including the Kurdish, Arab, and Baluchi

minority groups and is probably aware of former Prime Minister Bakh-

tiar’s contacts with Iraq. Iran also recognizes that Iraq is its major

competitor for influence in the Persian Gulf. [portion marking not

declassified]

Since early 1979, the Iranians have provided some limited support

to Iraqi Shia dissidents. This support primarily has been propaganda—

leaflets and tape cassettes advancing Khomeini’s views have circulated

among the Shias calling for the overthrow of the Baathist regime.

[portion marking not declassified]

Iranian media have also focused on Iraq, making the Baghdad

regime Iran’s second major target of hostile propaganda after the

United States. Tehran radio features a 45-minute daily program

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

directed at Iraq and highlighted by an anti-Iraqi commentary entitled

“The Baath in the Dock.” The main themes of Iranian propaganda are:

• Iraq secretly supports the United States and Israel against Iran.

• Iraq is fomenting sedition in Iran.

• Iraqi Shias are oppressed and should rise against the Baathist

leadership.

The programs directed toward Iraq occasionally include messages

from little known Iraqi dissident organizations supporting Tehran and

attacking the Baathists. [portion marking not declassified]

Iran also has provided some training and arms for Iraqi Shia dissi-

dents. According to one account Iran had given military training to

about 1,000 Iraqi militants by February 1980. There have been several

small border clashes between the two countries, and some have proba-

bly been caused by dissidents crossing the border from Iran. [less than

1 line not declassified] a clash in mid-December was the result of Iraqi

commandos raiding a Shia guerrilla center in Iran. [less than 1 line not

declassified]

[1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]

Baghdad has assets of its own to counter Iranian support for the

Iraqi Shia dissidents. Iraqi President Saddam Husayn has not hesitated

to order Iraqi security forces to pursue Shia rebels, and his Information

Minister said last June that “if there are those in Iraq who seek martyr-

dom, the government is prepared to accommodate them.” Baghdad

also seeks to exploit Persian-Arab differences and uses economic and

welfare programs to improve the Shias’ standard of living and loyalty.

[portion marking not declassified]

Tehran’s support for the Iraqi Shias also has been hindered by the

Shias’ traditional inability to unite. [3 lines not declassified]

Tehran will probably continue to provide propaganda backing to

the Iraqi Shias and may increase direct assistance. Bani-Sadr probably

will seek to prevent relations with Baghdad from deteriorating too far,

however, because he recognizes that the Iranian military is far inferior

to the Iraqis’. Iranian revolutionary leaders hope that limited support

for the Iraqi Shias will keep Baghdad off balance, prevent Iraq from

interfering in Iran, and ultimately create the revolutionary mobilization

of the Iraqi masses necessary for the creation of an Islamic Republic

to replace the Baathists. [portion marking not declassified]

Saudi Arabia

Tehran’s relations with the Saudi monarchy have been predictably

uneasy since the fall of the Shah. To many Iranians, the Saudi royal

family shares many of the Pahlavis’ worst characteristics—a pro-US

regime that has embarked on a massive modernization program with-

out any significant effort to change the autocratic and backward politi-

cal system. Moreover, Riyadh’s claim to be a world spokesman for

Islam because of its status as defender of the holy cities of Mecca and

Medina irritates the Iranian leadership. [portion marking not declassified]

Saudi Arabia is next after Iraq as a major Arab target of hostile

Iranian propaganda. Tehran has focused principally on the Saudis’

close ties to the United States. An editorial on 11 December told Saudis

that “oil-guzzling America is plundering your blood . . . and is crushing

you with the arms purchased with your own oil money.” It called on

all Saudis to recognize that “an uprising against America is a divine

duty.” [portion marking not declassified]

Iranian propaganda also has called explicitly for the overthrow of

the Saudi monarchy and has frequently broadcast messages supporting

a little known Saudi dissident group called the Islamic Revolutionary

Organization in the Arabian Peninsula. In one six-day period—31 Janu-

ary to 6 February—this group was mentioned at least four times by

Tehran radio as upholding the banner of Islamic revolution in Saudi

Arabia. [portion marking not declassified]

The Iranians have focused their attention on the 150,000-strong

Shia minority concentrated in the Eastern Province (about 3 percent of

the country’s population). Saudi Shias traditionally have been discrimi-

nated against by the predominant Wahhabi Sunni sect. In the Eastern

Province they constitute about one quarter of the native population

and have played a major role in the oil industry, amounting to between

one quarter to one-third of the work force. Iranian propaganda has

urged the Saudi Shias to strike and sabotage the oil industry to show

solidarity with Iran. [portion marking not declassified]

Tehran’s appeals have had some success. Saudi Shias have rioted

in the Eastern Province twice in the last six months, openly calling for

the overthrow of the monarchy and expressing support for Ayatollah

Khomeini. In late November during the holy days of the Muslim

mourning month of Moharram, riots broke out in the largest Shia towns

in the Eastern Province following pro-Khomeini demonstrations. Saudi

security forces quelled them at a cost of 60 Shia lives. Rioting occurred

again on 1 February during demonstrations marking the anniversary

of Khomeini’s return to Iran in 1979. In both cases the Saudi authorities

concluded that many of the young Shias involved had been influenced

by Tehran’s propaganda. [portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is a picture of Iraqi, Afghan, and Palestinian dele-

gates to a liberation conference in Tehran.]

There is some evidence of more direct Iranian involvement in the

Shia unrest. One report in February indicated that the Saudis had

intercepted a shipment of arms for the Shias that may have come from

Iran. Last fall, Iranians making the annual pilgrimage to Mecca (the

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Hajj) reportedly also visited Shia towns in the Eastern Province to

preach the Khomeini line to the devout. The Saudis subsequently

expelled several Iranian clerics. [portion marking not declassified]

The Saudi Shias are too few in number and too isolated from the

mainstream of Saudi society to overthrow the monarchy. Their strategic

location and participation in the oil industry, however, give them the

ability to pose a serious security problem for the regime. Tehran will

almost certainly continue to support Shia dissidence in Saudi Arabia,

even if diplomatic relations between the two countries remain correct.

[portion marking not declassified]

Bahrain, Kuwait, and the Gulf States

Iran’s relations with the small Persian Gulf monarchies also have

been troubled by Tehran’s support for Shia unrest. Iranian propaganda

often has criticized the Gulf states for failing to support Iran against

the United States. Government officials have stressed that Iran would

like to maintain good relations with the Gulf states, but have also

argued—as Bani-Sadr said in early February—that “we are not respon-

sible for other peoples oppressed by rapacious and unpopular govern-

ments (in the Gulf) who are attracted by our deeds to follow our

example.” [portion marking not declassified]

Tehran’s attention has focused largely on Bahrain because about

half of its population is Shia and because until 1971 the island was

claimed as part of Iran. One Iranian cleric, Ayatollah Sadiq Rouhani,

has been especially outspoken in his support for Bahraini Shias and

on occasion has demanded the return of Bahrain to Persian sovereignty.

Rouhani’s statements had caused considerable embarrassment for for-

mer Prime Minister Bazargan’s government and never appeared to

have had full support in Tehran. Since the fall of the Bazargan govern-

ment, Rouhani has continued to call for the overthrow of the regime

in Manama, but it remains unclear how much support he enjoys among

his fellow clerics. [portion marking not declassified]

Nonetheless, some Bahraini Shia dissidents and clerical leaders

have made several trips to Tehran and Qom to meet with Iranian

officials including Ayatollah Khomeini. Some have been arrested or

expelled upon their return to Bahrain. Radio Tehran, moreover, has

broadcast statements from the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bah-

rain praising the Iranian revolution and appealing for support to over-

throw “internal and foreign despots.” Antigovernment leaflets also

have been sent to Bahrain from Iran. [portion marking not declassified]

[1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified]

The level of Shia unrest in Bahrain has been relatively low since

last fall, and support for Ayatollah Khomeini has apparently fallen off

because of the hostage crisis. Tehran probably will continue to try to

maintain correct but cool relations with Manama while giving some

low-level support to dissidents. Individual Iranian leaders like Ayatol-

lah Rouhani may be more active on the dissidents’ behalf, and given

the confusion in Iran, they will be able to do what they please. [portion

marking not declassified]

Kuwaiti-Iranian relations also have been strained by the Shia revo-

lution in Tehran. The US Embassy in Kuwait has been the target of

several pro-Khomeini demonstrations that may have been organized

at least in part by the Iranian Embassy. Kuwait has a Shia population

estimated at approximately one quarter to one-fifth of the country. As

in other Gulf states many Kuwaiti Shias are of Iranian background,

and some are also Iranian citizens. [portion marking not declassified]

As in Bahrain, some religious leaders in Iran have supported Shia

unrest in Kuwait. There have been several pro-Khomeini demonstra-

tions in the country, and a major Kuwaiti Shia leader, Sayyid Abbas

al-Mihri, was deported on 26 September along with 18 members of his

family. Kuwaiti authorities have also recently arrested several Iranian

Shias who were preparing to distribute antiregime and anti-US leaflets.

In one arrest, the authorities discovered an arms cache. [portion marking

not declassified]

The Iranian media, on the other hand, generally have been fairly

favorable to Kuwait. Tehran radio promptly and favorably reported

Kuwait’s opposition to the foreign military buildup in the Gulf, the

US decision to freeze Iranian assets, and the call for UN economic

sanctions against Iran. [portion marking not declassified]

Afghanistan—the Communist Menace

Iran has viewed the government in Kabul as a threat since the

Marxist military coup in April 1978. Even before the Soviet invasion

of Afghanistan in December 1979, Iranian leaders were providing some

support to insurgents opposed to the Kabul regime. The Soviet inter-

vention has only increased Tehran’s concern about the problem. The

Iranians particularly fear that Afghanistan may be used as a base for

subverting Iran, especially the Baluchi minority in southeast Iran. [por-

tion marking not declassified]

Tehran radio has broadcast a steady stream of attacks on the Marx-

ist government, branding it an atheistic enemy of Islam and a tool of

Soviet designs in the region. Several Afghan leaders have visited Tehran

and Qom appealing for aid from the Iranians. Ayatollah Khomeini last

August appealed to the Afghan people to “take a lesson from Iran”

and “kick out” its Communist rulers. President Bani-Sadr has been

especially outspoken and has often promised to provide aid to the

rebels, including military training and arms, financial support, propa-

ganda, diplomatic assistance, and even volunteers to fight with the

rebels. [portion marking not declassified]

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Substantial evidence indicates that since the revolution toppled the

Shah in early 1979 Iran has been providing some limited support to

Afghanistan:

• [3 lines not declassified]

• [3½ lines not declassified]

• [4½ lines not declassified]

• [2½ lines not declassified]

• [2½ lines not declassified]

[Omitted here is a picture of Afghan insurgents near Herat.]

There are now about 100,000 Afghan refugees in eastern Iran, and

some are reportedly using the refugee camps near Zahedan and Mash-

had to train militants and mount cross-border operations into Afghani-

stan. The border is more than 400 kilometers long and poorly super-

vised. Tribal groups like the Baluchis live on both sides of the border

and have traditionally passed back and forth with ease. Smuggling is

a major business in the area. [portion marking not declassified]

• [2½ lines not declassified]

• [2½ lines not declassified]

• [4½ lines not declassified]

Iranian aid appears to have had little impact on the Afghan insur-

gency. Although dissident tactics in Herat have at times been patterned

after those used in Iran to bring down the Shah, there is no good

evidence to support Afghan Government charges of direct Iranian

involvement. The Shia Hazaras (Shias compose only 12 percent of

Afghans) look to Khomeini for leadership, but their success in limiting

government control to some towns is chiefly due to their own efforts

and to the low priority Kabul has given to the Hazara insurgency.

[portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is copyright information on the photographs.]

206.

Memorandum for the Files

SUBJECT

Conversation with Secretary General Waldheim

PARTICIPANTS

UN

Secretary General Waldheim

Rafii Ahmed, Executive Secretary to the SYG

Diego Cordovez, Secretary of the Commission

US

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Ambassador vanden Heuvel

Arnold Raphel, Notetaker

Secretary Vance and the Secretary General met to discuss the Com-

mission’s visit to Tehran and consider where we go from here on the

hostage issue. Waldheim led off the conversation by sharing some

thoughts on “personalities” to give us an understanding of the dynam-

ics of the Commission. It was obvious that Waldheim’s impressions

were based on extensive conversations with Bedjaoui. His assessment

of the members of the Commission, their relative strengths and weak-

nesses, and the role they played in Tehran was in large measure a

reflection of Bedjaoui’s views.

Waldheim noted that Bedjaoui was “quite confident” that the issue

would be resolved sooner rather than later. The special treatment Bed-

jaoui received from Bani-Sadr, whom he met with alone two times,

obviously irritated the other members of the Commission, especially

Co-Chairman Aguilar. Waldheim noted that Bani-Sadr and Bedjaoui

had many affinities, both being “children of the revolutions.” The

Secretary General, as illustrative of the tensions within the Commission,

explained at some length why the Commission left when it did. He

noted that Bedjaoui wanted to stay one day more, as requested by

Bani-Sadr and Qotbzadeh, on the assumption that the two Iranians

could deliver on their promise to move the issue forward. The other

four Commission members, especially Aguilar, were very skeptical,

however, and insisted the Commission leave when it did. Aguilar went

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

so far as to say he would resign if the Commission chose to stay

in Tehran.

Waldheim said that Bedjaoui characterized his fellow Commission

members as follows: Aguilar was very outspoken, emotional and diffi-

cult to work with. He also did not understand the unusual political

dynamics in Iran. Pettiti was deeply afraid from the beginning of the

mission and his one overriding goal was to get out of Iran. Jayewardene

was “very honest and nice but living in the clouds.” Bedjaoui contended

he had no political understanding and did not appreciate that in an

unusual situation one must act unusually. He believed that Daoudy

was honest, cooperative but ill for some of the time and therefore did

not play an important role. Waldheim concluded his comments on

the personalities of the Commission members by noting that the real

problem was the Bedjaoui-Aguilar split.

On the substance of the mission, Waldheim said that on Thursday

everyone was quite optimistic. The students were ready to transfer

authority for the hostages to the government. The Imam had received

Bani-Sadr but refused to see representatives of the students. Over the

next three days, however, something happened, and Khomeini changed

his position saying the Commission would first have to issue a state-

ment on Iran’s grievances castigating the Shah and the American role

in Iran.

Waldheim said that although we did not know specifically what

happened in the three days, he and the Commission members pieced

together the following: Waldheim believes the fundamental mistake

made by Bani-Sadr and Qotbzadeh is that they did not arrange to

transfer authority immediately upon the students’ announcement on

Thursday that they would give up the hostages. Instead there was a

delay and on Friday, a holiday, the students organized demonstrations

in front of the Embassy. On Saturday, Khomeini issued a statement

which did not contain any mention of the transfer of the hostages.

Monday morning, in an attempt to get reconfirmation of Khomeini’s

position, Qotbzadeh went to see the Iman and asked him to order the

immediate transfer of authority. After the meeting with Khomeini,

Qotbzadeh came to see the Commission members and was, for the

first time, accompanied by Revolutionary Council Spokesman Habibi.

The Commission members thought this was a disquieting change since

Habibi had become a hard-liner on the hostage issue. Qotbzadeh told

the Commission members that Khomeini would issue a statement on

Tuesday which would demand that the Commission, before seeing all

the hostages, issue a statement condemning the Shah and American

interference in Iran.

In an attempt to head this off, the Commission planned to see Bani-

Sadr and ask him to tell the Imam that such a statement would be

unacceptable. As the Commission members were leaving the hotel

Monday morning to see Bani-Sadr, however, Khomeini’s statement

had already been made. According to Waldheim this was the final

straw; most Commission members were angered and lost confidence

in the word of their Iranian interlocutors.

When the Commission members met with Bani-Sadr, he said he

disagreed with Khomeini’s statement and suggested that the Commis-

sion stay on for one to two days to see whether the issue could be

worked out. The Commission was adamant in its intention to leave

and went to a meeting with Qotbzadeh to inform him that they would

depart on Tuesday morning. Qotbzadeh told the Commission members

that Bourguet had just called with a new formula and suggested the

Commission stay on for 24–48 hours.

The Commission agreed that Bedjaoui could then meet alone with

Bani-Sadr and Bourguet to discuss the new scenario, which was as

follows: within 24 hours the Commission would (1) meet with the

Revolutionary Council; (2) meet with the Imam, accompanied by Bani-

Sadr; (3) issue a joint communiqué which would, inter alia, condemn

the Shah and the United States; (4) see the hostages at the Embassy.

The Commission responded that this was not acceptable. Qotbzadeh

made one last attempt to turn the Commission around at 11: p.m.

on Monday night, but the Commission remained firm and departed

on Tuesday morning.

The Secretary asked whether the Commission had completed work

on the first part of its mandate. Waldheim responded that no report

has yet been prepared. The Commission believes it has heard all it

needs to and all that remains is to put the report together.

In response to the question of how we proceed, Waldheim said he

had discussed this with Bedjaoui who noted that Bani-Sadr had told

him that the matter would be settled soon—perhaps in ten days to two

weeks (by March 21st or 22nd). Bani-Sadr implied it is not necessary

to wait for the establishment of Parliament; he may be able to move

after the first round of elections on Friday. This is predicated, however,

on Bani-Sadr’s expectation of strong support from the electorate. With

this new mandate he could go to the Imam and get a favorable decision

on the hostages. Bedjaoui therefore feels that the Commission should

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

perhaps return just before the 21st and arrange for transfer of the

hostages over the Iranian holidays.

Waldheim’s own view was that we should wait and see how the

elections turn out and then look at setting a date for the return of the

Commission. Waldheim closed the conversation by noting, a point later

made by the Commission members, that in their last conversation with

Qotbzadeh, the Foreign Minister told the Commission that it would

be welcome back but not with the same composition. Both Bedjaoui

and Aguilar said that this comment may have been a result of fatigue

and discouragement on Qotbzadeh’s part and a reflection of his own

mercurial personality. They did not see it as a definitive Iranian request

to change the makeup of the Commission. Both felt, however, that it

was an issue that must be reviewed before the Commission makes

plans to return to Iran.

207.

Telegram From the Embassy in Switzerland to the

Department of State

1455. For the Secretary From Saunders and Precht. Subj: First Meet-

ing With B and V.

1. (S) Entire text.

2. Please pass to the White House Eyes Only for the President and

Dr. Brzezinski.

3. Summary: Our initial meetings with B and V Wednesday2 con-

centrated on their analysis of how the situation evolved in Tehran over

the past 17 days while the UN Commission was there and, to a lesser

extent, on how we move ahead from here. We will begin at breakfast

208.

Telegram From the Embassy in Switzerland to the

Department of State

1463. For the President and Secretary. Subj: Second Meeting With

B and V Revised Scenario.

1. S–Entire text.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

2. Please pass to the White House Eyes Only for the President and

Dr. Brzezinski.

3. In order to focus discussion on how the situation in Tehran can

evolve relating to the hostages and the work of the UN Commission,

we developed the middle and final stages of the scenario as a basis

for discussions in Washington, Tehran, and New York on how to

proceed. You will have an opportunity to study the revised scenario

in Washington Friday and Saturday. V is planning to return to Tehran

Sunday. One possible action for Friday is discussed below.

4. Begin text of revised scenario.

Scenario—Second Revision

I. Principles and Procedures

The United States and Iran renew their commitment to resolve

the crisis between them through completion of the previously agreed

scenario. The following is a suggested development of events in the

days ahead:

II. Transfer of the Hostages (Objective: March 15–25)

A. March 15 or 16: Election results are announced.

B. March 16: V returns to Tehran with a personal message from

Jordan to Bani Sadr4 which would make the following points:

—President Carter appreciates President Bani Sadr’s message stat-

ing that the transfer of the hostages to the control of the Revolutionary

Council would take place no later than March 25.

—President Carter appreciated this direct communication and has

asked Jordan to discuss with B and V agreed steps that could be taken

to make possible an early end of the crisis between the two countries

and also ask them to report to President Bani Sadr steps that the US

has taken.

—The US is prepared to continue restraint in its public posture for

a few more days, despite the increase in public pressure for it to adopt

stronger measures.

—The US has urged the UN Commission to complete its work and

to be prepared to return to Iran to do so in coordination with the Iranian

authorities. Until the time is right, we have urged the Commission also

to maintain restraint in its public posture.

—When the hostages are transferred, the US will regard that as a

clear indication of President Bani Sadr’s willingness to continue,

through the series of agreed reciprocal steps, the process to allow an

early end to the crisis, including release of all 53 Americans now held

in Tehran.

—The US looks forward to a period beyond the present difficulties

when we can build a relationship with Iran and its people based on

equality and mutual respect.

C. March 15–17: The Commission would limit its public statements

to an announcement that it is reviewing the material collected. But, in

private messages to Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, the Commission would

recall in particular that it will be unable to complete its report until it

has seen all the hostages, and that it will be ready to return to Tehran

as soon as the Iranian authorities indicate to it the date and the condi-

tions under which the visit can take place. As the Commission discussed

with Bani Sadr, it would suggest that the visit take place between

March 21–25 and could ask the Foreign Minister to place at its disposal

all the remaining documents it wishes to submit to the Commission.

D. Transfer of the hostages to the authority of the Foreign Ministry

and of the Revolutionary Council.

III. The Return of the Commission to Tehran (Objective: March

(The following would be agreed in advance by Bani Sadr, Ghotbza-

deh, and the Commission.)

A. On arriving, the Commission would state: It has returned to

complete its mission. It has asked the Foreign Ministry to place all

remaining evidence at its disposal.

B. The Foreign Minister, as the Imam requested, would collect all

remaining documents and enable the Commission to examine them.

C. The Commission would meet with the Revolutionary Council

to set forth the facts invoked by Iran, to state that it indeed has received

elements of evidence relating to these facts, and that within

days

it will be able to present a report to the Secretary-General giving the

findings and recommendations that it has been able to derive from the

evidence presented.

D. The Revolutionary Council would make a statement on its meet-

ing with the Commission.

E. The Commission would then visit each of the hostages under

the conditions which the Commission will prescribe.

F. The Commission would make another report to the Revolution-

ary Council on the conditions of the hostages. It would also tell the

Revolutionary Council that the credibility of its report would be seri-

ously limited unless the hostages are released. It would ask Iran to set

a date for releasing the hostages and would commit itself to publish

its report on that date. (The simultaneity indicated in the last sentence

is subject to review as the final stages are revised.)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

IV. Final Steps (Objective: Ten days after transfer)

The previous scenario agreed to by both parties envisioned a final

stage of reciprocal steps leading to release of the Americans held in

Tehran.

However, the sequence of steps envisioned then has changed

because in the new circumstances the Commission will return to Iran

after the Revolutionary Council has taken custody of the American

personnel. Because of recent developments, the final steps of the sce-

nario agreed earlier seem no longer to be completely applicable. If that

assumption is not correct, the US is prepared to abide by the previously

agreed scenario.

If the final steps of the earlier scenario can no longer be followed,

it is necessary for both parties to agree on the steps in a new final

stage. In these new circumstances, the United States believes that the

components of the final stage—including the report of the United

Nations Commission, the statements of Presidents Carter and Bani

Sadr, the establishment of an Iran-US joint commission to resolve bilat-

eral issues, and the release of all 53 Americans—should be taken simul-

taneously. It is also the position of the United States that the release

of the hostages should take place no later than 10 days after the transfer

of the American personnel. End text.

5. The one possible action the Secretary might wish to discuss with

SYG Waldheim Friday while members of the Commission may still be

in New York is the possible message from the Commission described

in para IIC of the scenario above. They could at least talk it over with

a view to authorizing the co-chairmen to send it Sunday or Monday

to arrive in Tehran shortly after the election results are available and

when the US message arrives in Tehran Sunday.

6. A draft of the message mentioned in para IIB of the scenario is

being carried back to Washington Friday morning.

Vine

209.

Draft Letter From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to

Iranian President Bani-Sadr

Bern, March 13, 1980

210.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran/Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

Warren Christopher

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Harold Saunders

David Aaron

Hedley Donovan

OSD

Joseph Onek

Secretary Harold Brown

W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

NSC

Gary Sick

JCS

Marshall Brement

General David Jones

Lt. General John Pustay

Justice

John Shenefield*

CIA

Frank Carlucci

Treasury

Robert Carswell*

Robert Mundheim*

*Present only for Items 1–3

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Iran: Seizure of Assets. Justice reviewed briefly an options paper

concerning steps we would have to take to seize Iranian assets. One

initial step we could take with no additional legislation and without

the creation of a large legal mechanism would be a census of claims.

The President could direct the Department of Treasury to conduct a

census of private claims presently asserted against Iran, to identify the

nature and amounts of claims. The SCC thought this would be a good

step to take since it could be a useful and necessary prior step for

seizing the assets or dismantling the freeze we have imposed. The

signal could be played either way. However, this action by itself would

probably not be effective in pressuring Iran, and the timing should be

left open until we have decided on an overall approach. (C)

Approve in principle a census of private claims, with timing

of implementation left open for the moment.

Disapprove

Justice believes that it would not be desirable to take custody of

Iranian-owned assets or to introduce new legislation authorizing sei-

zure of Iranian assets. This would create a massive legal mechanism

in the United States and would have very limited results. Moreover,

the requirement of new legislation would involve Congressional hear-

ings on Iran policy. State and other SCC members agreed that seizure

of assets would have little practical value beyond the present freeze,

and it did not appear worth the effort at this time. (C)

Agree that assets should not be seized at this time.

Other

2. Iranian Exports. Treasury circulated a paper5 proposing that com-

panies be required to contact the Office of Foreign Assets Control before

making any exports to Iran, either to get a license or to get a written

interpretation that a license is not required. This is simply a clarification

of the regulations already in effect which would tighten up our control

on all exports, direct or indirect, to Iran. The SCC approved this measure

is summarized in and attached to a memorandum from Saunders, Hinton, and William

(Tony) Lake to Vance, March 17. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom,

Claims/Assets Litigations)

but asked that it also be held pending completion of a full package of

new steps. (C)

3. Iran: Diplomatic Relations. The Department of State provided six

options for possible changes we could make in our diplomatic relations

with Iran, ranging from a reduction of personnel through closure of

the Embassy and Consulates and expulsion of all Iranian diplomats.

State argued that we should stop short of severing formal diplomatic

relations because of the problems this would create when we wish to

reestablish relations at some point in the future. The SCC agreed, and

recommended the following:

—Effectively cut Iranian representation in this country by half,

halving the number of Iranian diplomats in Washington and closing

two of the four Consulates.

—The New York Consulate will be closed, since its functions can

be taken over by the Iranian UN Mission, and a second Consulate will

be chosen after State reviews the comparative effects.

—The movements of Iranian diplomats will be restricted to cities

where they are assigned.

—Publication and distribution of Iranian propaganda materials

through the Embassy and Consulates will be prohibited.

—Constitutional provisions probably do not permit us to forbid

public or media appearances by Iranian representatives in this country.

However, we will monitor such appearances, and in those cases where

we find the performance to be obnoxious or harmful, we will be pre-

pared to declare that representative persona non grata. (C)

The Department of State and Justice will review the legal and

diplomatic implications of these moves prior to implementation. (U)

Approve in principle the restrictive steps outlined above.

As amended.

The SCC also discussed briefly the recurring story that 112 of the

Iranian diplomats previously cut from the roster have not been located.

Justice noted that the addresses were many years old. Some may have

left much earlier, and others may simply have faded into the popula-

tion. It was agreed that greater efforts should be made to insure at a

minimum that those individuals who have been cut are not in fact

continuing to work in the Embassy or Consulates. Justice agreed to

follow up. (C)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

4. Iran: Report to the Security Council. Mr. Christopher briefed the

SCC on the options of raising the Iranian question once again at the

UN Security Council. Waldheim will talk to Bani-Sadr later this week,

and we expect a speech by Khomeini on March 20. In the meantime,

there does not appear to be anything to be gained by going to the UN.

The most we could expect would be to get another resolution along

the lines of the previous resolutions, and another Soviet veto. It is also

possible that the resolutions would get watered down or that we would

lose some votes on a second attempt. The SCC unanimously recom-

mended against a formal UNSC resolution at this time. (C)

Concur.

Go back to the UNSC.

5. Iran: Other Sanctions. Dr. Brzezinski expressed concern that we are

being diddled along indefinitely by the Iranians. The Iranians obviously

want to keep alive the illusion that the UN Commission will produce

results, but in the meantime, we are beginning to look increasingly

impotent. The polls indicate that the U.S. public is increasingly consid-

ering the Administration’s policy a failure. We are universally praised

by the international community for our restraint and patience; however,

he wondered what really lies behind that praise. Dr. Brzezinski sus-

pected that we are increasingly perceived as ineffective and indecisive.

The convening of the new Parliament, which will probably not occur

until May, will probably make the situation worse, not better. He

wondered if the situation was not turning into farce. He proposed that

we keep the UN Commission alive, but that we deliver a private,

credible ultimatum to the Iranians and to the allies that if the situation

has not been resolved peaceably and with dignity by April 15 we

will take unilateral actions which will be highly disruptive to Iranian

society. We would not specify precisely what we would do. This would

break the present impasse in which the Iranians have every incentive

to do nothing. Mr. Aaron agreed, but added that we need to take some

action which will make our threat credible, since it is doubtful that the

Iranians would believe us today. He suggested that we begin interrogat-

ing merchant shipping enroute to and from Iranian ports in conjunction

with a private warning. (S)

Mr. Christopher said that this was a good point but he did not

agree. If we issue a warning, we must be able to carry it out. He did

not see this situation as unprecedented. In the case of the Pueblo, we

had waited far longer than this, and the risks associated with escalation

at that time were less than they are today in the Gulf region. Perhaps

the Pueblo affair was not one of the high points of American diplomacy,

but we have to consider the problem we have today with the Islamic

nations and their possible reaction to a blockade or similar use of

military force. Secretary Brown noted the dangers of a Soviet reaction

or of pushing the Iranians closer to the Soviets by our acts. Mr. Carlucci

noted that our evidence indicates that the Soviets are making gains

inside Iran through the Tudeh Party. He observed that our problem

remained what it had been all along: how to influence Khomeini. He

felt that Khomeini would not respond to this kind of pressure. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski said he did not believe that this situation was compa-

rable to the Pueblo incident which had involved a U.S. Navy ship on an

admitted spy mission. He was not convinced that the Islamic countries

would necessarily respond negatively. He felt that our continued lack

of action was losing us prestige and respect. He recognized the validity

of the possible Soviet reaction, citing Gromyko’s speech this morning

in which he had identified himself with the Iranians. Mr. Aaron dis-

puted the CIA evaluation of Khomeini. At every point, Khomeini had

taken extreme steps to assure his own personal security, and the Irani-

ans had backed down quickly in the face of our warning on November

20. Khomeini wanted more than anything else to insure the success

of the Islamic Revolution and he was not anxious to become a martyr.

Secretary Brown cited a psychiatrist friend who observed that a man

with a martyr complex seldom lives to become 79 years old. (S)

The SCC agreed that it was necessary to consider seriously the

option of a warning and possible intermediate escalatory steps. This

would be discussed again at the SCC meeting on Thursday. (S)

[Omitted here is material on Afghanistan.]

211.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, March 18, 1980

SUBJECT

NSC Meeting

If I understood your approval correctly, the NSC meeting today—

in addition to deciding several specific policy issues—is meant to

accomplish a larger purpose: to infuse a renewed sense of direction

and discipline into our foreign policy. (C)

You must have sensed, as I have, that in recent weeks there has

been a loss of momentum and increasing uncertainty in our foreign

policy. In large measure this is due to the mixed signals which you

criticized in your notes to Cy and me. I hope you will use the meeting

again to establish in our foreign policy a more assertive tone and to

insist on closer coordination. (S)

Insofar as the agenda itself is concerned, I would suggest that you

use the meeting to accomplish the following:

1. Iran. Explore more systematically whether our negotiating strat-

egy has a real chance of success and whether the time has not come

for perhaps a more risky course, involving direct action;

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

NSC ISSUES

The following key issues and alternative actions need to be consid-

ered to give shape to our current foreign policy effort. (U)

IRAN

Two fundamental policy questions need to be addressed:

1. Short Term. Should we continue to pursue the negotiating track

with Bani-Sadr as our sole strategy, consciously minimizing any words

or actions which might disrupt that effort; or should we turn up the

pressure of words and actions to build a fire under both the Iranians

and the Allies to increase the tempo of their efforts? (S)

2. Longer Term. Should we step up our efforts to encourage alterna-

tive leadership and pro-Western presence to counter a growing Soviet

effort to build a leftist infrastructure? (S)

The answer to the first question turns on the judgment of whether

Bani-Sadr and his associates will be able to deliver more in the future

than in the past, and whether he would be helped or hurt by increased

U.S. pressure. Any increase in pressure will have to be unilateral action by

the U.S. Our European Allies will refuse to go beyond the limited

measures they have already adopted, on the grounds that this would

only push the Iranians into the arms of the Soviets. Our own options

are limited:

—We can take largely symbolic steps, e.g. imposing tighter restric-

tions on Iranian diplomats and imposing formal economic sanctions;

—We can move closer to a de facto state of war with Iran by

breaking diplomatic relations and confiscating Iranian assets; and

—We can escalate direct pressure by a range of military actions,

e.g. interrogating commercial shipping enroute to and from Iranian

ports, overflights, interruption of power supplies by technical means,

and blockade of imports and/or exports. (S)

The early results of the Friday elections3 suggest that Bani-Sadr is

going to be sandwiched between an unruly pro-clerical Assembly on

one side and by the clerical overseers and Khomeini on the other. Bani-

Sadr is living on hope, and he will attempt to string out negotiations

in the chance that something will turn up. Realistically, the odds appear

very slim. Unless we take some firm measures which convince all

parties that we will not stand still indefinitely, we can anticipate that

the hostages will remain captive well into the summer. (S)

Limited military actions are likely to be most effective in persuad-

ing the Iranians and our friends that a political solution is urgently

required. By dramatizing the risks of continued procrastination, it could

strengthen the hand of those working for a solution. There are obviously

risks involved in such a course. However, a carefully orchestrated

program of increasing pressure is the only apparent alternative to

simply leaving the hostages to the fate of internal Iranian politics for

the foreseeable future. (S)

The longer-term issue of countering a leftist buildup in Iran is

directly related to the hostage situation. Again, our options are limited,

and the natural obstacles we could expect to face in a militant revolu-

tionary environment are compounded by our concern for the welfare

of the hostages. Nevertheless, this is a problem which cannot be

ignored. We should begin immediately building our relationships with

nationalist elements inside and outside Iran. This will not go unnoticed

by the leadership in Iran. However, we are accused of doing this in

any case, and the investment in human resources at this stage will be

212.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The Vice President

Secretary of State Cyrus Vance

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown

Deputy Secretary of Defense Graham Claytor

Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff David Jones

Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Hamilton Jordan

David Aaron

MINUTES

The President began by saying that he wanted to try to keep the

meeting short and not go into great detail, but he wanted a general

discussion about what is taking place in our foreign and defense poli-

cies. It was his sense that the last two weeks were the worst since he

has been in office. We are confronted by several important issues which

are not directly related but which are tied together in terms of the

overall posture of the U.S. and the impression that our country is

making at home and abroad. The President said that after a general

review this afternoon, he wished to get together again, perhaps at Camp

David this weekend, after our subordinates have had an opportunity

to clarify the issues and define the options.

The President’s analysis of the current situation was as follows: at

best we have a stagnant situation in Iran and Afghanistan, as well as

in the Israeli/Egyptian peace talks. We have a deteriorating position,

and perhaps worse, with our European Allies. Finally, our relationship

with the Soviet Union is dormant and perhaps deteriorating as well.

On this latter point, the President said that he and President Brezh-

nev do not understand one another. The President said he does not

know what Brezhnev’s next step is and what he is aiming to accomplish.

Perhaps Brezhnev is in the same position. Both of us, he said, must

assume the worst of each other.

On Iran, the President said we need to increase our pressure.

Although the latest election returns are favoring Bani-Sadr, the Ameri-

can people are getting sick of the situation. Indeed, the President said,

he was sick of it as well. He thought that we had been quiet to the

detriment of all concerned. We have been holding off criticizing the

Iranians and taking direct action in order to create the most favorable

circumstances for a settlement, but we verge now upon accepting the

status quo. He said we could not sit still until May without placing

greater pressure on Iran to take action to release the hostages.

[Omitted here is material on Afghanistan, the Soviet Union, the

Middle East, and the U.S. Defense Posture.]

The President said that all of these issues are interrelated. He

needed the top people in each of the agencies to get together to evaluate

these problems and determine our options. The President said that he

had to assert his own role and to improve at least the image of our

performance in foreign policy. He thought that there are possibilities,

ultimately in Iran, for success. He thought the naive European rush

towards neutrality negotiations on Afghanistan needs to be dealt with.

He said we need to increase public support for the Olympic boycott.

He thought that Sadat’s and Begin’s visit will dramatize once again

the importance of the Middle East peace talks and that this might offer

a glimpse of hope.

[Omitted here is material on the Soviet grain embargo.]

As far as Iran is concerned, the Secretary of State said that there

are a few steps, though not major, which can demonstrate that we are

willing to tighten the screws without closing the door on negotiations.

He said these had been discussed in the SCC this morning and that

the President would get them shortly.

[Omitted here is material on Afghanistan, the Soviet Union, the

Middle East, and the U.S. Defense Posture.]

The President proposed that the group get together to discuss some

of these issues on Saturday. Dr. Brzezinski said that we will go forward

with these preparations.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

[Omitted here is material on the Middle East]

Mr. Jordan inquired about Iran and the prospects for movement

there. The Secretary of State responded that nothing is going to happen

until we get further along in the election process. He thought the

upcoming speech by Khomeini or Bani-Sadr, depending on who gives

it, may prove something. Dr. Brzezinski added that if Khomeini is

totally hostile in his speech, we ought to consider sending the kind of

signal we did in November—that we will negotiate and we will do so

in good faith, but that there is a deadline, beyond which the U.S. will

take alternative actions if negotiations are not successful. Harold Brown

added that we will, however, have to decide what we will do and that

we will do it.

In this connection, the President noted a report by Cottam in his

discussions with Gotzbadeh that the latter thinks the Islamic represent-

atives being elected to the Iranian Parliament will want to end the

hostage crisis.

The Secretary of State said we may see more in the speech, but

there are some steps that we can take and are prepared to take that

will not rip the relationship so badly that a peaceful solution is not

possible. Dr. Brzezinski added that these steps are extremely modest

and they are more for U.S. domestic consumption than they are to put

real pressure on the Iranians.

[Omitted here is material on the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, and

the U.S. Defense Posture.]

The President then concluded the meeting by instructing the group

to discuss the question of follow-up and preparation of the meeting at

Camp David with Dr. Brzezinski.

213.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, March 19, 1980

SUBJECT

Gaming a Blockade

The following is a proposed sequence of events to put pressure on

Iran. It is high risk, but the risks can be minimized.

1. Convey a very private warning to Iran that we are prepared to

keep the door open for a negotiated peaceful settlement until April 15,

but if a peaceful settlement cannot be arranged by that date, we will

take unilateral action to disrupt Iran’s economy. The allies should be

informed as they were before. This should be done as soon as possible.

2. We could use the intervening time to build up the resources we

would need to carry out the threat. However, we would probably have

to do very little to build a sense of tension since the reaction of the

allies and the inevitable leaks could be expected to have that effect.

We could, however, begin a program of ship interrogation a week or

two before the deadline if some convincing evidence of purposefulness

were required.

3. My guess is that the Iranians would not just sit stubbornly and

wait for the ax to fall. At a minimum, I suspect they would begin

pressing the UN Commission to return, and the pace of the negotiations

would speed up. There is no certainty, however, that the hostages

would be released by the deadline. We could be faced with the need

for a determination at the end of the period whether or not sufficient

progress had been made to justify postponing action. A postponement

would not necessarily be a failure if our pressure had succeeded in

getting real concessions.

4. If we proceeded with the blockade, it should be a quick irreversi-

ble act of mining the key ports of entry. Soviet grandstanding would

be reduced to bringing in minesweepers, but that would be a lengthy

process. Iranian threats to cut off the Europeans would be an empty

gesture since pressure on the Europeans could not remove the mines.

We could not stop ship traffic through the Shatt al-Arab, but there are

very few merchant shipping companies that would rush to the one

available port. If we wanted to draw the line more firmly, we could

technically interrupt power supplies in Abadan and Khorramshahr,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

which would give pause to any adventurous merchant captains and

would halt port operations at least temporarily. We should make clear

that our blockade is aimed only at seaborne supply as a unilateral

gesture. We should not attempt to stop air traffic or land traffic. The

seaborne traffic is 75–80%, which is enough to make the point.

5. We should use the intervening time before the deadline to get

in place the elements of the best rescue operation we can mount. This

could be needed as a fallback if the Iranians begin threatening the lives

of the hostages as bargaining leverage.

Anticipated reactions:

—European Allies. Deep concern, nervousness, strong opposition,

and leaks suggesting that the U.S. risks stumbling into a Third World

War. Although this will place additional strains on the Alliance at a

difficult time, the shock and rumors should help to make the Iranians

take it seriously, and it could inspire a fresh round of dedicated efforts

by the Europeans to find a way out.

—Japan. Extreme nervousness. No action.

—Soviets. Increased propaganda about dangers of U.S. imperialist

intervention. Efforts to draw Iran closer to its orbit. Increase in naval

and air presence in the Indian Ocean. However, any actual military

involvement or counteraction is not likely.

—Islamic States. They understand the dilemma, and we can help

them understand our objectives and the limited nature of what we

propose by careful preparation in advance. They will counsel against

a blockade, but they will also renew their efforts to persuade the Irani-

ans to be reasonable. The threat—or reality—of U.S. action will breathe

life into the Iraqi efforts to get a charter opposing all Great Power

intervention. There will be a growing tendency to equate U.S. actions

with the Soviet actions in Afghanistan. The April deadline would vir-

tually coincide with the scheduled Islamic Foreign Ministers Confer-

ence, which might lead to a new Islamic call for the U.S. to postpone

action in order for them to consider possible solutions—not a bad

excuse if we need one.

—Oil. The threat of a blockade and uncertainty about oil supplies

will heat up the market as nations scramble to assure their reserves.

Prices will go up and the spot market will thrive.

Risk Assessment. In my judgment, if we are prepared to carry

through on our threat, and if we successfully convey that impression,

we almost certainly will not have to impose a blockade. By energizing

the Europeans and the Islamic states and the UN, a flood of new

pressures will build up on the Iranians to do something. The hostage

issue is not popular in Iran any more, and it will be difficult to whip

up public emotion to a new frenzy on this issue. Even the Iranian man

214.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran/Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

Agriculture

David Newsom

Dale Hathaway*

Deane Hinton

White House

Harold Saunders***

David Aaron

OSD

Hedley Donovan*

Secretary Harold Brown*

Lloyd Cutler*

W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

Joseph Onek*

Henry Owen

JCS

General David Jones*

NSC

Lt. Gen. John Pustay

Gary Sick

Marshall Brement

CIA

Edward Fried**

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Alfred Friendly, Jr.*

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti*

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Treasury

C. Fred Bergsten*

Commerce

Homer Moyer*

*Present only for discussion of items 1 and 2

**Present only for discussion of items 2 and 3

***Present only for first ten minutes

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

[Omitted here is material on the Soviet Union and the Olympics.]

3. Possible Blockade of Iran: The SCC was then reduced to the small

political-military group. Mr. Aaron asked whether it was the judgment

of the group that to be effective, Iranian exports of oil would have to

be blocked, or would it be enough to block imports into Iran? Secondly,

if oil exports should be terminated either by blockade or Iranian retalia-

tion, what would be the effect? Admiral Turner replied to the first

question that, if all imports, including food, were blocked, it would

have a significant impact on Iran’s economy within two weeks. Blocking

oil exports, however, would take nearly a year to have a major impact

since Iran has sufficient monetary reserves to do without the revenue.

It would be reasonable to expect Iran to cut off oil exports as retaliation

for any U.S. blockade. About 80% of Iran’s exports come in by sea,

and the land and rail routes through Turkey and the USSR could not

make up the difference. It would not be necessary to block ground and

air traffic to have the desired impact. There were no real alternatives

to seaborne trade. Mr. Aaron noted that there could be a political

problem if Turkey and Pakistan actively helped Iran evade a boycott

at the same time we are trying to get large sums of assistance for them.

Mr. Sick suggested that we should make it clear from the outset that

this was a unilateral U.S. action limited to maritime commerce, that it

was not intended to interfere with other commerce, and that we

believed that the naval interruption was sufficient to make the political

point and to significantly affect Iran’s economy. Henry Owen com-

mented that Iran would probably cut off oil, which would raise the

level of hostility in the U.S. and elsewhere; that in turn would draw

criticism on those nations which were helping Iran avoid the full effects

of a blockade. (TS)

Mr. Fried said that, in many respects, this is the best possible time

for a possible cutoff of Iranian oil. Iranian exports are down to only

1. mbd, world stocks are high, there is slack in the market, and demand

is historically low at this time of year. Because of these factors, Kuwait

and some other nations are planning to cut back production. Neverthe-

less, we are not likely to get out of it without a market reaction, and

specifically a price increase. The market is very nervous, and the reac-

tion to an Iranian cutoff would be to compete for remaining supplies

in order to protect stocks as a hedge against future contingencies. He

increase, which would represent an increase in the inflation rate of

that much. Since there is a good chance of a price increase late in the

year, it might simply make that happen sooner than anticipated. The

Saudis would certainly not increase their production. If they should

decide to reduce production as a gesture against blockade of an Islamic

state, that could be quite serious. More dangerous would be the reaction

of Kuwait, Libya and perhaps others who might go ahead with planned

cuts or even cut deliberately as a form of counter-embargo. Most of

the effects would fall on Japan which relies on Iran for 10% or more

of its total consumption. They would be entitled to trigger the IEA

sharing mechanism. The actual amount of oil involved would be very

small, but the IEA reaction would probably be internal acrimony. The

Japanese would scramble to secure alternate supplies, again tending

to drive up the price. (S)

Mr. Claytor said it would create hell in the Islamic world. Mr.

Newsom said that, if the action was taken suddenly and without

advance indication, it would have an adverse effect on the moderates

in Iran. It would create a strong public reaction and inspire a new

round of anti-Americanism which the hardliners would use to their

advantage. However, if this could be relayed in secret in advance to

the moderates, it might give them leverage to use in the in-fighting. If

handled very carefully, a case could be made that this would improve

the chances of getting the hostages out. We would have to be prepared

to follow through, however. (S)

Mr. Aaron wondered what the effects would be if the threat had

to be carried out. Mr. Newsom said that there would be a very strong

reaction in Iran which, in the worst case, could lead the militants to

start killing hostages. There would be massive demonstrations and a

hellish month or so for us to get through. In the end, however, it could

go either way. It could succeed, although it was a high risk. Admiral

Turner said it was his judgment that the militants would be very

215.

Memorandum from the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan)

and the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State (Raphel)

to President Carter and Secretary of State Vance

New Orleans, March 21, 1980

We are waiting in New Orleans for a new plane to take us to

Panama.

Based on our conversations today with Dr. DeBakey and with

Ambassador Ambler Moss, we wanted to convey our thoughts to you

prior to your breakfast meeting and discussions.

Shah’s Medical History and Present Condition: At the time of the

Shah’s departure from the States for Panama, he was experiencing an

enlarged spleen. As this was a condition he had experienced before,

his doctors decided to defer surgery. Over the last several weeks, the

condition of his spleen has deteriorated and his spleen has enlarged

to the point that his doctors consider the operation both necessary

and critical.

At the recommendation of his doctors, Dr. DeBakey was contacted

and retained to perform the operation. The announcement of the selec-

tion of Dr. DeBakey infuriated and insulted the Panamanian doctors

who have been caring for the Shah the several months he has been in

Panama. Representatives of the Shah in New York made background

statements to the press which said that the Panamanian doctors were

not competent or qualified to perform the necessary surgery. This

immediately surfaced in Panama in the media and prompted an emo-

tional and irrational response by the doctors that DeBakey could not

operate at the Panamanian hospital. Ironically, most of these same

Panamanian doctors were trained in medical schools in the United

States.

At any rate, Dr. DeBakey arrived in Panama to find a very unpleas-

ant situation. He found the medical staff at the hospital—on whom he

would have to depend during and after the operation—resentful of

his presence and almost openly hostile to him. His immediate reaction

was to say that he would withdraw from the case, as his only interest

was in seeing that the Shah received proper medical attention.

From all that we know, the reaction of the doctors was spontaneous

and genuine and not stimulated by the government. However, once

they took a public position of being opposed to DeBakey doing the

surgery, the government did not attempt to reverse it. After a cooling-

off period which took the good efforts of Ambassador Moss, Dr. De-

Bakey and the key Panamanian doctor met to resolve their differences.

The Panamanian doctor was embarrassed at the situation that had been

created and pledged a more cooperative attitude in the future. It was

agreed by both doctors that a cooling-off period was necessary, and

that a delay of up to two weeks was medically tolerable for the Shah.

Realizing that he might very well have to operate in the Panama

hospital ultimately, Dr. DeBakey went to great lengths to make peace

with the doctors. But he left Panama shaken by his encounters with

them and concerned about conducting the operation in such a hostile

atmosphere. DeBakey told us that one of the Panamanian doctors has

reported to him that he has been offered $1 million to kill the Shah.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Dr. DeBakey said that he had operated in 30 different countries in very

unusual circumstances, but that was the worst situation he had ever

encountered. Some or all of this was conveyed to the Shah by DeBakey,

and he quickly hardened against having the operation in Panama. This

probably stimulated the latest initiative to go to Egypt for the operation.

Meeting with Dr. DeBakey: In talking with Dr. DeBakey, we laid out

for him all of the concerns which we see. We told him that we shared

his interest in seeing that the Shah received good medical treatment,

and we had the additional responsibility of the lives of 53 Americans

being held in Iran. We tried to probe as to what new conditions—

improvements—would be required before he would be satisfied to

conduct the operation in Panama.

He talked very frankly and insisted that his comments be treated in total

confidence. I assured him they would be treated in confidence.

He said that the Shah is a very sick man and that his condition is

fragile. He said that his principal concern about Panama was not a

concern based on medical facilities, but on the larger questions of

authority and attitude. He said that the operation itself was not difficult

or particularly risky, but that complications often arose in the post-

operative period that could be serious and fatal. He said that someone

had to be in charge, and that he could not tolerate a situation in the

operating room or during the post-operative period when a decision he

had taken was undermined or reversed by well-meaning Panamanian

doctors. He said that he could operate in a tent with less risk than in

a situation where his authority was not clear and a general atmosphere

of hostility existed which might prejudice the care given his patient.

We asked if assurances were given by the Panamanians as to his

ultimate authority, would he be willing to do the operation in Panama.

He said that he would do the operation in Panama if he had to, but,

based on his experience there and the hostility directed toward him

by the medical staff, he would not believe or accept assurances if given

by the Panamanians.

He said that he thought the brief delay in the operation would

create a situation in Panama which would permit him to conduct the

operation there, but that his professional medical advice to the Shah

would have to be that he would be better off to go to Egypt or the

United States for the operation. We pressed him as to the degree of risk.

He said that the risk of death to the Shah in ideal medical circum-

stances was in the range of 5 percent. He said that if the operation was

conducted in the Panamanian hospital under the present circumstances,

the risk would increase to the range of 10 to 15 percent. We asked if

there were steps we could take to diminish that risk, and he said that

all we could do was to obtain assurances from the Panamanians that

he could trust.

His bottom line was and is that he is willing to perform the opera-

tion in Panama in partnership with the Panamanian doctors, but that

his medical advice to the Shah would have to be that the surgery could

be performed with less risk in some other country.

Options: As the Shah considers what to do, he has three basic

options: for the operation to be performed in Panama (either in Paitilla

or Gorgas), in Egypt, or in the United States. Each of the options carry

heavy costs for us.

Panama—The Shah is extremely hesitant to have the operation

performed in Panama and was traumatized by the events of last week-

end when the operation was scratched. He has said he will continue

following DeBakey’s advice, and DeBakey has told us that his medical

advice will be to operate in Egypt or in the United States, not in Panama.

We do not believe that any other Panama-related alternative, such as

the use of a French medical team, will now be acceptable to the Shah.

The second possibility in Panama is to operate at Gorgas Hospital. The

Shah would most probably find this acceptable. It would also mean

we are somewhat less exposed than we would be if he came to the

States for the operation. On the negative side, Ambassador Moss

believes there would be a very negative reaction from the Panamanians

with a real possibility of demonstration and possible violence at Gorgas.

Also, the Panamanians told us that they will not allow the Shah to

remain in Panama after the operation. This may be a bluff and, faced

with an embarrassing departure of the Shah from Panama, there is a

slight chance of developing a better Panamanian attitude at Gorgas.

Also, after three or four weeks, we would be faced with the strong

possibility of having to take the Shah into the States after the operation.

The main attraction of Gorgas is that it would buy us three or four

weeks delay, would be somewhat less disruptive to our continued

attempts to gain the release of the hostages, and there would be less

of a chance that the militants would take action against our hostages.

Egypt—Ambassador Moss and we believe that the Shah is ready

to contact Sadat this weekend and ask for permission to go to Egypt.

We all agree that this would be highly detrimental to Sadat’s domestic

and regional position and our own policy in the area. We assume that

Sadat will stick to his invitation. If we are to avoid having the operation

in Egypt, we should be prepared to hold out some alternatives to the

Shah as early as tomorrow.

United States—The disadvantages of having the Shah return to the

States for the operation are evident. Our overriding concern would

have to be what actions might be taken against the hostages as a result

of his entry. At a minimum, we have to accept the possibility of the

hostages being held indefinitely, and we would have to contemplate

the terrible thought of immediate violence being directed against them

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

as a result of the Shah’s return to the States. On balance, in terms of

our national interest, it is preferable to have the operation performed

in the United States rather than Egypt.

Summary: The Shah has a terminal illness and is a dying man. Dr.

Norman Rich, who accompanied us and who has worked with Dr.

DeBakey and is an expert in this area, estimates that he has no more

than one or two years to live. If you decide to allow the Shah to return

to the United States for the operation on humanitarian grounds, I think

it is important that he understand clearly the ramifications of his return

to the States and accept some personal responsibility for a decision to

return. Although we are not saying that this would work, we believe

that if the Shah was confronted with the stark realities of the situation

and the ramifications of each of the options, he might decide to ask

Dr. DeBakey to perform the surgery in Panama.

We would suggest an approach to the Shah that is frank and

acknowledge our willingness to receive him in the United States. We

would use talking points along the following lines:

—The President understands that surgery may be necessary and

is concerned that the surgery be conducted under conditions that are

satisfactory both to yourself and to your doctors.

—If your doctors analyze the need for surgery to be both critical

and pressing, we are willing to have you return to the United States

for surgery. We are sure that you would want to know and understand

our frank analysis of possible consequences of your return.

—We understand that another option is for surgery in Egypt. We

believe that if the surgery were performed in Egypt it would have a

very detrimental impact on Sadat’s internal position, which is already

precarious, and will increase his isolation in the Islamic world. The

President would strongly prefer that, if you are convinced the surgery

cannot be performed in Panama, it should be done in the United States

rather than Egypt. The President is confident that you share this per-

sonal concern for President Sadat and wanted you to have the benefit

of our own analysis.

—You should realize that the President of the United States

believes, at a minimum, that it would prolong the detention of the

American hostages in Iran and increase the chances of some immediate

harm coming to them.

—We understand that Dr. DeBakey will perform the surgery wher-

ever you decide.

—We realize the conditions in Panama are not as good as they

might be elsewhere. We know that this is a difficult decision for you

to make. You and your family are justifiably concerned about the

chances of the success of the operation. You are faced with a very hard

choice of having to balance your legitimate personal concerns with

humanitarian concerns that might emanate from a decision not to

operate in Panama. The President wants you to know, with this back-

ground in mind, that the final choice is yours. We will respect and

abide by any decision you make.

—If you decide to leave Panama for either Egypt or the United

States, it will require at least several days of highly sensitive prepara-

tions and discussions. For that reason, we will go to great lengths to

keep confidential even the possibility of your departure. Once you

have made a final decision, we would ask for various reasons that it

be kept in strict confidence until time for departure.

Final Thoughts: After your breakfast meeting, we would like to have

your reaction to this proposal by telephone. If we decide to offer and

the Shah exercises the option of returning to the United States, we

should give the Iranians prior notice through our French lawyers. This

might stimulate the government to take control of the hostages. It is

certainly worth the risk. I would remind you that we have a commit-

ment from the top elected official there to effect the transfer by the 25th.

(This memo was dictated in the middle of the night, so we apologize

for not being lucid and coherent, but it represents our best thoughts

and analysis.)

216.

Telegram From the Embassy in Panama to the Department

of State

2622. Senior Watch Officer, please arrange for following message

to be sent to Camp David via SitRoom Eyes Only for the President

and Secretary Vance. Subj: Conversation With the Shah and Empress.

1. For the President and Secretary Vance from Cutler, Jordan

and Raphel.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

2. Cutler and Raphel met alone with Shah and Empress for 1½

hours evening March 21 on Contadora. Cutler described in detail the

three options available to the Shah—operation in Panama, United States

or Egypt. Cutler emphasized the very real and serious difficulties if

operation were performed in either the States or Egypt and noted that

many of these difficulties could be ameliorated if operation took place,

under medically acceptable conditions, in Panama.

3. In response, the Shah was adamant in his refusal to have opera-

tion in Panama. He exhibited no flexibility, referred in highly negative

terms to experience of last week-end, and gave every indication his

decision in this regard was firm. When we suggested that it may be

possible to check again with DeBakey on this issue, the Shah responded

that he had already spoken with the doctor, his strong recommendation

was to have the operation elsewhere, and there was no need to

check again.

4. The Shah was obviously undecided between the Egypt and US

options. He noted that in strictly medical terms, it made sense to have

the operation performed in Houston. In quote mental terms close quote,

however, he would prefer to go to Egypt where he knew Sadat would

welcome him. While discussing the Egypt option, the Shah tended to

downplay any immediate threat to Sadat due to the Shah’s presence.

217.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The White House

The Vice President

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Mr. David Aaron

State

Mr. Jody Powell

Secretary Cyrus Vance

CIA

Defense

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Secretary Harold Brown

JCS

General David Jones

MINUTES

The President began by saying that he wished to bring the group

up-to-date on the Shah and his spleen. The President had talked with

Sadat2 and been in contact with the Iranian negotiators. Our objective

is to keep the Shah in Panama but the President did not believe we

could do so. Sadat is willing to let the Shah come to Egypt, and felt

very strongly about wanting to make that offer. Sadat insisted that it

would not bother him politically. Dr. Brzezinski noted that that elim-

inates the second option (coming to Houston for his operation).

The President said he thought the Shah was willing to leave on

Sunday3 and reported that Sadat is preparing to send an airplane to

Panama for that purpose. The Secretary of State said that he had con-

sulted with key Members of Congress and they all prefer the Egyptian

option to the Houston option. Howard Baker, in particular, said he

would help in any way that he could.

The President then said he would like to proceed with the briefing

on the rescue operation. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff then

proceeded to give his briefing. The following questions and answers

arose in the course of the briefing.

The President asked whether the seizure of the airfield at Nain

was supposed to take place without the knowledge of the people in

the town 10 kilometers away. The Chairman replied yes, that was the

key problem and uncertainty associated with that part of the operation.

He pointed out, however, that it would be a weekend and that in

monitoring the activities around the airfield, it appeared that there was

very little interaction between the town and the base on the weekend.

The Secretary of State asked what we know about the alleged

mining of the Embassy. The Chairman replied that we have no evidence

that any mining or booby-trapping has taken place. He said that in

addition to talking to those who had been inside the Embassy, they

have also debriefed the few hostages who have been released. None

of them indicate that any such mining actually has occurred.

The Secretary of State asked what is the distance to the stadium

from the Embassy. The chairman replied that it is about 100 yards. He

explained that the street would be sealed off at both ends and the

C–130 gunships would provide cover.

The Vice President asked whether the helicopters would be left

behind. The Chairman indicated that they would be.

The Secretary of State asked how confident we were of the location

of the hostages; whether they rotate them in different locations. The

Chairman said that we are not sure and that uncertainty over the

location of the hostages within the compound is a major factor. We

believe that all of the hostages are still in the compound but we could

not be certain. However, our best estimate is that the hostages are

located in the buildings indicated in the briefing but the rescuers might

have to go into all the buildings to search for the hostages.

Dr. Brzezinski commented that we will have to kill quite a few

Iranians in this process and that there is a possibility that some Ameri-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

cans will be left behind. Thus, we need some threat to deter reprisals

against whatever Americans might be left behind.

The Chairman commented that if we can get to the wall with

surprise and if the Americans are in the compound, he had high confi-

dence that we could get them all. However, some of them may be

dead. Thus, while there was a possibility that some Americans could

be left behind, it was more likely that Americans would be killed than

left behind.

The Secretary of State asked how much time was required for the

rescue operation. The Chairman replied that inside the compound we

were aiming to complete the operation in 45 minutes, however, we

were allowing up to an hour and a half.

Secretary Brown asked where is the nearest Iranian military instal-

lation and how well we could hold them off for this period of time.

The Chairman replied that a few blocks away there is an installation

with Revolutionary Guards. It is our estimate that they could mobilize

a few hundred personnel in about an hour. To handle this, we would

be placing our main reliance on the C–130 gunships. These aircraft

provide tremendous firepower and this gives our team confidence that

they can defend themselves. The C–130 gunships are very accurate,

able to fire within 40 feet of our own personnel, they have up to 105mm

cannons aboard and have incendiary ordnance called “mishmash”

which will cause diversion and enormous confusion. The Chairman

explained that we would, however, try to minimize the damage to the

Iranians and would not fire into crowds unless it were absolutely

necessary.

The Vice President asked what would happen if the Iranian Air

Force is tipped off and they attack our C–130s.

The Chairman replied that there would be a gunship covering the

Mehrabad airport, which is the main problem and where there are two

F–4s kept on alert. The gunship would circle the field and keep Iranian

aircraft on the ground. They would be able to break up the taxiway

or shoot the aircraft before they took off.

Dr. Brzezinski commented that the rescue in Tehran is in fact the

easiest phase of the operation. There were two more risky aspects to

the operation. The first is getting the Delta team into town and hiding

the helicopters. The second is the operation at Nain: sealing off the

base for 26 hours without any word getting out that Americans are

conducting a military operation. He was particularly concerned that

in the assault on Nain, someone might get away, go into town and

pass the word that they had been attacked by Americans.

The Chairman commented that his confidence level is someplace

between that of Dr. Brzezinski and his team. The team is highly confi-

dent that they can conduct the operation. The Chairman said he was

not highly confident but he was not as pessimistic as Dr. Brzezinski.

We were, however, depending heavily on the inefficiency of the Irani-

ans and upon the very relaxed atmosphere which we have found at

the compound. The weakest part is getting into Tehran without tipping

off the Iranians.

Secretary Brown commented that this was the reason Mr. Aaron

had raised the question of whether the Soviets might be able to tip off

the Iranians by monitoring the aircraft flights involved in the operation.

The Secretary of State said the biggest question is the danger to

the hostages, the possibility that they would be killed in the course of

the operation. The President commented that he was concerned about

the Iranians somehow getting a tip off in advance. Dr. Brzezinski com-

mented that there was no way to know if the Iranians might be

tipped off.

The Vice President asked again about the possibility of dynamite

booby traps in the Embassy. The President noted that the kidnappers

had given as a reason for delay in letting the UN Commission into the

Embassy the time needed to disassemble the booby traps. The Chair-

man said that we have no information that there are such booby traps

apart from what the kidnappers say. The DCI commented that from

a military standpoint, the first person over the wall might set off a

booby trap and be killed but the second would get in.

The Chairman concluded by saying that he felt better about the

viability of each of the parts of the rescue operation than he did about

the whole system as an entirety. Making the parts fit together on time

gave him the greatest concern.

Secretary Brown said that we have to look at the alternatives when

weighing the risks of this operation. We have examined the question

of a blockade and of mining. Both have very serious risks, including:

possible retaliation against the hostages, achieving impact on the

Islamic world, driving the Iranians into the arms of the Soviets, and

creating severe difficulties for our Allies. Moreover, it is not clear that

those actions would put pressure on those who need to be pressured

to release the hostages. In sum, if we are concerned about getting the

hostages out, the rescue operation is at a comparable level of risk and

cost to the other military actions that have been proposed.

The President asked what he needed to decide in order to prepare

for a rescue operation.

The Chairman replied he needed: 1) to send in two people to survey

the Foreign Ministry, 2) to send in the Otter aircraft to explore the

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

feasibility of the alternative rendezvous site6 and 3) some early flow

of support material to Wadi Kena. The latter would reduce the time

required for initial activity. The Chairman added that we ought to

realize that in five or six days we did not have to make a go decision

but we would want to take a next step which is moving the airplanes

actually involved in the operation. This is assuming of course that we

want to go about April 4, which is the point at which the night becomes

so short that we have to contemplate a three-day operation.

The President asked to be told again what the two men would

do. It was explained that two military personnel, [less than 1 line not

declassified] would go in by regular airline to reconnoiter the Foreign

Ministry. They would find out about the security arrangements to see

if they can get in easily, where they might drive their vehicles, check

out where the helicopter might land and so forth. They would be in

Tehran for three days and then come out.

The President asked why the people who are already in there

cannot do this. The DCI said that the men inside do not have the

tactical expertise to perform this mission.

The President asked if there was any objection to the two men

going in and to the Otter operation. The Vice President asked what

were the risks of the Otter operation. [1½ lines not declassified] Three

men would go in to test the ground, drill core samples and so forth

to make sure that the area would be suitable for the landing of C–130s.

If we have problems, the three men will have documents indicating

that they are on their way to Afghanistan. Even if they are found, it

will be difficult to associate them with the situation in the compound.

The greatest danger would come from the Otter not being able to restart

once it had landed.

The Secretary of State said he had no objection to sending in the

two military personnel but he felt very strongly that we should not

proceed with the rescue operation at this point. The President said that

he did not want to undertake a rescue operation unless there was no

choice. He said he would rather wait a month and a half to get the

hostages out than undertake an operation in which the hostages might

be killed.

The Chairman pointed out that one problem was the fact that the

nights were getting shorter which meant past early April it would in

all likelihood be necessary to conduct the operation over three days. Mr.

Aaron asked what was the sequence of events in a three-day scenario.

The Chairman explained that the movement of the helicopters into

Tehran would take an additional day. Otherwise, the sequence would

be the same. He said that they were looking at imaginative ways that

we might still stick to a two-day scenario.

The Chairman also explained that he was not recommending that

the rescue operation be undertaken on April 4. He was only saying

that there is substantially lower risk than there was previously because

we had practiced it and had developed what he thought was a good

program. However, it was still very risky and as the days go by, it

becomes more difficult because the nights are growing shorter.

The President asked whether there is any place on the beaches

where we might refuel the helicopters. The Chairman said they had

looked at these alternatives, including the possibility of putting an LPH

all the way up into the Gulf. It still was not close enough to get the

helicopters to Tehran in one jump. However, he said if we can find

out a way to hide good fuel, then we might simplify the operation

significantly. The problem, however, is how to get the Delta team in

if we do not marry them up with the helicopters along with the fuel.

They had looked at the possibility of infiltrating the Delta team and

then supplying their weapons along with the helicopters. The Chairman

said that this greatly simplified the operation but it did not appear to

be very practical.

Mr. Powell said that if we will only do a rescue if we thought our

hostages were going to be killed, how long would it take us to act.

Secretary Brown said five to six days.

The President said it was his guess that the hostage-takers do not

intend to kill our people. He also thought that they would be released

over the next few weeks or perhaps even a couple of months. He said

we do have some pressure points that we can apply to the Iranians.

He said he would hate to embark on an action which would in all

likelihood kill a large number of Muslims. He said there would be a

reaction all over the Muslim world, even in Saudi Arabia. He said

some hostages would in all likelihood be killed and of course there

was always the possibility of a catastrophe. He said that at this point

he saw no pressure to endanger their lives in this fashion. He said that

as far as world opinion was concerned, there also was no great pressure

to act. He said there was some chortling over the United States’ embar-

rassment even among our Allies but this was not a sufficient basis to

embark upon such a risky course of action.

Secretary Vance added that we would have to undertake this opera-

tion without telling our Allies and their people in turn might be the

focus of Iranian retaliation.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

The Vice President said that he was not against sending in two

officers but he had questions about the Otter. He wondered whether

it was really so crucial at this point. The DCI said that it was a low-

risk operation but there was the danger that the plane will not take

off. If that were the case, we could then go in later and pick them up

and move them out, [less than 1 line not declassified]. Thus, he was

not so concerned that his people would be immediately apprehended

unless of course a truck carrying the wrong people came along.

Dr. Brzezinski asked if they would be armed. Admiral Turner said

yes. The President asked how far it was from Tehran to this location.

Admiral Turner replied 200 kilometers. The President said that’s a long

way [less than 1 line not declassified] to have to drive to pick them up.

The Chairman said that whoever comes down from Tehran should

come beforehand in order to position themselves in case we have

some problems.

[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]

The President explained that this proposal had been under consid-

eration for some time and asked whether it would not be desirable to

go forward with it. There was general agreement to do so. Admiral

Turner said he would start immediately and added that the mission

could be turned off right up to the last minute. It was agreed that he

would check with the White House prior to takeoff.

The President said he did not want anyone to leave the meeting

with the impression that there should be momentum proceeding

towards a rescue. He said he did not intend to mount a rescue operation

unless he was convinced there was a risk of loss of life of the hostages

and that that risk was imminent. As for our diplomatic strategy, the

President wanted to escalate pressure on the Iranians and get our Allies

to join us. The President said he had received a letter from Prime

Minister Thatcher saying that the British will stay with us. Therefore,

he wanted to proceed to consider expelling the diplomats, breaking

relations, undertaking legal sanctions and any other options. He said

he thought that breaking relations would leave a gap which might be

difficult to close later but it is something we should consider.

The Secretary of State said there are some steps which are not very

effective, but which would give an impression of some movement.

First of all, there is the idea of compiling a compendium of the claims

against Iran preparatory to legal action against the frozen assets. Sec-

ondly, we could expel the diplomats. He thought this would only have

an effect in the U.S. It would make us feel better. It had little or no

downside risk but it would not do much to get the hostages out. Finally,

there was the implementation of sanctions on a formal basis. That is

as far, the Secretary said, as he is prepared to go. The President asked

for Dr. Brzezinski’s advice.

Dr. Brzezinski said that he favored going forward on the overt

level with these actions because it was important to restore some

momentum. But he also thought it was important to discuss the pluses

and minuses of privately giving the Iranians a deadline. We should

consider the following dates in determining such a deadline: the gather-

ing of the constituent assembly and the Islamabad meeting. Taken

together, this suggested that May 1 would be an appropriate date, after

which we would tell them we would consider additional severe steps.

He said he was concerned that if the deadline passes and we take these

steps, we will get a worsening of the atmosphere but not get the

hostages. Nor would we find our Allies doing very much to help us.

Nonetheless, he thought it was important to think beyond the month

of April in dealing with the hostage situation.

Secretary Vance said that he thought we could pursue vigorously

the recommendation of the EC Nine Ambassadors in Tehran to

break relations.

The President saw justification of what Dr. Brzezinski was suggest-

ing. He thought we should consult with our major Allies to encourage

them to break diplomatic relations if we are not successful in securing

the release of the hostages by a certain date. We should also explain

to them that if we are not successful, we are prepared to go to other

options, including the interruption of trade. The Allies must be aware

that if they do not help us in a non-military way, then we will be left

only with military options. In considering the military options, the

President said he was much more attuned to the mining option than

to a blockade because the latter would involve other countries in the

Gulf including Iraq.

The President concluded that this approach would have a good

effect on Schmidt.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

The Secretary of State said the suggestion of possible use of military

actions will help encourage our Allies to take the step of threatening

a break in relations and actually following through, but he thought

military actions are not a good idea because of the effect on the hostages

and upon the solidarity of the Allies as well as the Islamic world

reaction. He also thought that a mining or interruption of trade would

drive the Iranians into the arms of the Soviets.

The President asked the Secretary whether he wanted the hostages

out next December or to mine the harbors. The Secretary said he would

rather find another way, one that did not threaten hurting the hostages

or US interests.

The Secretary of Defense said we ought to be sure what we are

going to do once the deadline passes. We have several options: a

blockade, mining and interdiction of their power supplies. The Secre-

tary said that if we cannot convince ourselves we are going to do any

of these things, we ought to be careful about threatening to our Allies

that we would do them. Otherwise, we will look foolish and our credi-

bility will be undermined.

The Secretary of Defense said that in looking at our options, he

concluded that mining is better than a blockade. There is a risk that

the Soviets would sweep the mines and then we would have to do

the mining again and the result is that we might find ourselves in a

confrontation with the Soviets. In any event, we would drive the Irani-

ans toward the Soviet Union. The question we have to ask in consider-

ing mining is: Why are we doing it? Presumably to get the hostages

out. But he was not at all sure this would result in getting the hostages

out. From this standpoint, he thought a rescue is better than mining

or a blockade. He allowed that it would kill hostages and Iranians but

it was aimed at the kidnappers and not at the Iranian Government

with which we would hope in the long run to have some kind of

relationship. Mining, on the other hand, was aimed at the Iranian

Government, which already wants the hostages out.

The President reminded the group that we had stated previously

that the option of interrupting trade was open to us. Dr. Brzezinski

said that we had conveyed that privately to the Iranians. Mr. Powell

added, however, that this was the implication of what he had said

publicly. Secretary Vance added that it had been conveyed to the Irani-

ans through the Swiss. He explained, however, that he was not saying

that we should not keep the option open. He was just saying that the

more he looked at it, the worse it looked.

The President then asked but how are we going to get the EC Nine

to follow through on the recommendation of its ambassadors? The

Secretary said he had no difficulty in saying that if they do not stick

with us on the Iranian crisis, we will do what is necessary and they

may find themselves in a much more difficult situation. Secretary

Brown added but we wouldn’t really mean it.

The President said the Allies have not done anything on Iran and

he wanted to force them to break relations. They could then tell the

Iranians that if the hostages are not released, they will cut their relations

with Iran. He thought this would have a very important impact on the

Iranians. Secretary Brown reiterated his doubts about going forward

with a bluff.

Dr. Brzezinski said any action should take into account three audi-

ences. First, our own domestic situation. The President interrupted to

say that we do not have a problem yet on that score. Dr. Brzezinski

said the second group were the Allies, who have to believe that we

will act if they do not. The third group are the Iranians and there are

three different categories in Iran: the Marxist radicals, who do not want

to solve the problem; Khomeini, who is in the middle but against the

United States; and Bani Sadr, who wants to solve the problem but is

now unwilling to take any big risks to his own personal power and

prestige to do so.

Therefore, Dr. Brzezinski concluded that we need enough pressure

on the latter category of Iranians that they will take these risks. Our

choices lie between creating real turmoil in the country or undertaking

a rescue operation.

The Secretary of State reiterated that he was willing to use the

threat of a blockade but he would not do it.

The President said that suits him fine, but he wants Schmidt to

think that we will impose a blockade.

The President said he was not in favor of a deadline but he wants

the Allies to take stronger action. He wants them to tell the Iranians

that they will break relations and impose sanctions. We notified the

Allies earlier that we were going to undertake sanctions10 but then we

backed off. The Allies asked us to back off. Indeed, the Muslim countries

asked us to suspend our action under the UN Security Council Resolu-

tion. Now Schmidt goes around saying he was ready to impose sanc-

tions. The President thought that we would have to threaten the Allies

in order to get them back to the earlier position. He would reserve

the right to decide whether we actually go ahead with any mining

or blockade.

The DCI said that it was the Agency’s analysis that we cannot get

the hostages out by negotiation. Bani Sadr is the only one who wants

the hostages released and his power is waning. Indeed, he thought

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

there was a fourth power center that had to be considered: the new

Iranian Parliament. Once they get into office, the price will keep going

up, as it has already.

The DCI added that if we want the Allies to go along with our

actions, we must let them see that we have a plan for the future of

Iran overall, not just for the hostages. They already think that we are

giving too much weight to the hostages and not enough to Iran’s

strategic position. However, the longer the hostage issue goes along,

the more there is a threat of a leftist takeover in the country. We must

demonstrate to the Allies and to the Iranians that we are prepared to

take action and that we want to end the hostage crisis because it is

one of the principal vehicles whereby the left will come to power in Iran.

The DCI said that he agreed with Secretary Brown that our choices

were either mining, interrogation of vessels, or a rescue. He concluded

by saying that the humanitarian interest we have in the hostages is

declining because of the increasing risks to our overall interests in

the region.

The Secretary of State disagreed with the DCI’s analysis of the

prospects of a negotiated solution. He said the odds are not good, but

we need more patience on the negotiating track. He said we do not

know what the consequences of using force will be, so we have to

pursue negotiations.

The Chairman said that if Admiral Turner was correct, then the

rescue was the best way to go and far preferable to a blockade. How-

ever, he emphasized that he would not create any momentum towards

a rescue in his preparations. The Chairman expressed concern about

the impact on the Allies if our threats to act prove to be empty. However,

he thought they might be willing to help on Iran because they do not

want to take stronger action against the Soviets on Afghanistan. He

then turned to the military options short of mining which were available

to us. One was the interrogation of ships. That would look like a

prelude to a blockade. Second, we could put an SR–71 flight over

Tehran. Third, we could have carrier aircraft patrol the Persian Gulf.

The trouble is that all of these steps soon become empty gestures. As

for mining versus a blockade (which he preferred to call a quarantine

since a blockade was an act of war), he felt that mining was better. But

he added that we could not mine Khorramshahr, which is a port which

is shared with the Iraqis and that port could expand to take up much

of the slack. The Iranians could also shift to the Bandar-e-shahtur.

Therefore, he was not at all certain that mining would work. [1 line

not declassified]

[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

The President said the only way we got our Allies on board the

Olympics is to give them time. They are now feeling pressure from

the statements of Dr. Brzezinski and Bob Komer. They are also feeling

pressure because they are not doing enough and their public opinion

supports us on the Olympics. The President suggested two dates to

trigger allied action: two weeks after the Majlis first meets or after the

World Court ruling.

The President suggested that Allies, such as the FRG, could say

that the United States has been patient and they (the Allies) have been

patient; they want to be friends with Iran, and they want to help deter

the Soviets. But if after a couple of weeks beyond the dates the President

had indicated, the Iranians are still unprepared to release the hostages,

they would simply have to break diplomatic relations and impose

sanctions. The President said that if the Allies could be persuaded to

take that position, he thought it would help quite a bit. He thought

that this action would be sufficient to get the hostages released. Dr.

Brzezinski asked why he thought that. The President replied because

he thought a break in relations with all the Western countries and

Japan would be extremely damaging, both politically and economically.

It would affect Bani Sadr, Khomeini and Beheshti. Indeed, the President

said he did not see any other real threat as tangible and as effective

as that.

Dr. Brzezinski said to get the Allies to do this will be quite difficult.

They will see in breaking relations a threat of a retaliatory oil cutoff.

Therefore, we will have to be damn convincing that we will take action

which could have the same result.

Admiral Turner said that he was skeptical that a break in relations

would impact on Khomeini or the Iranian Parliament. It would impact

on Bani Sadr, but he does not have the power to release the hostages.

Admiral Turner said that he thought that Khomeini had reneged on

the earlier scenario because he saw the secular authority of Bani Sadr

gaining too much power.

The President was then handed a message which he reported as

indicating that Bruce Laingen’s wife had said that the hostage families

were meeting on the possibility that the Shah might be returned to the

United States for medical treatment. They opposed that. Mr. Powell

reported that the families do not want the Shah back in the country.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Returning to the subject of Iran, the President said that a major

immediate goal should be to get the Allies to commit themselves to

breaking relations by a certain time. There may be other dates than

the ones that he had suggested, but he did not see how we could get

the Allies to commit themselves to such a course except by threatening

other options that would have a severe adverse impact on them. We

did not have to agree at this point on those options in order to go

ahead on this track. Personally, the President said he was not so adverse

to mining as some of the members of the [National] Security Council

but that was a future decision.

The Vice President said that we were not under pressure politically

to take drastic actions. In time our position will slip but it is not severe.

There was no support in the country for any other course of action so

we have political room to maneuver. We ought to use this time to

push the Allies. The best way to do that would be to suggest that the

alternative courses would be much more painful to them. The Vice

President’s personal view was that all the other options were excessive

at this point. He felt the appropriate target date was after the Parliament

had met.

Secretary Vance raised the issue of our own sanctions. The Vice

President suggested that we should formalize them. The Secretary

agreed. The President said that we should outline for the Allies a series

of steps that would include the possibility of more serious measures.

Then we might take the first step in order to persuade them of our

seriousness.

The Secretary of State said he thought we ought to tell the Allies

that we are taking the step of breaking relations and imposing economic

sanctions, and we are putting them on notice that we will be pressing

them to do the same. The President asked: Why not press them now?

The Secretary replied that we would probably get a mixed bag in

response. The President said that even if we know they would not do

it, he had the feeling that it would be good to press them. They agreed

in the UN to break relations and to impose sanctions. The Secretary

of State replied that some of them backed off when the UN Resolution

was vetoed, saying they did not have a legal basis for imposing

sanctions. The Secretary wondered whether we wanted to fight them

on that issue. The Secretary of Defense observed that our Allies were

saying that they cannot do sanctions without Soviet permission.

The Secretary of State asked nonetheless, do we want to get into

that kind of fight?

The Vice President asked when the Iranian Parliament would be

in place. The Secretary of State replied May.

The President said that we should send a message to our other

partners about moving to break relations. It should make clear that we

want them to invoke sanctions and, if two weeks after the Iranian

Parliament meets the hostages are not released, we would like them

to proceed. We should also tell them that we will go ahead with our

own sanctions and that if these peaceful options fail we reserve the

right to interrupt commerce to Iran. Therefore we would like our Allies

to join us in threatening a break in relations so that these other options

prove unnecessary.

The President said that even if Helmut Schmidt rejects this

approach he wants Schmidt to know that we have asked for his support.

At the same time, the President said he did not wish to impose a

deadline nor schedule military operations.

The Vice President asked when we would expel the diplomats.

The President replied right away. The Secretary of State said that we

should tell them first but we could do it as soon as next Thursday.

Dr. Brzezinski asked whether we were breaking relations or simply

expelling the diplomats. The Secretary replied that we were expelling

the diplomats. An actual break in relations would follow the meeting

of the Iranian Parliament and the failure to secure the release of the

hostages.

Dr. Brzezinski summarized the foregoing discussion as follows:

we will ask our Allies to break relations on a coordinated basis

following two weeks after the convening of the Iranian Parliament if

the hostages had not been released; this message to the Allies would

be accompanied by a statement that if this does not work, we reserve

the right to interrupt commerce to Iran.

General Jones said that he could brief our Allies on our military

options. Harold Brown cautioned that we should be certain not to give

an impression which later would look like a bluff. The President asked

that a message along the lines outlined by Dr. Brzezinski be coordinated

for his review.

As for the possible briefing of the Allies, General Jones indicated

that he could do this in May. Dr. Brzezinski endorsed the idea saying

that it could reinforce our diplomatic message if it did not appear to

be credible. The President also thought it would be useful to let General

Jones provide his briefing before the Allies decide.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

The Secretary of State reported that the National Council of

Churches was organizing a world-wide appeal for Easter release of

the hostages. Moreover, they are also trying to organize services for

the hostages.

Admiral Turner suggested that we push hard on the concept of

more visits to the hostages. The Secretary of State endorsed the idea.

Admiral Turner further suggested that we promote the idea of each

of the hostages calling their families to verify that they were all right.

The President thought that also was a good idea.

[Omitted here is discussion on Afghanistan, the Middle East,

relations with the Soviet Union, SALT II, and Diego Garcia.]

218.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance

Washington, March 24, 1980

The President has approved the following initiatives discussed at

—The proposal to proceed with imposing formal economic sanc-

tions against Iran, to conduct a census of claims against Iran and to

expel Iranian diplomats.

—The proposal to ask our Allies to break diplomatic relations and

to impose sanctions by a fixed date, possibly two weeks after the

convening of the Iranian Parliament. The Allies will be asked to convey

their determination to do so to the Iranians. In making this request to

the Allies, we should make clear to them that the alternative to this

peaceful pressure on Iran is more direct military action which could

create more difficulties for the Allies in their relations with Iran. A

possible briefing by the JCS for allied military leaders on our military

options in regard to Iran will be conducted if our initial discussions

with the Allies indicate that it would be useful.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran.]

Zbigniew Brzezinski

219.

Editorial Note

On March 22, 1980, General Omar Torrijos, Military leader of Pan-

ama, informed White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan that the

former Shah of Iran should leave Panama before Monday, March 24,

when Iranian lawyers would file a request for his extradition. (Memo-

randum for the File, March 22; Department of State, Records of David

D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files,

March 1980, Egypt Jan–July 1980) Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff later wrote that Christian Bourguet had the extradition

papers in Panama but was awaiting the arrival of an Iranian lawyer.

(Sick, All Fall Down, page 319)

On March 23, the Shah left Panama for Egypt. In his memoir,

Jordan recounted last minute negotiations with Bourguet and Iranian

Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghotbzadeh. The latter promised to move

the hostages to government control within the hour if the Shah were

prevented from leaving Panama or landing in Egypt. Jordan, reluctant

to believe Ghotbzadeh, yet unwilling to miss an opportunity, asked

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown to delay the Shah’s plane in the

Azores. Although this was done, Bourguet informed Jordan that the

Revolutionary Council refused the gambit. The Shah continued on to

Egypt. (Jordan, Crisis, pages 223–227)

According to telegram 77415 to all diplomatic and consular posts,

March 24, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbig-

niew Brzezinski, explained to the press that the Shah was in Egypt in

order to seek medical treatment. The militants holding the hostages in

Tehran told Reuters, however, that the Shah’s departure was of “no

importance” as they would “only free the hostages when the Shah and

his wealth were returned to Iran.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central

Foreign Policy File, D800149–0652)

In Egypt, the Shah underwent a successful operation to remove

his spleen and was scheduled to begin chemotherapy within 2 weeks

for his lymphoma, which had become more aggressive since its initial

220.

Message From the U.S. Government to Iranian President

Bani-Sadr

Washington, March 24, 1980

Please deliver the following message from the U.S. Government

to President Bani-Sadr:

Quote: Over the past four months, we have followed with great

interest your statements to the Iranian people and in particular your

principled position on the fundamental wrong involved in the holding

of hostages. We noted your private personal assurance on March 10

that the hostages would be transferred to the control of the Iranian

Government within fifteen days. We hope that the transfer can be

accomplished within the next few days. It is essential to give a tangible

sign to their families and to the American people of the improvement

of the condition of the hostages and that there is real movement towards

a prompt resolution of the crisis.

221.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran and Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Harold Saunders

David Aaron

Lloyd Cutler*

OSD

Ray Jenkins*

Secretary Harold Brown

Henry Owen*

W. Graham Claytor*

Office of the Vice President

JCS

Denis Clift*

Lt. Gen. John Pustay*

NSC

CIA

Gary Sick

Admiral Stansfield Turner*

Alfred Friendly*

Justice

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti*

Treasury

Robert Carswell*

*Present only for discussion of item 1

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Sanctions Against Iran. Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by

noting that the President wishes to move expeditiously to implement

the sanctions agreed at Camp David over the weekend. Consequently,

it is necessary to inform the allies as quickly as possible. The three

areas to be discussed are: (1) imposing formal economic sanctions;

(2) expulsion of Iranian diplomats; and (3) conducting a census of

claims against Iran. (S)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Imposing Formal Economic Sanctions. The papers are prepared for the

President to sign. It can be implemented at any time by a Presidential

signature and subsequent publication of appropriate regulations in the

Federal Register. Treasury raised the question of whether we should not

proceed with the proposal approved at the March 18 meeting2 to advise

U.S. companies to seek a license or Treasury interpretation prior to any

direct or indirect export of goods to Iran. This would permit Treasury

to exhort companies to prohibit action by their subsidiaries, which is

an extraterritorial limitation not included in the UN sanctions. The

222.

Editorial Note

On March 25, 1980, French lawyer Christian Bourguet stopped in

Washington on his way from Panama to Iran. As White House Chief

of Staff Hamilton Jordan recalled, Bourguet had lunch with Jordan,

Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Harold Saunders, Director of the Office of Iranian Affairs in the Bureau

of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Henry Precht, and White

House Counsel Lloyd Cutler. Vice President Walter Mondale stopped

by briefly. Bourguet then met with President Jimmy Carter in the Map

Room at the White House. This was the first time the two men had

met. Bourguet told Carter that the departure of the Shah from Panama

was “a turning point.” The Iranians had originally thought the United

States helped the Shah escape arrest in Panama, but now, he argued,

this could be sold as a “victory” for Iran “in that it demonstrates that

the Shah did commit crimes and is having to flee from justice to avoid

paying for them.” (Jordan, Crisis, pages 230–234)

During their discussion Bourguet admitted the hostage situation

was frustrating. Carter responded: “Frustrating? Look at the spot I’m

in! I am the President of a great country. Fifty-three people look to me

for support week after week and month after month while we watch

this comic opera in Tehran.” The President continued:

“I don’t see that there is any progress at all! We’re in exactly the

same position as we were four months ago. The hostages are suffering

every day. We are a strong nation and we do not have to prove it, but

our patience is beginning to look like a demonstration of cowardice of

which we cannot be proud and which I will not allow to become a

way of life. Something has to change.” (Ibid.)

At Jordan’s prompting, Carter quickly wrote a note for Bourguet

to take to the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini or President Abol Hassan

Bani-Sadr. The note stated that the United States wanted the captives

released unharmed, would eventually want normal relations with Iran

under the existing government thereby recognizing the results of the

revolution, and wanted Iran to air its grievances through the Interna-

tional Court of Justice or through the media. (Ibid.) The President,

dent’s Daily Diary) No other record of the meeting or of the note has

been found.

223.

Message From President Carter to Japanese Prime Minister

Ohira

WH30387. Please deliver the following message to Prime Minister

Ohira at the earliest opportunity:

Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

During the past 150 days that our diplomats have been held hostage

in Iran, I have valued your support and advice. The actions that your

country has implemented have helped to isolate Iran politically and

to bring home to the Iranian leadership the high costs of their continued

violation of international law. Notwithstanding the efforts that all of

us have made, Iran continues to affront world opinion and has made

no move towards release of our people or of improvement in their

condition. Because of Iranian intransigence and the suffering of the

captives, I have come to the conclusion that the time has come for

stronger measures. Unless Iran moves before Monday2 to show its

goodwill and willingness to resolve the crisis by transferring the hos-

tages to government control and improving their condition of deten-

tion, I will order the following additional measures:

—Implementation of formal economic sanctions against Iran as

provided for in the UN Resolution;3

—A compilation by the Treasury Department of all claims against

Iran, with the suggestion that we may move unilaterally to settle those

claims out of blocked assets;

—The expulsion of all Iranian diplomatic and consular officers

from the U.S.

We continue to need your active support and assistance. As a

first step, it would be valuable if you would communicate now with

President Bani-Sadr so that he might clearly understand the seriousness

of the present moment and the consequences that will flow from contin-

ued Iranian intransigence.

The U.S. strongly hopes that you and our other close friends will

let the Iranian officials know that in the event the above steps do not

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

result in freeing the hostages by no later than two weeks after the

Majlis convenes, and in any case no later than mid May, you will join

with us at that time in complete and formal severance of all diplomatic

relations with Iran. Without this kind of support from our close friends,

the U.S. will have little choice but to undertake further and more severe

unilateral actions.

It is important to keep the attention of the Iranians on the issue of

releasing the hostages. While the departure of the Shah from Panama

was dictated by medical considerations, his presence in Egypt has the

effect of again removing the extradition of the Shah as a possible

element in the arrangements for release of the hostages. We had sought

to enable the Shah to have necessary surgery in Panama, but that proved

impossible given his assessment of the medical circumstances there.

We will want to be in close touch with your government during

the days ahead so as to share assessments of changing circumstances

and to coordinate our actions in the most effective way possible. No

one can dispute the fact that the patience of the American people during

this crisis has been extraordinary. That patience will not endure in the

face of further Iranian inaction. I trust you will agree that it is now

time to bring home forcibly to Iranians the consequences of their ille-

gal action.

Thank you again for your help during this difficult time.

Sincerely,

Jimmy Carter

224.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to

President Carter

225.

Message From the Swiss Chargé d’Affaires in Iran (Kaiser)

to the Department of State

Tehran, March 27, 1980

(1) This morning, following a prolonged siege which enabled me

once again to observe how strongly the President is assailed from all

sides with various concerns, I personally transmitted the State Depart-

ment message to Bani-Sadr2 as you had once again urged me to do.

Bani-Sadr responded very calmly and without the slightest sign

of any emotion whatsoever, speaking partly in very general terms and

reiterating statements that are already known. He clearly indicated his

willingness to effect the transfer of the hostages provided the general

situation, which had again become strained as a result of the recent

events, made it possible for him to do so.

Regarding the U. S. communication, Bani-Sadr made the following

comments:

(a) He had promised the transfer of the hostages on the condition

that the UN Commission remained in Tehran, which, as is generally

known, did not happen. The current situation had been complicated

further by the former Shah’s trip to Egypt.

(b) He is completely opposed to all attempts by the U.S. to dominate

the world. This applies especially to the attempted domination of Iran.

A policy aimed at independence requires the elimination of all ties

establishing dependence. It is clear that the hostages are an impediment

to such a policy. Bani-Sadr made clear that it was unnecessary for the

U.S. to feel that it had to encourage or threaten him in any way in

relation to his pursuit of his policy.

(c) Regarding the U.S. position on this matter, he noted that to

date he had not yet been able to perceive one single sign of good will

on the part of that side, be it on the issue of the Shah himself, or with

regard to Iran’s assets or to plots directed against Iran.

(d) The Shah’s departure from Panama has created a new situation,

and it is not clear to him what the presence of the ex-monarch in

Egypt signifies.

He is determined to effect the transfer of the hostages to the control

of the government. However, for that he needs time to review the

entire problem in the light of the newly created situation. The procedure

selected should be such as to avoid any damage whatsoever to his

country. The general conditions must be such as to make such an

action possible.

In the general conversation that ensued, I told Bani-Sadr of the

mounting pressure put on the Administration by the U.S. public and

briefly touched on the results of the primaries in Massachusetts and

the trend in New York. The President replied that he certainly was not

interested in causing problems for Carter since his opponent, Kennedy,

was an even greater enemy of the Iranian revolution.

Asked about the prospects for Easter services, Bani-Sadr replied

that GH was seeing the Imam today—it could be presumed that he

would use the occasion to discuss the subject.

226.

Message From the Swiss Chargé d’Affaires in Iran (Kaiser)

to the Department of State

Tehran, March 27, 1980

(Text of letter intended for Khomeini and attributed to President

Carter)

Excellency:

I have read your message to the Iranian people dated March 21.

I consider it to be a key document for the future of your country.

In that message you also defined your international policy choice.

This concerns us. I agree that the peace of the world requires new

relations between States, especially respect for the sovereignty of

nations and the right of peoples to self-determination.

I wish to say to you that these two principles often expressed by

you and by President Bani-Sadr are my principles, and we have proved

to the world our decision to implement them, in Nicaragua, in Pakistan,

and in the face of a probable threat to the sovereignty of Yugoslavia.

I wish to say to you that my Government inherited a very delicate

international situation—the product of another policy, of other circum-

stances which have led us all to commit errors in the past.

The great advantage of American democracy is that it has always

been able to recognize or condemn its mistakes. We agreed to the

Congressional Commission of Inquiry to clarify the truth of serious

acts of American intervention such as in the case of Chile, and that

Commission of Inquiry made very important decisions condemning

that intervention and taking very important measures against those

responsible for those acts. President Bani-Sadr has been informed by

us that we are prepared to establish this Commission of Inquiry in the

United States within the framework of a program which would allow

the settlement of this crisis between our two nations.

We have also informed President Bani-Sadr of our great willingness

to make a major effort and give the Iranian people the necessary satisfac-

tions in order to solve peacefully the disputes between our two Govern-

ments. I can understand very well that the takeover of the Embassy

of our country there could be an understandable reaction of the youth

of Iran. But the situation has changed, and I have serious reasons

to harbor doubts as to the true motivations of those who took over

our Embassy.

Today this takeover is creating major problems for your Govern-

ment and for mine. It has now become an element of discord which

does not allow us to end the present crisis or to establish these new

relations which you talk about and which we accept on the basis of

equality of mutual respect. We are ready to recognize the new realities

created by the Iranian revolution. This continues to be our objective

and our hope, because in the final analysis I believe that we share a

single objective—world peace and justice for all peoples. From the

moment that the overthrown former Shah left the United States where

he had been admitted for humanitarian reasons and for medical pur-

poses, my Government decided not to intervene in these problems.

The ex-Shah’s departure from Panama was his own personal decision,

and we were in no way involved with the negotiations he himself

undertook with Sadat in order to find refuge in Egypt. We would like

there to be no misunderstanding on that point: We opposed his return

to the United States, we opposed his being treated in American hospi-

tals and by American physicians. We conveyed to President Bani-Sadr

all the information we had on the physical condition of the former

Shah. I consider it to be essential to maintain the principle that these

two problems should be kept totally separate. The crisis between our

two countries must be resolved by the will and the capacity of our

Governments to act in accordance with reality and in the interest of a

serious future for our peoples. I wish to say to you that as soon as the

immediate problem is resolved by the transfer of the hostages to the

custody of the Iranian Government, we are ready to adopt a reasonable

and friendly attitude in regard to our numerous bilateral problems. It

has been recommended to us that there be established a Joint Commis-

sion as the instrument for dealing with those bilateral issues. We would

be receptive to this approach and could see the Commission as the

means for developing our future relationship. I would ask you to make

a great effort to help me to resolve the crisis between our two countries

in a manner which is fair and honorable for all. I am very grateful to

you. Our peoples will be very grateful to you. I would note for you

that in my humble opinion time and the true enemies of our respective

political processes are working against us.

With my greatest respect,

signed: Jimmy Carter

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

227.

Message From the U.S. Government to Iranian President

Bani-Sadr

Washington, March 29, 1980

228.

Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

Tehran, March 30, 1980

1. After receiving the message for BS, I briefed V who judged, in

view of its contents, that it was urgent for BS as well as Gh. Given BS

lack of English and reliance on translators (who made mistakes), I

immediately dictated a French translation.

2. At Gh’s behest, BS received me immediately.

3. His (BS’s) comments.

3. He admitted he had told Kaiser that a transfer of the hostages

was possible, but he meant on condition that the commission continue

its work. Now, the commission had departed, and, moreover, the Shah

has been transferred to Cairo, and, according to his information, Kissin-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

ger had organized this move (re the US declaration that it had tried

to prevent the departure of the Shah.)

this is not done, but it was done. (According to V by Ahmed Khomeini

who found the text less harsh than message 155 which BS presented,

in confidence, to the Revolutionary Council, but which Behesti hastened

to show to the Imam.) Moreover, there is now a White House denial

of the message.

BS told me that the message which I transmitted to the Imam had

an altogether different tone, much more conciliatory. I, therefore, had

to say that we had not transmitted this message. BS was shaken and

said, but Gh told me it was from you. I told him there must have been

a misunderstanding.

To avoid all misunderstanding about the situation (based on mes-

sages received and reports from Washington), I took the liberty of

saying that the White House was now under intolerable pressure and

that the deadline of March 31 must be taken more seriously.

3. BS reaffirmed his position. The hostages are an issue which

must be put out of the way. BS believes that US imperialism is the

worst thing, but he realizes, as a militant, that the hostage affair is only

a nuisance for the US, but very serious for Iran. We must free ourselves

from it. I have no need of courage or threats to do so.

3. The US need only remain calm, have patience and avoid provo-

cation. I, therefore, repeated with unusual insistence the seriousness

of the situation which requires absolutely an Iranian gesture before

tomorrow night in view of the great pressures on the other side.

I emphasized our “good offices” mission by which we have been

doing our best to avoid the worst and recourse to escalation.

229.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State

230.

Paper Prepared by the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang)

Tehran, March 31, 1980

Meeting with Bani-Sadr

1. In view of the fact that my meeting took place with almost a

two hour delay, I will convey the general climate in my next cable. I

want you to know that Bani-Sadr appeared to me to be at the end of

his rope, he could hardly get his words out, was confused and impre-

cise. This forced me to ask him to repeat his words several times in a

manner which was almost unpleasant.

2. Because of the capital importance of his message I took his words

down as he was saying them.

3. Bani-Sadr, who had just left a meeting of the Revolutionary

Council, told me the following:

The Council decided that we can ask for a change in the situation

of the hostages in order to give the Americans more confidence than

is really needed provided that they (the US) waits for Parliament to

take the decision to release the hostages, which will take a while. Bani-

Sadr tells me the Imam agrees, the students agree, the students have

just left my office.

4. Bani-Sadr is mixing up what occurred today and what occurred

a few days ago and tells me that he spoke to the Imam’s son who

talked to his father and who also saw the students and convinced them.

5. Bani-Sadr states that two proposals have been worked out and

that the students are prepared to accept them:

(1) The Council proposes to Bani-Sadr that he requests that the

students place the hostages under control of the state. Comment: V et

Cheron had forewarned me against joint control of the condominium

(sic) kind (government, revolutionary council and students) therefore

I asked Bani-Sadr to clarify if this was under sole control of the state

excluding any other organization or parallel power. Bani-Sadr replied

that yes this would be under the sole control of the state.

(2) Second proposal: the hostages would remain in the custody of

the students, I stress “in the custody of”, who would pledge to the

state that they would completely improve their situation providing all

of them with excellent and adequate housing conditions with total

freedom of action within the compound and periodic visits of the Red

Lion and Sun. The second proposal is designed to give the hostages

all guarantees as to their safety and these guarantees would be checked

periodically by the government.

6. I was so flabbergasted by the second proposal that I asked Bani-

Sadr to repeat it three times and each time I told him that I could not

understand the difference between the two proposals since safety, care,

and comfort are in fact included in the first proposal since the hostages

would be under the control of the government in whom the other side

has full confidence. I had a hard time getting Bani-Sadr to speak clearly

on this because of his condition of extreme fatigue. What I got out of

him follows: he confessed that he is deeply perplexed as to the safety

of the hostages during their transfer to governmental control. He wor-

ries over provocations and attempts against them particularly on the

part of those he calls the “Russians”. I am astonished and asked for

clarifications, are there Russians in the compound? He says yes there

are. I assume he is alluding to a group close to Tudeh.

7. V advised me to be extremely firm. I therefore spoke accordingly

and stressed to Bani-Sadr the seriousness of the situation on the other

side. I stressed that I had no mandate from anyone nor did I have any

power but because of my dealings with my government and with my

colleague in Washington I understood the present situation in the

United States and the problem with which the President would be

faced and I thought therefore that only a radical change and not simply

psychological measures could be taken up by the other side. By radical

change one must understand a total and final break of any contact

between the hostages and their keepers the latter being replaced once

and for all by representatives of the legitimate power that is to say of

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

the Iran Government. I pursued this same idea three times in different

terms and until the end of our meeting.

8. I asked Bani-Sadr when a choice would be made between these

proposals, meaning in effect become specific and be implemented and

Bani-Sadr said that will happen tomorrow.

9. I asked Bani-Sadr what was the immediate followup on his part

and he replied that while awaiting the reaction of the other side he is

going to the Imam to get him to choose a solution. If the Imam agrees

with the two solutions and tells me to make a choice, well then I

therefore will have to analyze myself Bani-Sadr, the psychology of our

people in tactical terms and I would choose two stages. The first stage

would be the second solution to be followed after a certain interval by

the first solution.

I told him one more time that this analysis was very good as far

as it went but that a capital element was lacking: to know how the

other side would take this.

10. Following V’s advice who insisted strongly that he wanted a

press statement I asked Bani-Sadr if he was going to make a statement

to the press. I admit that V had showed me the advantages of it but

what I had just heard caused me to think that a press statement would

be counterproductive. I therefore did not object when Bani-Sadr told

me that he would not speak to the press now but only as soon as a

solution had been chosen. Either the Imam or Bani-Sadr himself would

issue a public statement.

11. During the last ten minutes of our conversation which were

extremely difficult because Bani-Sadr could barely get a word out—a

condition he acknowledged himself—Sandjabi et Molavi came in and

sat down at the table. I took advantage of this to repeat firmly and

clearly what I believed to be the kind of solution the other side was

expecting and I stressed the determination to see the hostages placed

henceforth under the direct and sole control of the legitimate govern-

ment of Iran.

12. Logistically speaking I don’t know how President Carter will

reply. I can reach Bani-Sadr at his office until midnight, after that time

I have his private number but considering the condition he is in I

wonder if a direct communication or a communication through B or

V would not be preferable.

Lang

231.

Record of a National Security Council Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

Pres

Vance

Christopher

Brown

Claytor

ZB

DA

Jones

Turner

Cutler

Donovan

Powell

Jordan

Sick (notes)

The Pres opened the meeting by summarizing what had occurred

we had heard from Ghotbzadeh via an intermediary that the hostages

were to be transferred, at the decision of the Revolutionary Council,

from the custody of the students to the Government. Bani-Sadr was

to make an announcement to that effect at 3: a.m. Washington time

today. That, of course, had not happened. It was impossible to summa-

rize all the delays and obfuscations which had occurred in the meantime

today and all the messages back and forth. Bani-Sadr had evidently

met with some of the student leaders, and the Revolutionary Council

had just completed a 5½ hour meeting, after which they let it be known

that their plan is to transfer the hostages. The President read to the

group the message which had been sent to Bani-Sadr after the Camp

David meeting of the week before. In addition to that message, which

was sent to Tehran via the Swiss Embassy, there have been a number

of messages back and forth through the Swiss which have informed

the Iranians that we are not opposed to the Government of Iran and

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

other statements, but no one sent a message to Khomeini such as that

which has been published in Tehran.

Sec Vance noted that our reports indicate that, after 5½ hours of

discussion about the modalities of making the transfer of the hostages

to the Government, the Revolutionary Council reaffirmed its decision

and that this had been agreed to by the students. Reportedly, Bani-

Sadr was given two options: (1) for the Government to take over the

Embassy and remove the students; or (2) to take joint custody of the

Embassy with the students. We understand that Bani-Sadr has had a

further meeting with the students and will make a statement tomorrow.

ZB pointed out that the meeting with the students took place earlier

today according to Reuters. We also had private reports that Bani-Sadr

had rejected the idea of joint custody.

Jordan said he was concerned that, according to the Reuters report,

the students had no derogatory comments to make after the meeting,

which may indicate that they cut a deal with Bani-Sadr.

CV said we were trying to confirm these reports through the Swiss.

We have an open line with them.

ZB said we have a massive credibility problem. For example, Jim

Schlesinger called him today and was convinced from the New York

Times story that there had been a message from the U.S. along the lines

publicized in Tehran. If someone as sympathetic to the Administration

as he believes the Iranians, it means that the belief is widespread. With

regard to next steps, if we go ahead with our sanctions at this point,

we provide Bani-Sadr a perfect excuse to blame us for not taking the

necessary steps to transfer the hostages.

Cutler asked if we had any indication that they intend to move the

hostages out of the Embassy.

CV said no. Addressing the President, he said it was his view that

to go ahead with the three items today would put us in an impossible

position. We can wait until tomorrow. He would recommend against

acting today.

Sec Brown said he agreed but wondered what we could do to clarify

the confusion over the messages. Could we clarify what was in the

message which was actually sent to Bani-Sadr?

The Pres said he had met last night with the editors of the Washington

Post, the Star, the LA Times, the New York Times and the Chicago Tribune

and had told them flatly what had happened. They agreed to honor

the confidentiality of his words, but to improve the stories they publish

to reflect the facts more accurately. There is another development. We

have had good support from the European and Japanese allies who

have weighed in with Bani-Sadr. The President had talked to Margaret

Thatcher (who was with Chancellor Schmidt) and with Giscard yester-

day. We also know that the Prime Ministers of Japan and Italy sent

strong messages to Bani-Sadr. Giscard reported today that Bani-Sadr

told the French Ambassador, “I don’t attach too much importance to

threats.” But the action of all the allies, the President thought, had

made a real impression. Bani-Sadr told us via Giscard that the hostages

would be released at the time of the convening of the Majlis and that

Khomeini had agreed to this, to avoid long debates on the subject. The

Congressional leadership will be here within an hour, and the President

intended to bring them up to date in the same way. He saw nothing

wrong in informing them of the decisions we understand had been

taken in Tehran, indicating that we would monitor developments care-

fully, with an announcement to be made tomorrow. He thought that

would carry us over the night.

ZB said the President should read the message he had sent to

Bani-Sadr.

Powell wondered about reading the text.

ZB said they already know the substance.

JP said that parts of it could be turned against us, e.g. the emphasis

on American public opinion.

HJ said we are in a hell of a fix when the media believes the Iranians

instead of us. We should weigh in officially with the Iranians that joint

control of the hostages is unsatisfactory.

CV said we already have but we can do so again.

HJ said the speech at midday tomorrow will force Bani-Sadr to

take a position.

ZB said we should be ready to move if the speech is again dilatory.

The Pres asked where we got this latest information.

CV replied from Bourguet. We were checking the information with

the Swiss.

The Pres said he had jotted down some thoughts about a statement

to the US people to the effect that we had been informed by top Iranian

leaders that the US hostages were to be released from the militants

. . . it was not yet official . . . we would see it as a constructive step

. . . it was necessary to assure the safety and well-being of the hostages

Central Foreign Policy File, P900077–1842)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

. . . if these steps are not taken, we will take additional measures which

we have not taken thus far . . . the NSC meeting had been held . . .

and the President will make an appropriate announcement tomorrow.

CV said it would be a mistake to refer to it. They were not able to

produce in the past. This could create another credibility problem for us.

JP said we need some basis for it.

CV suggested saying that the Revolutionary Council had met for

5½ hours, we have information that Bani Sadr will make a statement

at noon their time and that the President will make a statement.

HB thought we should hold off for today, but if the decision is

bad it will hurt us.

HJ said we will take a beating tonight if we do not go ahead. We

can’t make Bani-Sadr’s statement for him. They say we are giving them

no reason to make a statement.

JP noted that we had asked them for more assurance.

ZB suggested saying that the President met with the NSC to review

the situation and that an appropriate statement will be made tomorrow.

If we say what we are going to do, we give Bani-Sadr an excuse to

back out.

LC said if we make a statement we should start with the gist of what

we told Bani-Sadr, that there has been a meeting of the Revolutionary

Council, we have no report, that we will wait until we hear the speech

tomorrow. We cannot make a speech without referring to the confusion

over the messages.

The Pres said that would be demeaning. We could indicate that

reports from Iran say . . .

ZB said anything could happen today. The Pres could go on the

tube tomorrow.

The Pres said we need to be able to tide over until tomorrow.

HJ suggested saying that we have reports from Iran that the Revolu-

tionary Council has met and made decisions concerning the transfer

of the hostages. We are also informed that Bani-Sadr will make a speech

tomorrow, so the President will make an appropriate statement to the

U.S. people tomorrow.

ZB wondered why we should say that. It will be disappointing if

the results are not good. Why do we want to put out the story?

HJ said we would take a beating overnight.

DA suggested saying the NSC met to review reports . . .

HJ said if we do not announce our actions, we need to give the

reason. The reason is that we have reports that the hostage question

will be addressed by the Revolutionary Council tomorrow.

HB wondered about the so-called message to Khomeini?

JP said we should repeat our denial.

The Pres said he had discussed this with the five guys last night.

CV said the Swiss are prepared to make a further statement.

JP said the problem is that if we say there were no such messages,

then the Swiss will say there have been messages from the President.

If we say nothing for one day, people will be skeptical.

The Pres noted that the Swiss claim they did not know the content

of the messages.

HJ said that is not true.

CV quickly read the second message which had been sent to Bani-

Sadr, which welcomed his reassurances, noted the things we had done

to improve the negotiating situation, that we had tried to make the

Shah stay in Panama, that we had not objected to the proposed Senate

Foreign Relations Committee study, and that the U.S. had been scrupu-

lous in maintaining its responsibilities under the scenario and hoped

that Iran would do the same.

HJ noted that this was the follow-up message sent on Saturday,

March 29.

The Pres said there had been a stream of messages from the U.S.

to Iranian officials using the UN, the French lawyers, the Panamanians,

etc. They had described U.S. attitudes toward Iran and indicated we

would not stand as an obstacle against Iran presenting its grievances.

Ghotbzadeh said (in the so-called letter) that we understand why the

militants took our hostages. The Pres had seen that for the first time

in the text of the letter in the New York Times. Apparently, Ghotbzadeh

had contributed a written answer, using bits and pieces of things we

had conveyed and adding embellishments, then delivered it to Kho-

meini and Bani-Sadr. When the Swiss told Bani-Sadr, he was shocked.

This was a Ghotbzadeh contrivance, perhaps in good faith and con-

trived to be helpful. Calling him a liar and going beyond our present

statements could destroy his credibility—if he has any. He had

explained this to the papers last night. Today we should repeat our

position and read a statement. If there is nothing overnight from Iran,

the Pres would make a statement.

HJ suggested 7: a.m.

The Pres said it should get on the morning talk shows.

HJ said we must say that joint control is not acceptable, then indicate

that here is what we will do tomorrow.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

LC said there were infinite possibilities of possible arrangements

for custody of the hostages.

GC said that merely having some students in the Embassy was not

so bad. It was their control which was important.

The Pres said Vance should talk to Waldheim.

ST said we should be prepared if the Revolutionary Council gets

into the Embassy they may not find 50 hostages. British Ambassador

Graham was just back and talked to us in London. He had been in

touch with Entezam in prison who had said that the militants control

a section of the prison and there may be Americans in that section.

The Pres said it was the impression when the UN Commission was

there that some hostages had been moved back.

HJ said we should maintain flexibility. If the Iranians renege, we

should break diplomatic relations.

ZB said it is important that we reject joint control.

The Pres agreed. If the government was in control, we cannot specify

exactly what arrangement will be adopted.

LC asked if the Pres wanted a 7 a.m. meeting.

The Pres said that Jody Powell and two or three others should meet

with him at 5 a.m.

HJ said that if the news was bad, we could sleep late.

JP asked in the event of bad news, what would we implement

regarding the Iranian diplomats.

WC said we plan to call in the Chargé and give him a diplomatic

note ordering [that] the 15 diplomats here and 5 others from each of

the Consulates were being declared PNG and must leave. State will

work with Justice. We would plan loose surveillance of the diplomats

between now and April 4. There were 35 diplomats in all. Under the

diplomatic note we would be prepared to have 4 in Washington and

1 in each of the Consulates remain for an additional 5 days. We would

identify those who could remain. Justice has asked that they be

restricted to the Embassy and their homes and a 2-mile radius of the

corridor between them. This would be civilized but firm. The diplomats

could not claim to be students or have other status which would permit

them to remain. The only way they could stay would be to request

asylum.

The Pres said he prefers to assign an extra 15–20 agents and be sure

to get them out by Friday morning. He did not want to find that half

of them had vanished.

ZB noted that we could have tighter surveillance. We could have

individual interviews with each diplomat, informing him of his respon-

sibilities by the FBI or State. The police or FBI could take up positions

in front of the Embassy and homes.

WC said Justice had suggested that a bus pick them up and take

them to the airport. They were concerned about creating an incident.

ZB said each should be informed individually of his responsibilities

and there should be some visual surveillance.

CV said they could increase the number of agents and tighten

surveillance.

WC said we should let them make individual arrangements since

they had to go to banks, etc. This entailed some risk, but they would

be restricted carefully.

HJ said it was hard to be sensitive to their personal needs at this

point.

ZB said to let an agent go with them wherever they needed to go.

WC said it would take a lot of people.

The Pres said it would only be for 3 days.

CV said State would get together with Justice and work it out.

The Pres said we should be humane, but he wanted them out. He

asked if he needed to sign something to order the census of claims.

LC said it would use the same order as before and a new signature

was not required.

The Pres said he was to brief Congress and would read the message

to Bani-Sadr.

CV said to note that it was from the U.S. Government to Bani-Sadr

and that this had been made clear to the Swiss.

ZB agreed that it was important that it be clear that the message

did not come from the President personally. Also that there had been

no message authorized from the President to Khomeini, whether oral

or any other way. People believe such a letter was authorized.

HJ said the PRES should not reveal to Congress his suspicions

about Ghotbzadeh. LC agreed.

The Pres noted that Senator Byrd had gone public after his briefing

last Saturday. This was not like him.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

WC said he could not explain it.

LC said that Congressional leaders should be told that when we

get to the next steps, we will need Congressional consultations about

imposition of IEEPA.

The Pres wondered if he should mention the question of stopping

the $4 million to the Olympics.

LC said that the chances of stopping it by legislation were slim.

He had talked to Stevens and Byrd. However, it would depend on

Byrd. It would probably be better to prepare a letter to the Olympic

Committee and others signed by 88 senators and House members.

The Pres said we want to stop things, not people, from going to

the Olympics. Rosalynn had asked if we could stop TV broadcasts of

the Olympics. We can stop NBC.

LC said that use of the Export Administration Act was alright to

stop NBC if it is not challenged in court. However, we cannot stop news

or broadcast of events as news items. Most of the sports federations

will go against us. We will work hard over the next few weeks to get

a favorable outcome on the Olympics.

DA noted that if we are quiet, others will go against our position.

The Pres noted that NBC is giving us hell on this issue.

WC said the President should tell Congressional leaders what to

say to the press after the meeting.

The Pres said the thrust should be that no one in the government

sent a message to Khomeini or any apology.

HJ added that they should note that things were at a delicate stage

and that the Pres is wise to act tomorrow rather than today.

232.

Paper Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 31, 1980

233.

Record of an Oval Office Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

PRES

VANCE

CHRISTOPHER

SAUNDERS

ZB

DA

SICK

POWELL

JORDAN

Mr. Christopher said we had a message from Swiss Ambassador

Lang in Tehran that Khomeini was very hard in his speech. Bani-Sadr

indicated they are ready to transfer control of the hostages, but sets

two conditions: first, the definitive release of the hostages could come

only after the parliament meets; and second, that the U.S. refrain from

any hostile act.

The Pres said we could delay the imposition of sanctions since they

have said they will transfer the hostages.

ZB said we have two options. First, we could say the Iranian

response is inadequate and go ahead with the sanctions. Second, that

the Iranians have accepted transfer of the hostages and therefore we

hold off. He thought the latter could be justified. We could note that

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

the Iranians have responded to the message sent to them on March

24, consequently our measures are suspended. We could ignore the

conditions they set.

The Pres said it would be better to say that the President of Iran

has said that the hostages will be transferred, therefore, we are delaying

our actions until a certain time . . .

Mr. Powell said we could say the Iranians say they are ready to

transfer the hostages. If they should release them by a certain time . . .

Jordan said we should be careful. It is clear that Bani-Sadr and

others are under the gun and have little room for maneuver. We should

not put them in a corner.

The Pres said we should acknowledge their decision.

ZB said we should indicate that it was the result of your (the

President’s) initiative.

Jordan said he thought we should not mention our message.

Saunders came in after being on the phone. He restated Amb. Lang’s

understanding of the Khomeini statement and Bani-Sadr’s speech.

The Pres said we should restate that Iran has announced that the

hostages will be released after the Majlis meets. Our statement could

say that Iranian officials have stated that the hostages will be released

when the Majlis convenes.

Mr. Christopher read a possible draft statement acknowledging the

announcement of Bani-Sadr as a positive step, and acknowledging the

Iranian Government statement that the hostage issue would be resolved

when the Majlis convenes. There was also a statement at the end

expressing unity with the families of the hostages.

ZB said he was uneasy about making too positive a reading of the

Iranian position. The President should take credit for the initiative. We

should not read too much into their statement. Mention of the decision

to be taken by the Majlis prompts a response from them saying that

only the Majlis can decide the release of the hostages. We legitimize

that position by mentioning it.

The Pres said we are dealing with a crazy group. Bani-Sadr and

others are holding on by their fingernails. If we leave out any mention

of the Majlis, they could come back to us and demand acknowledge-

ment of their position. He felt it was necessary to mention it in our

statement.

Jordan said the decision about the Majlis was already in the pub-

lic domain.

The Pres said we could do what John Kennedy did at the time of

the Cuban missile crisis when he received two messages from the

Soviets: take the best part of the message and ignore the other. We can

couple the Majlis acknowledgement with a statement urging the earliest

possible release of the hostages.

CV asked Jody Powell for his view about how to handle the Kho-

meini speech.

JP said ignore it.

ZB said he thought mention of the Majlis weakened the statement.

The Pres said there is no need to keep going around this. He pre-

ferred to say something about the Majlis. We could say that the hostages

will be released when the Majlis convenes. That is in line with the

messages we have received from Giscard.

Aaron and Jordan said it would be better not to say that they will

be released when the Majlis convenes. They have never said this pub-

licly and it could prompt a denial from them.

Christopher proposed wording it that “the hostage issue will be

resolved when the new Parliament convenes.” All agreed that this was

the best formulation. All agreed to drop the part about unity with the

families, etc.

ZB said we would be better off arguing the main point which is

the transfer of the hostages.

DA wondered if we should say that the hostages will be “trans-

ferred immediately.”

The Pres said he had trepidation about saying more than Bani-Sadr

had stated publicly. We should get the announcement out on the wires

immediately.

JP wondered if the President should make the announcement on

camera.

CV said it would be better for Jody to make the announcement.

The Pres said that this was good news. At least it is better than he

was starting from a pretty low base.) The Pres joked that Rosalynn

had gone in the bathroom and thrown up when he read her what

Khomeini was saying. He discussed briefly with JP what the effect

would be in Kansas and Wisconsin if he made the statement personally.

JP said he did not like the idea of the President personally standing

up and accepting conditions.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

The Pres said we should give this the maximum positive twist. It

gives Bani-Sadr what he asked for via the Swiss. He asked everyone

in the room to make no statements. All statements should come through

Jody Powell and Hodding Carter. There will be rapidly changing cir-

cumstances. We can expect Khomeini, Beheshti and others to say crazy

things in the next few days.

CV said he would contact Senator Byrd and other key congres-

sional leaders.

ZB asked how we respond to the question if we have accepted

Iran’s conditions.

JP said we would not address it.

The Pres said we should turn it around, i.e., that they accepted our

conditions.

ZB suggested that on background we note that it was the Presi-

dent’s message which set this off.

The Pres said we should ask Congressional leaders to exercise

restraint over the next 24 hours. They can say it is a positive

development.

ZB asked whether Kennedy and Reagan should be contacted to

ask them for restraint.

The Pres said Kennedy was avoiding the issue. Reagan, however,

is giving us hell. Last night he (the Pres) had called the three TV anchors

(Cronkite, Reynolds, etc.) and had told them on background that we

never apologized to Iran and that we never condoned the taking of

hostages by the militants. He thought the news coverage last night

reflected that. He wondered if he should call them again this morning.

We could turn around the idea of conditions, to say that it was not we

who had accepted conditions. He asked Saunders to thank Swiss Amb.

Lang for his efforts.

234.

Editorial Note

reporters in the Oval Office at the White House. He reminded them

that his administration has been seeking a positive development in

Iran, such as the transfer of the U.S. hostages to the Iranian Government.

Carter stated: “If this action had not been taken, or is not taken, we

were considering additional sanctions against Iran and had notified the

Iranian government of that fact.” (See Document 227.) Carter continued:

“This morning, the President of Iran has announced that the hos-

tages’ control will be transferred to the Government of Iran, which we

consider to be a positive step. In light of that action, we do not consider

it appropriate now to impose additional sanctions. We will monitor the

situation very closely. We would like to see this positive development

continue and our foremost consideration and our constant effort will

be devoted to the hostages and their return to this country and to

freedom.”

After his statement, in response to a reporter’s question on whether

the United States had agreed to Iran’s condition of no hostile action,

no provocation, and no propaganda (see footnote 3, Document 233),

Carter replied that the United States would maintain present trade

restrictions and continue to hold Iran’s assets. He repeatedly stressed

the fact that the United States would not impose any additional sanc-

Later that day, President Abol Hassan Bani-Sadr told reporters that

Carter’s statement had failed to meet Iran’s demands and that an official

declaration containing U.S. acceptance of all the conditions had to be

published. (Reuters wire, attached to a memorandum from Aaron to

Carter, April 1; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski

After this announcement by Bani-Sadr, on the same day, Carter

decided to call an NSC meeting “to impose all the sanctions, expel all

their diplomats, collect all the claims against Iran, maybe prohibit any

more people coming into this country from Iran—and to act without

further delay.” Carter recalled that within a few hours, Foreign Minister

Sadegh Ghotbzadeh had said that Iranian demands had been met,

implying that the hostages would, in fact, be transferred to government

control. Carter then decided to let the situation stew for a few days

until clarification was received from Tehran. (Carter, Keeping Faith,

pages 503–504) No copy of Ghotbzadeh’s statement has been found.

235.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Aaron)

Washington, April 2, 1980

SUBJECT

Next Steps on Iran

There are two categories of additional steps which we need to

consider: (1) interim steps which can keep the pressure up over the

next 48 hours while we wait for transfer of the hostages; and (2) sanc-

tions which can be used in addition to those we already have in our

pocket.

Interim Pressure

1. Ask Allies to make a new démarche to Bani-Sadr stressing the

importance of prompt action.

2. Private message through Swiss or other channels telling them

we will be unable to hold off beyond Saturday morning.

3. Message to selected Third World capitals (especially Pakistan,

Syria, Turkey, Algeria) informing them that we will have to proceed

soon with the sanctions unless there is tangible movement in Tehran.

4. Preliminary consultations at the UN about possible new resolu-

tion condemning Iran, revival of sanctions in the Security Council,

or some other move which they will hear about—even if we do not

go ahead.

5. Sharply increase the VOA broadcast time in Farsi—even if only

for a day or two. Fill the time with rebroadcasts of Christopher’s state-

ment on Afghanistan, indications of growing restiveness in the U.S.,

read editorials which call for more action, do updates on the U.S.

military presence in the Arabian Sea, interviews with U.S. military

figures about the U.S. presence.

6. Close an area of the Arabian Sea for a naval live firing exercise.

7. On the clandestine broadcasts, drop some rumors about U.S.

intentions. [3½ lines not declassified]

8. Citing the TASS attack on the U.S., plant a story that the Soviets

have sent a secret message to Khomeini telling him to resist the U.S.

pressure and offering him their full support if he does. If the story is

good enough, it will feed the rumor mill and put the Ayatollah on

the defensive.

9. Institute visible, spot surveillance of Iranian diplomats.

New Sanctions

Many of the above suggestions would also be useful in building

an atmosphere of uncertainty in Tehran even if we go through with

the sanctions. The following are some additional steps we can take if

we decide to openly resort to graduated pressure tactics. The key word

is graduated, since any package we invoke is going to be more effective

if it is seen only as the first step and if there is real concern in Tehran

that more stringent measures are seriously being considered.

1. Tighten up Immigration. We probably should do this anyway.

Exactly what are the guidelines which INS is using to screen Iranians

coming into the country?

2. Students. Can/should we toughen the limitations on renewal of

Iranian student visas after this semester is over? Could we require

written statements by school officials about political activities of Iranian

students? Can we simply require that all student visas be formally

renewed prior to beginning a new semester?

3. Spot Interrogation of Merchant Shipping. This would be a first step.

It could be stepped up if desired, but a limited program could raise

fears while being portrayed as normal maritime activity.

4. Economic Transactions. Can we ask the allies to privately ask their

companies to deliberately slow down all financial and commercial

transactions with the Iranians? This would not require legal steps, and

each country could do it in its own fashion. It might even be attractive

to them as an alternative to more severe measures.

5. UN. Any attempted new action against Iran at the UN is a two-

edged sword. However, my guess is that the Iranians are not any

happier about relying on the Soviet veto than we are—it shows how

low they have sunk in world opinion. Merely undertaking some kind

of effort will be seen as threatening by them, although it has a down

side for us as well if we fail to gain as many votes as last time or force

a new Soviet veto.

6. ICJ. Are we totally on hold at the World Court? Can we ask for

them to accelerate their consideration of the case on the grounds that

danger is increasing? When do we expect a final judgment? Will the

judgment increase our ability to press the allies for sanctions?

7. Diplomatic Representation. We could renew pressure on our allies

and others to reduce their diplomatic presence in Tehran, or, at a

minimum, to communicate to the Iranians the fact that they see a

dangerous situation developing which could require them to reduce

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

their presence. We would have to take some unilateral steps which

would add conviction to their démarches.

A Negotiating Strategy

We cannot maintain our present posture of watchful waiting for

more than a few days without losing credibility entirely. We must also

not lose sight of the fact that the transfer of the hostages—even if

successful—is not the end of the game. The final negotiation for release

is still ahead of us and will be even tougher. We need to have cards

in our hand for the next round which will give us some negotiating

leverage—things we can give up or things which we can renounce

doing—which will keep the negotiations from being focused entirely

on U.S. concessions on matters of basic principle.

Even if we decide not to go ahead with tangible punitive acts, we

need to create an environment of uncertainty and potential threat which

will keep the Iranians focused on the immediacy of the problem and,

if possible, for them to set deadlines for themselves. This is the necessary

counterpart to the carrot we have been brandishing. We must have the

private channels of communication, but we should also be doing things

which raise doubt in their minds about our real intentions. Pure carrot

is going to be ineffective without some stick in the background.

There are a number of things we can do which create uncertainty

and even fear in the minds of Iranians but which we can blandly

explain away as not our doing or as unrelated to Iran. We have been

playing the game totally in the open. We should reach down a little

into our bag of tricks.

I recommend a brainstorming session with the Agency, DOD, State

and some selected members of the NSC Staff which would come up

with a menu of largely deniable actions which could be orchestrated

over a period of time to build pressure and tension. We were doing

this for a while, but the effort ceased as the UN Commission took over.

It is time to start some new systematic thinking about the end game.

236.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran/Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

David Newsom

David Aaron

Peter Constable

Hedley Donovan

Lloyd Cutler

OSD

Jody Powell

General David Jones

Henry Owen

Lt. Gen. John Pustay

Office of the Vice President

CIA

Denis Clift

Frank Carlucci

NSC

Justice

Gary Sick

Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti

Alfred Friendly

Judge William Webster

Robert Carswell

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Iran Negotiations. Mr. Newsom reported on the latest contacts

through Villalon in Tehran. He had seen Bani-Sadr who was to meet

with the Revolutionary Council today. The firm intention is for a trans-

fer of custody of the hostages to occur on Saturday. The precise details

of the role of the students once the transfer has occurred is “a great

mystery,” but Villalon says he has made it clear that a joint custody

arrangement is unsatisfactory. Reportedly there are still issues to be

resolved in Tehran on the question of transfer. The SCC agreed that

we should not encourage undue optimism through our public state-

ments since this could all come apart as it has so many times in the

past. Our basic posture should be to acknowledge the positive signals

which are coming out of Tehran but to restrict our comments to the

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

fact that the situation is very fluid and no comments are desirable at

this time. (S)

2. Expulsion of Iranian Diplomats. The Attorney General reviewed

for the SCC the problems associated with expelling Iranian diplomats.

The decision to grant them five days to depart, to impose close and

visible surveillance, and to avoid disruptive incidents were inconsis-

tent. A considerable number of non-diplomats are present in some of

the facilities (perhaps more than 60 in the Washington Embassy, for

example) and arms have been stockpiled. By allowing five days, we

increase the chances that these individuals will organize incidents

which could have an impact on civil order here and possibly on the

hostages in Tehran. The need for close surveillance over a five-day

period increases the diplomats [refusal?] to leave or a refusal of the

airlines to accept them. (S)

The Attorney General recommended that we assume responsibility

for removing the diplomats from the facilities and transporting them

to the departure point. There would be an initial demonstration of

U.S. presence, including individual notification of the requirement to

depart, then less visible surveillance in the interim, followed by official

escort to the departure point. He recommended reducing the period

of delay to the minimum and no more than 24–48 hours. If there is

substantial resistance, we would attempt to defuse it by negotiating

methods rather than the use of force. (S)

Judge Webster seconded this recommendation. He noted that the

FBI had located all but two of the residences of the diplomats involved.

There is no evidence to date of any plan by the diplomats to run or

attempt to escape. There are thousands of Iranian students in all of the

cities where facilities are located, and demonstrations are a significant

possibility. Recent reports indicate one case of an individual entering

the Embassy with an AK–47 submachinegun. Another report indicates

armed guards on the roof. There are Hanafi Muslims on the grounds

of the Embassy with hand guns. There is one diplomat in Chicago who

has been linked to the militants, and we would keep particularly close

surveillance on him. However, we want to avoid a “Keystone Kops”

situation where police cars converge on the Embassy and Consulates

from all directions as the diplomats come to work in the morning.

Three teams of two men each would be assigned to each individual,

and this would be increased as the moment of departure arrives. Agents

in each of the locations have been notified to make preparations, but

detailed instructions have not yet been sent to avoid leaks. (S)

Mr. Aaron strongly supported the idea of reducing the departure

time for the bulk of the diplomats to 24 hours from notification. This

would cause personal hardship in some cases, but their personal effects

could be handled by those who remained behind. The Department of

State preferred 48 hours, but eventually acquiesced to the 24-hour

deadline. The Department of State will develop a plan for the exit

of the diplomats from the country. The Defense Department will be

prepared to provide transportation if necessary. (S)

Approve 24 hour notice

48 hours

Other

It was also agreed that a Justice, State, FBI group would develop

a plan for removal of diplomats. The plan could be reviewed tomorrow

afternoon if required. (S)

The Attorney General noted that as many as ten of the Iranian

diplomats may seek asylum here. Others, such as the Chargé in Wash-

ington, may apply for residence on the grounds that he has an American

wife. Mr. Aaron said we do not want an expulsion which results in

half the expellees staying here under various pretexts. He said we

should be harsh in our interpretations of the rules. If the Chargé is

required to leave under the order, he should go and then apply for

residence from outside the country.

3. Additional Sanctions. Mr. Aaron noted that we need to consider

measures which go beyond the three sanctions we had previously

accepted. Those measures had been widely advertised and might be

discounted in advance by Tehran. The Department of State circulated

a list of possible measures they had developed for the discussion.

Resolutions in the UNSC or UNGA. All agreed that any new condem-

natory resolutions would fail due to the Soviet veto, and we might

also lose support as compared to the past. However, this may become

an option once the ICJ hands down a final ruling. That will probably

be about a month. (C)

INS Tighten Up Examination of Iranian Students. The Attorney Gen-

eral said this was being done. However, the delay in deportation

resulted from the requirements for due process. By utilizing all channels

of appeal, the process could be drawn out for as much as two years.

Another problem is confirming departure of those deported or choosing

voluntary departure. We do not maintain INS presence at departure

points. We have no established checks on departures from this country.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Mr. Aaron said the airlines are supposed to report departures to INS,

but the Attorney General said they often fail to do so. The SCC agreed

that the Attorney General should crack down on the airlines to insure

that they fulfill their reporting obligations. With that data, we can

determine what further steps might be effective.

Revoke all Iranian visas and Revalidate only for those who have no

residence or business connection with Iran. Mr. Newsom noted that we

still may be receiving visas issued by the militants using the visa plates

at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. Instructions had already been prepared

to implement this order if the decision is taken, with special instructions

to give preference to minority groups. Mr. Sick noted that this would

impact heavily on many Iranians who are friends of the United States

and who have legitimate business and personal interests here and in

Iran. Mr. Aaron said that was a cost that would have to be accepted

so long as the hostages are being held. The SCC agreed that this should

be placed on the list of steps we would consider taking in the event

we invoke sanctions.

Explore legislation to prosecute individuals supporting the militants. The

Attorney General said that there are very few actions Iranians in this

country might take which would justify prosecution. If we want to get

rid of the students, there are better ways to do it than restricting their

freedom of speech. The SCC agreed that this should be rejected. (C)

Prohibit Shipment of Food and Medicine. Treasury noted that the

present level of shipments of food is very small. Henry Owen said he

would look into the question and report back to the SCC. It was the

general feeling of the SCC that food should be included in the sanctions,

since we had imposed the grain embargo on the USSR. Medicine should

continue to be excluded. (C)

Prohibit all Transfers of Funds from Iran to Iranians in this Country. It

was noted that a cutoff of funds for the Iranian students here would

force them either to leave the country or to go on welfare. Mr. Aaron

noted that this would be an option if and when we should decide to

break diplomatic relations. We had decided not to take that step for

the time being.

Agree that this step should be held in abeyance.

Prepare to proceed if sanctions are invoked.

Terminate Iranian Military Training Programs. Secretary Brown said

that some of the military procurement people would leave if we expel

the diplomats. The military students will go if we decide to act on

other Iranian students. The SCC agreed. (C)

Census of Claims. Treasury noted that the inventory of claims against

Iranian assets is the only part of the sanctions package which has not

been widely publicized, or at least understood. That being the case,

we could probably toughen it up by indicating from the start that this

is a first step toward the preparation of legislation to bring claims

against Iranian assets. Originally we had intended to be neutral and

note that the inventory of claims could be used either to resolve the

freeze or to eventually seize assets. All agreed we should indicate that

this is a first step toward satisfying U.S. claims against Iranian assets.

Agree

Keep it neutral as previously planned.

It was also agreed that Justice and Treasury should prepare draft

legislation which could be introduced at some point in the future which

would permit families of the hostages to bring claims immediately

against the Iranian assets, even if no seizure of assets was ordered.

Concur

Other

[Omitted here is material on Libya.]

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

237.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, April 3, 1980

Afternoon Report from Iran

I. Cottam-Ghotbzadeh Conversation: (1530) Cottam found Ghotbzadeh

very depressed and reluctant to go into details on the telephone about

the Revolutionary Council meeting. He said he was aware it was a

horrible setback but he had not yet given up hope. He would go

239.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of

State Vance

Washington, April 4, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran Update—April 4, 1980

Today’s Objective

—To determine the chances for an Iranian decision to transfer the

hostages this weekend.

—To begin to prepare a second package of measures we might

take against Iran if the transfer does not occur.

Status of Initiatives

—The attached cable from Lang3 responds as best he is able to the

questions we put to him on Wednesday. It also conveys the flavor of the

situation prior to the Revolutionary Council’s about-face late yesterday.

—In addition to the message to the Swiss last night, we asked the

lawyers to press hard for action on the transfer. At this writing, we do

not know whether Bourguet will join Capucci in Tehran, but the latter

could also be a helpful influence with the Iranians.

—At the suggestion of the SCC, we are looking into a suspension

of food aid shipments and revocation of visas for Iranians as a means

of additional pressure.

—We sent a cable to Rome of individual messages from the families

for delivery to the hostages by Capucci should he have the opportunity

to deliver them at religious services.

241.

Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Aaron) to President Carter

Washington, April 5, 1980

SUBJECT

Sanctions on Iran (C)

I chaired an SCC for two hours Friday afternoon2 to review the

status of our planning and options in the event we decide to proceed

with sanctions against Iran. You now have the following package:

1. All Iranian diplomats and military officials will be expelled in 24–

48 hours (except one who will clean up).

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

2. The Census of Claims against Iran will be accompanied by legisla-

tion to permit the families of the hostages to begin legal action against Iran

and its assets in the U.S.

3. An economic embargo which could be total, if you decide to add food

and medicine.

4. A cut-off in all visas for Iranians except humanitarian cases and

exiles/refugees.

In addition, we are preparing for a new approach to our allies to

urge further actions on their part—including the withdrawal of their

Ambassadors shortly after our actions go into effect. We also are explor-

ing some military “gestures” (surveillance, jamming, overflights) which

would underscore the seriousness of the moment. The problem is that

some of them may heighten Iranian military readiness and thus conflict

with other options on which you have been briefed. JCS and CIA will

do a quiet analysis before Monday.

Finally, it is extremely important that the agencies get 24 hours’ advance

notice so that everything will proceed smoothly and we remain in

full control.

The following sets forth the specifics on the diplomats’ explusion

and the decision needed on including food and medicine in the

sanctions.

Expulsion of Iranian Diplomats

—From the time of notice of explusion, the diplomats would be

allowed until the departure of the last plane out of the country the

following evening to leave the United States.

—All Iranian diplomats and all official Iranian representatives of

purchasing missions here would be included in the order. Only one

diplomat now would be allowed to remain in Washington for an addi-

tional five days to handle turnover to a Protecting Power. Military

officials will be expelled, but military students and their liaison officers

would be permitted to remain.

—Those diplomats wishing to apply for residence or asylum would

be permitted to do so from Europe or other locations after expulsion.

—Guidance was developed for the FBI and Secret Service in the

event of demonstrations, resistance or other contingencies with an

emphasis on avoiding incidents which could affect the welfare of our

hostages. However, if the lives of FBI agents are directly jeopardized,

they can defend themselves.

Economic Sanctions

—The SCC, with the exception of the Department of State, favored

making the embargo total by including food and medicine in the sanc-

tions. The arguments in favor of a food and medicine embargo are:

(1) it merely formalizes what we are already doing, since virtually

nothing is currently being shipped; (2) it increases the scope of the

sanctions package beyond the measures previously publicized; and

(3) it demonstrates U.S. determination to terminate all trade with Iran

while the hostages are being held. The Secretary of State objects to the

use of food as a weapon and believes that, despite the Soviet grain

embargo, this is contrary to past Presidential statements. They argue

that this goes beyond the sanctions voted by the UNSC, has little

practical effect since our Allies will not join us, and will be viewed

negatively by other states in the region. I have been unable to reach

Secretary Bergland, Dale Hathaway or anyone else in charge of the

Department of Agriculture. However, I would imagine they might

oppose including food.

Your Decision

Make the embargo complete

Exempt food

Exempt medicine

242.

Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

Tehran, April 5, 1980

2. The last cards are being played. B back from Paris just visited me

(11:30) before going to see GH. B shared with me the current strategy.

2. A “family” meeting is to take place at the Imam’s with BS, a

delegation from the Revolutionary Council, and students. The results

should be known soon. B has a very interesting theory: the Imam, in

his hatred for the Americans, wants to humiliate them ad nauseam.

This is not the case with BS. Like a Persian rug merchant, the Imam

believes he can pressure the US ad infinitum the more so since he

interprets American moderation as weakness. Unlike BS he does not

realize the damage caused by the sanctions. Paradoxically the Imam

does not seem to oppose the transfer of power, but he wants BS and

the leadership to do it by themselves and prove their maturity and their

authority by showing that they are directing the country effectively.

The Imam would be delighted if BS shows himself to be a real President.

(Here there is a paradox because he takes umbrage if (BS) becomes too

popular or influential.) What is BS doing? Good will, certainly, but no

courage. BS is seized by “the great fear” that if he acts the Imam by a

word or a speech of which he is a master will not guarantee or not

guarantee entirely the action (transfer) or the release, and in so doing

ignite public opinion and cause him to lose the Presidency which he

values above all. He therefore fears a stab in the back.

2. So what is to be done if the results of the consultation with the

Imam is negative or inconclusive. B and V and GH have the following

cards in reserve.

2. Mgr. Capucci has just arrived with B. He is, perhaps, the best

person in all the world, given the context, and has perhaps the greatest

capacity to persuade because he is “not involved”. Capucci is religious,

Palestinian favorably viewed by the students, well viewed by the

Imam, he knows what it is to be a captive, but above all intelligent.

He could make the Imam understand that the affair is costing Iran as

much as the USA and that it is likely to cost much more. That numerous

Iranians have died and are dying because of this affair (due to a lack

of spare parts for helicopters, Khuzestan, medical equipment, etc.).

And finally, that Iran has won enough points for this stage and Iran

is now likely to lose more than it gains.

2. As a last resort if necessary GH will go to the Imam and use

all his credit, since he is the favorite child of the Imam.

3. B was astonished that I have no message from Carter for BS.

He left me convinced that I was going to receive one in a matter of

minutes. (It’s a question of a message that should indicate that the

Monday3 deadline was understood as assisting BS and should not be

interpreted as a sign of weakness and that the immediate implemetation

of sanctions will occur if the affair is not dealt with in the coming x

number of hours. My version is not exact but I hope that the idea is

right. Should I understand by your 180. that Carter had decided not

to do it or the contact between B and the State Department is later and

something is foreseen?4

4. Taylor of Reuters has called me to say that the prayers in the

Mosque this morning is against the transfer.

5. I remained in touch with B and V and will go to the Presidency.

Lang

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

243.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Hector Villalon

Henry Precht

SUBJECT

Iran Hostage Crisis

Villalon said that the meeting between the Revolutionary Council

and Khomeini had been postponed by Bani Sadr because the conditions

were not right (presumably he was referring to the attack on the idea

of transfer by the religious hardliners).

244.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, April 6, 1980

SUBJECT

NSC Meeting on Iran, April 7, 1980 (C)

There are three sets of questions which need to be addressed:

1. Should we proceed now with sanctions against Iran? If so, when

should the announcement be made? (S)

2. What should be included in the text of the announcement and

the communication to the allies? (U)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

3. What measures of a limited military nature (if any) should we

take in conjunction with the announcement, and what preparations

should we take now for more stringent military activities which may

become necessary later? (S)

Proceed Now With Sanctions

Barring some last-minute change in Tehran, it now appears that

Bani-Sadr and his associates have been unable to achieve the kind of

support within the Revolutionary Council and with Khomeini which

would permit a prompt transfer of the hostages from the custody of

the militants. We have postponed imposition of sanctions for a full

week to give them an opportunity to make the necessary decision. All

of your advisors are agreed that we have delayed as long as we reason-

ably can and that we must proceed with sanctions in order to sustain

our credibility and in order to convince Tehran that their inability to

act is costly. This view is shared by Bruce Laingen and by the French

lawyers as well. (S)

The package of sanctions is ready to be announced. The timing of

an announcement should take into account the need for the Department

of State to notify the Iranian Embassy of the expulsion of their diplomats

and for the Department of Justice to have its personnel in place to

implement the order. You will wish to ask Cy and Ben Civiletti for

their comments on timing. (S)

Texts of Communications

The following texts are attached and will be distributed to the

participants at the NSC meeting:

Tab A—The draft text of the formal announcement which you

will make. (U)

Tab B—The draft text of a message to the allies, in the form of

an Aide Mémoire. (U)

Tab C—The text of an Executive Order directing revalidation of

all outstanding Iranian visas. There is no difference of views on this

issue, and it need not be raised at the meeting. The Executive Order

amends the Order which you signed on November 26, 1979, (but which

was never implemented) extending its scope to include all categories

of visas. (S)

A. Draft Announcement. There are three points of controversy in

the text:

—Embargo on Food and Medicine. Cy supports Option A, which

would limit our embargo to those items included in the UNSC sanctions

vetoed by the USSR, but excluding food and medicine. Other members

of the SCC have supported an extension of the sanctions to formalize

what is already a de facto total embargo. (S)

—Announced Purpose of Inventory of Claims. Cy supports Option A,5

which is a neutral statement, leaving all future options open. Other

members of the SCC favored some indication in the statement that the

inventory of claims would lay the basis for satisfying claims by the

hostages and their families against the Government of Iran. Options

B, C, and D6 provide increasingly explicit commitments to proceed

with disposition of claims by the hostages and their families. Option

D, which commits us to proceed with formal legislation, is opposed

by State and Treasury as counterproductive, on the grounds that it

highlights the likelihood of major claims by the hostages and that it

may eliminate any flexibility in using the frozen Iranian assets as a

negotiating lever in the final negotiations for release of the hostages.

Stu Eizenstat proposed Option D as a means of underlining our commit-

ment to use the Iranian assets to compensate the hostages and their

families for the ordeal they have been through. (S)

—“Refugees from Injustice.” This bracketed language in the fourth

numbered paragraph7 is opposed by Cy on the grounds that it unduly

draws attention to minority groups and will work to their disadvantage

by focusing Iranian attention on them. All others supported this lan-

guage as entirely consonant with U.S. policy and sufficiently general

to avoid damaging minority group efforts to remain inconspicuous. (S)

at Tab A reads: “The Secretary of the Treasury will implement (a) fully the U.S. sanctions

as approved.” Paragraph 1, option B, reads: “The Secretary of the Treasury will implement

(b) a total embargo on U.S. trade with Iran going beyond the economic sanctions

approved.”

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

B. Draft Message to Allies. Because of the technical nature of the

message, it is more appropriate to send it as an Aide Mémoire rather

than a Presidential message. The only item of controversy is the possible

additional phrase in paragraph 14 indicating that we intend to go

beyond the UN sanctions by embargoing food and medicine. (S)

Additional Measures of a Military Nature

Before turning to this subject, you may wish to reduce participation

to the statutory membership of the NSC. (C)

There are a number of limited military measures which could be

taken simultaneously with the imposition of economic and diplomatic

sanctions which would enhance the sense of uncertainty and risk in

Tehran (and with the allies) without committing us to any specific

additional actions. An illustrative list of such actions is at Tab D, with

a paper prepared by JCS and CIA analyzing the possible effects of such

measures on Iranian military alert and possible reaction. With the

exception of overflights, none of these measures would intrude on

Iranian air or sea space. None is intended to do more than build

credibility that we may be prepared to follow through with more

stringent military measures, and thereby add urgency to the decision-

making process by Iran and our allies. (S)

As we undertake a new program of pressure against Iran, we

necessarily edge closer to the point where mining of Iranian harbors

may be essential to demonstrate to Iran that continued holding of the

hostages will severely damage Iran’s economy. You may wish to review

the status of contingency planning at this point and consider the possi-

ble circumstances and timing for such a step. (S)

Finally, you may wish to reconsider with the NSC the desirability

of proceeding with a rescue operation. In view of the failure of diplomatic

efforts to budge Khomeini, and the bleak prospect of any improvement

in the internal power struggles inside Iran, this may be the only realistic

means of freeing the hostages in the next six months. (S)

245.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The White House

The Vice President

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Mr. David Aaron

State

Mr. Hamilton Jordan

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Mr. Lloyd Cutler

Deputy Secretary Christopher

Mr. Jody Powell

Defense

CIA

Deputy Secretary Claytor

Admiral Stansfield Turner

JCS

NSC

General David Jones

Gary Sick (Notetaker)

Justice

Attorney General Civiletti

MINUTES

The President read the latest report of telephone contact with Bour-

guet in Tehran, then opened the meeting noting that the only item on

the agenda was Iran. The last week had shown a profound change in

the situation. The militants had offered to let the hostages be transferred

to the custody of the Government, and the Government had refused.

We are close to the point where we must take forceful action. We

should inform the Allies privately and then publicly that they should

break diplomatic relations with Iran, and we should prepare for forceful

action, including the interruption of commerce. They need to know

we have a very serious situation on our hands. We have bent over

backwards, we have been patient and long suffering, and we could

not have been more willing to wait for responsible action by Iran. The

President saw no way we could raise the level of our activity on

the diplomatic or negotiating front, including the actions of the five

individuals (Capucci, Noland, Lang, Villalon and Bourguet) who have

formed themselves into a crisis commission in Tehran. We have an

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

obligation to some of our people there in Iran and we should let them

know that they should come out. The President had read the list of

options discussed previously by the SCC and was aware of the areas

of agreement. His own preference was to bring the thing to a head,

to ask others to join with us, and if they will not to move to take

forceful action later on.

The Secretary of State noted that a draft announcement4 had been

circulated to all participants in the meeting, and he suggested that it

be made later today, possibly about 3: p.m., which would provide

sufficient time to notify those who need to be notified, including those

key congressional leaders who should be informed in advance. He

noted that there had been some possible additional steps discussed by

the SCC which should be reviewed in addition to those covered in the

draft announcement.

The President said we are no longer involved in a negotiation with

the terrorists. The obstacle now is the Government, with Khomeini as

the ultimate authority of the Iranian Government.

Admiral Turner said he did not think it was that clear. Although

that was a good line to take publicly—and it could be defended—it

was not entirely clear that the militants would in fact have let the

hostages go if ordered to do so by the Revolutionary Council.

The President said he included Khomeini in the Government. In

that sense, it was not a radical departure, but the militants had for the

first time stated that they would turn the hostages over. We should

get it out of our minds that we are dealing directly with the terrorists.

We need to expell the Iranian diplomats from this country as quickly

as physically possible.

Secretary Vance said he recommended the announcement today,

with the diplomats to depart by tomorrow night.

Dr. Brzezinski asked if we could enforce it.

Attorney General Civiletti said yes. The only difficulty would be

if there was armed resistance.

Dr. Brzezinski said it was his view that we should confront any

armed resistance with overwhelming force. It should be crushed

quickly.

The Attorney General said he would argue against that approach.

If there is armed resistance from the Embassy or Consulates, we should

take the kind of measures which the FBI would normally take in such

a situation and cut off the food, water and electricity and force them

out within 3–5 days. If we should storm the Embassy and kill a dozen

or more persons, the results could be tragic and have serious conse-

quences for the hostages in Tehran.

Dr. Brzezinski said it would be worse if a siege should develop

here supported by threats from Iran to kill or harm the hostages if the

siege is not lifted.

Secretary Vance said he supported the Attorney General.

The President asked what would be the best time to take action.

The Attorney General said evening would be best. Immediate sur-

veillance of the diplomats would be established, with full escort and

the Embassy would be ringed. In effect we would take custody of

them, although they would be free to move within a very restricted

zone. We would stay with them.

Mr. Aaron pointed out that this would not constitute an arrest.

They would have the 24–36 hour period to get out of the country.

The Attorney General said that they would arrest them if they

violated the terms of their restrictions or failed to depart.

Dr. Brzezinski asked what would happen to the Embassy.

The Attorney General said it would be sealed, and no one would

be allowed to enter. We would hope that a third power would be

appointed as Protecting Power, and then we would permit some of

them to enter as necessary. We have reports that anywhere from 15 to

60 non-diplomats either reside in the Embassy or move through it

frequently. Some of them are armed.

The President wondered if this was the case only in Washington.

The Attorney General said it was also true of the Consulate General

in Houston.

Mr. Aaron wondered in the event of resistance whether we could

seize the Embassy.

The Attorney General said that would not be legal until the order

to depart had expired.

Mr. Aaron wondered if we should not break relations. Would that

give us more latitude?

Dr. Brzezinski noted they could barricade themselves in the

Embassy and refuse to leave.

The Attorney General said that was the worst case. It was consid-

ered unlikely so far as the diplomats themselves were concerned, but

we do not know about the others.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered if tear gas could not be used to rout

them out.

The Attorney General said he thought so.

The President asked what short of a declaration of war would give

us the necessary authority to move into the Embassy.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

The Attorney General said that a situation deemed beyond the

control of local forces could justify a declaration of national emergency

and the sending of U.S. troops.

The President asked if the Attorney General anticipated problems

in the event of an announcement this afternoon.

The Attorney General said that he thought 3: p.m. was about

right to move. We should begin during normal business hours. After-

wards we would seal the Embassy. We would let people out, but let

no one in, and we would hope the numbers inside would be reduced

by attrition.

The Secretary of State wondered what would be the interaction

between this action and the Iranian students who planned to march

against the Shah. Where is this group likely to be between 2 and

4 o’clock?

The Attorney General said that they had a permit to march for the

a prayer vigil. They proposed starting their parade at the Islamic

Mosque and march a double circuit, ending at Lafayette Park. They had

been negotiating yesterday with Police Chief Klutz, and an alternate

location for the final demonstration had been agreed. They were banned

from Lafayette Park. We can ban them from any location near the

Iranian Embassy—as far as ten blocks if we wish. The demonstration

was expected to be a group of about 200.

Dr. Brzezinski said in his view nothing would be worse than a

prolonged siege. We should employ surprise and clear them out of the

Embassy before they had a chance to react. Otherwise, if it drags out,

the situation will work to our disadvantage and the militants in Tehran

could threaten to kill the hostages.

The Secretary of State said that we could not surprise them. They

were already expecting this and had shipped some documents out of

the Embassy to the UN Mission.

Dr. Brzezinski said that perhaps there would be no resistance. If

so that was good. But we should gain control of the facilities right away.

The Secretary of State said that in his judgment there would be

no surprise.

Dr. Brzezinski said that they should not be allowed to barricade

themselves in the Embassy.

Mr. Aaron noted that we have reports that the Embassy will be

closed today.

Mr. Sick observed that a conversation between the Chargé, Ali

Agah, and an unidentified individual yesterday evening indicated that

the Embassy might be closed today and/or tomorrow in protest against

President Sadat’s arrival in Washington.

Mr. Cutler said the best time to move would be in the evening.

The diplomats could be picked up outside the Embassy.

Mr. Aaron observed that 30 or more are reported to be living inside

the Embassy.

The Vice President said he thought the evening would be the

best time.

The Attorney General agreed, but added that he saw no real prob-

lem with the diplomats themselves. It was earlier agreed that we would

not grant immediate asylum to any of the diplomats, but they need 24

hours at least to get out of the country. That could be from 3 o’clock

today until midnight tomorrow night. He said he disagreed with Dr.

Brzezinski only if there were armed resistance. He did not think it

would be advisable to storm the Embassy.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the Embassy could not be saturated

with tear gas. It should be done quickly so no siege could develop.

The Deputy Secretary of Defense said he agreed with Dr. Brzezin-

ski. A prolonged seige would be the worst possible scenario.

Mr. Jordan asked if those with weapons would not be in violation

of the law.

The Attorney General said that possession of weapons within the

Embassy at this time and until the deadline for departure had expired

was not illegal.

The President asked what our position would be if we called the

Chargé to the State Department and advised him to depart and he said

he needed to go back to the Embassy to get some papers together.

The Attorney General said we would permit him to go to the

Embassy. We cannot violate the Embassy premises until the expiration

of the 24-hour notice. Presumably, if we broke relations and allowed

only an hour to comply, we could do everything necessary. However,

this would be contrary to traditional diplomatic law and practice.

The President wondered what would prevent him from going back

to the Embassy and barricading himself inside.

Mr. Powell said that he was not a very gutsy individual, and it

seemed less likely that he would do it than some others.

Secretary Vance said that the FBI had had experience with situa-

tions of this kind over the years. He had faith in their experience and

ability to get people out of buildings.

Mr. Claytor said the FBI could starve them out, talk them out,

freeze them out. But that would take 2–3 days which would give

the militants the opportunity to use threats against the hostages. This

situation was very different from the usual siege type situation.

Mr. Powell said he was not sure we would look inept if we cut

off the Embassy utilities and if they barricaded themselves in against

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

the law. After two or three days we could get them out and lock them

up and hold them until our own people were released. Rushing in

would just get people killed, and it could make us look even more

stupid.

Mr. Cutler said that killing someone would put the hostages in

greater danger.

Dr. Brzezinski said that tear gas did not kill people. He could

imagine being forced to close off Massachusetts Avenue for several

days during an armed siege. They could have stockpiled food and

drink. It could take many days to get them out. We would look ridicu-

lous if we could not enforce the law right in our own capital. We

should use tear gas in the evening, preferably on the first day rather

than the second.

Mr. Powell said we should make a judgment expeditiously when

the situation arises.

The President said we would not foreclose the option that the

situation might develop peacefully. If we take violent steps at the start

we allow them no opportunity to leave on their own. However, if there

is a barricade situation, we would not reject the use of forceful actions.

If they hurt our hostages, they will be hurt severely. If we hurt them

at this point, we open a new likelihood that our hostages will be injured.

We should do it peacefully but firmly.

Secretary Vance said that the diplomats are required to depart

from Dulles.

The President asked if we would escort them to the plane.

The Attorney General said yes. We are also prepared to put an

escort on board if necessary. We also have contingency military air-

craft available.

The Vice President said taking action in the evening makes sense.

During the day there are people in and out. There is a chance they

could grab innocents and hold them. If we moved at night, the innocents

would be out of the building.

Mr. Cutler said that would also avoid any possible interaction with

the proposed demonstrations.

Dr. Brzezinski said it was inevitable that the demonstrators would

congregate in front of the Embassy.

The President said we should prevent any assembly or demonstra-

tions around the Embassy and Consulates. He wondered if the

announcement should be postponed until 8 o’clock this evening.

Mr. Powell said there would be lots of speculation throughout

the day.

The Vice President said that would also avoid the heavy evening

traffic and the danger of a shooting incident.

Mr. Cutler said the problem would solve itself if it turned out that

the Embassy was closed today.

Secretary Vance said that would not take care of the Consulates.

Dr. Brzezinski wondered how we know they are armed.

The Attorney General said Secret Service observations had seen

armed individuals inside. Of the Consulates at Houston, San Francisco,

Chicago, and New York, the highest risk appeared to be in Houston

because of the substantial student population and in Chicago where

the head of the office was a rabble rouser and very nearly a fanatic.

Weapons have been seen only in Washington.

The President said we would come back to the timing question.

He noted that the sanctions should go ahead. The question was whether

they should include food and medicine.

Secretary Vance said we have taken the position all along that food

would not be used as a weapon. We would not get our Allies to go

along with us on a food boycott. The closer we stick to the sanctions

voted in the UN the better will be our chances to get others to come

along.

Mr. Cutler agreed. Most food was already effectively blocked. Our

position would have more moral force if we observed the sanctions

voted at the UN. An embargo would accomplish nothing except pub-

licly making us look tougher.

Mr. Powell wondered if the Allies will help.

The President said only if they think we will interrupt commerce.

Mr. Claytor said a blockade would also interrupt food and

medicine.

Mr. Aaron said that our present announcement must have an

“except” clause which requires us to explain.

Secretary Vance said the answer is simply that we are imposing

the sanctions voted by the UN.

Mr. Aaron said that will attract attention to the fact that no one

else is imposing these sanctions.

The President said we will call on the Allies to institute these

sanctions. We will first ask privately, later publicly. He preferred that

we go for now with the UN sanctions. We should call on the Allies

forcefully to join with us. Then . . .(?) We need to get others involved

even if it aggravates them. The situation is intolerable.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Admiral Turner said that no embargo of food would likely have

a substantial impact. Cutting off all Iranian commerce would, but other-

wise they will be able to find suppliers.

The President said the primary thing is not a mutual interest by

five or seven nations, but rather to let Khomeini know he faces a

problem not just with us but with others as well. Because of our actions,

he is not convinced. In retrospect, he did not believe we had been firm

enough. We had been too equivocal. He then turned to the question

of a census of claims.

Mr. Cutler said we should make it clear that we intend to satisfy

claims especially of the hostages and their families out of the frozen

assets and that legislation is being introduced to that end.

The Attorney General said that suits and claims are pending now

and could be satisfied by attachment except that the sovereign rights

immunity prevents attachment. This could be removed by statute or

it could be combined with extra rights and a claims proceeding which

would recognize the right of claims for reparations.

The Vice President said that the freezing of $8 billion in Iranian

assets was the one thing we have done which really hurt them. We

will need to be in a position to bargain with that money for the final

release of the hostages. Once it has been attached, we lose control.

Mr. Cutler said if we take ownership of the assets and establish a

claims process, we are always in a position to settle on the remainder

of the assets. But in the meantime we can pursue more vigorous steps.

The President asked how much money was involved.

worldwide. We should only vest the assets held in this country, but

that would be more than sufficient to cover any conceivable claims

that might be made.

The President asked how soon we could have legislation.

The Attorney General said very quickly if we only wish to waive

sovereign immunity. If we want to set up a claims process, that would

be more complex, but there are ample precedents and it should be

possible within a week to clearly define all the alternatives.

The President said we cannot bargain away the rights of the

hostages.

Mr. Cutler said we never planned to give back all the frozen assets

without first settling claims.

Dr. Brzezinski said he thought that we could send a message to

Iran by use of the language in Option A6 but it would not lock us into

a specific program. We would not wish to be faced with the need to

extricate ourselves from legislation for purposes of negotiations.

The Vice President said we should keep the Congress out of this.

They can vote any kind of attachment on these funds, and it would

be impossible to vote against that sort of thing. They could vote half

a billion to every hostage.

Mr. Cutler said the mere inventory of claims was a very modest

step. It would take five years for individuals to pursue their claims

through litigation.

Mr. Christopher said he was concerned that we do not know exactly

where we want to go. He wondered if we wanted to go to Congress

with all the hearings, etc.

Mr. Powell said Option A was not clear enough. We should say

something about claims dispersal. He thought Option B7 was more

appropriate.

Dr. Brzezinski said we could announce Option A and background

the other.

Mr. Cutler said “claims are to be satisfied out of assets frozen by

the previous Government order.”

The President was inclined to go for Option D.

Mr. Powell said we need to move forcefully. If necessary we can

get congressional leaders down here and say what we need.

The President said we need to be able to move expeditiously if the

hostages are released. We should keep any legislation honed down

and specific. The legislation can be vetoed if it is too much. We can

warn the Congress that special interest legislation is not acceptable.

He could not see keeping the hostages and their families on tenterhooks

for five years.

Dr. Brzezinski said this would make it more difficult to negotiate

the final release.

Secretary Vance said that Option C would aid in designing a

claims program.

The President said we would still have to draft legislation.

Mr. Powell said it would be known within 24 hours of the time

we started.

Mr. Cutler said that the Congress will draft it if we do not.

The President said he could see no problem with drafting

legislation.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

The Attorney General said there was only a political problem.

Should we, for example, put in reparations of $1,000 per day for each

hostage held?

Mr. Cutler said he could see no problem. There was plenty of

money to cover any foreseeable claims. If there were insufficient funds,

that would be different.

The President said that since we must prepare legislation, we

should go ahead. He thought that if we were perceived as acting

forcefully for a change, that could keep Congress under control.

Mr. Jordan said he would hate to see us have to change legislation

two months from now to negotiate a solution.

The President said the problems are going to be there anyway. We

may face a struggle with Congress. He would prefer to let the courts

handle this expeditiously. He was not a lawyer, but in the few weeks

after the hostages are released—or killed—we should have a quick

response.

Mr. Aaron noted that the President had earlier indicated a desire

to raise with the NSC the proposal of stopping all financial transfers

between Iran and the U.S. The main effect of this would be to cut off

funds to the Iranian students in the country. Many would go on welfare.

Others would probably leave. The SCC had decided that if we wished

to get rid of the students, we should simply throw them out rather

than use the financial weapon. It would be cleaner. This action was

very close to a break in diplomatic relations.

The President agreed that this was probably not the way to go. He

did want to discuss the possibility of a break in relations, however.

Mr. Claytor briefed the President on the number of Iranian military

students in the country.

Secretary Vance asked what excuse we had to keep 500 military

students in this country under these circumstances.

Dr. Brzezinski said that if they were not sympathetic to the Kho-

meini regime, they should be allowed to stay.

The President said we could offer them asylum if they want to stay.

Mr. Claytor said that the U.S. military would prefer to send them

home if the diplomats go. A number of midshipmen are in U.S. colleges

just like civilian students. They are paid through Iranian banks.

The President wondered what proportion of these Iranian students

are supported by the Government.

Mr. Claytor said only 500 are actually paid by the Government

of Iran.

The President said that the other thousands are supported by their

families. He thought we should permit them (military students) to stay

if they ask for asylum, otherwise he thought they should go home. We

should have a viable option to break diplomatic relations.

Secretary Vance said we should do the expulsion first. If we then

get the Allies to join us, we could all break relations at once. He thought,

however, that the Allies probably will not break relations. They may

withdraw all their people.

Dr. Brzezinski said it would be better if we did it now in a clean

break.

Secretary Vance said that we previously told the Allies we would

consider that in mid-May.

Dr. Brzezinski said that was when we were talking about a transfer

first, with the break in relations to come if they did not follow through

with a total release by mid-May. That situation is now changed since

they have not agreed to a transfer of the hostages.

The President said he could not see what significance it should

have for the Allies if we decide to break relations.

Dr. Brzezinski said that in view of the political situation, he thought

a clean break in relations made a better package.

Secretary Vance said it could be argued, however, weakly, that a

break in relations would change the diplomatic status of our hostages.

The President agreed that was a weak argument in view of the

lack of respect they had shown for diplomatic immunity.

Mr. Claytor asked what effect a break in relations would have on

student visas.

The Attorney General said that a break in relations would immedi-

ately affect how quickly you could act in cancelling A–2 visas, but it

would not affect at all how quickly you could expel students. They

could still delay through the courts.

The President said he did not think we should try to expel students.

Dr. Brzezinski said the Allies would probably not break relations.

They have too much at stake. If we take the step several weeks from

now, it will look like a weak and empty gesture. He failed to see why

we should not do it now. The package we are considering is marginal.

We should not dribble it out.

The President said it would forego an Iranian break with us which

would make them seem to be more forceful than us. Our break should

put a greater sense of responsibility on our Allies. We would be saying

we were through with Iran, that we were washing our hands of it.

Giscard, Schmidt, Thatcher, and others would see the ball was out of

our hands and the responsibility was more their own. We should ask

the Allies to respect the UN sanctions and let Iran know that they will

break relations later if the problem is not solved. Our break in relations

should not shock even our most severe critics.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Mr. Claytor wondered about the effect on the U.S. priests and

others who had been going back and forth to Tehran.

Secretary Vance said that in terms of international practice, it would

make no difference. However, psychologically it would make them

less willing to continue their efforts.

Mr. Powell said the psychological effect of a break in relations

would be to send a signal that this is the first step. The average citizen

would see this as the possible prior step to some kind of military action.

The Vice President said that if they break first, we will look weak

and reactive. He would like to get ourselves out of the position of

being seen as trying to get the Allies always to go along.

Mr. Powell said it was important for us to signal that while we

want the support of our Allies, we intend to do what we have to do.

Maybe this is the most encouraging thing we could say to the Allies.

Dr. Brzezinski said it would also tell the Iranians that we have

exhausted all steps available to us. He recommended that we say that

explicitly and privately to the Iranians. We should also indicate that

we will wait 2–3 more weeks, then take more severe action. They may

threaten the lives of the hostages. It is necessary for the views of

Khomeini, the Revolutionary Council, the President and the students

to coalesce.

Mr. Christopher said he thought we should go ahead with the

break in relations. Otherwise we are left with the problem of trying to

explain the metaphysics of why this is different from a break in

relations.

The President asked for views, then noted that the group was

unanimous in their views, “Just like the Revolutionary Council.” He

did not support cutting off financial support for the students, but we

should cut off all visas. With regard to the “refugees from injustice,”

phrase in the announcement, he thought that our interpretation of

exceptions should be very narrow. We should not let them into the

country. If they are truly escaping from persecution, that is acceptable.

Mr. Aaron suggested changing the wording to say that Consular

officers will not let them in unless there are compelling reasons.

The President added unless there are compelling and proven rea-

sons. The impression is that we have not done a damned thing. Just

as the expulsion of 65 diplomats who then “vanished.”

The Attorney General said that nearly 1,400 Iranian students have

left and we are pretty certain of that although we do not have a signed

piece of paper to prove it in each case.

The President said that we are making tough statements, then

when the evidence dribbles in . . .

Dr. Brzezinski suggested “compelling and convincing reasons . . .”

The President said if people are truly suffering, yes they should

be let in. But if they are living comfortably in Europe or elsewhere, let

them stay there. The guidance needs to be rewritten.

Dr. Brzezinski noted that we needed to discuss employment of

measures beyond those adopted to date.

Mr. Christopher asked about timing of the announcement.

The President said he hoped he was not going to be informed that

the Revolutionary Council was meeting to reconsider the whole issue.

Mr. Christopher said he would not be that brave. He did want to

report that the Iranian Embassy was indeed closed today. Since the

danger of a confrontation was primarily a Washington problem, he

thought that an announcement as soon as possible after the meeting

would be desirable.

The President said that we should forbid any demonstrations to

go near the Embassy.

The Attorney General said they needed a little time to mobilize.

Not just an hour or so.

Mr. Aaron said the demonstrators were probably assembling now.

The President said that we should notify the Allies in strict and

cogent terms that the situation is intolerable and that we will take more

forceful action unless the hostages are released. We should call on them

to impose sanctions, break diplomatic relations, and use all available

means to release the hostages. Our words should not be equivocal.

This must not keep dragging on.

Admiral Turner noted one phrase in Khomeini’s statement was

noteworthy.

Dr. Brzezinski said that Khomeini had mentioned visitation rights.

Admiral Turner said that the hostages’ wives would wonder

whether we will try to get someone in. We could also use visits to get

more information about who is where.

Mr. Powell wondered if we should look to the UN for that.

The President said he did not attach too much significance to that

statement. He had read it and it was equivocal.

Mr. Christopher said that the latest message from Ambassador

Lang in Tehran said that the militants made Capucci promise not to

reveal how many hostages he had seen and that he was to come back

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

tomorrow for something important. This suggests a need to try and

see where all the hostages are located.

The President said that, on timing, it would be at 3: and he would

make an announcement.

Mr. Cutler said the news from Tehran suggested that the militants

cannot account for all 50 hostages. Perhaps we should mention that.

The President said he would be queasy about acknowledging that

there might be 50. The militants could use that as an excuse to get rid

of some of them.

Secretary Vance agreed, noting we should be aware of the reaction

of the hostages’ families.

(At that point, 10: a.m., the meeting was reduced to the statutory

membership of the NSC.)

At 10:37, the NSC reduced itself to its statutory membership. The

members at that point were: The President, the Vice President, the

Secretary of State, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Director of

Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Dr.

Brzezinski and David Aaron.

The President said that he was really quite disappointed in recent

developments. Bani-Sadr is apparently too weak and lacks the courage

to act. The Secretary of State agreed with him.

The President said that his own assessment was that we are

embarked, finally and after great caution, on a procedure which he—

he was interrupted at that point by Hamilton Jordan who asked about

Congressional notification. Should the Congressional leaders be

brought down to the White House? The Secretary of State pointed out

that the Congress was not in session and the leaders would not be

around. The President concluded that if we get a draft of the statement

before noon, we can notify the key Congressional Leaders.

The President then continued his earlier thought. We have been

adequately reticent. In retrospect, we may have delayed taking action

for too long, although, at the time, it seemed the better course of action.

Now, we need to consider additional steps. We need to force the Allies

to help. If they will not, they must know that we will be taking more

forceful action. The President said he thought that what we are going

to announce today will not result in the freeing of the hostages. But

he still believed that knowledge on the part of the Iranian officials,

including such figures as Beheshti, that Iran is suffering and is increas-

ingly isolated is a necessary step in getting the hostages released. He

did not believe that we would get the help of Bani-Sadr if the action

he must take to free the hostages is unpopular. Bani-Sadr is hanging

by his fingernails already.

Turning to the military options, the President said that his inclina-

tion for the last few months has been the mining option. He did not

believe that stopping ships at sea in a blockade would be operationally

sustainable. Moreover, he thought it would put pressure on us from

our Allies to desist, but if we simply go forward and mine the harbors,

we could maintain the mining even if they were occasionally swept.

Mining would have the virtue of being an accomplished fact and,

moreover, could be done without loss of life which the President

thought is an important factor for safeguarding the lives of the hostages.

At the same time, we would have to tell the Iranians that if the hostages

are hurt, then military action would be swift and would be severe.

The President said that we have to think of counteractions to Iranian

threats against the hostages, but the most important thing is to convince

the Allies that we are going to take these steps rather than the Iranians.

Turning to the possibility of a rescue, the President said he had a

bad feeling about the rescue operation. He thought that it would be

extremely difficult to stay undetected and in Iran for 24 hours. He says

that it sends shivers down his spine.

He wondered whether we had explored the other options such as

paratroopers and moving the carriers further into the Gulf so that the

helicopters could move in in one operation to pick up the hostages.

General Jones said yes, that we had looked at those options and dis-

carded them as being impractical. General Jones said that their confi-

dence in the rescue operation has gone up even since the briefing at

Camp David.

The President asked why.

The Chairman said there were two reasons. First, the two individu-

als which we agreed would be infiltrated into Iran have been there

and have looked around. They say it is perfectly safe to wander about

the streets. The abnormal has become the normal. They were never

threatened nor were they watched. They surveilled the Foreign Minis-

try, and they even went into the foyer. They went in routinely and got

directions from one of the militant guards. Their conclusion is that the

situation is so relaxed and so fluid that the operation could be con-

ducted with low risk of detection.

The Chairman said the other reason was that the Otter mission

was very successful. Moreover, they were looking at a modification

of the plan which would involve caching fuel out in the middle of

nowhere. He said, under those circumstances, we would still have to

hide the helicopters in the shed for a day, but the caching of fuel would

mean that the operation would be significantly less complicated.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

He said a C–141 could drop the fuel 12 miles south of the area

where the Otter explored. With fuel there ahead of time; the helicopters

can depart from the carriers with the Delta team on board and, if the

mission must be aborted, they can return to the carriers.

The Chairman said that our principal uncertainty is still whether

the hostages are in the Embassy compound. He thought we may need

to take some additional risks in order to get a better picture of that

situation.

Turning to the schedule, he said the 17th is a possible date for

conducting the rescue, but the 24th would be preferable. He would

like to ask the NSC to look at the possibility of a decision to cache the

fuel before that date. The operation would be conducted as follows:

We would take in a C–141, drop four people and a little fuel and a

jeep with some radios. They would go into the foothills, surveil the

area to find a place to cache the fuel and to land an airplane, if that

proved to be the desirable way to supply the fuel. If they run into

trouble, they would come out either with an Otter, with a helicopter,

or it is possible to literally snatch them from the ground with a moving

C–130. However, the area was totally barren and appeared as though

no human being had set foot on it for centuries.

The next night, three C–130s would come, and more people would

be brought into the foothills. They would then continue the execution

of the mission on into Tehran, or they would be pulled out and we

would stay in a holding pattern.

With this scenario, we would still have the 24-hour waiting period

around Tehran, but he did not believe that the risk of exposure is great

at that point.

The President asked what would be visible during the day of

waiting.

The Chairman answered that there would be no airplanes; there

would be six helicopters, outside, up in these barren hills covered by

camouflage. There would be 100 people waiting in the warehouse,

which is located 12 miles from Tehran.

The Director of Central Intelligence said that the principal advan-

tage of this is that there would be no more C–130s flying across Saudi

Arabia the first night. General Jones said the seizure and holding of

Nain has been eliminated and the overflight of Saudi Arabia has been

reduced to only the second day when there would be no tip-off problem.

Admiral Turner stressed that under this approach, the troops would

come out from the carriers on the helicopters and not on a C–130.

The Chairman said that they were about two days away from

completing planning on the fuel-caching operation. Once that is com-

pleted, he would then like to ask that we consider the possibility of

caching the fuel. At the same time, we are looking at the place where

the Otter landed to see if that operation could be simplified. He then

went on to describe the Otter landing—the fact that they had encoun-

tered three trucks, but concluding that it was a much simpler, easier

operation than had been anticipated.

Admiral Turner said that one of the members of the team with the

Otter reported that he was on the road and could not see the Otter which

had landed 100 yards away. He said that the Major who conducted

the operation was confident that we could get away with it. He said

that we would have to stop traffic on the road during the actual opera-

tion, but they had been successful in laying out an airstrip for the C–

130s. However, he thought the option of caching the fuel and using

only helicopters was a much better option because it avoided the C–

130 overflights of Saudi Arabia.

The Chairman continued by saying that we will worry most about

any tip-off during the 24-hour waiting period. If we got such a tip-off,

we could just go in after our people or lift ourselves out to an isolated

area where we could once again recover them with the C–130s.

He said he did not want to be optimistic, but if our planning

looks good and our training demonstrates that the operation could be

conducted, he would like to come back and seek a decision on the

possibility of caching the fuel. The President asked how soon we could

cache the fuel? The Chairman said in about a week, but we would like

to aim for the 24th as a rescue date.

Dr. Brzezinski asked, if we are inclined to do this, what would be

the actions we would take afterwards? Americans might be seized. He

thought we would have to threaten severe reprisals if any remaining

Americans in Tehran were harmed. Dr. Brzezinski also thought that

we need a post-failure plan. Again, a massive retribution would be

required if we wound up with a large number of our people killed or

captured. Failure, he added, would have massive international

consequences.

The Chairman said that they believe the possibility of a disastrous

outcome is probably small, primarily because we are building in fail-

safe points along the way. There is a much higher probability, however,

that we would have to pull out without having conducted the rescue.

Dr. Brzezinski said that if we are inclined to do this, then we do

not want to go ahead with mining or the military threats. We want

the vigilance of the Iranians to remain at a low point.

The Vice President asked the Chairman what his judgment was of

the likelihood of being detected on a scale of 0–100. The Chairman

replied that it was well above 50%. The Vice President asked, if we

were detected, what is the likelihood that we could get out? The Chair-

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

man said he would put that at 80%. He said the place is so relaxed,

so without authority, so without leadership, so without organization,

that he felt the likelihood of interception was small.

Dr. Brzezinski said the political advantage lies with the rescue over

a mining option. Mining would drive the Iranians towards the Soviets.

Rescue would not, unless it failed in which case retribution and retalia-

tion become necessary.

Secretary Vance said that mining also increased the likelihood of

the hostages being killed. He was concerned, moreover, about the effect

in the Middle East generally. He thought there was a likelihood of a

strong reaction on the part of the Middle East countries to a mining

operation. Finally, he agreed it would push the Iranians toward the

Soviet Union. He felt these were substantially negative considerations

to be weighed when deciding on the mining option.

The President said the blockade had the same disadvantages. The

Secretary of State agreed and thought that a blockade was even more

complicated. Dr. Brzezinski said that a rescue was politically more

desirable than mining, but considerably riskier.

The President said that what sticks in his mind is the bloodshed,

the deaths. He said we cannot do it without deaths.

The Chairman commented that the principal casualties would be

Iranians and not Americans, with the exception of those who may be

down in the vaults and being closely guarded in the basements of

some of the buildings in the Embassy compound. He thought the

operation at the Foreign Ministry would not be too difficult.

Dr. Brzezinski said there was no way of avoiding the fatalities,

including Americans. Indeed, we have had reports that some of the

militants would try to kill the Americans even if Khomeini had ordered

them released.

Admiral Turner thought the probability of Americans being killed

was less than that we might not be able to find them all. He has been

examining reports concerning the location of the hostages, but it was

his conclusion that, with the recent arrival of the visitors, all the Ameri-

cans had been moved back into the compound; however, he did not

have hard evidence to that effect. But even if they are all there, the

Delta force has to go through five buildings and count 50 heads, and

they have to do this running around in the dark; therefore, under those

circumstances, it is likely they would leave some behind.

Admiral Turner went on to say that surprise is the sine qua non of

a successful operation. He thought there were elements of possible

prior detection in the actions that would be announced this afternoon.

He said these actions will increase the alert of the Iranians. The longer

we wait: the more tense things become, and the more likely the possibil-

ity of detection. He said, at the moment, surveillance is down, but as

pressure is applied, the Iranians will go back to a more vigilant stance.

The President said that we could have some diplomatic subterfuge.

Admiral Turner suggested, for example, that we gear up another action

by Waldheim.

The Chairman said that mining would not adversely impact on a

rescue unless, as a result of the mining, the Iranians did something

with the hostages that would reduce our capacity to free them. Dr.

Brzezinski suggested that we would want to save mining as a post-

rescue option to deter subsequent actions against Americans left in

Tehran. The Chairman concluded by saying that we should use the

threat to work on a rescue operation, and come back in several days

for a decision on whether to proceed with a fuel caching operation.

The President said we cannot make idle threats. We cannot sit here

three or four weeks from now still wondering what we are going to

do. On the other hand, he was still not inclined to do the rescue until

the hostages’ lives were in danger. He said there is no question but

what we will kill some of them. On the other hand, we cannot foreclose

all our options. He noted the Secretary of State was against mining

and he, himself, was against the rescue. There seemed to be nothing

we could do.

Dr. Brzezinski said we could tell the Allies that we would take

more forceful action by mid-May and then, if necessary, we could go

earlier with the rescue operation. The President emphasized once again

that he would not go for a rescue until the lives of the hostages were

threatened. Dr. Brzezinski pointed out that we might get that reaction

with the break in the relations we were announcing today. Admiral

Turner added that the trouble with that criterion is that if the hostages

are threatened, the possibility of a rescue drops.

The President said he saw no objection to caching the fuel. The

Chairman pointed out that we would have a lot of people on the

ground during the operation. He said it was a fairly large operation.

However, if we were to get away with it, we would gain confidence

that we could also get away with a rescue undetected. He concluded

by saying that if we are not going to go after the hostages until they are

threatened, then he thought that mining was a reasonable alternative.

The President discounted that mining would drive the Iranians

into the arms of the Soviets.

Dr. Brzezinski said that we should send a message to the Iranians

giving them a deadline by which time we would take an action such

as mining. The President asked to whom we would send the message.

Dr. Brzezinski indicated that we could send it to Khomeini. He felt

that the history of his behavior indicated that he was subject to pressure

and threats.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

The Director of Central Intelligence said that we would be asking

Khomeini to back off his current and most recent statement which was

quite categoric and firm. The President said that he could always finesse

the problem by constituting the Parliament. Admiral Turner pointed

out that they have not gotten their elections completed for that pur-

pose yet.

The President asked the Secretary of State what options he saw.

Secretary Vance replied that he preferred a rescue over mining although

he said there would be substantial loss of life.

Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we move forward on a more flexible

program. We could tell Khomeini that by May 15 we would undertake

military action. We could tell the Allies that unless they pressure Iran

we would be taking more severe action. We could, at the same time,

authorize the caching of the fuel and then, by the third or fourth week

in April, we could make up our mind which route we wish to go.

The President said he thought setting a deadline in our messages

to the Iranians is ill-advised. It would put their nation on alert. Dr.

Brzezinski pointed out that this would not affect the mining option,

but the President added it would affect the rescue.

In reply, Dr. Brzezinski said we could nonetheless go earlier on

the rescue, before the deadline, in fact: we could begin by setting June

1 as the deadline. Dr. Brzezinski then asked what about the daylight

problem.

The Chairman said that there were two problems. First, the nights

were growing shorter, thus reducing the time we have for operations

and forcing us to consider a three-day operation. Second, by mid-May,

the temperature will have increased to the point that it will be difficult

to get the helicopters over the mountains fully loaded with the Delta

team. Thus, we may have to consider the use of even more helicopters

and more prepositioned fuel.

The President asked why the fuel cannot go into the rendezvous

zone on the same night that the helicopters go in.

The Chairman replied that it is a possibility and, indeed, is one of

our options. However, we then have a large number of C–130s and

refueling aircraft going over Saudi Arabia in daylight of the first day

of the operation.

The President asked at what point the helicopters needed to be

refueled. The Chairman replied that the helicopters only have the range

to get half-way to Tehran. The President asked whether they needed

to refuel on the first night. The Chairman replied, “yes”; they would

enter Iran on the first night, get refueled and then go on to Tehran.

The Chairman went on to explain that they are also exploring the

possibility of having the C–130 tankers come out of Diego Garcia, but

this required a lot of C–141 tankers as well.

Returning to the question of the shrinking nighttime, the Chairman

said that, as the nights grow shorter, they would fly the helicopters in

only a few hundred miles to a point where they could still return to

the carriers should they be discovered. They would wait the night and

then go on the second night to the point where they would pick up

their fuel.

The President asked how much fuel was involved. The Chairman

replied, “9,000 gallons.”

Dr. Brzezinski asked about the containers for the fuel. The Chair-

man explained that if we drop in the fuel, they will use blivits. These

are essentially large tires containing 400 gallons of fuel each that can

be rolled along the ground to a hiding place. However, if they land

the C–130s, there is fuel inside of them, and the helicopters simply

come right up next to the C–130s and are refueled. In this option, three

C–130’s are used. The helicopters, after being refueled, go and hide in

the hills outside of Tehran. The problem is that this requires overflight

of Saudi Arabia during daylight hours which might tip off the Iranians

somehow that an operation was under way. Therefore, we are looking

at the combination of C–130s and C–141s refueling from Diego Garcia.

The Chairman concluded by saying that, in three or four days,

we will have our analysis completed of these various alternatives,

particularly whether the caching idea looks good. If we do not proceed

with the operation soon, or if the prepositioning of fuel does not turn

out to be a desirable option, we can in a few weeks send in the Otter

to look for another landing site away from the road.

Mr. Aaron asked why we couldn’t have another Otter operation

right away. The Chairman replied that we need good moonlight for

the Otter operation. Admiral Turner added that the pilot found that

he could see much better than he thought he would be able to with

the night-vision devices that are associated with the Otter.

Dr. Brzezinski asked how much leadtime would be necessary to

place the fuel if we should decide today to go forward with that.

The Chairman asked if he could approach the problem from the

other end. If we were to go forward with the rescue, the Chiefs would

recommend aiming for the 24th of April. While we could get it there

within a week of any decision to go, our plans would call for putting

it in the night before and then go right on with the rest of the operation.

Alternatively, if we wanted to test our capacity to carry out this activity

surreptitiously, we could put it in three or four days ahead of time. In

that circumstance, they would camouflage and hide the fuel, and we

would pull the men out. Dr. Brzezinski asked, that if they just went

forward with the operation, what would happen to the men? The

Chairman explained that the men who would do the hiding of the fuel

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

and all the ground operations are part of the Delta team. They would

simply continue on into Tehran as part of the activity there.

Dr. Brzezinski thought that trying this operation might be worth-

while so that we could see whether the risks proved to be as great as

one thought. The President added that conducting a prepositioning of

fuel operation would increase the risk of detection, but if successful,

it would increase our confidence in being able to conduct the overall

operation. The Chairman explained that a large number of planes over

Saudi Arabia in the daytime might provide a tip-off to the Iranians

that an operation was under way. Dr. Brzezinski added that the Israelis

might well know of it, and they could be penetrated by the Soviets.

The Chairman said that, because our target date is the 24th, they

would like to come back to the National Security Council in five or

six days on a decision as to whether to cache the fuel. Admiral Turner

asked how many C–130s were involved. The Chairman explained that

there would be three. He said that we would come out of Diego Garcia

the first night, and the second night we would fly over Saudi Arabia.

The President asked whether it would be better to come out of Diego

Garcia than Egypt. The Chairman replied, yes.

Dr. Brzezinski asked, that if we were aiming for the 24th, when

would the Delta team have to leave the the United States. The Chairman

replied, the 18th or 19th.

The President asked, how far do we usually put the carriers up

into the Gulf? The Chairman said that we come as close as 60 nautical

miles from the Straits of Hormuz, but we are normally operating far-

ther away.

Mr. Aaron asked whether the British would be notified of our

operations out of Diego Garcia. The Chairman replied that we could

figure out a way to operate so that the British would not know what

we were up to.

The President asked if there were any further observations. Admi-

ral Turner said that he thought it was time to intensify our political

action operations in Iran. [4 lines not declassified] Admiral Turner felt

that, in the long run, [less than 1 line not declassified] neither Khomeini

nor Bani-Sadr is going to be viable and will be replaced at some point.

[1½ lines not declassified]

Admiral Turner also noted that we had been polite during this

period of negotiations in the material broadcast [less than 1 line not

declassified]. He would now like to be more strident.

The President replied that we will not prevent any group from

making whatever moves they may make—that we couldn’t do so in

any event. The Secretary of State asked whether the groups would then

expect money if we gave them such a signal. [1½ lines not declassified]

This portion of the meeting concluded at 11: a.m.

246.

Editorial Note

Speaking from the White House Briefing Room at 3: p.m. on

April 7, 1980, President Jimmy Carter charged the Ayatollah Khomeini

with full responsibility for not placing the hostages under Iranian Gov-

ernment control and announced that the United States was breaking

diplomatic relations with Iran. Carter simultaneously imposed several

measures against Iran. First, he ordered the Secretary of the Treasury

to put into effect official economic sanctions prohibiting exports from

the United States to Iran in accordance with the sanctions approved

by 10 members of the UN Security Council on January 13 but vetoed

by the Soviet Union. (See Document 147.) He expected the shipment

of food and medicine to be minimal or nonexistent. Second, he stated

that Iran’s assets would be formally inventoried as would be the out-

standing claims of U.S. citizens and corporations. This was to facilitate

the processing and payment of these claims. Carter also promised to

initiate legislation in Congress for claims against Iran. Third, Carter

announced a strict enforcement of visa issuance, including the invalida-

tion of all visas currently issued to Iranian citizens for future entry

into the United States, the non-reinstatement of current visas, and new

visas only for “compelling and proven humanitarian reasons.”

In his concluding remarks, Carter said that the United States had

“acted at all times with exceptional patience and restraint in this crisis,”

had supported Secretary General Waldheim’s efforts, and would con-

tinue to consult with its allies and other friendly governments on these

steps, and “on additional measures which may be required.” Carter

also stated that “the steps I have ordered today are those that are

necessary now. Other action may become necessary if these steps do

not produce the prompt release of the hostages.” (Public Papers: Carter,

Carter’s instructions to the Department of State for breaking

relations, the text of Executive Order 12205 for economic sanctions, his

message to Congress reporting on U.S. actions, and the text of Executive

of these developments in telegram 91816, April 8. They were asked to

withdraw their Ambassadors as a sign of solidarity, to think of a

complete break in relations, and to adhere to the economic sanctions.

An undated paper prepared in the Department of State, entitled “Euro-

pean Reaction to Our Request on Iran,” listed the responses of U.S.

allies (including Canada and the EC Commission) to telegram 91816.

As reported in this paper, the EC–9 Ambassadors met with Bani-Sadr

on April 12 to demand the release of the hostages, their respective

governments agreed to consider further steps, and the modalities of

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

economic sanctions would be discussed at an upcoming meeting.

(Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary

Demarches)

The Director of the Office of Iranian Affairs in the Bureau of Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Henry Precht, called in Iranian

Ambassador Ali Agah to tell him all Iranian diplomats would have to

leave the country immediately. Agah angrily told Precht that the hos-

tages were well cared for and were under the complete control of

the Iranian government. Precht responded: “Bullshit!” As Carter later

recalled in an April 8 diary entry, he congratulated Precht in a note

that reads: “One of the elements of good diplomatic language was to

be concise and accurate and clear, and his reply to the Iranians proved

that he was a master of this technique.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, pages

to Carter’s announcement, Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghotbzadeh, Swiss

Ambassador Erik Lang, lawyers Christian Bourguet and Hector Vil-

lalon, and Archbishop Hilarion Capucci had lunch. According to Lang,

“it was a sad and frustrating luncheon because we realized that the

inevitable was about to happen.” Lang reported that they had “engaged

in one last brainstorming session, the only card remaining to be played

being a visit by Capucci to the Imam.” They held out little hope. When

Lang left the lunch, Ghotbzadeh thanked him for his services. Lang

said he was prepared to continue working but, if so, it “will be under

much more difficult conditions.” Ghotbzadeh answered: “I know that,

and I appreciate it.” (Cable from Lang to the Department of State, April

7, and cable from Kaiser to the Department of State, April 7; Carter

Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 2)

247.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

The President’s Telephone Conversation with Giscard d’Estaing

PARTICIPANTS

President Jimmy Carter

Valery Giscard d’Estaing, President of the French Republic

The President: It is good to hear from you.

Giscard: Hello, how are you? I am calling you because I got your

message on the hostages in Iran.

President Carter: Yes.

Giscard: I wanted to tell you what we are doing these days.

President Carter: Good.

Giscard: There is a meeting tomorrow morning in Lisbon of the

European Foreign Ministers. And what we expect is that they will

agree on a joint statement on that day from the EC governments.

Carter: Right.

Giscard: We would condemn the Iranian Government action con-

cerning the hostages; say again that we support Waldheim’s action

and that we expect positive action from the Iranian Government. We

would condemn the detention of the hostages and instruct the ambassa-

dors of the Nine to make a joint protest to the Iranians asking why the

release of the hostages has been delayed. We will consider the Iranian

Government answer and then take a joint position. The EC statement

will probably be released tomorrow morning. Do you hear me?

Carter: Yes, I hear you fine.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Giscard: Yes, and then either we have a very negative answer from

Iran which I think is probable. And then we have to decide what to

do. I am just mentioning that I suspect that we will probably have to

act on the diplomatic aspect (sic).

Carter: Yes.

Giscard: If on the other hand there is an indication of delay by Iran,

then we can resort to take specific actions.

Carter: Allright, I understand. This is good information for me,

Valery. I think you understand the difficult position we’re in.

Giscard: Yes, I understand very well. Of course we must not only

work to release the hostages, but also consider the impact of our actions

on Iran.

Carter: Absolutely.

Giscard: We must consider both.

Carter: Yes, I understand that.

Giscard: This is for your personal information and the statement

will not say that we are proposing this.

Carter: I understand.

Giscard: But it will certainly be a firm and strong statement.

Carter: Valery, let me ask you to do one other thing for me which

I think you already understand. We have had so many promises from

them—either outright lies or failure to do what they say they will do.

The only thing I would like to ask you all to do is not to let them

equivocate and delay and delay and delay, as they have with us for

the past five months. That’s their character and even if Bani-Sadr and

Ghotbzadeh make a flat, absolute promise, they then refer it to the

Revolutionary Council. They insist upon a unanimous vote and in the

last few days they have had all the Council members except two who

approved the transfer of the hostages. Under those circumstances they

referred it to Khomeini, who then says it must be a unanimous decision.

I know you called me just for information purposes, but I think if you

all could try to prevent that sort of deliberate postponement or delay

in action, it would really be helpful.

Giscard: Yes. We will be very clear and precise about it. It will

look like the European countries acting on their own. If the answer is

negative, then we will take a decision at once.

Carter: That’s good. We want to avoid taking military action. And,

I think we have a few days that we can wait, as you know, before we

take any stronger action than we have taken. I think the outcome might

very well be determined by how forceful you all act together. Well, I

am very grateful to you for this information.

Giscard: One more point, Jimmy. We will also contact the Iraqis

tomorrow. They can have also indirect pressure on Iran.

248.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, April 10, 1980

SUBJECT

Getting the Hostages Free

The steps announced on Monday2 bought us some time and set a

new process in motion. We need to think now about what we will

do with the time we have gained and how we manage the coercive

process. (S)

Having taken these initial steps, we must be prepared to back them

up or else risk a further loss of credibility. Iran does not believe that

we will use force. The measures announced Monday have raised some

doubts in their mind, but those doubts will soon be put to rest unless

followed by additional measures. (S)

Gradual escalation makes sense only if it is part of a strategy which

has some promise of freeing the hostages. In my view there are two

strategies available to us which could succeed:

1. A graduated application of force designed to persuade the Aya-

tollah and his followers that the continued holding of the hostages is

self-defeating because it endangers Iran’s well-being.

2. A rescue operation which deprives the Ayatollah of his bargain-

ing leverage and punctures his aura of invincibility. (TS)

Both strategies entail significant risks and both are clouded by

uncertainties. The following is an effort to examine systematically the

risks and prospects. (U)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Graduated Pressure

It is now clear that the diplomatic option is closed. The hostages

are going to be held at least until the Majlis convenes in June, and the

prospects that a new Parliament dominated by the clerics will vote to

release them on terms even marginally acceptable to us are very remote.

In short, unless something is done to change the nature of the game, we

must resign ourselves to the continued imprisonment of the hostages

through the summer or even later. (S)

Accordingly, a sharp increase in the pressures on Iran is one way

of changing the environment. For example, we could undertake a delib-

erate program of increasingly severe steps every week or two weeks

until the hostages are delivered. We might wish to inform the Iranians

in advance of the schedule, or we could simply proceed step by step

and let them draw their own conclusions. The following steps represent

an illustrative program:

1. Sharply increased surveillance of shipping enroute to and from

Iranian ports, combined with some overflights.

2. Declaration of a state of belligerency with Iran, coupled with a

screening program of Iranian nationals in this country.

3. Technical interruption of power at a key point, e.g. the refinery

complex in Abadan or cities such as Tehran or Qom.

4. Mining of harbors, leaving the Kharg Island facility untouched.

5. Closure of Kharg Island and/or occupation of the Tunbs and

Abu Musa at the mouth of the Persian Gulf.

6. Selective air strikes on economic targets. (TS)

The objective of undertaking such a program would be to free the

hostages before the program had to be carried to its logical conclusion

of outright hostilities. However, once embarked, we would have to be

prepared to persevere or else be perceived as paper tigers. (C)

There are several difficulties with this strategy in terms of getting

the hostages released. First, the deliberate progression of actions, even

if fairly rapid in succession, will encourage the Iranians to seek some

counterpressure to force us to stop. The recent threat by the militants

to kill the hostages in the event of U.S. military action represents the

kind of pressure tactics we can expect to encounter. (C)

The second problem is the uncertainty of the political reaction

inside Iran. The Ayatollah would attempt to use this program to arouse

public opinion and to unite the nation against the common enemy. He

might succeed, at least initially, but over time, as it became clear that

the Ayatollah was unable to prevent the disruption of the internal

economy and as the citizens begin to bear increasingly heavy penalties

because of his obstinacy, the mood might begin to shift from defiance of

the U.S. to discontent with the irresponsibility of their own leaders. (C)

A third, very serious problem is the danger that our actions will

inspire the tribal elements and other opposition forces to rise up against

the clerical regime, with a complete breakdown of public order or even

civil war. Not only would this situation endanger the hostages, but it

would sorely tempt the Soviets to move across the border. The Soviets

might cite our military actions as armed intervention, permitting them

to invoke the 1921 Treaty. They might also be able to assemble a

Tudeh-dominated government in Azerbaijan or even in Tehran in the

name of protecting the Islamic Revolution. The Soviets have steadily

been building their military capability near the Iranian border, and

they have been accumulating political support by their support of

Khomeini against the U.S. A small, disciplined group with outside

resources can be very effective in conditions of anarchy and political

collapse. (S)

Finally, even if we succeed in pressuring Khomeini to strike a deal,

we will have a problem in extricating ourselves from the confrontation.

In short, though superficially cautious and controlled, it is a high-risk

strategy which sets in motion forces that are dangerous and beyond

our power to control. (S)

Rescue Operation

The alternative is to force the issue to a resolution by unilaterally

seizing the hostages away from the Iranians. From a political point of

view, this course of action has enormous appeal. It is quick and almost

totally under our control. A sudden strike with the sole objective of

rescuing our people would be understood—and perhaps applauded—

by regional states and allies alike. It would provide almost no opportu-

nity or excuse for the Soviets to intervene. And it would embarrass

the Ayatollah and show him and his regime to be inept. (TS)

The difficulties of making a decision turn almost entirely on ques-

tions of capability and risk. Can we get in and out before the Iranians

can react militarily? Can we get all the hostages? Do we believe that

we could act swiftly enough to avoid having many of the hostages

executed? Can we avoid losing many of our own military people? (S)

I am struck by the evaluation of some of those closest to the situa-

tion. My staff assistant, Gary Sick, who has been living with this issue

day and night for the past five months, has personally and privately

urged me in the strongest terms to adopt this course of action, and has

proposed this memo. He has also informed me that the three best

Persian-speaking officers in the Foreign Service have recently gone to

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Cy with the same recommendation. They all believe that the risks of

continued incarceration or of military escalation are far greater than a

surprise rescue operation. They are convinced that true surprise is

possible and that penetration of the Embassy is a realistic prospect. (TS)

I find this argument persuasive. There may never be a better

moment to undertake such an operation than the next few weeks. The

security at the Embassy must have settled into a routine by now, and

the Iranians are almost contemptuous in their certainty that rescue is

not a feasible option. Even the U.S. press has totally accepted our

explanations that such an operation is impossible. The Iranian military

is in nearly total disarray and preoccupied with the Iraqi threat. The

chance of maintaining true surprise is good, and with true surprise,

our chances of a successful operation grow. (TS)

We have no risk-free options. Even the risks of inaction are consid-

erable. No other option offers as many potential benefits or gives us

as many opportunities to keep the timing and control in our own

hands. We could even build in a little protection for any hostages who

might not be freed by “arresting” some of the militants and bringing

them back under kidnapping and even murder charges. (TS)

In my view, a carefully planned and boldly executed rescue opera-

tion represents the only realistic prospect that the hostages—any of

them—will be freed in the foreseeable future. Our policy of restraint

has won us well-deserved understanding throughout the world, but

it has run out. This is the painful conclusion we must now face. (TS)

I understand that your preference is not to undertake a rescue

except as a reaction to the killing of our hostages. But that is really

tantamount to dismissing the rescue option altogether. Please consider

the following: the lead time on any rescue operation is a minimum of

eight days. If a hostage is killed, there will be an immediate outcry for

retaliation; there will be mass hysteria; there will also be a heightened

state of alert in Tehran and perhaps even additional killings. I very

much doubt that we could afford to wait for days to undertake a rescue

operation, and could be thus forced to retaliate, which would then

further reduce the element of surprise which is so crucial to a successful

rescue. (TS)

Post-Rescue

It is essential that we be ready to react to any post-rescue conse-

quences. These would include threats to the lives of any hostages left

behind, or to any prisoners taken in the operation, or to any Americans

available in Tehran. In addition, we have to consider the need to react

to any large-scale failure that could occur, and which could maximize

the foregoing complications. Accordingly, in addition to the rescue

operation, we should be prepared to initiate almost immediately large-

scale retaliatory strikes against key Iranian facilities. Upon the comple-

tion of the rescue operation, the Iranian government should be

informed, and we could also make it known publicly, that the U.S.

will initiate large-scale retaliatory action if any reprisals follow the

rescue. If the rescue operation itself fails, we might want to initiate

such retaliation in any case in order to reduce the negative consequences

of the aborted undertaking. I believe that the U.S. public will be with

us whatever happens. (TS)

Procedure

I would recommend that at some point soon you consult with your

advisers on the above. If you decide to undertake the rescue, I would

suggest that you inform your advisers that you have decided against

it. Afterwards, a much smaller group could meet with you to initiate

the actual plans and to monitor their execution through completion. I

would think that such a small group would be confined to the Vice

President, Vance, Brown, Jones, Turner, and myself, as well as perhaps

Ham and Jody. At the very last minute, additional advisers could be

brought in, but it would be essential to enforce iron discipline and

minimum participation (on a need-to-know basis). (TS)

Conclusion

The above recommendation is not easy to make. It is even more

difficult for you to consider and accept. However, we have to think

beyond the fate of the 50 Americans (and also some Iranians) and

consider the deleterious effects of a protracted stalemate, growing pub-

lic frustration, and international humiliation of the United States. (S)

249.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee (Implementation) Meeting

Washington, April 10, 1980

The meeting opened with a brief discussion of the situation between

Iraq and Iran. There continue to be intermittent skirmishes but there is

no sign that either side is engaged in a large-scale buildup or has made

any commitment to extend the hostilities substantially. (S)

The State Department reported that our allies’ reaction to your impo-

sition of sanctions has been cautious so far. The Europeans have come

to realize, however, that what we are doing not only affects our relations

with Iran or potentially their relations with Iran, but also will be an

important factor in relations between the United States and Europe.

The EC–9 Foreign Ministers have devoted their current discussion to

the Iranian question and we understand that they will be withdrawing

their Ambassador from Tehran for consultations. (S)

Treasury pointed out that it will be attending a large number of

basically economic meetings with countries from all over the world in

the next several weeks. They volunteered to take up the question of

Iran and the Olympics as subsidiary themes in these meetings. Henry

Owen added that he would be glad to do the same. State and Lloyd

Cutler will provide talking points. (S)

The bulk of the discussion focused on a memo by Ben Civiletti

posing issues arising out of your commitment to introduce legislation

for claims against the Iranian Government. There was general agreement

on a variety of issues including timing of actions to be taken, alternate

means of settling claims, and the desirability of maintaining maximum

executive branch flexibility. There was however significant disagree-

ment among the agencies on whether you should seek authority to

vest Iranian resources as part of the claims legislation. (Treasury under-

lined the impact this could have on the dollar abroad; Civiletti and

Cutler saw a claims process without vesting authority as being empty.)

In addition there are a number of factors that have to be considered

in providing relief for the hostages. (S)

There seemed to be general agreement that legislation should be

introduced to remove impediments to legal action against Iran resulting

from jurisdictional limitation and the provisions of the Sovereign

Immunities Act. There was much less agreement, however, on the

means of settling hostage claims or providing other relief to the hos-

tages, mainly because of the impact that action taken now would have

on the negotiating situation. (S)

State, Defense and Treasury will prepare a memorandum for your

decision on the issues that were not agreed upon; it will also brief you

in more detail on the areas of agreement. (S)

An additional item was introduced by the Department of Justice

concerning the procedures for dealing with the visa requests of non-

immigrant Iranians in the United States. The questions here are mainly

technical and can be settled between State and Justice. There are some

more basic questions, however, including whether or not an Iranian

married to an American citizen can claim “humanitarian need” in

attempting to prolong his or her stay here in the United States. State

and Justice will sort their problems out and get back to us quickly. If

there is need for a decision by you on any of these issues we will

forward the memorandum to you. (S)

Another issue relates to the status of some 213 Iranian military

personnel who are studying in the United States and are not under the

provisions of the FMS. Defense, State, and Justice are not willing to

accept responsibility for locating these students and forcing them to

leave the United States. In effect, they are in much the same position

as any Iranian student here and their military status probably does not

make them any more or less vulnerable to deportation. If they can avail

themselves of the numerous remedies available in the INS procedure,

it could be years before we could deport them. State and Defense will

attempt to find a means of getting to them and preemptively moving

them out of the country before they can become embroiled in the INS

procedures. (S)

[Omitted here is material on the Olympics.]

250.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The White House

The Vice President

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Jody Powell

State

Deputy Secretary Warren

CIA

Christopher

Adm. Stansfield Turner

Defense

Secretary Harold Brown

JCS

General David Jones

MINUTES

The President: The likelihood of hostage release is remote. We need

to review our options. Diplomatic moves not likely to be productive.

We need to decide our actions and to set a timetable. I will go around

the table and solicit opinions.

Warren Christopher: There are some non-belligerent options we

should consider: no more exports/imports of any kind; blacklist Iranian

ships; blacklist airline companies that service Tehran; embargo telecom-

munications; remove all items from pipeline; go back to the UN.

We need to give the Europeans some time to respond to our request

for embargo. (Then discusses the down side of the blockade mining

option for Americans, Europeans—it does not resolve the hostage

issue.)

Harold Brown: The proposed diplomatic initiatives are not impres-

sive. Moreover, they will push Iran toward Soviet bloc. For example,

Aeroflot could step in. There are punitive military options, but a block-

ade could complicate relations for us with the Gulf states and even the

meeting took place in the White House. At the top of the page, Carter wrote: “Susan,

My top secret pers file. J.” Susan Clough was Carter’s personal secretary. Vance was on

vacation in Florida. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp. 492–493) Jordan also attended

this meeting and for the first time learned of the rescue operation. (Jordan, Crisis, pp.

terrorists are making all kinds of crazy threats to kill the American hostages if they are

invaded by Iraq—whom they identify as an American puppet.” He then wrote: “We

could no longer afford to depend on diplomacy. I decided to act. On April 11, I called

together my top advisers.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 506)

Soviets. Mining is less dangerous, though the Soviets could be invited

to sweep. Neither, however, resolves the hostage issue.

We should therefore consider the rescue. Latest plans reduce the

possibility of disaster, but some deaths are unavoidable. A decision

needs to be made very soon—no later than within the next three weeks:

Stansfield Turner: The negotiating option is not really open. The

only non-belligerent option is to get Khomeini’s advisors to convince

him that it is immoral to retain the hostages. Mining would have impact

on internal stability if undertaken before the harvest comes in.

As to a rescue, it is probable that all of the hostages are now in

the compound.

David Jones: (Describes in detail the mining option.) The rescue

option has been well rehearsed. It may be too late to undertake it in

May–June. The current scheme calls for two nights and one day—and

we are losing nighttime (describes the operation in detail).

The Vice President: Rescue is the best option. We are in an intolerable

situation which is humiliating to the United States. A blockade will

enhance the humiliation while increasing Soviet influence in Iran. I

come down for the rescue. We need a careful deception program, and

we should explore the Iraqi aspects.

Jody Powell: We need a formula for explaining the timing of the

rescue.

Zbigniew Brzezinski: Rescue is the best of the available action alterna-

tives. If undertaken, it should be undertaken as early as possible; there

should be a post-rescue punitive option, if the rescue fails; and we

should consider taking prisoners to Egypt (as protection against new

hostages being taken by the Iranians).

David Jones: The 24th would be the earliest date.

The President: I have talked this over with Rosalynn, also with Ham,

Fritz, Jody, and Cy, and I have talked extensively with Zbig. We may

have damaged our country by not acting sooner. (Impressed by Sadat’s

views.) We have to go now on a stronger course of action. Our national

honor is at stake. We have to go with the rescue. To do so we will

Daily Diary) In a March 28 meeting in Giza, Sadat had told Sol Linowitz, Special U.S.

Negotiator for the Middle East, that, because of Iran, the Soviet Union would not with-

draw from Afghanistan and that, after Khomeini died, Iran would move to the left and

the Soviets would exploit such a development. “In Iran,” he said, “anything can happen.”

Sadat also reaffirmed that he would allow the Shah to remain in Egypt. He told Linowitz

that the Shah was “very bitter” toward the United States. (Memorandum from Linowitz

to Carter, April 1; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP

251.

Memorandum From Robert D. Blackwill of the National

Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s

Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)

Washington, April 11, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran and the Allies (U)

After listening to the President’s clear exposition to Stobbe this

morning2 on the gravity of the Iranian situation, and in view of the

President’s sharp sense of urgency, I am moved to express my concern

that our message to the Allies on Iran is not getting across in a blunt

and unambiguous way. In his Wednesday meeting with the Allied

Ambassadors, Secretary Vance declined to speculate on military

options open to the United States if current sanctions proved insuffi-

cient. But, according to the reporting telegram, “he did make clear

that there remain additional economic steps as well as non-economic

measures.” Following this meeting I received several calls from Euro-

pean Embassies which indicated that they had interpreted Vance’s

remarks to mean that we were not seriously considering the use of

military force and that the Allies had some time in which to decide

what additional measures, if any, they should take against Iran. This

later point was reinforced in the Aide Mémoire that we sent out on

Tuesday4 which said “we also strongly urge that Allied Governments

give serious consideration to a complete break to relations in Iran in

the weeks ahead, if Iranian authorities continue to reject efforts to achieve

a peaceful solution.” (S)

I worry that Vance’s comments to the Ambassadors, which were

quite different from those of the President, may have contributed to

the vapid statement by the Nine yesterday in Lisbon. If we have in

our own mind a clear deadline for European action against Iran (the

President told Stobbe we had only a few days in which we could

continue to act in moderation), we should so inform the Allies immedi-

ately. If we do not, and if we act militarily, they will certainly charge

that they were surprised again by an Administration speaking with

more than one voice and that they had been led to believe that more

punitive steps on our part were not imminent. Such a straightforward

message from us would also, of course, increase the likelihood that the

Allies will come around. (S)

252.

Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, April 11, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran and the Soviets (U)

I am concerned about the evidence we continue to get of steady,

quiet build-up in the Transcaucasus for a Soviet military move into Iran.

While I do not question current intelligence assessments that there is

no indication that the Soviets are actually preparing to move, I am fearful

that we are in danger of wishfully turning this rational assumption

into a conviction that they will not move. I worry about the kind of

mind-sets that afflict intelligence estimators and comfort policymakers

and which led to conclusions, e.g., that the Soviets were not putting

nuclear weaponry into Cuba in 1962 or that the dynasty was secure in

I am worried also about the impact of increased pressure by us on

Iran or punitive measures if the hostages are harmed. Given the utterly

irrational state of mind that dominates elements in Tehran, and the

intense hatred of Khomeini for America, a seemingly rational action

such as a naval blockade could conceivably provoke an Iranian invitation to

the Soviets to come in to protect them. Khomeini could give such interven-

tion his blessing with a doctrine of “the lesser Satan.” The Iranian left,

certainly capitalizing on current tensions to improve its position, could

abet such a move. (C)

[1 paragraph (4½ lines) not declassified]

Do the Soviets want to invade? In the final analysis, I find it impossi-

ble to believe that the Soviets could resist temptation to take over most

or all of Iran if the opportunity presented itself to them in a form where

they could get themselves invited in as a protecting power. For more

than 150 years, the Russians have aspired to advance in this area. Afghanistan

has whetted their appetite; but Afghanistan will continue to cost with

little prospect of return. Iran could be a paying proposition with its vast

oil and gas reserves—the first really profitable territorial acquisition

for the Soviets. It could help pay for Cuba and Ethiopia and help

surround and subdue Afghanistan. If the Soviets were invited in to

help frenzied Iranians defend themselves against America, they could

anticipate almost no internal resistance, such as they have had to face

in Afghanistan. (C)

[1 paragraph (17 lines) not declassified]

Unless we think in broad strategic and operationally bold terms,

we are likely to stumble into a mess in Iran which will result in the

takeover of the whole country by the Soviets. (C)

[1 paragraph (10½ lines) not declassified]

In contemplating possibilities for unusual, far-reaching actions

against Iran, we should at least think about the potential for more

effective action we might have if we were able to utilize bases in Turkey

for this purpose. The state of our relations with Turkey during the

1970’s has, in spite of the recently concluded DCA, left us sadly limited

in our capacity to utilize that country’s facilities. But how much is

release of the hostages and settlement of our festering crisis in Iran

worth to us? How much have we already expended on it? A half-

billion dollars in military aid firmly committed to Turkey for the next

three or four years would go a long way toward satisfying their needs

for force modernization, would tie them in more firmly to NATO and

would enormously strengthen the alliance in its southeastern sector.

It does not seem to me that this would be too high a price to pay for

utilization of Turkish bases for mounting a strike against Tehran. (S)

In terms of the kind of thinking we conventionally do these days,

the “strategic thoughts” I have just outlined above might be considered

justification for my incarceration in a psychiatric institution, an inverse

American version of the fate of General Grigorenko . . . But I sense

that we may be whipping ourselves up into a emotional frenzy over

the hostages in Tehran which could inadvertently have far worse conse-

quences which would do more harm both to us and to the world than

some of the actions I have suggested thinking about . . . (C)

253.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Summary of President Carter’s Telephone Conversation with Helmut

Schmidt (C)

PARTICIPANTS

President Jimmy Carter

Helmut Schmidt, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany

President: How are you this afternoon?

Schmidt: Fine. How is spring in Washington?

President: It is absolutely beautiful. The whole White House

grounds are covered with wonderful flowers, and I am sure it is the

same where you live.

Schmidt: Ja, it is the same in Bonn, not as yet in Hamburg. Bonn

is a benevolent place for the eyes and for the human soul.

President: Well, this is too. It’s one of the bright spots about my

life these days.

Schmidt: Are the cherry blossoms already on?

President: They have already come and almost gone. But now we

have the flowering crab apples which in my opinion are even more

beautiful; and the dogwoods are just coming on, and the tulips are in

blossom; the azaleas are on the way. It is really a lovely time.

Schmidt: Jimmy, I guess this is my call, or is it yours?

President: It’s yours I think.

Schmidt: Let me please, in the first instance reiterate a point which

I would like to deal with so that you can interrupt me or say that you

have some other points as well and then get back to them one by one.

President: O.K.

Schmidt: Number one, I would say a few words about our actual

communications; the next point would be oncoming decisions, which

I will take next week as regards Iran, as regards the Olympic Games.

I would like also to have an exchange on Afghanistan and on medium-

range weaponry. This is about the number of subjects I would like to

touch upon shortly, if you have the time for that.

President: Yes, I have the time, go ahead.

Schmidt: Number One. I would like to thank you for your talk with

Berlin Mayor Stobbe. I have seen his report; I have not seen him in

person so far and would also especially thank you for the very clear

statements about the United States and its support for Berlin. I would

connect this with my repeated expressions of thanks for our ongoing

talks a month ago at your place in Washington. I have not seen your

television talk with the European editors, but there has been some

confusion in the West European press about a deadline or a specific

date. I am not aware of any such deadline and it makes me ask you

what is it you mean by that?

President: Well there was no deadline to Allies. I did ask you all

to help us with action either two weeks after the Majles is convened

or the middle part of May, and we would hope that all of our concerted

efforts would have success by then.

Schmidt: Well, I fully understand it. This was my belief that this

was what you had in mind.

President: Yes, that is exactly what I had in mind.

Schmidt: It was my speculation. Let me please say that some people

of course, in the French, British, German press, I don’t know what the

other Europeans have said, are speculating whether the Heads of State

or Heads of Governments in Europe and in America are communicating

over the media with the other leaders. This is certainly not the case

and I think we shall take the opportunity within the next couple of

days to make it clear that we are in necessary and close personal contact.

I just talked to Valery, and he told me that you had been in contact

with him, a couple of days ago.

President: Yes, that’s true. And that’s the only reference I made,

and it was completely distorted in some of the European press as an

ultimatum or a demand for action and so forth. What I said in the

interview was that there was an expectation of success and that we

did have a target date, but what I was referring to is the one I have

just described to you.

Schmidt: Let me tell you that on Sunday, the day before yesterday,

I had a couple of hours with the leading members of the Cabinet,

to go over to Parliament to talk to the Foreign Relations Committee in

a private session to tell them what is in the making.

First, Iran. As you know from early January, we are still not really

convinced that extending economic sanctions will help to liberate the

hostages, but we will certainly follow through. We are determined to

take that decision next week in our Cabinet.

President: Yes, I am not sure either. There is no way to be sure.

Schmidt: I think it opens up two dangerous possibilities: one danger

is that they fall back on the Soviet Union which they will not like, but

they may feel they may be forced to and secondly, if sanctions don’t

work, then in a couple of weeks, we have to come to the point where

we have to ask for other measures.

President: Yes.

Schmidt: Anyway, we will participate. Valery will participate. I

guess we’ll get a consensus with the EC Foreign Secretaries on Monday

or Tuesday next week. They are sitting together Monday or Tuesday;

we will try to form a so-called European umbrella for the Nine govern-

ments to act on a national basis. Possibly, we might also act by a joint

decision. The Rome Treaty has some clause, the famous article 113

which may be useful as an end. Anyway, I guess you will see in the

course of next week some European Cabinets, at least, anyway my

Cabinet to publicly decide that we take economic sanctions. They would

be declared next Wednesday, but probably becoming effective a fort-

night after the election of the Parliament, if within that fortnight the

hostages are not freed. This would mean about the date which you

mentioned five minutes ago.

President: Well, you know, we have indications that it is very doubt-

ful that the Parliament is going to be elected at all. And the date that

I mentioned was really either mid-May or two weeks after the

voted to impose sanctions on Iran on May 17 unless “decisive progress” was made on

freeing the hostages. (R.W. Apple, Jr., “Allies Set To Impose Economic Sanctions on

responsibility for negotiating common commercial policies with the rest of the world.

254.

Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The White House

Zbigniew Brzezinski

State

Hamilton Jordan

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Jody Powell

Deputy Secretary Warren

Christopher

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Defense

Secretary Harold Brown

Deputy Secretary Graham Claytor

JCS

General David Jones

meeting took place in the White House. As he later recalled, Vance had voiced to Carter

his objection to the rescue mission earlier in the morning and then again before the NSC

meeting. After the meeting, Vance questioned his desire to remain in the administration.

(Vance, Hard Choices, pp. 409–410) According to the President’s Daily Diary, Vance and

record of their April 15 non-NSC meetings has been found.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Secretary Vance: It is a serious mistake to go ahead with the rescue

because (1) the Red Cross visit has accounted for all hostages and all

they will plan to adopt sanctions. We should not go forward. There

will be loss of lives (5–15 hostages); risk to other Americans and maybe

Europeans; and our allies will not understand this.

Secretary Brown: When do you expect the hostages then to be

released?

Secretary Vance: I don’t know—but maybe one-third of them will

get killed in this. Maybe after the Majlis elections.

Secretary Brown: Majlis will be less amenable to release

Zbigniew Brzezinski: We have the problem of timing. If we do not

now undertake the rescue, later may be too late. There is also a strategic

issue here—Iran is drifting leftward, and we need to lance the boil

(which is the hostage issue).

The President: Schmidt is deeply concerned over the negative effects

of pressure in Iran, and I am also concerned over a failure to act. If

the Majlis meets and nothing happens, we will be faced with lengthy

detention. Lately the Iranian government has not been disavowing the

threats to the lives of the hostages. I don’t think our rescue option will

itself improve as time passes. If we are left with only the military

option, the element of surprise will diminish, whereas now the eco-

nomic sanctions are lulling the militants. On balance, it is better to go

ahead. Delay will cause deterioration in the region. I will stick with

the decision I made.

Zbigniew Brzezinski: (Summarizes questions for further discussion:

nature of any additional punitive action? What governments to be

informed, and when, about the rescue? What disinformation campaign?

How to get Americans out of Iran? Possible foreign reactions, notably

Soviet? Reaction to a possible failure? Updating the operational

scenario?)

Secretary Vance: (Feels that it would be a mistake to consider any

additional punitive actions.)

Zbigniew Brzezinski: It is important that we do not look as if we

are acting out of desperation. Should examine carefully other options.

a 7-hour visit. (Memorandum from Saunders to Vance, Christopher, and Newsom, April

15; Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State

of the Red Cross visit. (“Visit to the Hostages,” April 15; ibid.)

Secretary Brown: (Outlines possible strike at a TV-power station

installation in Tehran.)

The President: It is important that all casualties be limited and that

we do not engage in wanton killing.

Zbigniew Brzezinski: We should also avoid Kennedy’s mistake at

the Bay of Pigs of so limiting the military operation that its chances of

success were reduced.

General Jones: We will not engage in wanton killing—we will only

do so if it is necessary to avoid U.S. casualties. We will stay in the

compound for one hour and search thoroughly the four buildings.

(Discussion between Turner, Vance, and Brzezinski about the com-

pound—how it is fortified, how it is guarded.)

The President: My inclination is not to launch any other attacks. We

need a clean operation. We should not blow up other buildings in

Tehran and I am doubtful about taking prisoners.

Zbigniew Brzezinski: It may be desirable to have prisoners as coun-

ter-hostages in the event the Iranians take new ones. (Brown and Clay-

tor agree.)

The President: I want it clean and simple.

Zbigniew Brzezinski: It is an asset. We can always send them back.

Warren Christopher: Taking prisoners would be more complicating

than helpful.

Jody Powell: I agree with Christopher. What would we do with

them ultimately?

Hamilton Jordan: I agree with the above. If we grab someone, it

should be someone important.

General Jones: I would take prisoners only as far as Mansuriyah

and then let them go. I would want the Commander to have the option.

Secretary Vance: This will simply complicate the situation.

The President: Talk this over with the Commander. Basically, I do

not want the prisoners. If need be, take them to Mansuriyah and then

release them.

Zbigniew Brzezinski: We should also consider what to do if the

operation fails. We should consider retribution if things go badly or

more hostages are taken. Our options are mining or an attack on a

refinery.

Secretary Brown: (Favors more than that if the failure is large.) The

question is, when to react if the operation fails?

Admiral Turner: We should react the same day so it looks like a

single operation. Then it looks less like a failure.

Secretary Vance: What would be the consequences for other

Westerners?

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

The President: We are going into our own compound to take our

own people out. There is no additional purpose.

General Jones: We should let the gun ships hit some Tehran targets

the same night if things go bad.

Jody Powell: It might be a good idea to do the TV station in in the

same night.

The President: One thing bothers me. Our nation’s stature should

be preserved. The Iranians have not killed anybody, and hence we

should not kill innocent Iranians.

Secretary Brown: Then we should mine in that case.

Zbigniew Brzezinski: The President is right. We should only do these

additional things if there is a failure and killing of hostages afterwards.

Maybe we could take out the TV/communications tower. (Discussion

of various diplomatic initiatives designed to provide a diversion to

prevent speculation on a rescue mission.)

Jody Powell: We won’t be able to get all of the American press out.

Maybe Ham could get his contact in Tehran to throw our people out.

Alternatively we could warn the top TV people that our own media

people have been targeted for attack and therefore they should leave.

(The President and Brown skeptical that the above would work.)

Admiral Turner: Major disinformation should have an overall

theme. We particularly need to deceive Soviet/Cuban intelligence. We

also need a cover story for a possible leak.

Zbigniew Brzezinski: We should hint that we are considering mining.

(Further discussion about cover for the operation, insofar as Oman

is concerned—a cover story emphasizing air drops to Afghanistan

approved.)

General Jones: The operation will proceed unless the President disap-

proves next Thursday. If weather bad, we will postpone on a day by

day basis.

255.

Editorial Note

[text not declassified.]

256.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

Warren Christopher

Zbigniew Brzezinski

David Newsom

David Aaron

Robert Owens

Lloyd Cutler

Hedley Donovan

OSD

Jody Powell

W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

Joseph Onek

JCS

NSC

Lt. General John Pustay

Gary Sick

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Treasury

Robert Mundheim

Justice

John Harmon

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The SCC reviewed a proposed list of additional non-belligerent

sanctions against Iran. The following steps were unanimously recom-

mended for Presidential approval:2

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

1. Embargo all imports from Iran to the United States. This can easily

be done under the existing provisions of IEEPA and amounts to approx-

imately $1 million per month. Treasury will prepare the necessary

implementing regulations. (C)

2. Prohibit the export of food and medicine to Iran. IEEPA provides

authority to prohibit all exports except private donations of food, cloth-

ing and medicine. The SCC agreed that private donations would con-

tinue to be excepted since this includes packages to the hostages and

clear humanitarian gifts. A finding will also be prepared under the

Export Administration Act prohibiting exports on the grounds that

Iran is assisting international terrorism by its acts. (C)

3. Prohibit the Use of U.S. Passports for Travel to Iran. There is statutory

authority for the President to invoke measures short of war in order

to induce the release of hostages. Use of this statute to prohibit using

passports is subject to challenge under the provisions of the subsequent

Passport Act which does not provide such authority for hostage cases.

If applied to U.S. journalists, we can anticipate an immediate challenge;

but court action will require some time. We can probably defeat such

a challenge on grounds that the safety of U.S. citizens is endangered

by remaining in Iran; however, we will not cite that as our reason in

the initial announcement. (S)

4. Prohibit all Financial Transactions with Iran, Including any Transac-

tions in Connection with Travel to Iran. If drawn tightly and applied

immediately, this would prevent a U.S. citizen from buying a ticket

to leave Iran. A group composed of representatives of State, Justice,

Treasury, Commerce and the Counsel to the President will meet to

draw up regulations which are as tight as possible to pressure all U.S.

citizens to depart Iran as soon as possible. The group will also examine

the potentially serious policy and constitutional problems relating to

the application of this order (under IEEPA) to the press. (S)

5. Telecommunications. Matt Nimetz will meet today with represent-

atives of COMSAT to explore the technical implications of interrupting

satellite communications with Iran. It was agreed that continued contact

with Iran was sufficiently beneficial for intelligence purposes and for

maintaining contact with Laingen and intermediaries in Tehran that

we should not order an immediate interruption by COMSAT. However,

unless there are overriding technical reasons, we should call for an

extraordinary meeting of INTELSAT members within 30 days to con-

sider barring Iran from use of the INTELSAT system. The SCC recog-

nized that we may be unable to muster a two-thirds vote in INTELSAT,

but considered it desirable to signal our intent to pursue our efforts

to isolate Iran internationally. (S)

6. Close Offices of Iran Air, the National Iranian Oil Company, and the

Iranian Natural Gas Company in the United States. They would be given

until May 1 to comply. The SCC considered closure of Iranian banks,

but recommended against taking this step at this time since it would

cut off the financial support of most of the 50,000 Iranian students in

this country, many of whom are minorities. It could also prompt a

massive shift of these students and other Iranian nationals to wel-

The SCC also considered denying landing rights and port facilities

to foreign airlines and ships serving Iran. This is a secondary boycott

and totally inconsistent with U.S. efforts to defeat the Arab boycott

against Israel. It would create major policy problems for the U.S. and

with our allies. The SCC recommended against such moves at this

257.

Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, April 16, 1980

SUBJECT

Group Discussion on Soviet Threat to Iran (S)

As you directed, Odom, Welch, Brement and I discussed the memo

I sent you2 (Sick and Denend could not make it). We had large areas

of agreement, and lively differences. I try here to summarize them,

and invite the others to comment further below, as needed. In a nutshell:

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

—There is a substantial Soviet military threat to Iran, in both the

near and the longer term, most likely to be triggered by (a) US military

action, or (b) the need of a promising pro-Soviet regime for support.

—The judgment in my memo on Soviet expectation of the need to

use force and willingness to do so may or may not prove correct; but

it is overstated in the light of current evidence. (Three-to-one against

me here; I’ll stand pat on my judgment, however.)

—We do need to do more faster in building our security posture

in and for Southwest Asia. But it will take more than apocalyptic

opinions to generate the requisite additional money and political

258.

Memorandum From Marshall Brement and Stephen Larrabee

of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s

Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the

President‘s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Aaron)

Washington, April 17, 1980

SUBJECT

Future Soviet Military Intervention in Iran (S)

Attached at Tab A is a CIA analysis of Soviet policy toward the

Iran-Iraq conflict. It argues that the Soviets are likely to try to avoid

getting drawn into the conflict in a manner which could seriously

damage their relations with either side. To date, the Soviets have sought

to cast the blame on the US for the exacerbation of tensions between

the two countries. However, pressure is mounting on Moscow to take

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

a clearer stand, and lately Soviet commentary has evinced a slight tilt

toward Iran. (S)

Although they could use the threat of Iraqi military intervention

justify their own intervention, the Agency thinks the chance of their

doing so is remote—in large part because of the danger that the US

might respond militarily. They feel that the Soviets are more likely to

try to maintain a balanced policy and attempt to preserve—and where

possible extend—their influence in both countries through conven-

tional diplomacy and economic means. (S)

The paper does not deal with a number of recent developments

which suggest an attempt by the Soviets to exploit the instability in Iran

and to prepare for possible limited military intervention. These include:

—[1½ lines not declassified]

—the dispatch of large numbers of ethnic Azerbaijanis back from

the USSR, including prominent exiles dating back from the post-war

Soviet sponsored Azerbaijan Democratic Republic;

—the apparent reactivization of the Azerbaijani Democratic Party

which closely cooperates with the Tudeh;

—aid to ethnic dissident groups, including arms and guerrilla

training;

—[1 line not declassified]

—upgrading of combat readiness of units in Transcaucasus MD.

(TS)

These developments do not provide hard evidence that the Soviets

have decided to intervene. The Soviets may well only be engaging in

prudent contingency planning. But the Soviets could conceivably also

be positioning themselves to take military action when and if it becomes

desirable or necessary. (C)

The Soviets are now pinning their hopes in Iran on the ability of

the Tudeh to increase its strength and eventually assume a position of

power. The Tudeh is, for example, in far better shape today than the

Bolsheviks were in the autumn of 1916. The Tudeh has consistently

supported Khomeini for tactical reasons; in return Khomeini has

granted the Tudeh a degree of freedom and autonomy not allowed

other Leftist parties. The Soviets undoubtedly hope that this strategy

will allow the Tudeh to dominate a post-Khomeini coalition. It is the

best organized and best armed party in Iran. While it still lacks a

strong popular following, it has been increasing its strength among

key elements in society, especially the intellectuals and labor groups,

and it recently has been actively attempting to recruit among the

military. (S)

The continued revolutionary situation and consequent economic

deterioration or, for that matter, Khomeini’s death or removal from

the scene, could work to the Tudeh’s advantage. At present the middle

class is weak and fragmented, and power is in the hands of the extrem-

ists—the mullahs who would take the country back to the fifteenth

century, on the one hand, and the radicals who want to accelerate the

pace of the revolution, on the other. Under these conditions, the Tudeh

could well present itself as the only viable “modernizing” force capable

of opposing the mullahs and implementing a true socio-economic revo-

lution. Demoralized and disenchanted with the mullahs, many ele-

ments of society might acquiesce in, or at least not resist, a power grab

by the Tudeh. (S)

Should the Tudeh take part in a popular front government, an

Afghanistan-like situation might well develop where an appeal for

Soviet forces to stem “counter-revolutionary bandits” may be made—

a call the Soviets would find hard to resist, particularly if they are

successful in Afghanistan. For this reason, it is extremely important

for us to have counter-forces positioned in the area in order to make

a Soviet decision to intervene as difficult as possible for them. This

underscores the need for us to:

—monitor Soviet activity in Iran and the Transcaucasus very

closely;

—accelerate our efforts to develop the RDF;

—continue to press forward vigorously with our search for facilities

and other sites for pre-positioning and stockpiling in the Gulf;

—intensify our efforts to improve our bilateral relations with Tur-

key and to bolster Ankara economically, with the long-term goal of

stationing

some

forces

there

for

use

in

Mideast/Persian

Gulf

contingencies;

—improve relations with other Arab states in the area, particu-

larly Iraq;

—set up a forum in the Alliance to discuss non-European threats

to the Alliance;

—press the European allies to do more to bolster their own defenses

on the Central Front; and, above all,

—keep the pressure on the Soviets in Afghanistan (the more they

are bogged down there, the less likely they are to intervene else-

259.

Message From the Department of State to the Swiss

Ambassador to Iran (Lang)

Washington, April 17, 1980

We would appreciate Ambassador Lang’s delivering the following

message at the earliest possible moment to President Bani-Sadr from

the USG:

1. While we are pleased that the hostages were visited, we hope

that their conditions can be improved and that visits can take place on

a regular basis.

2. Our continued objective is the prompt and safe release of all the

American hostages. Because the hostages continue to be held in viola-

tion of international law and all principles of civilized behavior, we

have today announced additional non-military steps. Under the cir-

cumstances, we have no choice but to take steps necessary to redress

our grievances and to seek the cooperation of others in such measures.

3. We have seen statements indicating that there is a possibility of

release before the parliament meets. This outcome is by far preferable

to others that have been proposed. We would welcome your sugges-

tions for achieving such a result, through any of the existing channels

or otherwise as you may wish.

4. But we are also very concerned about press accounts out of Iran

saying that the hostages may be kept through the summer. If the Majlis

election takes place May 2, can you give us an estimate as to when it

will be in a position to deal with the hostage situation, and how you

will avoid a situation in which the Majlis would seek to impose condi-

tions which the United States cannot and will not accept or to delay

indefinitely an ultimate decision.

5. Beyond the present crisis it is our hope to build a new relationship

with Iran based on equality and mutual respect.

260.

Intelligence Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

Washington, April 18, 1980

COUNTRY

Iran/Iraq

SUBJECT

Former Iranian Prime Minister Shahpour Bakhtiar‘s comments on his plans to

return to Iran, on his recent visit to Iraq, on his problems with General Gholam

Ali Oveisi‘s plans, and on his support from Hassan Nazih [less than 1 line not

declassified]

SOURCE

[1½ lines not declassified]

Summary: On 15 April 1980, former Iranian Prime Minister Shah-

pour Bakhtiar told a confidant that he now plans to return to Iran

towards the end of May once some deficiencies in his plans have been

corrected, once his staff in Baghdad is better organized and once he

has had an opportunity to hold discussions on cooperation with former

Iranian Oil Company Director Hassan Nazih. During 13–14 April,

Bakhtiar was in Iraq for discussions with Iraqi President Saddam

Husayn. Saddam Husayn agreed to support Bakhtiar, but was unsuc-

cessful in getting Bakhtiar to agree to cooperate with General Gholam

Ali Oveisi. Iraq is supporting Oveisi in his efforts to overthrow Ayatol-

lah Khomeini by military means. Bakhtiar is reluctant to support Oveisi

because of Oveisi’s past associations and because he thinks Oveisi’s

plan will only cause the urban Iranian population to unite behind

Khomeini. Bakhtiar warned Saddam Husayn about providing troops

to Oveisi because it might give the Soviets cause to move into Iran,

but Saddam Husayn discounted this. He also told Bakhtiar, whatever

happens in Iran, Iraq does not want the U.S. to be able to reestablish

its presence there. Bakhtiar also commented on the progress of his

own plans: He said that his propaganda campaign and clashes of his

supporters with Pasdarans are going well, that plans are underway to

sabotage pumping stations on refined products lines, and that he has

enough arms for his supporters, but is having trouble getting them to

Tehran. End summary.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

1. Former Iranian Prime Minister Shahpour Bakhtiar now plans to

return to Iran in the latter part of May 1980. He had hoped to return

to Iran by the end of April, but was forced to change his plans because

of several new developments. Notably, in reviewing the plans drawn

up by his staff, he noted some deficiencies which must be corrected

prior to launching his movement. He is also disappointed at the delays

that have occurred in getting his staff in Baghdad organized.

2. Bakhtiar went to Baghdad at Iraqi President Saddam Husayn’s

request the weekend of 12–13 April and had numerous discussions

with Barzan Ibrahim Al-Tikriti, Saddam’s half-brother, as well as a

two-hour meeting alone with Saddam on 13 April. Saddam told Bakh-

tiar that he was willing to support him despite Bakhtiar’s refusal to

cooperate with General Gholam Ali Oveisi who is also receiving Iraqi

aid. According to Bakhtiar, one of the primary reasons Saddam Husayn

wanted to talk to Bakhtiar was to try to obtain some form of cooperation

between Oveisi and Bakhtiar. Bakhtiar refused to even consider cooper-

ation with Oveisi for two basic reasons: One reason is Oveisi’s past

association with the Shah and the second is that Bakhtiar does not

accept Oveisi’s relying solely on a military solution to overthrow Aya-

tollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Bakhtiar told Saddam Husayn that Oveisi’s

plan will not work because it will unite the urban population behind

Khomeini. Bakhtiar warned Saddam Husayn about committing any

Iraqi soldiers in support of Oveisi as such a commitment would provide

the Soviets the option of moving into Iran. Saddam told Bakhtiar that

he did not think there was much chance of the Soviets actually invading

Iran, particularly because of the already heavy Soviet involvement in

Afghanistan.

3. What impressed Bakhtiar most about his discussion with Saddam

Husayn was Husayn’s almost irrational fear of Khomeini. He was

particularly concerned about what Khomeini might or might not be

able to do among the Iraqi Shia.

4. In discussing big power involvement in Iran, Saddam Husayn

said that one benefit of the revolution in Iran was that the Americans

had been forced to withdraw in toto. The Iraqi President thought this

was a positive development and he hopes the U.S. will not be able to

get back into Iran in strength. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment:

Saddam Husayn would look with disfavor on the evolvement of any

situation which provides the U.S. the opportunity of regaining a foot-

hold in Iran.) Bakhtiar disagreed with Saddam Husayn about the bene-

fits of keeping a U.S. presence out of Iran. Bakhtiar argued that a big

power presence is needed to counter the Soviet threat in the region,

pointing out that while Iraq has no common border with the USSR,

Iran has 2,000 kilometers of common border with the Soviets as well

as bordering on Afghanistan. Given this situation, Bakhtiar, said, Iran

must take steps to protect its independence. He pointed out how easy

it was to kick out the Americans and commented given the same degree

of Soviet involvement, Iran would have a difficult time getting rid of

the Soviets.

5. In spite of Bakhtiar’s conversation with Saddam Husayn, Bakh-

tiar remains concerned about what to do with General Oveisi, and his

desire to attempt to overthrow the Khomeini regime militarily. Oveisi,

Bakhtiar says, considers it essential that a military decision be obtained

before the politicians move in. Bakhtiar is concerned at the amount of

support that Oveisi is getting from the Iraqis who find Oveisi’s argu-

ments persuasive mainly because they fit in with the Iraqi view of Iran.

([less than 1 line not declassified]. Comment: [2 lines not declassified]) On

campaign, Bakhtiar pointed out that he is coming under increasing

attack in the Iranian media. He believes this is an indication that his

message is getting through. He has sent tapes back to Iran where they

are copied and distributed throughout the country. Bakhtiar said that

he would like to see more public relations support from Western coun-

tries. He is attempting to generate more support from liberal European

groups. He plans a public appearance on 22 April in Brussels which

is being supported by a liberal political group. He also plans to meet

with West German Socialist Party leader Willy Brandt in Strasbourg

at the end of April.

7. As his propaganda campaign increases, Bakhtiar will begin the

next phase of the plan which will be to sabotage the transportation of

refined oil products. Bakhtiar has obtained the advice of experts who

say that the pumping stations on refined products pipelines are very

vulnerable as Iran does not have the spare parts and expertise to repair

them. Bakhtiar’s supporters are planning now to blow up some of these

pumping stations. Large amounts of explosives have already been sent

to Iran. Bakhtiar said that Saddam Husayn told him the major oil

companies assume there will be sabotage operations against Iranian

oil. As a result, Iraq has already been approached by the Japanese and

261.

Editorial Note

On April 16, 1980, President Jimmy Carter met with senior advisers

and mission commanders to discuss the details of the rescue operation.

p.m. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary) Among those present at

the meeting were the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs,

Zbigniew Brzezinski; Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, Chairman of the

Joint Staff General David Jones; Secretary of Defense Harold Brown;

leader of the Delta Force, Colonel Charlie Beckwith; Director of Opera-

tions, Joint Staff, Lieutenant General Philip C. Gast; the commander of

the overall rescue mission Major General James Vaught; and White

House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan. (Jordan, Crisis, pages 254–264)

Frank Carlucci, the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, represented

Admiral Stansfield Turner, the Director of Central Intelligence. (Turner,

Terrorism and Democracy, page 110)

As Brzezinski later recalled, during the briefing Carter emphasized

that he would not interfere with operational decisions and would give

the military maximum leeway within the approved plans. Carter

emphasized that every effort had to be made to avoid “wanton killings.”

He and Brzezinski also agreed to increase the number of helicopters

planned for the mission from seven to eight, but held the number there

rather than compromise surprise and secrecy with a larger armada.

(Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pages 495–497) According to Jordan’s

account of the meeting, the closest Carter came to direct operational

orders was over the discussion of possible loss of life. Jordan quoted

Carter:

“I think it is important to keep your mission simple. It will be easy

and tempting for your men to become engaged in gunfire with others

and to try to settle some scores for our nation. That will interfere with

your objective of getting our people out safely. In the eyes of the world,

it is important that the scope of this mission be seen as simply removing

our people. If innocent people are killed, the Iranians will make a great

public spectacle of it and will say we murdered women and children.”

(Jordan, Crisis, page 254)

In his account of this meeting, Carter wrote that he was particularly

impressed with mission commanders Vaught, Gast, and Beckwith. He

gave them his complete confidence including the promise of non-inter-

ference in the mission. Carter noted also that the helicopters and trans-

port planes were already in position, and, for the first time, they had

eyewitness information on the location of the hostages. (Carter, Keeping

Faith, pages 507–509)

The next day, April 17, Carter wrote the following diary entry:

“Vance has been extremely despondent lately, and I called Warren

Christopher in this morning to talk to him about what should be done.

He advised me to meet with Cy late in the afternoon to add some

personal concern to help resolve the problem.” Carter further wrote

that he had spoken with Vance who for “the third or fourth time” had

“indicated that he might resign.” Carter then wrote that “after he

[Vance] goes through a phase of uncertainty and disapproval, then he

joins in with adequate support for me. He said he would stay on, but

afterward would reserve the right to say that he disagreed with some

of the policies on Iran.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, page 511) Carter and

Daily Diary)

Brzezinski recounted that a small group, which he chaired, began

holding daily meetings to fine-tune the rescue mission. He noted that

they had stepped up “efforts to deceive the Iranians by initiating a

new round of negotiations while pressing publicly for all Americans

to leave Iran.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pages 495–497)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

As a part of this disinformation campaign, a message was sent to

Iranian Foreign Minister Sadegh Ghotbzadeh on April 23 through Swiss

Ambassador Erik Lang in Tehran suggesting that Iran and the United

States “take stock of our respective positions in the crisis” and noting

that the Carter administration was “willing to discuss practical steps

to resolve the crisis as soon as possible.” (Carter Library, National

Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 33, Iran Update

4/80) As Jordan recalled in his memoir, he volunteered to see Iranian

Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh again. The meeting was arranged

through lawyers Christian Bourguet and Hector Villalon. Jordan and

translator Stephanie van Reigersberg left Washington on April 18 and

met with Ghotbzadeh in Paris on April 19. (Jordan, Crisis, pages 264–

267, and Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in

Iran, page 135) Ghotbzadeh stressed that breaking relations had been

bad, and, in answer to Jordan’s question, said that the hostages “are

not important anymore,” but that it would still be “months and

months” before they returned home. He also told Jordan: “I just hope

your President doesn’t do anything rash, like attack Iran or mine our

harbors.” Jordan reassured him that this would not happen. On April

19, Carter read Jordan’s report, which Jordan had written on the return

flight, then called Brown to say “my last remaining doubt about the

mission has been removed. Tell Colonel Beckwith to proceed.” (Jordan,

Crisis, pages 265–267)

Carter recalled that Jordan had concluded from his meeting with

Ghotbzadeh that “there is absolutely no chance the hostages will be

released for two and a half to three months, and an even greater chance

that it will drag on five or six months. This only supports the tentative

decision that you have already made.” Carter also noted that he had

been impressed with a report from hostage Chargé Bruce Laingen,

urging strong action against Iran. (Carter, Keeping Faith, pages 511–

512) The telegram from Laingen, received via the British Embassy in

Tehran, is in Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under

Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot

No other records of these meetings have been found.

262.

Memorandum Prepared by the Iran Working Group

SUBJECT

Cottam said Ghotbzadeh’s first point was that his position was

“very bad.” He was desperately fighting within the government to

resist a turn towards the Eastern Bloc and he was losing. Cottam

said Ghotbzadeh had always argued that he was the main obstacle to

communist influence in the new revolutionary regime and it was possi-

ble that he was employing this argument to induce us to be more

flexible.

The second point was that Ghotbzadeh’s preferred “salami tactics”

would no longer work. His idea of a careful step-by-step to persuade

Khomeini to change his position could not succeed now. Previously

he had thought that family visits to Iran could have an effect on the

Ayatollah. Now he thought there was little chance Khomeini would

263.

Telegram From the Commander of the Joint Task Force

(Vaught) to the Deputy Commander of the Joint Task Force

at Masirah (Gast)

Subject: Execute Order.

Execute mission as briefed.

We are ready and able. God speed.

mander of the Joint Task Force for Fixed Wing Air Operations at Masirah, and the

Deputy Commander for Helicopter Operations aboard the Nimitz.

264.

Telegram From ALFA/J–2 to the Joint Task Force Intelligence

Officer (Mattingly) Aboard the U.S.S. Nimitz

Following is a CIA report. [1 line not declassified]

[1 paragraphs (5 lines) not declassified]

B. Condition of Hostages. Per subject, hostages are physically fit,

have been seen walking in the courtyard and those seen walking appear

alert and in good health. An ambulance has entered compound on two

occasions but it is not known if anyone of the hostages were taken

away from the compound. Based on their conversations [less than 1

line not declassified] hostages appear to be well-fed and shortages of

food in city have not affected them.

C. Location of Hostages. The hostages are located in two areas.

[less than 1 line not declassified] perhaps four to five of the hostages are

kept in the Ambassador’s residence. Will attempt to determine from

subject exact location within residence, but we are not sure they know.

FYI. Four Iranian female guards cover the kitchen area. Subject said

that hostages in the residence are often the Marine guards and they

are rotated periodically. Can only speculate that they might be assisting

[less than 1 line not declassified] in general KP duties. Bulk of hostages

are in Embassy offices proper—they are split up between basement,

first and second floors.

D. Strength of Guard and Their Readiness. Guard force formerly

consisted of three units: Khomeini Revolutionary Guards, Iranian Air

Force and the militant students. Air Force guards no longer present

and compound is guarded by two remaining groups. Headquarters of

Khomeini guards is the house formerly occupied by Mister Moore, the

admin officer. The Khomeini guards total approximately forty—rpt

forty. Khomeini guards mount guard duty only outside—repeat out-

side—the compound area. The militant students: Their headquarters

are in small building located inside compound bordering on deadend

street called “Coutche Bijan.” This is right of house occupied by subject.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

There are approximately twenty—repeat twenty—militant students in

that apartment house. To left of subject’s apartment house there is

another apartment house—three stories high—which normally houses

approximately six Iranian female guards, those female guards who are

on night duty.

E. Areas Patrolled. Areas patrolled by militant students are: 1. Em-

bassy building where there are approximately one guard for each hos-

tage or approximately 45. 2. Ambassador’s residence—approximately

six guards including four female guards for kitchen area mentioned

above. 3. The militant students also control the interior of the compound

with emphasis on gates, exits, and around the Embassy building. These

latter guards number approximately 100. There are also five to ten

militant student guards near the gate to the compound in the vicinity

of the Bijan Gate. In all, militant students total approximately 175 at

any given time.

F. Status of Alert. All those mentioned above have weapons but

subject unable to designate just what kind of weapons. The guards,

according to subject, appear very alert and “keyed up.”

[Omitted here is the remainder of the telegram.]

265.

Editorial Note

President‘s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brze-

zinski wrote in his memoir: “On April 23, the day before the rescue

mission, Carter decided that no concurrent attacks on other targets

would be undertaken.” He added that President Jimmy Carter also

decided that during the following day, D-day, he would conduct busi-

ness as usual in the Oval Office, I would operate out of my office, and

Brown would be in touch with me from DOD, while General Jones

would conduct the operation from the National Military Command

Center.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, page 496)

In his memoir, Carter notes that on April 23 he “received a last-

minute intelligence briefing about Iran, encapsulating information

received from all available sources. The substance was that there was

little prospect of the hostages‘ release within the next five or six months,

and that everything was favorable for the rescue mission. Our agents

in and around Tehran were very optimistic.” He met with Senator

Robert Byrd (D–West Virginia) that evening about notifying Congress.

They went over a bipartisan list of senators “who should be notified

of any secret operation of this type. I had planned to let him know

about the impending rescue mission at the end of this conversation,

but now I decided to brief him and the others during the following

night, after our team was actually in place and ready to enter Tehran.

I therefore told him that such an operation was imminent, but not

when it would be launched.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, page 513–514)

According to an August 28 memorandum from Colonel Stebbins

and an updated paper attached to the memorandum, the following

taped conversations occurred April 24–25 between Joint Task Force

headquarters at Wadi Kena and the White House. Because of secrecy

requirements, normal recording capabilities were not used. Instead,

a portable cassette recorder was connected to the secure instrument

provided for dedicated point-to-point contact. The recorder required

manual start-stop for each transmission and, therefore, had no elec-

tronic means of establishing the time for each call. Stebbins also pro-

vided codenames used for other people engaged in the calls. (Depart-

Conversations)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Carter: David, my question was how close is the nearest settlement

or town to Desert One.

Jones: We are . . . I don’t know that information . . . I asked them

for a full (plot out) (phonetic) on it. It appears in the rough map I have

here it’s quite a distance to the first town.

Carter: Yes. Quite a distance, OK. That was the question I tried to

ask but couldn’t get through.

Jones: OK. I’ve got the book map here and we’re just trying . . .

we want to know which way it’s . . . the truck was going and information

of that nature . . . and if the 41 people . . . where they may have been

going, leaving home and going to a place like Teheran or something

may be expected at home, whatever the . . . we’re trying to figure out

where the closest gendarmerie station. We’ve got the report as of a

few minutes ago that about 40 minutes after the supposed truck fire

gendarmerie were still not up on the network as of now.

Carter: Yes. And you don’t have any report on the helicopter’s

location?

Jones: Well one report that they have passed the point of no return

and the fuel to the carrier . . . the six have and that means they were

only within 30 minutes out from the landing point, I should be getting

a report at anytime on the helicopter in . . . and the refueling.

Carter: OK.

Jones: There’s a small town about 15 miles through the roads here

to the west . . . it is much further over to the northeast depending on

which way the truck was going. It is still . . . it is quite a ways to

(NAIENE) (phonetic) and (YAZDEH) (phonetic) where the . . . it will

be over 100 miles where we would expect the gendarmerie major post

to be. We’re listening to all of those and there’s no report. But there is

this town . . . we’re trying to figure out whether those would be any

communications out of this little town of (ALI ABAD) (phonetic).

Carter: David, just as a matter of intent . . . do you recall why we

decided to land just adjacent to a highway?

Jones: It’s not a highway, sir, it’s that little road . . . the only place

we’ve been able to find, so for that we could land the 130s . . . and we

looked and looked and looked and it’s the only place we found. We

looked at another one and hoped to land there, and . . . we just did

not find any place to land. We have speculated that if we had some

delay or something to send the Otter back in if we could find another

place. But we had not found another place to land, and the alternatives

were (NAIENE) (phonetic) to go ahead and seize the field, or to go to

this place.

Carter: OK. If you have any further reports just send them to Dr.

Brzezinski.

Jones: All right sir, I’ve been . . . Harold told me . . . All right, I’ll

do that. Harold told me to keep him informed. I have been as soon as

I get information.

Carter: Oh yeah . . . I was just going to be leaving for a while,

that’s why I said that.

Jones: All right, sir,

Carter: And I’ll check with Zbig. Thank you.

Jones: OK sir. Bye.

(electronic click)

(new call)

Inman: . . . of the helicopter. Again, it’s on the field from which

they normally do night ops. It’s a long way nonetheless from the desert

site. And again, our best guess at this point is that it is because of the

Iraqi situation that they are doing the flight. On the two reports, which

are hopefully down to you now, on the gendarmerie, one of those is

certainly at . . . over in Region 4 at the Iraq border. [4½ lines not

declassified]. My sense is that if they . . . if this was centered over there

Carter: This was on the ground?

Jones: On the ground . . . as the report . . . on the ground there at

Desert One. Still sketchy report. And some burns and injuries and

people . . . we assume in the 130, but we haven’t got whether it’s in

the 130 or the RH–53. They are taking them out and putting them on

. . . [words indistinct] . . . on 130s and evacuate them to Masirah. We

have no idea how many or how serious. We will try to get that as soon

as we can.

Carter: Uh huh.

Jones: The other part about it is that . . . it appears the report we

got from the carrier on the identification of 8 crews was not accurate.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Talking with Vaught we have only been able to determine with cer-

tainty 7 of the crews from the helicopters. It’s likely that one helicopter

is down, probably they think with mechanical trouble someplace down

in the southern part of Iran. We’re doing everything we can to figure

out the identification of it . . . figure out a rescue way, but it looks as

though we do not have the eighth helicopter crew identified. They

talked with the helicopter crews at the Desert One and they said there

are six there. The seventh is returning to the carrier from having landed

down below . . . they think the other one went down from mechanical

trouble, which probably means they are on the ground and can be

retrieved though.

Carter: Now can we detect them on the ground . . . can we find

them on the ground?

Jones: We should be able to if they landed OK . . . we should be

able to with radios and the rest . . . to be able to find them. We’re

going to try every effort to see . . . to locate them, to include the

helicopters that are coming back to the coast . . . to pick up radios,

NSA to try to pick up any radio contact from them. They should be

able to pick them up, should be able to get them if everything goes

OK. But we are expending all of our efforts towards two things. Getting

the people out of Desert One, and two, to identify this eighth crew

and get it rescued. I have talked to Admiral Long, who’s talking to

the carrier task force commander to do everything they can to avoid

any casualties on Iranians, and only as a last resort to engage. In that

regard, because of the endangering of our hostages. Still the report . . .

and of course it’s still sketchy until we get everybody figured out . . .

that there were no Iranians that were killed or injured at Desert One,

but we’ll have to confirm that a little later.

Carter: Is everyone off the ground now at Desert One?

Jones: No, they are having to . . . it’s been I guess 15 or 20 minutes

since I talked to Vaught . . . they may be off the ground, but they were

having to move everybody from that 130 to another 130, and helicopter

and 130 people had to get off. I would expect them to be off fairly

shortly. I asked him for a report as soon as they all get off and headed

south. I will pass that word on.

Carter: OK. Thank you David.

Jones: Yes sir.

[electronic click] [new call]

Long: Long speaking.

Johnson: Ah sir, General Johnson here. The Chairman asked me

to check, sir, if we had a confirmation on the one helicopter making it

back to the Nimitz sir.

Long: We have not received a report yet that they . . . the first helo

is back aboard Nimitz.

Johnson: All right sir. Thank you sir.

Long: All right. Good bye.

Johnson: Good bye sir.

[electronic click] [new call]

Long: . . . as of 2300Z

Johnson: Yes sir.

Long: Reference C–130/helo accident refers. All helos being

destroyed/left. All crews coming out in C–130s with some casualties.

Number unknown. That’s paragraph one. Got that?

Johnson: Yes sir. That all . . . I understand they are destroying

all helos?

Long: All helos being destroyed/left. It is they are being destroyed

or left.

Johnson: Those that could not fly out. All right sir.

Long: General, I’m giving you what [CURTSY] saying. I don’t

know that.

Johnson: All right sir.

Long: All crews coming out in C–130 with some casualties. Num-

bers unknown. Paragraph two. No additional tankers available at Diego

Garcia. Additional tanking must come from Wadi Kena. Two KC–135

on station. One boom rigged for C–130. One rigged basket for TACAIR

[SEEB] (phonetic) Oman. Paragraph 3. BLUEBEARD . . . BLUEBEARD

5 on board Nimitz. That’s it.

Johnson: All right sir. Thank you sir.

Long: So the first helo is back aboard. And as soon as you tell the

Chairman that, call me back. I’ve got another message for you.

Johnson: All right sir. Thank you, sir.

Long: Good bye.

[electronic click] [new call]

Johnson: General Johnson.

Voice C: Yes sir. Is General Jones there for the President?

Johnson: Yes sir . . . [word indistinct].

Voice C: Beg pardon?

Johnson: Yes, General Jones is here.

Voice C: Thank you.

Jones: Yes

Voice C: General Jones, one moment for the President, please sir.

Jones: Yes. Uh huh. [pause]

[indistinct voices in background]

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Voice C: Go ahead, gentlemen.

Carter: Hello?

Jones: Yes sir, Mr President.

Carter: Heard anything else?

Jones: Yes sir. I just got a report from General Vaught. He’s on the

other phone now, but let me just give you a run down. He believes

that all Americans who are alive are off the ground. That is his report.

Carter: All Americans who are what?

Jones: He said who are alive. There are some who evidently were

fatalities there. Here is his report. He said it’s unsure until they sort it

out . . . what they have done is because of the problem of the helicopter

and the departure of time . . . and the daylight flyout, they have decided

to take everybody out in the 130s and to leave the helicopters there

because of the risk of losing people.

Carter: OK. All right.

Jones: Their estimate is that one helicopter crew . . . the one that

was involved in the accident . . . the crew . . . the missing . . . probably

died in the accident.

Carter: Yes . . . I . . .

Jones: Probably five, they think one got out, that the . . . in the EC–

130 . . . when the helicopter hit it up in that part, the pilot is believed

missing and presumed dead. And some passengers . . . the passengers

most got out, but there may have been some trapped in there. And

they haven’t been able to make an exact accounting. They just went

around and made sure that everyone they could get a hold of got

aboard and get them out. They don’t believe that anybody remained

. . . except fatality . . . but the accounting is very very poor. As to right

now they have to sort it out as to what . . . what the situation would

be. The . . . if they all left now . . . it’s about 2 and one half hours to

coast with the . . . with the MC–130s and another hour and a half up

to . . . down to Masirah. We are getting air MEDEVAC aircraft into

Masirah . . . the one out of Daharan so that there will be the medical

treatment there when they arrive. We . . . one helicopter is back on the

carrier . . . the one that I reported earlier, and the eighth crew is still

unaccounted for. We are doing everything we can to determine the

rescue of it. Over.

Carter: I understand.

Jones: And we will try to get an accounting as soon as we can

. . . on the accident and how many got out. It will be a little different

with the 130s coming out . . . come out somewhat faster . . . better

. . . and fewer . . . so the risks of them being attacked probably less

. . . less than having both helicopters and 130s coming out.

Carter: Yes, David. Thank you.

Jones: Yes sir.

[electronic click] [new call]

Davis: . . . Therefore imperative that crew returning to Nimitz

. . . BLUEBEARD 5 be debriefed as to what occurred enroute as soon

as possible, and information passed to CINCPAC. Specific questions:

Can all 8 helo crews be accounted for? Were there any personnel

casualties in the helo/130 collision? Now, you’ve already answered

Jones: OK.

Inman: Thank you.

Jones: Bye.

[new call]

Voice E: . . . for the President sir.

Jones: OK. [pause] Yes sir.

Carter: Hi David.

Jones: The update is that all of the 5 130s are enroute out. The last

one should cross the coast in an hour and about 5 minutes.

Carter: About 8: our time.

Jones: Yes sir. Landing in two hours and 40 minutes . . . something

around just before 10: our time down at Masirah. The first airplanes

should be on the ground sometime before that. They came out early.

Carter: So the last one should be on the ground about 10 o’clock?

Jones: Should be by 10 o’clock, yes sir. Five coming out. The best

. . . and again they’ll have to count everything up . . . but they believe

there were 4 crew members of the RH–53 lost in the accident, one pilot

of the 130, and one other in the rear for a total of 6 fairly confirmed.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

There may be others who are missing from that group. We have aero

MEDEVAC airplanes . . . we had at Dhaharan one positioned for the

next day . . . and a C–9 special with whole blood coming out of Germany

to go into Wadi Kena to meet. We have report from [less than 1 line

not declassified] . . . we’re not sure . . . may be from the helicopter crew

that is missing, however their first report is that they cannot get a

location on it yet. So we’re working on an expedited basis on that [less

than 1 line not declassified] and the whole business of trying to rescue

that crew that’re down.

Carter: How would we go about that David?

Jones: Well, probably with that RH–53 we now have back and

refueled on the Nimitz. They also have other helicopters. That would

be the quickest thing. We are also . . . we had loaded aboard C–5 in

New Mexico . . . launching some special RH–53s that we did not launch

ahead of time because it would tip the hand of the whole operation.

But if it becomes very complex they are better. But it appears that the

Nimitz could pick up in the rescue . . . from the Nimitz . . . with its

helicopters if we could find out where the crew is located. So that’s

where . . . now it appears that everybody’s airborne out of Desert One

and getting close to the coast. We’re really concentrating on trying to

find that crew. And also be sure to get those 5 aircraft across the coast

without being intercepted.

Carter: Now David one thing we don’t want to do is compound

the problem by having a major pitched air battle over Iran.

Jones: Yes sir. I had told that to . . .

Carter: We need to think this through if we know where that crew

is on the ground, how to go about getting them out.

Jones: Yes sir. Well when we find it I’ll talk with you or with

Harold and we’ll make sure we’ve got a well organized plan to get in

and to get it out. I told Harold one thing we wanted to do the better

choice we have [1½ lines not declassified] to get this helicopter crew

picked up. We have no report [less than 1 line not declassified] any alerting

of anybody anyplace.

Carter: That’s unbelievable, isn’t it?

Jones: Yes sir.

Carter: Someone just walked through the office watching TV.

They’re apparently having massive riots on the street over there in

Tehran because of other altercations, and they said the streets in Tehran

looked almost like they did when the Shah fell.

Jones: I hadn’t heard that. I know there was a lot of fighting in

and around the Iraqi border, and many people killed over there that

we’d gotten earlier. Things have quieted down now as far as all of the

gendarmerie out in the country.

Carter: David let’s leave it this way. I’m not going to say anything

or do anything until we clear it with you. And before you all firm up

any part of air intrusion into Iran again make sure you have the clear-

ance from me and Harold.

Jones: Yes sir.

Carter: Because I’m going to ask Harold to stay here with me.

Jones: Well . . . we will and I’ve got . . . we’re working the aftermath

problem but we can. All my colleagues have been here and . . . one

thing that I have authorized CINCPAC to do is to have the ships that

are in the . . . and we had planned to do this after the operation reveal-

ed . . . ships in the Persian Gulf that are at sea to move on down out

Carter: Yes.

Jones: It will take awhile . . . but the LaSalle is in port and would

stay in port in Bahrain . . . it can’t sail now for quite awhile and we

think it’s safe in port . . . but the others to come on down and try to

avoid any confrontation. One thing that came in as a recommenda-

tion . . . which I recommend against . . . that is on the destruction of

those helicopters . . . the problem is if we try to destroy and go into

the middle of the country we might get there before people get there,

but you can never be sure.

Carter: I wouldn’t worry about that. If we send a gun ship in there,

there would probably be more complications.

Jones: It would probably be an A–6 sir, but I do not recom-

Carter: An A–6 or anything . . . I was . . .

Jones: . . . recommend for it . . .

Carter: Let’s not do it, because if there are hundreds of Iranians

all over those helicopters looking at them as a curiosity . . . you know

we’re going to wind up with a bunch of Iranian casualties.

Jones: I agree.

Carter: So let’s not do that.

Jones: We’re working our best . . . I recommend not and we will not.

Carter: OK. We’ll charge them for the helicopter later.

Jones: All right sir.

Carter: OK David. Thank you.

Jones: That’s all I have.

Carter: David?

Jones: Yes sir?

Carter: One other thing . . . we’ve got a problem and a fairly

substantial time delay in getting any part of message to GHOTBZADEH

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

and BANI-SADR . . . and what we’d like to do as soon as you all . . .

you might want to think of this independent of us . . . we’ve got to go

through the Swiss and things have to be translated into French and so

forth . . . and so we’ve got at least a couple of hours delay in getting

him a message. And I need to let him know as soon as possible that

we had planned a rescue operation . . . we had canceled it when we

had a collision between . . . an accident involving our own aircraft. So

far as we know there are no Iranian casualties and that we . . . that all

Americans have been withdrawn. We don’t want to have them think

we’re invading Iran and have them all of a sudden go on a bloodbath

against Americans over there.

Jones: Uh huh. Yes I think though they will . . . it will take them

quite awhile if they don’t see the 130s coming out or anything like that

. . . to get out to those helicopters and then look at them and identify

them as American . . . and not . . . they were all painted . . . and to

get inside them . . . there are things we had to abandon . . . we’re not

sure what they’ve . . . abandoned in there . . . but I think there will be

a considerable time period before they’re really aware of it. I think

we’ll have a few hours . . .

Carter: Yes.

Jones: . . . and so we are working that and we will be alert to that.

Carter: Let me know . . . let me know immediately when you hear

anything about . . . [less than 1 line not declassified]. David it’s better for

you to call . . . we’re all here in my little black office . . . it’s Signal 176

. . . and then just tell me to pick up the secure phone, if you want to

call me.

Jones: OK. Signal 176 and then ask you to pick up secure.

Carter: Yeah. One other thing David. Do you have anyway yet to

know what American bodies were left in there?

Jones: No we do not. We . . . they had report of one body, but it

was confused if whether the body was taken out. The intent would

have been to bring the bodies out.

Carter: I know. I understand they were completely burned.

Jones: They said they were missing . . . I think there may be one

body coming and the other 5 missing, but that is clearly not determined

as yet.

Carter: OK. I’ll be sitting here by the phone.

Jones: Yes sir. Thank you.

[electronic click]

[new call]

Jones: . . . the other one we got back through [CURTSY] which

we’re still not sure of indicated that 7 were coming back from Desert

One and one had already arrived back at the Nimitz. We will assume

for now there is a crew down. The main thing is to get . . . we’ll ask

when the 130s come out. We got a report from [less than 1 line not

declassified]. We don’t want though any egress or penetration of Iranian

territory with a search mission until we sort things out a little better

. . . is the crew down, where is it down, some debriefing and that, and

figure out our rescue operation. Over.

Long: All right. I understand. I’m now satisfied there was only one

crew aboard the helo that has returned to Nimitz.

Jones: Yeah.

Long: We have . . . we are trying to find out through both your

office as well as [CURTSY] how many crews are actually in the 130s.

And we have accepted the SAR mission and we are going to [CURTSY]

to tell him to give us plans . . . do not execute at this time . . . but give

us plans for a search plan considering egress and no egress. Now we’re

pretty well convinced here . . . or I am . . . that the nature of the beeper

is such that it would be impossible to detect it in any range in excess

of 50 miles. And probably considerably less from where we are out in

the Gulf. So that would appear if there is in fact a helo down that the

only way we would be able to detect that beeper . . . other than overhead

system . . . would be actually overflying Iranian territory. We will not

do that until we get some other indication that that’s what is required.

Jones: OK. I agree. Maybe if they can hide out by dark comes again

that RH–53 that’s got all the overnight capability . . . the night capability

might do it. Maybe the 130s coming out can get some indication on

beepers. And also when the crews land we ought to be able to get

some indication of when that helicopter dropped out. If it just flat

dropped out of the sky it most likely crashed. If he aborted because

of maintenance trouble he should have told somebody he was going

Box

7,

Iranian

Hostage

Crisis

Telephone

Conversations)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

people that were casualties at Desert One. That’s just . . . they won’t

know until they get on the ground at Masirah and count up everybody.

We now believe . . . and it’s highly likely . . . we keep getting confusing

reports . . . but it’s highly likely that that eighth helicopter crew is on

the 130. They just haven’t been able to confirm it . . . it’s been on again,

off again . . . through one channel we get a confirmation, through the

other channel an uncertainty . . . but when they land in an hour and

45 minutes, shortly thereafter we should know. So I would say better

than 50–50 that the eighth crew . . . so we won’t have a rescue mission

to perform, but that’s still uncertain.

Carter: Well, if that materializes that will be the first good news

that we’ve had tonight.

Jones: Yes sir.

Carter: Any disturbance in Iran yet?

Jones: I just talked with Admiral Inman and he said everything is

very quiet. Nothing . . .

Carter: I cannot understand that.

Jones: Nothing at all.

Carter: David, can you explain to me now . . . we’re getting down

to the point where I’m going to have to start notifying . . . you know

. . . members of Congress . . . and even telling the American people.

It’s getting to . . . it’s not crucial, it’s getting more and more urgent.

[1½ lines not declassified]

Jones: [4½ lines not declassified]

Carter: I’ll hold.

Jones: The belief here is that they will . . . get working together

today and it’s getting . . . it’s light over there now . . .

Carter: It is?

Jones: [4½ lines not declassified]

Carter: [1 line not declassified]

Jones: [4 lines not declassified]

Carter: [1 line not declassified]

Jones: [8½ lines not declassified]

Carter: [7 lines not declassified]

Jones: [3½ lines not declassified]

Carter: [1 line not declassified]

Jones: [1 line not declassified]

Carter: [1 line not declassified]

Jones: [1 line not declassified]

Carter: [1 line not declassified]

Jones: [1 line not declassified]

Carter: [1 line not declassified]

Jones: [7½ lines not declassified]

Carter: [2 lines not declassified]

Jones: [1 line not declassified]

Carter: [1½ lines not declassified]

Jones: [1½ lines not declassified]

Carter: [1 line not declassified]

Jones: [1 line not declassified]

Carter: [1 line not declassified]

Jones: [9 lines not declassified]

Carter: [3½ lines not declassified]

Jones: [1 line not declassified]

Carter: Sure, I got you. OK, well I’ll be here if you need me.

Jones: There’s one thing I would suggest be considered as to what

to tell the Omanis . . .

Carter: Yes, Cy and Warren are working on that.

Jones: What we’d planned to do is attempt to transfer the people

. . . particularly with the burned one injured . . . but transfer the people

and get them to Wadi Kena . . . so they’re not on the ground down

there . . . to get back to better care . . . and to get them out of Masirah

. . . but it’s likely to be some . . . some discovery there.

Carter: OK. There’s two things . . . just to summarize . . . the

obvious. There’s two things I need to know about. One is that eighth

helicopter . . . the crew. And the other one if the alarm is raised.

Jones: [6½ lines not declassified]

Carter: OK.

Jones: . . . specifically can be the better.

Carter: [less than 1 line not declassified] I’ll try to take care of my

advisors over here. OK?

Jones: All right sir.

Carter: Thank you David.

Conversations)

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Brown: All right.

Jones: . . . that we go ahead and start moving them back tomorrow

if that’s OK.

Brown: Yeah . . . let me check here, but that’s my inclination. Very

strong inclination. OK. See . . . the Vice President is here and would

like to talk to you a little. Then, after that, maybe you could get John

[COUSTAY] (phonetic) to call me back over here . . . I’ll be in the

Cabinet Room or reachable there . . . with his ideas about the sheath

of things he sent over in the way of messages that we would send out.

The only one I would propose to send out now, suitably modified, is

the CINC’s alert message. I don’t think it makes sense now to tell the

Pakistanis, the Omanis, and the Indians to stay away from our ships.

Jones: I agree.

Brown: OK. Here’s the Vice President.

Mondale: David, I just wanted some information. If you’re busy

in an operational sense just call me back.

Jones: No, I’m not busy right now. If I get a hot call or something

. . . [words indistinct]

Mondale: Yeah, sure. As I understand it our planes have now

cleared Iranian territory.

Jones: That is correct. We still have an uncertainty as to one of the

helicopter crews.

Mondale: Uh huh. But everyone that was at Desert One got in the

130s . . . has left and has cleared Iranian territory.

Jones: Yes sir. We had an unfortunate accident at Desert One, where

a helicopter ran into a 130 and they both caught fire, and it appears

that all but one crew member on the helicopter is a fatality and a small

number . . . maybe the pilot and one or two . . . we’re not sure . . . in

the back on the 130 from that accident and until they get back and sort

it out we won’t be sure. But a small number . . . caused by an accident

there as they were getting ready to leave.

Mondale: What do you estimate? Six dead?

Jones: Well . . . that’s so uncertain right now. I would say that’s

. . . that’s about what we know about, but there may be some others

missing or dead from that accident.

Mondale: Yeah . . . ah . . . what about the helicopter crew that

we’ve had trouble finding?

Jones: Well, we think it’s aboard the 130, but we’re not sure. It was

confusion as to . . . out of Desert One we got a report that there were

only 6 crews there. Then a report . . . no, there were seven crews, and

that one got picked up. We have one crew, the eighth one, that had

landed and then went back to the Nimitz.

Mondale: Uh huh.

Jones: Arrived Nimitz about an hour or so ago. He reported that

his indication is that there were seven, and one had been picked up.

We won’t know for sure . . . and I would say better than 50–50 that

this seventh helicopter crew is aboard the 130s, but certainly not a high

assurance. It should land . . . the 130 should land at Masirah in about

40 minutes and then they’re going to . . . General Gast is going to meet

. . . check everybody as they get off and see who’s missing and . . .

one of the first things we do is whether that helicopter crew is there.

If it’s not, then we’ve got to . . . a rescue . . . problem of trying to find

it without penetrating . . . we then trying to do things through NSA

and others to . . . get some indication of where it is . . . the radio

beacons . . . we’d earlier had the indication of a beacon . . . but that

could be spurious. We got quite a few of those.

Mondale: If, in fact, the crew is aboard, presumably the craft had

to land because it was stricken . . . another chopper picked them up

and took them on to Desert One, huh?

Jones: That’s what the feeling is, the most probable thing now

. . . but still not a certainty.

Mondale: Uh huh.

Jones: When they had the accident and the delay and the time that

they had [words indistinct due to Mondale’s breathing] they decided

all to come in the 130s . . . supposed to fly helicopters . . .

Mondale: They just left them behind. . .did they blow them up?

Jones: No . . . for a number of reasons. One is they didn’t have

time . . . it was the primary reason. And I would guess another reason

. . . at least if I had a 130 problem and had to go back . . .

Mondale: You . . . you might need them. Yeah.

Jones: What it looks like now in the post mortem is that everything

would have worked well . . . we lost from a reliability standpoint . . .

three of our eight helicopters . . . and a determination had been made

that if we lose more than 2 of the 8 before we leave Desert One . . .

the probability of losing one more was very high . . . and therefore the

mission couldn’t be accomplished . . . so that . . . so for want of the

nail was three of eight helicopters [voice smothered over by Mondale’s

breathing] . . . the mission.

Mondale: And we’d flown these helicopters all over the country

successfully, hadn’t we?

Jones: Well, we have . . . those had been on the Nimitz since last

December or so but they’ve been flying off the Nimitz, and the crews

went out about a week ahead of time and did some flying on these

helicopters. But they were different ones than we had in the States

because we shipped those out many many months ago. We’ve been

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

working on them and been flying them out there and . . . but it’s just

one of those things . . . the reliability impacted on the mission . . .

Mondale: We just got two bad breaks, that’s all.

Jones: It looks as though that . . . there’s no tip off from that desert

landing as yet, and we’re surprised, but these vehicles . . . and the

vehicle that drove through evidently didn’t report anything.

Mondale: It’s hard to believe, isn’t it.

Jones: Well if I were a person over there and I wasn’t sure if you

put your head above water you’d get your head chopped off . . . that

if I were some poor guy out in the country I’m not sure I just wouldn’t

drive home . . . you don’t know who’s there and what it’s all about,

and that sort of thing.

Mondale: Yeah.

Jones: So, I . . . we thought maybe there was a good chance he

wouldn’t report. Now, the bus load of 41 people . . . we don’t know

if this bus was still OK and that they are heading to town or that they

are . . . the bus was disabled and they’re waiting for the next vehicle

to come by or what. There were more vehicles than we thought. We

knew there were vehicles coming down that road. We had expected

that on a Thursday night . . . a holiday . . . weekend there would be

fewer road . . . vehicles in the middle of the night. We did have the

expectation there would be some and the roadblock was set up for

stopping of the vehicles. But he hasn’t tipped off yet, so we’d have

been up in the hideout now, and everything was total green at that

way . . . bedded down, and things were going. But the reliability . . .

once we aborted, when you do that sort of thing . . . confusion increases

and the unfortunate accident.

Mondale: I suppose people get so damned distressed and disap-

pointed that they sometimes lose their efficiency too, don’t they?

Jones: We may never know, but we’ll try to find out what hap-

Mondale: Sure.

Jones: . . . helicopter running into that 130 out there. It looked as

though . . . if we accept the uncertainty of that helicopter . . . which

we think now is probably aboard that 130, we could have gotten all

our people out. We don’t have any indication of any casualties among

the Iranians right now . . .

Mondale: Uh huh. OK, thank you very much David.

Jones: You’re welcome, sir.

Mondale: Right, Bye. (Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–02–

phone Conversations)

266.

Chart Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated

TIME

ACTUAL

IRANIAN

(ZULU)

PLANNED

EVENTS

REACTIONS

Tehran = ZULU + 4½

declassified]

ca. 1700

Two helo’s down in

mountains about

275 miles inside

Iran on flight path

situation reports

ACTUAL

IRANIAN

(ZULU)

PLANNED

EVENTS

REACTIONS

Trouble at DS1.

Vehicle evaded

roadblock. Injured

7 helo’s depart DS

for Helo Landing

Strip

Final MC130 departs

DS1 for Masirah

for Masirah

DELTA and six

helo’s at DS1.

Tankers can stay to

2130Z. Op not yet

abandoned.

DELTA refueling

and awaiting final

decision.

Provides report on

Tabas Gendarmerie

post to DELTA

Mission has aborted.

Forces being

extracted.

7 helo’s with DELTA

land at HLS

CHARLEY/1

notified of abort.

He rogered on PT

25 and ceased

transmission.

Some aircraft have

departed DS1.

Milsat circuitry

down. [1 line not

declassified]

Ground collision

between helo and

C–130. Order had

already been given

to destroy

inoperable helo

7 helo’s with DELTA

depart HLS for

mountain hideout

Milsat circuitry up.

Cease relaying

NSA traffic

TIME

ACTUAL

IRANIAN

(ZULU)

PLANNED

EVENTS

REACTIONS

Recommends against

destructive strike

against abandoned

aircraft.

[24 lines not

declassified]

Tehran Radio’s

first report cites

Press Secretary

Powell’s

statement

Iranian Army

says two US

planes collided

while Iran AF

plane was

chasing them.

First commentary

by Tehran

Radio says

planes down

and helo’s stuck

in mud.

Khorassan

Governor

General put out

widespread

roadblock order

Tehran Gend gets

report that area

has been

inspected. Five

helo’s plus

another helo

sighted. At least

one other

aircraft.

Vienna Austria

radio carries

live report from

its correspond-

ent who claims

Iran

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

TIME

ACTUAL

IRANIAN

(ZULU)

PLANNED

EVENTS

REACTIONS

JGS learned of

event when he

called them.

Tehran Radio has

report on bus

passengers from

Tabas

Gendarmerie

Students at

Embassy say

report is a lie.

DELTA assaults

Embassy

TIME

ACTUAL

IRANIAN

(ZULU)

PLANNED

EVENTS

REACTIONS

2029Z

Iranian

Gendarmerie

ordered to

search for helo

down about 60

km from coast.

267.

After Action Report

Washington, undated

RESCUE MISSION REPORT

The Countdown

On 12 April, CJCS instructed COMJTF to finalize planning for

deployment of the force. COMJTF recommended Thursday, 24 April,

based on many considerations, a primary one being moon illumination.

A series of interrelated but separate actions were initiated, one of

the more significant being a training exercise to practice helicopter

refueling using one C–130 aerial tanker and four helicopters on the

desert as a final verification of this capability.

On 15–16 April, COMJTF conducted a two-day meeting in the

Pentagon to review the plan with commanders, affirm command and

control matters, evaluate force readiness, review contingencies, and

make an overall assessment of mission success should it be executed

on 24 April.

On 16 April, the Joint Chiefs of Staff approved the plan. That

evening, the President approved the plan after he was briefed by

COMJTF, Deputy COMJTF, and the commander of the ground rescue

force. The President stated that deployment flow should proceed with

Desert One, in the desert. The C–130 element with the ground rescue

forces was also in the execution phase on a different track and time

schedule to Desert One. Approximately two hours after takeoff, the

crew of Helicopter #6 received cockpit indications of an impending

rotor blade failure; landed; verified the malfunction (an automatic abort

situation); and abandoned their aircraft. The crew was picked by

another helicopter, which then continued the mission individually.

Approximately one hour thereafter, the helicopter formation unex-

pectedly encountered a dust cloud of unknown size and density. The

helicopters broke out of the first area of suspended dust but, within

an hour, entered a second, larger and denser area. While attempting

to navigate through this second area with severely degraded visibility,

a second helicopter (#5) experienced a failure of several critical naviga-

tion and flight instruments. Due to progressively deteriorating flight

conditions that made safe flight extremely questionable, the helicopter

pilot determined that it would be unwise to continue. He aborted the

mission, reversed course, and recovered on NIMITZ. Eventually six of

the original eight helicopters arrived at the refueling site in intervals

between approximately 50 minutes and 85 minutes later than planned.

While en route, a third helicopter (#2) experienced a partial

hydraulic failure, but the crew elected to continue to the refueling site

believing repairs could be accomplished there. Upon landing, however,

the crew and the helicopter unit commander determined that the heli-

copter could not be repaired. A hydraulic pump had failed due to a

fluid leak, and no replacement pump was available. Even if a pump

had been immediately available, there was insufficient time to change

it, repair the cause of the leak, service the system, and complete the

next leg prior to daylight. The helicopter was unsafe to continue the

mission unrepaired.

Earlier, it had been determined that a minimum of six operational

helicopters would be required at the refueling site to continue the

mission. Since at this point there were only five operational, the on-

scene commander advised COMJTF by radio of the situation, and he

in turn communicated to Washington the status of the force and his

intention to abort the operation and return to launch base. The President

concurred in the decision that the mission could not continue, and

preparations began for withdrawal of the five operational helicopters,

the C–130s, and the rescue force.

While repositioning one helicopter to permit another to top off his

fuel tanks for the return flight, the first helicopter collided with one of

the refueling C–130s. Both aircraft were immediately engulfed in flames

in which eight crew members died and five other members of the team

were injured. Since the C–130 was loaded with members of the rescue

force awaiting extraction, even greater injury and loss of life were

avoided only by swift and disciplined evacuation of the burning air-

craft. Shortly afterwards, ammunition aboard both aircraft began to

explode. Several helicopters were struck by shrapnel from the explosion

and/or the burning ammunition, and at least one and possibly more

were rendered nonflyable. At this point, with time and fuel running

out for the C–130s, the decision was made to transfer all helicopter

crews to the remaining C–130s and to depart the area.

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Attachment

Map of Rescue Mission Operations From the Iranian Border

to Desert One

Washington, undated

268.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

Switzerland

109041. For the Ambassador. Subject: Urgent Message to Bani-Sadr.

1. Secret (Entire text)

2. For Ambassador: Please deliver following message to Ruegg

Foreign Office soonest. If immediate circuits not open to Ambassador

269.

Editorial Note

On April 25, 1980, the White House issued a short statement on

the failed hostage rescue attempt. President Jimmy Carter followed

this with a longer address to the nation at 7 a.m. that morning. In his

address, Carter briefly outlined the rescue mission and then explained

that the rescue attempt, which had been months in the planning, was

executed only when it became clear that Iranian authorities “could not

or would not resolve this crisis on their own initiative.” He also stated

regarding the decision to attempt the rescue and the decision to cancel

the mission: “The responsibility is fully my own.” (Public Papers: Carter,

The Carter administration then continued the process of dealing

with the consequences of the failed rescue operation, including engag-

ing in correspondence with U.S. allies and congressional leadership,

debating among advisers a new rescue attempt, meeting with the

wounded, holding a press conference, accepting the resignation of

Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, and attending the burial of the returned

bodies of those who died at Desert One.

Carter personally apologized to Sultan Qaboos bin Said of Oman,

Prince Fahd ibn Abd al Aziz Al Saud, the First Deputy Prime Minister

of Saudi Arabia, and President Anwar Sadat of Egypt for using facilities

on their territories as part of the rescue mission without giving them

prior information. Carter assured Sultan Qaboos that he would provide

“prompt assistance” if the security of Oman was jeopardized as a result

of U.S. activities. And he assured Prince Fahd “of full U.S. support for

the maintenance of the integrity of Saudi Arabia.” (Letters from Carter

to Sultan Qaboos and to Prince Fahd, April 25; Carter Library, Plains

2438) Qaboos was at first “angry,” then asked that the United States

“do everything possible to avoid publicly linking Oman or Masirah

Island to Iranian operation.” (Telegram 1151 from Muscat, April 25;

Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary

NODIS Cables Apr 1980) Sadat responded that while it was “well-

known that Egypt had said it would provide facilities for such humani-

tarian purposes,” to avoid criticism, Egypt did not intend to say any-

thing publicly, and if it did, any statement would be in the form of a

denial. (Telegram 9284 from Cairo, April 25; ibid.)

Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary

of Defense W. Graham Claytor, and Assistant to the Chairman of the

Joint Chiefs of Staff General John S. Pustay briefed the representatives

of the U.S. allies in Washington on April 25, providing a detailed

explanation of the decision-making process. (Telegram 109502 to all

NATO Capitals, et al., April 26; National Archives, RG 59, Central

Foreign Policy File, P880029–0131) That day Carter met with bipartisan

President’s Daily Diary) No other record of this meeting has been

found. The next day, Carter wrote to Speaker of the House Thomas

P. O’Neill, Jr. and President Pro Tempore of the Senate Warren G.

Magnuson, describing the operation and assuring them that he had

acted within the War Powers Act. (Public Papers: Carter 1980–81, Book

I, pages 777–779)

advisers to consider the viability of another rescue mission. Attending

were the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew

Brzezinski, Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, Director of Central

Intelligence Stansfield Turner, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

General David Jones, Commander of the Joint Task Force Major General

James B. Vaught, Commander of Hunter Army Air Base. (Carter

Library, President’s Daily Diary) As Turner later recalled, the meeting

was chaotic. Vaught, who Turner thought should have apologized for

mission failure, instead lectured Carter on how well he himself had

commanded. Carter didn’t respond. Turner described the discussion

on ideas for a new rescue plan as unproductive. Suggestions escalated

toward a full-scale invasion of Iran by several divisions, and Vaught

interrupted everyone. At one point, Carter admonished “that if he

could just be allowed to finish a thought,” some progress might be

made. Eventually, Turner wrote, Carter simply terminated the meeting

in frustration. (Turner, Terrorism and Democracy, pages 126–127) No

other record of this meeting has been found.

On April 27, a personal message from Carter was read at the

memorial services for those who died during the operation, although

Carter himself did not attend. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I,

pages 779–780) That day, Carter met with members of the Delta Team

and five Iranians who had helped in the mission. (Carter, Keeping Faith,

page 519) Carter’s remarks to the Delta Team are in Carter Library,

Plains File, Box 7. On April 28, in San Antonio, Texas, he met with

those wounded in action, telling reporters afterwards that he was “over-

whelmed with emotion” and “filled with a sense of abhorrence and

horror” over the Iranian willingness to exhibit the bodies of the dead

reference is to April 27 events in which the Revolutionary Guard,

apparently acting under the guidance of Ayatollah Khalkhali, had

moved the bodies of the U.S. servicemen to the U.S. Embassy compound

in Tehran. There, in front of journalists, the wrappings around the

bodies were removed, revealing the charred remains. At one point,

Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission

Khalkhali held up a limb to show a wristwatch. He vowed that the

bodies would not be returned to the U.S. Government because it was

“unworthy.” (William Branigin, “Pledge to Return Corpses in Doubt,”

On April 28, Carter accepted the resignation of Secretary of State

Cyrus Vance “with regret.” Carter wrote to Vance: “Because you could

not support my decision regarding the rescue operation in Iran, you

have made the correct decision to resign.” Vance had submitted his

resignation letter on April 21, prior to the rescue mission, due to differ-

ences over Iran. The exchange of letters is in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–

Edmund S. Muskie as Secretary of State on April 29. (Ibid., pages 791–

792) On April 29, Carter gave a full press conference on the rescue

mission from the East Room of the White House. (Ibid., pages 792–801)

Speaking for all the hostages, Chargé and hostage Bruce Laingen

expressed “respect” for Carter’s “courage in the tough decisions that

surrounded the rescue mission.” Laingen noted that Carter “has our

total understanding in the disappointment we know he feels in its

forced cancellation.” (Telegram 31 from Tehran to the Department of

State, via the British Embassy, April 29; Department of State, Records

of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs,

Iran eventually returned the bodies of the U.S. soldiers killed in

Iran. Carter delivered the eulogy at their burials at Arlington National

Cemetery on May 9. He stated:

“I speak for all Americans when I say to those who anonymously

risk their lives each day to keep the peace and to maintain our military

strength, and to the loved ones of those who died on the Iranian desert:

Your risk, your suffering, your loss, are not in vain. I fervently pray

that those who are still held hostage will be freed without more blood-

shed, that all those who would use terror to impel innocent people

will see the cruel futility of their criminal acts.” (Public Papers: Carter,

270.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, April 27, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran—Next Steps

From the perspective of our negotiating strategy, it is essential that

we build on and reinforce the central message that the U.S. is prepared

to use extreme measures to get our people released. It is that underlying

factor which lends credibility and urgency to all the other measures

we are able to take.

Nothing builds credibility more effectively than the fact that we

believe in our own minds that there are valid options available to us.

The underlying assurance and singleness of purpose in the various

voices of the U.S. Government over the past several weeks has been

unmistakable. That is an asset which must be preserved.

Any future rescue operation must work. A mere demonstration that

we are willing to keep trying—and failing—will do more harm than

good. In any systematic evaluation of possible alternative rescue plans,

several key factors must be taken into account:

—Intelligence. We must at a minimum have confidence that we

know where the hostages are being held and under what conditions.

I suspect, as you do, that the Iranians may be bluffing about moving

the hostages. But until we can confirm that with some degree of assur-

ance, and until we can evaluate what changes have been introduced

into the security patterns at the embassy (or elsewhere), any action

would be irresponsible.

—Regional Support. The Sultan of Oman is now skittish, and all

other regional parties are going to watch us like a hawk. We must get

our fences mended, since we cannot conduct any kind of an operation

without at least tacit cooperation and access to regional facilities.

Covert and Overt Operations

—Deception. The press, the Iranians, and all other observers—

including the Soviets—will not be easily lulled a second time.

—Internal Unity of Purpose. Any new attempt must have the kind

of dedicated purposefulness which went into the first. Certainly, an

operation of this magnitude cannot be planned and run from the White

House. Those who will be called upon to risk their lives must have a

sense of participation. They must believe in what they are doing, not

just be ordered to do it.

We learned some important lessons in the first operation. The most

important was that the Iranians are as disorganized and vulnerable as

we suspected. We can with some confidence deliver men and materiel

to points inside Iran with considerable confidence of remaining unde-

tected. We should absorb that fact into our future planning to look at

new possibilities.

I recommend that a small group be assembled at some location

(e.g. [less than 1 line not declassified] a Delta Team facility) for an extensive

damage assessment effort. This would involve a total analysis of lessons

learned, a complete assessment of assets and capabilities, and a man-

date to recommend to the President alternative courses of action. This

“total immersion” exercise should include, at a minimum, the key

leaders of the team which made the recent attempt, the most capable

and hard-nosed planners from the JCS, CIA operatives with on-the-

ground experience and knowledge of overall Agency capabilities, and

a few carefully selected individuals with knowledge of the political

realities as well as an appreciation of the bureaucratic realities in this

town. The group should be given at least a week to put something

together.

There are a series of specific alternatives which this group could

be asked to flesh out:

—Gradual infiltration of personnel on the ground in Tehran or

vicinity, with a quick strike and evacuation by a few planes at the

last minute.

—Establishment of a base camp in a tribal area or remote location

in preparation for a quick “snatch” and evacuation.

—Examination of infiltration overland from Turkey by truck.

—A one-shot operation using a C–5 or several large transports

with their own transportation (APCs?) operating from a location as

near as possible to Tehran.

—“Commandeering” transportation from lightly guarded civilian

(or even military) locations for initial exfiltration to the evacuation

point.

—A quick and powerful military strike to be used in the event the

situation suddenly deteriorates or hostages are being killed.

271.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

Acting Secretary Warren Christopher

Zbigniew Brzezinski

David Newsom

David Aaron

Harold Saunders

Hedley Donovan

Lloyd Cutler

OSD

Secretary Harold Brown

Office of the Vice President

W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

Denis Clift

Robert Komer

NSC

JCS

Gary Sick

General David Jones

Lt. General John Pustay

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

(There was a preliminary discussion of Cuba to be reported

separately.)

Covert and Overt Operations

Next Steps on Iran

Dr. Brzezinski asked the group to step back and consider the longer

track of our strategy on Iran. Before the rescue operation, we were

proceeding with economic sanctions, allied pressure, and were consid-

ering a range of other alternatives including secondary boycotts, cutoff

of food and medicine, and interruption of communications via INTEL-

SAT. The allies have reaffirmed that they are prepared to follow

through on sanctions. Should we take some additional actions of our

own? (S)

Secretary Brown said it was his inclination to let the allies proceed

down their own track of sanctions as the focus of attention before we

do something ourselves. Secretary Christopher agreed, noting that the

reason many of the remaining actions available to us were not taken

previously was because they had so many adverse consequences. State

was preparing a paper looking ahead at the changes in our strategy

which were required by the new circumstances. This would be com-

pleted and available for circulation by the end of the day. It could be

discussed at the SCC meeting on Thursday. All agreed. (S)

Mr. Cutler noted that the claims legislation was being completed.

At this point the legislation does not include any standby authority to

vest assets, which means that it has no real bite. Mr. Cutler thought

the legislation should be reviewed before going forward. It was agreed

that this issue would be taken up at the SCC meeting on Thursday. (C)

Dr. Brzezinski noted that it would be useful to have a clearer idea

of just what steps the allies are taking and what commitments they

have accepted. We should also examine the impact these steps are

likely to have on Iran. State and CIA agreed to prepare a brief paper

on this subject. (C)

Admiral Turner noted that he had met yesterday with a group of

hostage wives and mothers. It had not been a pleasant meeting. He

thought it would be useful if the “cash register could start ringing”

for these people. He suggested an initial payment of $50,000 per family

and $1,000 per day for each day of captivity, with the money to be

taken from Iranian assets. Others argued that the amount of money

would be too small to be of real concern to the Iranians, and the

impression would be created that the families are getting rich as a

result of the situation. Mr. Saunders noted that State had had some

recent meetings with the hostage families which had not been as grim

matic Strategy for Iran—The Period Ahead,” is Document 273.

as Admiral Turner’s had evidently been. Dr. Brzezinski said it would

be useful for a small group to look into tangible things we could do

as a government to help the morale of the hostage families. It was

agreed that a group would meet today under the chairmanship of

Sheldon Krys of State who has been closely involved with the Family

Liaison Action Group which has done such an excellent and imagina-

tive job in dealing with the problems of the hostages’ families. (C)

Secretary Brown noted that hearings are beginning on the Hill into

all aspects of the rescue operation. Thus far we have maintained our

position that details of the operation beyond the termination point

would not be discussed, but Senator Jackson and others intend to press

very hard for full information on the ground basis of determining if

the plan was well-conceived and had a realistic chance of success. We

may not be able to maintain silence indefinitely, and this was a tough

policy choice to be made. Admiral Turner agreed, noting that more

and more details—correct and incorrect—about the rescue plan are

appearing in the papers, which will make it difficult to remain silent.

Moreover, the Intelligence Committees are insisting on being informed

about CIA actions on the grounds that it is a covert action. Mr. Cutler

had talked to Bill Bader of the SFRC staff. Secretary Brown thought

that it might be useful for the President to meet with key leaders as

he did immediately after the operation last week to update them. This

may be essential if we are to hold the line on not revealing details of

the plan. All agreed that the various agencies should be careful to

follow the same line in their various testimony so that one agency did

not get out in front of the others. (S)

(At that point the meeting was reduced to those who had partici-

pated in the planning of the rescue operation.)

272.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, April 29, 1980

SUBJECT

Items from the Restricted Session of the SCC Meeting, Tuesday, April 29,

273.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, undated

DIPLOMATIC STRATEGY FOR IRAN—THE PERIOD AHEAD

This paper lays out for discussion, revision, and decision certain

possible propositions from which our strategy for the period until the

new Iranian Parliament is formed might be built. It goes on to describe

the elements from which our strategy will be fashioned and suggests

for consideration a specific course of action over the next few weeks.

After six months of frustrating dealings with the Iranians, it is clear

that we are dealing with an outlook that differs fundamentally from

our own, and a chaotic internal situation. Our character, our society

are based on optimism—a long history of strength and success, the

possibility of equality, the protection of institutions enshrined in a

constitution, the belief in our ability to control our own destiny. Iran,

on the other hand, has a long and painful history of foreign invasions,

occupation and domination. Their outlook is a function of this history

and the solace most Iranians have found in Shi’a Islam. They place a

premium on survival. They are manipulative, fatalistic, suspicious and

xenophobic.

With such fundamental cultural and historical differences, it is

easier to understand why most Iranians have remained unmoved by

Covert and Overt Operations

our various actions throughout this crisis. We are not in a classic bar-

gaining position.

If we are to help create a break in the situation—recognizing the

hard fact that the odds are against such a break so long as the internal

situation in Iran remains inchoate and the clerics dominant—we need

a strategy which takes account of both the complexities of Iranian

politics and the complexities of the Iranian outlook. It must combine

elements of reasonableness with regard to the future without making

the concessions now that Iranians take as weakness. It must convey a

strong element of threat without implying retribution when the hos-

tages are released. And the elements of threat must be both credible

and conveyed in a way which does not so challenge their pride that

they simply posture, blunder, and recall their history of martyrdom.

Some Basic Propositions

1. We can start by eliminating two extreme options:

—We have long since embarked on a policy of imposing costs on

Iran for prolonging the hostage crisis, so no one is proposing a policy

of negotiation without some form of pressure.

—A policy of pressure alone cannot force a solution. For one thing

Khomeini and the clerics are not susceptible to Western-style pressures,

so we have to find a different approach to them. Even then, someone

will have to work out a political strategy for engineering the release.

We will have to play a role whether we want to or not.

2. Within Iran, different leadership groups have different aspira-

tions, vulnerabilities and objectives in this crisis. Our strategy must

play on these varying hopes and fears. Our strategy, therefore, must

also be a mix of punitive measures and diplomatic initiatives, to try

to help construct a solution which would be politically acceptable both

to key groups of the Iranians and to us. The issues are (a) the mix of

pressures and diplomatic steps and (b) timing.

3. Our first opportunity for a breakthrough could come, as the

Iranians have said, with the convening of a new parliament. We should

keep in mind, however, that the Majlis will be fractionated and unruly

and perhaps without effective leadership. No date has even been set

for its opening session. The major purpose of the Majlis may be as a

device toward furthering a solution—or rubberstamping a consensus

among lay and religious leaders that it is time to end the crisis. The

Majlis is likely to hesitate to assume a leading role in forging a solution.

But the period between now, the May 9 elections, and the date the

parliament is convened will be a time of political flux in Iran. It seems

sensible to focus our immediate efforts on this period. There will be

relative calm in the political process. Delegates will have been elected,

and they will be unsure how to use the new institutions. For a short

time after the convening of Parliament, there will not be clear lines

between parties, personal alliances, or political strategies. At that

moment, a determined and effective leadership might be able to push

through a well-planned solution to the crisis. It is thus important that

we seek to engage Iranian authorities in a productive dialogue on how

the release of the hostages might be presented so as to win positive

support in the new parliament.

4. This time we will want to broaden our approach to work with

three separate but related leadership elements: Bani Sadr, who will be

responsible for putting before the Majlis a program to end the crisis

with the U.S. as part of his overall program; with Ghotbzadeh, who is

our most helpful collaborator; and, more than we have before, with

the clerics, who must be prepared to follow Bani Sadr’s lead or at least

not to resist it and make a solution impossible. The failure of our last

effort to achieve a negotiated settlement resulted from rivalries between

the lay leadership and the clerics. We need to find a way, through a

combination of carrots and sticks, to persuade the clerics to accept the

outlines of a settlement that the government could push through the

Majlis when it meets.

5. In designing our approach, there may be advantage, in some of

our communications, in broadening it to reach beyond the hostage

issue. With Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, as well as in seeking help from

our allies, we could focus on the consequences of widening the crisis

for the future of Iran and for the future of Europe. We could concentrate

on the kind of U.S.-Iranian relationship we might aim for. However,

with the clerics, who believe that a reasonable U.S.-Iranian relationship

is impossible or undesirable, it will be necessary to paint more specifi-

cally the consequences for their own leadership if the crisis continues.

6. The U.S. position on the elements of a settlement—which might

be useful in dealing with the allies and with Bani Sadr—remains that

described in the six points passed to Waldheim in January (Tab 1),2

with one possible addition. It may be desirable to elaborate on these

points to make clear that we would forego retaliation against Iran if

the hostages are released safely under honorable circumstances.

Near-Term Objectives

If these propositions are accepted, three specific objectives should

be discussed:

—To encourage progressive improvements in the conditions of the

hostages—beginning with regular visits and messages for families—

with the purpose of working toward a more active official Iranian

Covert and Overt Operations

involvement in the management of the hostages’ welfare and in

accounting for them.

—To increase steadily tangible pressure by the OECD states and,

where possible, to encourage other states to take more limited measures

against Iran; in this context by portraying Iran’s holding of hostages

as offensive to the world community, to broaden the confrontation to

Iran vs. the non-communist world.

—To engage key Iranians in discussions that could lead to an

understanding on (1) a scenario for hostage release when the Majlis is

convened; (2) the role of key leaders during the Majlis consideration;

and (3) actions by the U.S. or third countries that would facilitate a

release decision by the Majlis.

The issues to be decided are the degree and timing of new pres-

sures, if any, and the nature of a broader diplomatic effort.

Maintaining Pressure

We have the following range of choice in maintaining or expanding

pressures on Iran:

—We can maintain the sanctions the U.S. now has in place and

press the Europeans to proceed on their present course by following

through on the decisions made at Luxembourg. This would seem an

essential minimum.

—We could take some additional steps to expand our own sanc-

tions (see Tab 2 for a list of possible steps). In deciding whether we

should impose additional sanctions, we face the possibility that a new

cycle of growing expectations and then deeper frustration could be

stimulated within the U.S. and new divisions with the Allies created,

conveying weakness to Iran at a time we should be emphasizing the

strength of the Allies’ stand. Another issue is whether such steps would

best complement a diplomatic effort now, or should be held in reserve

as a threat during the Majlis’ meetings. Once implemented, we would

have little left with which to threaten.

—Additional pressures may be possible through covert action. A

great deal of disruptive activity is already under way in Iran which

has no U.S. involvement but which most Iranians assume is American-

inspired. These disruptions and the assumption of American involve-

ment heighten fears in Iran that we have important assets that could

undermine the revolution. In an Iranian context, the advantage of covert

options is that although the Iranians will assume we are playing a

subversive role—because of their beliefs in foreign devils and conspir-

acy theories—we will not have admitted such a role and reactions

would be correspondingly muted. Consideration of action stimulated

by the U.S. should include whether risks of detection and the attendant

setbacks to any negotiations or harm to the hostages are outweighed

by the advantages to be gained.

—The options for such military acts as mining or blockade can be

kept open. Indeed, the threat of such action might well be more effective

during a Majlis debate than the action itself. See Tab 4.

Diplomatic Approaches

It was one of the propositions set out for discussion at the beginning

of this paper that we would not stand back on the diplomatic front

altogether simply to allow time to pass and pressures to work but

rather use the diplomatic resources at our disposal at least to explore

the political situation in Tehran and to determine whether a scenario

can be found which might pave the way for release of the hostages

when the Majlis is formed.

It was also proposed that we broaden our diplomatic approach to

concentrate through a special channel on Bani Sadr and to make an

effort to reach the clerics.

If those propositions are accepted, the choice narrows to variants

of two approaches:

—Exploration. We can start by stimulating a broader range of diplo-

matic channels whom we would request to explore the situation in

Tehran and report back to us so that we can begin to determine whether

and how to shape a scenario for coupling Bani Sadr’s presentation of

his program to the new Majlis with the release of the hostages. We

would encourage all those whom we request to participate in this effort

(see below) also to make appropriate arguments for the release of the

hostages. But we would make no proposal at this time. We would

make these approaches immediately in an effort to begin opening broad

range of channels as quickly as possible.

—Exploration with a U.S. proposal. We could go farther by introduc-

ing a tentative proposal of our own, at least to Bani Sadr and Ghotbza-

deh. One possible approach to Bani Sadr would be to look beyond the

hostage crisis, to talk with him about the elements that could character-

ize a U.S.-Iranian relationship after the hostage crisis is over, and to

talk about ways in which he could present to the Majlis a program for

Iran’s relationships with the world in such a way as to subsume the

release of the hostages. The elements of our position would be those

Covert and Overt Operations

approved in January (Tab 1) with the possible addition of a statement

that we have no intention of taking punitive military action against

Iran once the hostages are released. But we would make no concession

on the issues between us, since the Iranians would interpret this as

weakness and a sign of still further concessions. The purpose of the

approaches to Bani Sadr would be to determine how to package the

January position and what preparatory steps might be useful before

the Majlis receives Bani Sadr’s program. While this approach is being

made to Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, other approaches would be made

to the clerics (without a U.S. proposal) stating the arguments for ending

the crisis in a way that might be more compelling to them.

The Substance of Diplomatic Approaches

More specifically, the separate approaches to the secular and reli-

gious principals in Tehran might go as below.

—With Bani Sadr (and Ghotbzadeh) we would take the following

line:

—We recognize the importance to the Iranians of their convening

parliament in completion of the task of putting into effect the Islamic

constitution. We accept Iran’s constitutional process.

—We expect that Iran-U.S. relations will be reviewed by parliament

in the context of setting the course for Iran’s foreign relations.

—We regret difficulties in relations between U.S. and Iran and

believe it is in the interest of both countries to find an early resolution

to our problems.

—We believe it would be helpful for the President and Revolution-

ary Council to be able to present to parliament a basis for future U.S.-

Iranian relations. We are prepared to discuss this with him on the basis

of the position we have conveyed to him (Tab 1). But the Iranians should

not expect any American concessions, or a relaxation of pressures until

all the hostages are freed. We have no interest in talking on any

other basis.

At the same time, through different intermediaries and others who

will not be acting in our name, we should try to develop an understand-

ing by Beheshti and the clerics that the continued holding of the hostages

will not be in their interest. The principal motivations of the clerics

appear to be (1) desire for power and the construction of an Islamic-

dominated regime; (2) fear of the power of the U.S. to prevent them

from achieving power; and (3) fear of a Soviet-dominated left. We

would use themes that play on their fears and aspirations.

Much of the work on the fear side is already well in train. The

rescue mission itself signals U.S. ability to mount significant military

operations against Iran. Hostilities with Iraq, the Kurds, the activities

of Bakhtiar and Oveissi, and continuing sabotage and disruption within

Iran are all assumed to have an American connection and play to the

fears of the revolutionaries that we are out to overthrow them. We

should do nothing to relieve them of this fear, as long as the hostages

are held. At the same time, we need to find ways to persuade the

clerics that the U.S. will not interfere in Iran or retaliate against Iran

once the hostages are released.

The line intermediaries might take with Beheshti and the clerics could

include these points:

—Continued confrontation with the U.S. creates additional pros-

pects for Soviet influence, contrary to the interests of the Iranian revolu-

tion. The left is gaining every day in Iran.

—The Europeans and Japanese wish to have good relations with

Iran; they can be helpful to Iran in many ways. But this is impossible

so long as the hostages are held. They are approaching the Iranians

not out of altruism, but because their interests are involved, and they

are worried about the future course of events.

—The U.S. is dangerous, unpredictable, and is prepared to give

full support to the opponents of the revolution unless the crisis is

resolved. The anger toward Iran within the U.S. is widespread and

deep.

—The intermediaries would be prepared to press the U.S. to agree

to the following points:

—It is for Iranians themselves to decide on the policies of their

new government.

—Iran must maintain its integrity.

—Iran must maintain its independence from the Soviet Union.

—Iran must acquire political stability to prevent subversion

from within.

—The U.S. would forego retaliation against Iran after all the hos-

tages are released safely under honorable conditions.

—The release of the hostages is a necessary step in the removal of

obstacles to such an agreement.

—They would be in a position to guarantee these points once the

hostages are released.

The Channels

1. Ambassador Lang: Now that Switzerland is our protecting power,

we might if the Swiss are willing put more emphasis on Lang as

our chief negotiator and representative to present official U.S. views,

particularly with Bani Sadr.

2. Bourguet and Villalon could continue their concentration on Ghot-

bzadeh and other secular members of the Revolutionary Council.

Despite their contacts with Bani Sadr, they tend to see the situation

through Ghotbzadeh’s eyes, and it seems a reasonable division of labor

to ask Lang to cultivate Bani Sadr while they stick with the Foreign

Minister.

3. Key Islamic states (including the Saudis and Bangladeshis) could

explore the possibility, especially with the clerics but also with the lay

Covert and Overt Operations

leaders, that the Islamic Conference could act as an intermediary in

resolving the hostage crisis. The Islamic Conference’s role would be

particularly important in providing the Iranians with credible assur-

ances that the U.S. would not take retaliatory action against Iran or act

against the Revolution once the hostages are released. The Saudis have

hinted to other Islamic states that they might be interested in exploring

such an initiative if others would join them.

The French, Germans, Turks and possibly the British could also be

persuasive with the various clerics with whom they maintain contact.

4. Richard Cottam is prepared to go to Iran for intensive discussions

with Ghotbzadeh, Beheshti, and other contacts.

5. Archbishop Capucci is possibly the single most influential foreigner

with the militants, Khomeini, and the Revolutionary Council. He can be

especially helpful with the religious leadership and with the militants.

There are other channels that could be developed, but these are

the ones that we might start with. These approaches are laid out in

the table at Tab 3.

In engaging our allies, the best approach might be to share at high

level the outlines of our strategy for the next two months on a bilateral

basis, asking each government to designate one senior official in its

capitals with whom we can discuss our plans in detail on a highly

restricted basis.

An important element in enlisting overall allied support and spe-

cific cooperation of some close allies will be our position on the use of

military options. Understandably, we will not wish to tie our hands

completely, but we can assure the allies that (1) we have no present

plan to use force; (2) we are prepared to wait for a reasonable period

after the Majlis is convened to determine if a peaceful resolution is

possible and if our joint diplomatic/political/economic efforts can

bring this about; (3) we will consult closely with our allies if we subse-

quently conclude that the use of force is necessary; and (4) for tactical

reasons, we will continue publicly to leave the option of using force

open in this interim period, and expect the allies not to criticize us

publicly on this point.

Public Affairs Strategy

Because the crisis is likely to continue for some time it will be

important to reduce the level of public expectations and to attempt to

calm public frustration. Thus, we should avoid the public expectation

that there will be new or dramatic initiatives every week or so.

A reduced level of rhetoric is important for three reasons:

—The greater are the public expectations that pressures will lead

to a solution in the near future, the greater the frustration and impres-

sion of U.S. weakness when they don’t. Rather than continuing the

cycle by meeting a new wave of frustration with new measures, it is

better to begin to prepare the public for a lingering problem. The less

the public frustration, the wider are our options and the less likely we

will be driven to action which does not serve our interests.

—The more we play up the hostages as a public issue, the more

the militants are likely to conclude that we will make new concessions

and the more the militants will want to keep the limelight by keeping

the hostages.

—With regard to our Allies’ actions, our public position should

underscore the serious hardships and isolation of Iran implied in the

sanctions; it is more valuable in Iran and here to play up what the

Allies do, rather than down play their actions. This is not to imply that

we should take a soft line on Iran. Indeed, a less public line should be

shaped to convey menace rather than compromise. But we should avoid

promising our public more than we can deliver, thus also building up

the militants in Iran.

Our public theme should emphasize the following points:

—Sanctions have been applied and it is necessary to allow time

for full effects to be felt in Iran.

—The effects on Iran will increase as the European sanctions are

implemented.

—Iran is in conflict with the entire civilized world, not just the

United States.

—We are consulting with our allies and friends about further steps

they might take.

—Iran has an obligation to the world to improve the condition of

the hostages and to report regularly to the families. (We should consider

family visits as a means of increasing this form of pressure on Iran.)

Where there are diplomatic developments reported in the press,

we should not build these up but portray them as part of our ongoing

efforts. We should avoid threats or discussion of military force, except

perhaps on background.

Initiatives During the Next Two Weeks

Through May 10

During this period we should attempt to lay out a general scheme

for concerted activities by our key collaborators and get their agreement

to this plan of action. This would mean:

Covert and Overt Operations

—A Saunders meeting with Ambassadors Brunner and/or Lang

in Switzerland for their assessment and our presentation of strategy.

—A meeting with Capucci, Bourguet and Villalon, and, if possible,

Nobari on the same trip.

—Messages to our allies or meetings with them outlining special

roles for them:

—For the Germans: To maintain contact with Tabatabai for improve-

ment in the condition of the hostages; with Beheshti to develop a

new relationship there; with Bazargan to encourage him to reassert

his influence.

—For the French and Turks: To become more active generally with

the clerics to convey an “independent” European view. To work also

with Bani-Sadr, Salamatian, and others with whom the Ambassadors

may enjoy special access.

—With the British: To concentrate on Beheshti and the other clerics

on the Revolutionary Council or to solicit those clerics by other persons

with better influence.

—A trip by Richard Cottam for talks with as many leaders as he

can arrange, especially Beheshti, whom Cottam has known for seven

years. We would encourage Cottam to stay at least one week and

perhaps return to Iran after consultations with us.

—Continue foregoing actions as appropriate.

—Messages to the Algerians and Syrians or Bedjaoui and Daoudi

to explore the mediation effort by those countries, possibly supple-

mented by a role for the Swiss and French or possibly a Non-Aligned

Movement initiative. The Algerians and Swiss, for example, could sug-

gest, as protecting powers, that they constitute a contact group to hold

talks with us for the Iranians in an effort to resolve specific problems

in the dispute between us.

—Capucci and Bourguet or Villalon return to Tehran.

—Refine and expand, if possible, our six-point position paper with

the idea that Lang could use this with the leadership in Tehran—

without introducing any new concessions.

—Messages or possible visits to EC–9 capitals to assure there is no

wavering on the May 17 sanctions.

After May 18 we would try to put ourselves in a position, through

the appropriate intermediaries, to work out a scenario that would

reflect the political dynamics in Tehran and steps that are politically

feasible for us which might contribute to the decision in Tehran to

release the hostages.

Summary of Decisions

If this general diplomatic strategy is approved, we would be mov-

ing into a phase of exploring through a number of channels the political

274.

Memorandum From Stanley T. Escudero of the Office of

United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International

Organization Affairs, to Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff

Washington, May 2, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran: US Cooperation with Iranian Exiles

Following our recent conversation I contacted two of the three

Iranians whose names I gave you and asked them about leadership

among the exiled groups. Both agreed that the exiles have come to an

understanding that no government can rule in Iran today without the

backing of a military organization. They have agreed that a military

commander is required to establish the stability which will be necessary

to permit the return of the Western educated technocrats without whom

Covert and Overt Operations

Iran cannot effectively address its economic problems. Once that stabil-

ity is achieved the question of permanent leadership could be resolved.

Therefore the exiles believe that a collegial form of leadership can be

made to work in the early stages of a regime which would replace

the clerics once they have thoroughly discredited themselves. General

Oveissi is the man whom the exiles feel must take the lead in these

early stages. Thereafter there could be agreement on the transfer of

power to a civilian regime, perhaps headed by someone like Bakhtiar

or conceivably a constitutional monarchy as provided by the 1906

constitution.

The problems of collegial leadership in Iran are obvious but there

is some recent precedent for this in General Zahedi’s departure for

Switzerland after his restoration of the Shah and subsequent Prime

Ministership. In addition, ancient Persian history reveals the successful

conspiracy of seven Persian nobles against the Magian usurper and

their agreement that one of them, later Darius the First, should be king

after the Magus was slain.

It is not clear to me the extent to which Oveissi’s role is in fact

accepted by other exiled leaders. Moreover, they would be ill-advised

to take decisive action in Iran until the clerics had produced widespread

dissatisfaction through misrule. Other obvious problems which would

have to be addressed during the planning stages by the exiles would

include the degree of Westernization to be reestablished in a nation

recently subjected to a strong dose of Islam; economic programs to

promptly and effectively ameliorate the effects of unemployment,

shortages of various kinds, and a generally stagnant economy; relations

with other countries including assistance programs.

To repeat, I do not suggest that we deal with any of these substan-

tive issues now—only that we consider approaching the exiles to

encourage the development of an alternative to the left following the

inevitable collapse of the clerics.

275.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Justice

Acting Secretary Warren Christopher

Attorney General Benjamin

(very briefly at beginning)

Civiletti*

Harold Saunders*

White House

Roberts Owen*

Zbigniew Brzezinski

OSD

David Aaron

Secretary Harold Brown

Hedley Donovan*

Frank Kramer*

Lloyd Cutler*

Henry Owen*

JCS

General David Jones*

Office of the Vice President

Lt. Gen. John Pustay

Denis Clift*

CIA

NSC

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Gary Sick

Frank Carlucci

Treasury

Secretary William Miller*

Robert Carswell*

*Present only for items 1–6

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Claims Legislation. The legislation is currently in draft, and a

number of points of disagreement are being worked out at the staff

level. The key question of a policy nature is whether the legislation

should contain standby authority to vest (seize) assets. Mr. Cutler noted

that it was previously decided not to include such a provision. He

Covert and Overt Operations

wondered if, in the wake of the rescue attempt, we may not wish

to toughen the legislation by adding such authority. Otherwise, the

legislation provides nothing more than administrative regulations for

handling claims which would be resolved either by litigation or negotia-

tion with the Iranians. (C)

Secretary Miller strongly opposed including vesting authority. He

did not believe that this action would help free the hostages, but it

does have very serious disadvantages for us by adding to the world

view that the U.S. is unreliable as a recipient of deposits. Certainly

such authority should not be put in merely for show; and if we really

intend to use it—especially to vest assets abroad—there will be serious

controversy with our friends and allies. One of the effects of vesting

assets would be to eliminate immediately the present system of offset-

ting claims against deposits. Those institutions which have claims but

no attachable assets will press hard for vesting out of pure self-interest.

However, it will be a net loss to the United States and would have an

adverse effect on the dollar. Miller hoped that we would not act in a

way which would do irreparable harm to Western financial institutions

in the interest of a short-term advantage. (C)

Secretary Brown acknowledged the clear disadvantages, but noted

that we must be seen to be doing something. The more we can do in

the economic or other fields, the less pressure there is on us to do

something else. Paying compensation to the hostages would be useful

in that regard. He thought the rest of the world would understand

that this is a totally unique situation and not aimed at others, e.g. Saudi

Arabia. Dr. Brzezinski said that the question was what it does for the

Iranians and what it does for the President domestically by showing

concern and taking a tough line. It was true that it would not budge

the Iranians. There is a real question whether this is the moment. He

thought that this single step now gave the appearance of dribbling out

our actions. Perhaps it should be reserved for use later as part of a

package. (S)

Henry Owen agreed with Secretary Miller that such action would

hurt the dollar, and the symbolism of a weakening dollar would also

hurt the President. Mr. Cutler made clear that there was no considera-

tion of seizing assets outside the United States. We have no authority

to do so. He acknowledged that this action will probably not budge

the Iranians, but that was true of each individual act we have taken

in the sanctions area. If the situation was sufficiently grave to justify

the risk of a rescue mission, he thought we could take this risk. (S)

The Attorney General said he believed there were advantages in

the legislation as now proposed. It provides the basis for settling claims

by hostages and others. Inclusion of standby authority to vest would

immediately result in pressure to exercise the authority so payment

can begin. He thought such action now would be precipitous. We have

not yet even reviewed the results of the census of claims. (C)

Mr. Saunders argued that vesting assets at this stage would greatly

complicate negotiations with the Iranians later, since they would

demand that all the seized assets be returned as part of the hostage

release. Once the President had taken this action, it would be difficult

to back down and return the seized assets. Secretary Brown disagreed.

He thought that would be a small price to pay for return of the hos-

The SCC agreed that a decision was not required immediately. The

legislation will be completed by next week, and the SCC will return

to the question at that time. (U)

2. Status of Allied Sanctions and Commitments. The Department of

State circulated a brief paper summarizing the status of the allies’

position on sanctions at this point. The SCC agreed it was very useful

and that it should be forwarded to the President (attached at Tab

3. Diplomatic Strategy. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the strategy paper

prepared by the Department of State had been discussed at the Foreign

Policy breakfast just prior to the SCC meeting. The President wishes

to read the paper himself. The subject will be discussed at Camp David

tomorrow, so the President asked that the SCC not present formal

recommendations at this point. (C)

Mr. Saunders reviewed the main points of the paper for the SCC,

noting that the intent was to begin a process of reopening lines of

communication with key individuals in Tehran. No proposals would

be offered until we had a feeling for the Iranian response to our feelers.

The problem in the past had been the division between the Beheshti

faction and Bani-Sadr which had prevented a unified position by the

Revolutionary Council. Our objective, recognizing the severe limita-

tions, should be to promote a unity of views in Tehran that the release of

the hostages is critical to Iran’s own interests. He noted that Archbishop

Capucci might be very helpful to us. Dr. Brzezinski noted that he might

be able to assist personally. He had just received a personal letter from

the Pope in Polish. Mr. Saunders agreed that the Vatican was one

channel of influence in Capucci. One of the French lawyers had also

that will be important in the longer term. Mr. Aaron observed that we

need an effective program which focuses public attention not only on

the hostage issue but the larger dangers of a possible Soviet takeover. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski said he was concerned that we were not focusing

beyond the immediate crisis. He saw the danger of Iran merging with

Afghanistan. We could find ourselves in the situation where the hos-

tages are rescued by Soviet tanks. The key question is whether we wish

to keep the pressure up or deescalate. Can we maintain a high level

of pressure while continuing on the diplomatic track? (S)

Mr. Saunders noted that Bani-Sadr has called a large meeting of

Islamic and Nonaligned nations in Tehran to “view the evidence of

U.S. aggression.” Without prejudice to the outcome of policy discus-

sions this weekend, we will need to get messages out to key parties if

we wish to have any influence on the event or possibly turn it to some

useful purpose. He proposed selecting half a dozen key Islamic and

Nonaligned leaders and sharing our thoughts with them in advance

of the meeting. Mr. Aaron suggested using the themes developed in

the strategy paper, for them to present in Tehran. All agreed. (C)

Approve

Avoid contact or association with

this event

4. Legal Action Concerning the Shah. The judge in the New York

court suggested in a bench conference that the issue should be resolved

by Iran’s release of the hostages and some payment by the Shah. Mr.

O’Dwyer (representing Iran) is now seeking permission to go to Tehran,

while Mr. Jackson intends to meet with the Shah. All agreed that, if

the Shah is unwilling to make an offer, it would be pointless—and

possibly counterproductive—to raise the issue with the Iranians who

are likely to demand payment of billions of dollars by the Shah. (C)

5. Islamic Conference. Mr. Cutler had been informed by the Saudi

Ambassador that the forthcoming Islamic Conference will be held in

Islamabad on May 17, the same date as the anticipated imposition of

sanctions by the allies. If the two events coincide, the Conference can

be expected to denounce the sanctions. State acknowledged the point

and said this would be taken into account. (C)

6. Rescue Mission Debrief. General Jones gave a brief summary of

the rescue operation for the SCC, responding to the many rumors that

are flying around. Secretary Brown said they are preparing to put

something out in organized form which would assist in responding to

the many queries and rumors. (U)

(At this point the meeting was reduced to those involved in the

rescue operation.)

7. [less than 1 line not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski noted that CIA had

prepared a paper. Since Mr. Christopher could not be here, we could

not discuss it in detail. It was agreed that a copy of the paper would

be delivered to Christopher for his personal information, and the subject

would be taken up by the SCC early next week. (S)

Admiral Turner noted that the State Department had been main-

taining contact with several individuals who are in contact with Admi-

ral Madani. They are interested in returning to Iran. The SCC agreed

that there was no objection to their returning to Iran at this point since

we wanted to keep the contacts open. (S)

8. Testimony on the Rescue Operation. Secretary Brown said that he

had previously believed it would be impossible to avoid testifying on

details of the rescue operation beyond the termination point. He now

believed that it would be difficult, but perhaps not impossible to hold

the line with the SFRC and the SASC. It was obviously going to be far

more difficult for the DCI to hold the line with the Intelligence Over-

sight Committees. Admiral Turner agreed, noting that the Committees

are building up to a major confrontation on their right to be informed

of the CIA role in detail. The SCC agreed that there were certain aspects

of the operational plan which we would not wish to reveal, since they

might be valuable in a future effort. It was difficult to determine exactly

which points we would wish to hold back. Admiral Turner agreed

reluctantly to provide a copy of his testimony for next week for review,

noting the problems of submitting CIA testimony for White House

clearance. He was concerned that a major confrontation with the Com-

mittees could result in undesirable new legislation. The Committee

was already very angry and had threatened to cut off CIA Reserve

funding. (S)

[Omitted here is material on Afghanistan.]

276.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, May 2, 1980

277.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

Acting Secretary Warren Christopher

Zbigniew Brzezinski

David Newsom*

David Aaron

Harold Saunders*

Lloyd Cutler*

Hedley Donovan*

OSD

Jody Powell**

W. Graham Claytor

Robert Komer*

NSC

Gary Sick

JCS

Lt. Gen. John Pustay

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

*Present only for items 1–3

**Present only for items 1–4

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Iran Strategy. It was agreed that the regular Thursday2 morning

meeting would be replaced by a PRC meeting chaired by State to

related strategy concerning allied sanctions to go into effect on May

17, whether we wish to press the allies to include existing contracts as

well as future contracts with Iran, and the problem created by the

anticipated simultaneous meeting of the Islamic Conference; and

(3) claims legislation and whether it should include standby authority

to vest Iranian assets. (S)

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]

(At 9: a.m., the SCC was reduced to key principals.)

Covert and Overt Operations

a.m. on the rescue mission before the Oversight Committee. The Com-

mittee is outraged at efforts to keep them from learning about covert

actions taken (and money spent) on support of the later phases of the

rescue operation. They insist they have a statutory right to be informed,

and retaliation by cutting off or reducing the Reserve Fund is a likely

consequence of refusing information. [5 lines not declassified]

This question raised the entire issue of whether or not we could

or should continue to hold to the line of not discussing any aspects of

the operation after Phase I. Mr. Claytor noted that the Defense wit-

nesses were getting very tough treatment in the Congress on their

refusal to discuss anything after Phase I. We are being seriously dam-

aged by the torrent of press leaks, which give the impression that

everyone is learning of the operation except the Congress. There is

great pressure to confirm or deny information appearing in the press.

Evans and Novak intend to publish a column tomorrow indicating

that the Administration is out of control and damaging U.S. security

by lack of discipline on leaks. It is impossible for the DCI to discuss

aspects of the operation after Phase I while denying comparable treat-

ment to the Armed Services Committees. There is also the question of

whether the Iranians have access to compromised information that we

are unwilling to share with the Congress. (S)

The SCC agreed to go back to the President with a request that he

reconsider his instructions not to discuss activities of the post-Phase I

operation. Massive leaks are destroying the credibility of this approach,

and we are being seriously hurt in Congress where it appears we have

something to hide. Press interest has died down, but the pressure in

Congress is growing stronger. All recognized that, once the point is

breached, it will be difficult if not impossible to prevent additional

details of the operation from leaking out. There are several specific

aspects which could and should be protected, however: (1) the use of

foreign facilities, [less than 1 line not declassified]; (2) identification and

location of airfields to be used inside Iran; (3) specific details about

special equipment used on the helos and in other parts of the operation;

and (4) any estimates of possible casualties. (TS)

5. Covert Action on Iran. The SCC reviewed a CIA proposal for

stepping up our covert action on Iran, which was slowed down during

the negotiating phase. No additional findings are required. The essen-

tial question is where we should place our primary emphasis. The CIA

paper proposed advisory assistance to Bakhtiar and Oveissi, each of

whom is beginning to cooperate independently with the Iraqis. Our

objective would be to exploit the existing organization, but attempt to

assist them to pull the various groups together and add more realism

to their planning [less than 1 line not declassified]. (TS)

Dr. Brzezinski noted that this was essentially an external strategy

and he questioned the wisdom of becoming too closely identified with

the Bakhtiar/Oveissi group as the central organizing point when they

are subject to manipulation by the Iraqis. [1½ lines not declassified] We

have seen that the situation is chaotic and the country porous. [15½

lines not declassified] (TS)

Mr. Christopher expressed strong reservations about the wisdom

of supporting Bakhtiar and Oveissi. [1½ lines not declassified] On balance,

his expectations with regard to Bakhtiar/Oveissi were more minus

than plus. We risk anointing them as the recognized leaders of the

exile forces. They have been discredited by their relationship with the

Shah and they are bad horses for us to ride. He did not object to some

level of contact with them, however. (TS)

Admiral Turner said he thought there was little likelihood we

would be able to subvert members of the revolution. There is too much

anti-Americanism. Bakhtiar and Oveissi are currently fighting an uphill

battle since the myth persists that the U.S. actually brought down the

Shah, put Khomeini in place, and that we are secretly supporting

an outcome which would favor Khomeini’s leadership. That may be

ridiculous on the face of it, but it is prevalent among the groups

opposing Khomeini and it inhibits their ability to organize effectively.

A clear decision on our part to support Bakhtiar and Oveissi would

overcome that misperception. (TS)

[2½ lines not declassified] Mr. Christopher noted that he was not

persuaded that support for Bakhtiar and Oveissi would result in

expanding contacts inside the country. On the contrary, it is likely to

complicate efforts to develop such contacts. Dr. Brzezinski said that

our plan should think through the implications of support for Bakhtiar/

Covert and Overt Operations

Oveissi and insure that we use them for our own larger purposes rather

than being used by them and the Iraqis for their own purposes. (TS)

Admiral Turner said he would go to work on such a plan. [3½

lines not declassified] Mr. Christopher said we should not get ourselves

in the position of making Bakhtiar our chosen instrument. Dr. Brzezin-

ski said we should not encourage Bakhtiar and Oveissi to move forward

at this time. (TS)

Approve development of a strategy focusing primarily on

the internal politics of Iran, rather than on an external approach. (TS)

Offer monetary and planning assistance to Bakhtiar. (TS)

Maintain contact with Bakhtiar, but withhold significant

monetary and advisory assistance until an alternative strategy has been

considered. (TS)

278.

Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee

Meeting

SUBJECT

PRC Meeting on Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Acting Secretary Warren Christopher

David Newsom, Under Secretary for Political Affairs

Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian

Affairs

Anthony Lake, Director, Policy Planning Staff

Treasury

Deputy Secretary Robert Carswell

Defense

Deputy Secretary W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

Robert Komer, Under Secretary for Policy

Justice

John Shenefield, Associate Attorney General

Joint Chiefs of Staff

Lt. General John Pustay, Assistant to the Chairman

Central Intelligence Agency

Admiral Stansfield Turner, Director

Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director

White House

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Hedley Donovan

Lloyd Cutler

Henry Owen

Jody Powell

National Security Council

Gary Sick

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Diplomatic Strategy for Iran. The Department of State presented

a draft recommendation to the President outlining a diplomatic strategy

(Tab A). This strategy is designed to keep lines open to Bani-Sadr and

279.

Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, undated

Recommendation to the President

—That we begin to work2 on the development of a diplomatic

strategy, looking toward a late May or early June meeting of the Iranian

parliament, when there may be an opportunity for a settlement of

the crisis.

—That we continue with our strategy of multilateral economic

sanctions and diplomatic pressures on Iran, keeping ambiguous in the

minds of the Iranians what additional steps we might take, while

making clear that we plan no retaliation or intervention in Iran if all

the hostages are released safely and under honorable conditions.

—That we reopen contact with Bani-Sadr and Ghotzbadeh to

explore how Bani-Sadr might present a program to the new parliament

that would subsume the release of the hostages.

—That in our initial explorations, we elicit Bani-Sadr’s ideas rather

than presenting our own, while making clear that we will not relax

our pressures or make concessions until the hostages are released.

—That we ask selected allies to seek contacts with leading clerics

to persuade them toward a consensus on release of the hostages. The

allies could point out to the clerics that: Soviet and leftist ambitions

for Iran are furthered by the continued holding of the hostages; that

the Europeans and Japanese want to have good relations with Iran but

can’t so long as the hostages are held; and that the US now is dangerous

and unpredictable but would not take retaliatory measures if all the

hostages are released safely and under honorable circumstances.

—That we explore with selected non-aligned such as Algeria and

Yugoslavia, and possibly the French, the prospects for their undertak-

ing an exploratory role with the Iranians. We would elicit their ideas

for the framework of a settlement without at this stage committing

ourselves to any specific steps.

—That we pursue a public affairs strategy which keeps all options

open, but emphasizes the requirement for patient determination while

the lessons of sanctions sink in with the Iranian leadership.

—That we examine closely what emerges from the Islamic Confer-

ence and from Bani-Sadr’s plans for a Tehran conference of non-aligned

and others, to see if there are opportunities for constructive exploitation.

At the same time we will continue to discourage participants in the

Islamic Conference or the Tehran meeting from taking unbalanced

positions that ignore the basic issue of the seizure and holding of

the hostages.

on the Revolutionary Council (Beheshti and the militant pro-clerical

faction) are using the issue to destroy Bani-Sadr’s position. Khomeini

is primarily interested in vengeance and humiliation of the U.S. Our

rescue mission was a unilateral effort to break this political impasse.

Covert and Overt Operations

On a strategic level, the violent anti-Americanism generated by

the hostage situation: gives the Soviets and the Iranian left a unique

opportunity to increase their strength and legitimacy by siding with

Khomeini; diverts attention away from Soviet activities in Afghanistan;

constrains U.S. freedom of action; and severely complicates U.S.

relations with regional states and our allies. The slide to the left in Iran

threatens to extend Soviet influence closer to the Persian Gulf and

radically reorient the regional power balance.

Current Policy. Europe and Japan are reluctantly prepared to pro-

ceed with economic and diplomatic sanctions in mid-May if there has

been no decisive progress toward freeing the hostages.

Basic Choices. We have no risk-free options.

Status Quo/Diplomatic. We can use the period between now and

the election of the Majlis to reopen channels of communication with

some of the key Iranian actors, including Beheshti if possible. The key

question will be whether we will offer any new inducements and/or

intensify our military pressures.

Escalate Pressure. We could enhance nervousness and fear in Tehran,

and also complicate Iranian shipping, by overt military demonstrations

(e.g. interrogation of shipping) and veiled threats. Although this would

keep the Iranians off balance and worried, it could play into the hands

of the hard-liners and the left.

Military Operation. Another rescue operation or a blockade could

be attempted in disregard of intense pressure from the allies.

Covert Action. We could lend active support to some of the dissident

groups which are becoming active. This would keep the political pot

boiling, but probably would not free the hostages.

[1 paragraph (4½ lines) not declassified]

281.

Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of

Intelligence and Research (Spiers) to Secretary of State

Muskie

Washington, May 8, 1980

SUBJECT

The Hostages and Iranian Domestic Politics

You have received analyses about the hostage situation from NEA

and other sources. INR has prepared here an analysis of the crisis,

setting it within the broader context of the Iranian political situation.

In sum we conclude that the hostages are being used as pawns by

competing factions in the Iranian domestic power struggle. Hence, the

possibility of reaching a negotiated settlement remains minimal. Only

Ayatollah Khomeini has the authority to negotiate on behalf of Iran.

Thus consensus building appears the best route to reach our desired

goals. The US has little ability to influence the key actors, however,

especially if our reward for releasing the hostages is only the cessation

of US power projection and pressures.

Background: The dominant ideology which has fueled Iran’s revolu-

tion rests on two basic ideas:

—Islamic Shiite fundamentalism which projects a vision of an ideal-

ized society governed by Islamic law and mores; and

—fanatical hatred of the imperialistic West and particularly the

United States, which is viewed as the epitome of decadent, bankrupt

Western culture.

These ideas have increasingly demanded strict adherence from all

revolutionary cadres. Over the past year, the hardline revolutionary

core has progressively eliminated or neutralized those individuals,

including former Prime Minister Bazargan, who re-interpreted or modi-

fied the Revolution’s basic ideology.

As events have developed, the Revolution can be divided into

three phases:

—Sweeping away the Shah’s regime. (November 1977–February

1979). This was eventually led by a broad and very large anti-Shah

coalition.

Covert and Overt Operations

—A series of political crises which have narrowed the base of the

revolutionary leadership and destroyed the original coalition. (from

March 1979 and still developing); and

—Eventual political and economic reconstruction.

Phase two is not complete. The highly fluid current situation is

characterized by competing factions striving to establish a solid political

base upon which to begin building Iran’s brave new world.

Phase two revolutionary politics are dominated by two fundamen-

tal questions. First, is the Revolution an essentially conservative move-

ment designed to restore the prestige and influence of Iran’s traditional

socio-economic elites i.e. the clergy and the bazaar merchants? Is it

instead a process which will eventually revamp Iran’s entire social

structure by instituting radical income and land redistribution policies,

as well as bringing to the forefront a new leftist-oriented elite? Or is

it some combination of religious fundamentalism and reform?

These complex questions pit the religiously-oriented ruling entou-

rage against various leftist groups. By and large, the dominant clerics

are satisfied with the revolution’s principal achievement: the ousting

of the Shah and his “henchmen”. Beyond re-establishing the predomi-

nance of Islamic law those clerics have little genuine interest in funda-

mentally altering Iranian society. The leftists, however, see the Shah’s

fall as the first step in a process which will throughly restructure the

Iranian socio-economic order. Bani-Sadr is in the middle between these

two positions and is often attacked by both.

A second question is simultaneously being debated within the

current governing entourage: who will rule post-Khomeini Iran? In

that connection, an intense power struggle has emerged, primarily

between the young hardline clerical fundamentalists and the “Islamic

technocrats” (i.e. those individuals who have been secularly educated—

often in the West—but who claim to be devout Moslems). The leftists

are not so directly involved in this question, preferring to bide their

time for now.

This framework helps to explain the seemingly incoherent twists

and turns in Iran’s domestic politics: most of these machinations are

part of the attempt to answer definitively the two previously mentioned

questions. Even so macabre an issue as the return of the American

dead, for example, is related to the second question: if President Bani-

Sadr favored sending the bodies back to the US, then as a matter of

principle, the fundamentalists would have to oppose his policy or risk

a loss of prestige in their continuing struggle with the President over

future pre-eminence.

The Key Actors: Several actors are participating in this on-going

drama. Ayatollah Khomeini, of course, remains the Revolution’s pre-

eminent figure and the final repository of revolutionary legitimacy and

authority. No important decision can be made without first ascertaining

his view. Khomeini’s power and influence, however, are not absolute.

He has always been careful to assure that his pronouncements are in

accordance with popular opinion. In this respect, Khomeini is as much

a follower of public opinion as he is a shaper of it. He will avoid at

all costs making an unpopular decision.

Three competing factions surround Khomeini:

—The Islamic technocrats led by President Bani-Sadr. Bani-Sadr

also has been able to forge links with some of the moderate clerics;

—The

hardline

fundamentalists

led

by

Ayatollah

Beheshti.

Beheshti heads the Islamic Republican Party, sits on the Revolutionary

Council and has been appointed to the Supreme Court.

—Ahmad Khomeini (son of the Ayatollah) and supporters at the

Qom Theological School. Ahmad, who is attempting to carve out a

sphere of influence, has supported Bani-Sadr one day and Beheshti

the next.

The embassy militants occupy a unique position within the political

matrix. While not a part of the ruling entourage, they are able to project

enormous influence into the political arena by virtue of their forceful

character and as symbols embodying all of Iran’s revolutionary aspira-

tions. They are committed to keeping the Revolution “on track” by

eliminating all US influence in Iran and establishing a thoroughly (but

as yet undefined) revolutionary society.

Although all of these factions (with the possible exception of the

Embassy occupiers) are united in their determination to prevent a leftist

seizure of the Revolution, they are split over the issue of who will

receive Khomeini’s mantle following the Ayatollah’s death.

The leftists represent the greatest single potential threat to the

ruling entourage; at present, however, they are not prepared to chal-

lenge Khomeini. Instead, they ride his coattails where they can and

strengthen their own position for the longer run. They are already

represented in several key places, including the student movement and

the oil workers.

Three leftist organizations are particularly significant:

—Fedayeen-al Khalq: These secular Marxists have broken with Kho-

meini. Their activities are considered illegal, their headquarters have

been raided and closed, and their leaders, for the most part, are under-

ground. Individual members may be associated with the Embassy

occupation. Some Fedayeen members have actively supported the

Kurds in their struggle with the Tehran government.

—Mujahiddin-al Khalq: These Islamic Marxists are also estranged

from Khomeini. Like the Fedayeen, they have been attacked and criti-

cized. However, they have not gone underground; some of their mem-

bers have been elected to the new Parliament.

Covert and Overt Operations

—The Tudeh (Communist) Party: This party, now reportedly legal,

supports Khomeini and carries on various activities, such as organizing

meetings and publishing a newspaper. The Tudeh has probably concen-

trated most of its activities in oil, military and bureaucratic circles. Its

membership strength has not been accurately gauged.

The intense competition among the basic three competing factions

has increasingly radicalized the Revolution. Any individual who has

tried to take a moderate stand on relations with the West and/or

the US has been tarred as being anti-Islamic and anti-revolutionary.

President Bani-Sadr could be the latest victim of this on-going,

devouring phenomenon.

Enter the Hostages: It is against this volatile, fragile, extraordinarily

complex political background that the hostage issue must be viewed.

Essentially, the hostages are involved in three levels of competition.

First, they are pawns in the continuing overall struggle for power.

For President Bani-Sadr, the hostages are a liability because the crisis

has prevented him from consolidating his political position and moving

on to his social and economic programs. By thwarting Bani-Sadr’s

efforts to unilaterally solve the hostage crisis, Ayatollah Beheshti has

kept Bani-Sadr off-balance and over the past three months has gravely

weakened the President’s political position. Beheshti’s Islamic Republi-

can Party won over half of the seats in the first round of the Parliamen-

tary elections and should capture a majority of the remaining seats in

the second round on May 9. As a result, Beheshti probably will be in

a position to decisively influence the approval and eventual power of

the new prime minister and cabinet.

In an atmosphere charged with anti-Americanism and chaos, the

left has openly thrived. All leftist factions have supported the Embassy

seizure. In the process they have worked to expand their influence and

strength. It was probably fear of the left’s growing influence which

recently led the hardline clerics to attack and oust them from their

university strongholds.

As long as the hostages remain an asset for a majority of Iran’s

clerically dominated factions, it will be difficult to devise a formula

for their release. Moreover, any formula which is eventually negotiated

must be the result of a consensus building process within Iran. Of

course, the eventual consolidation of power by one faction would facili-

tate the possibility of negotiating a settlement.

Second and on a deeper level, the hostages are living symbols of

a perceived US policy which exploited and dominated Iran. Revolution-

ary Iran believes that the US used the Shah as its instrument to pillage

Iran’s economic resources and rob it of its cultural heritage. The seizure

of the Embassy is, according to this line of thinking, the result of 35

years of pent-up moral outrage. Thus, for the Iranians, the hostage crisis

is a moral issue, rather than one of international law and diplomatic

immunity and can only be resolved when the issue is addressed in

those terms. At a minimum, Iran is demanding that the US acknowledge

the justice of this moral indignation.

Third, the hostages are probably serving as insurance against possi-

ble US retaliation. When the hostages were first seized, Iran was not

concerned about this insurance issue, but as the crisis has dragged on,

it is becoming an increasingly important factor. The Iranians are riding

a wild tiger on which they cannot safely remain, but from which they

are equally fearful of dismounting.

The Course of Events: Because Khomeini has decreed that the Iranian

people acting through the Parliament must decide the hostages’ fate,

no real progress toward resolving the crisis can be expected until that

body convenes. The final round of elections will be held May 9. Optimis-

tically, the new legislature will meet by the end of May and begin the

hostage debate by the end of June. (The intervening month will be

used by the Parliament for organizing internally and the selection of

a new cabinet.) The hostages debate could easily extend through the

summer, particularly if legislative sessions are suspended during the

holy, fasting month of Ramadan, which commences on July 17.

If Khomeini dies or is totally incapacitated soon, the prospects for

a negotiated settlement in the intermediate future will be almost nil.

Without Khomeini’s legitimizing influence, a weak coalition composed

of Iran’s various competing forces will not be able to reach an authorita-

tive decision on this issue. Thus, the hostages will have to wait until

a new, dominant power center is established which will have the

strength and legitimacy to find a solution to the hostage problem. That

process could, under the best of circumstances, take several months to

come to fruition.

Implications for the US: The previous discussions suggest several

conclusions:

—The crisis is essentially self-contained and not subject to manipu-

lation by an outside force. Although outside power and pressures can

be projected into the political arena, they will have little impact on the

key players. This is particularly true if the reward for releasing the

hostages is the mere cessation of outside pressures, such as the current

economic measures taken against Iran.

—The hostages are intimately linked to the domestic political proc-

ess. When a majority of the key players believe the hostages are a

liability, a framework for negotiations can be established; however,

—No single individual has the authority to negotiate on this issue;

therefore, it is a mistake to look for such a leader with whom normal

diplomatic relations can be initiated and pursued. What is needed is

282.

Message From the Department of State to the Swiss

Ambassador to Iran (Lang)

Washington, May 13, 1980

We would appreciate it if the following message could be transmit-

ted to Ambassador Lang in Tehran.

1. We have recently completed an assessment of our experiences

in dealing with the hostage crisis and reached several conclusions

which will guide us in this next phase of diplomatic effort. We regard

the period until the new parliament convenes and addresses the hostage

question as a crucial moment for preparing the ground for positive

action by the legislators. Ideally, we would hope during this period to

reach an understanding with the Iranian authorities as to how the

hostage issue would be handled with the new parliament and what

would be the most useful U.S. contribution. We would like to explore

the best ways of doing that and would welcome your analysis and

advice.

2. We consider that our previous efforts to negotiate release of

the hostages failed largely because of the intransigence of the clerical

leadership. We had concentrated our efforts on the secular leadership

and left it to them to carry the arguments with the clerics. In this phase

we want indirectly to try to be as persuasive as possible with the clerics.

We believe Capucci may be best suited to this job, but we will explore

whether others might also contribute to this process. We will be in

touch with the Germans, French and others in this regard to see what

they might be able to do.

3. In the previous phase we concentrated our attention heavily on

Ghotbzadeh, and we continue to assume he will be one of the key

actors. We believe, however, we must give increased attention to Bani-

Sadr for it will presumably be his responsibility to guide the hostage

issue through the new parliament. If he does not undertake the task,

then his yet to be appointed prime minister will be responsible. We

would like to continue to rely on you as our channel to official Iranians,

i.e. Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh, the new prime minister if and when he is

appointed, and others you consider appropriate. Obviously any contri-

bution you can make to the persuasive effort with the clerics or any

advice you have on that subject would also be welcomed but we recog-

nize that you and your government may well feel it is wise for you to

leave that group to others.

4. Bourguet and Villalon will continue to be helpful in a variety of

ways. We assume their primary contact will continue to be Ghotbzadeh.

5. There may be other intermediaries involved and we will try

to keep you fully informed on these developments. We would be

particularly interested in ideas on ways to get to the group working

directly with Khomeini.

6. Parallel to our intensified diplomatic effort will be augmented

pressure in the form of sanctions from our allies and friends. We believe

these measures are having some political and psychological effect but

are aware that the economic effects will take some time.

7. It is plain that this crisis will be resolved and the hostages

released when Iran’s leadership decides that it serves their interest and

the interest of the Revolution to do so. There are a variety of arguments

and actions that we will put forward to bring these points home to

key figures, and we will welcome your insights and suggestions for

this process.

8. We believe it would be useful at this stage if you could arrange

a tour d’horizon with Bani-Sadr to review the present situation, prospects

for favorable parliamentary action, the state of planning for such action,

and international initiatives that might usefully contribute to that proc-

ess, especially initiatives by the U.S. We would like to develop as

frank an exchange with Bani-Sadr as possible and believe a matching

exchange might usefully be held with Ghotbzadeh. We would appreci-

ate your assessment after these conversations so that we can refine

our planning.

9. One other issue concerns us. We have heard increasing talk from

Tehran again about trial of the hostages. Do you believe this is again

becoming a real threat? If so, do you have thoughts about how to turn

it aside?

283.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Summary of the President’s Meeting with Hostage Family Representatives of

F.L.A.G. (Family Liaison Action Group)

PARTICIPANTS

President Jimmy Carter

Katherine Keough, President of F.L.A.G.

Pearl Golacinski, Mother of Alan B. Golacinski, Security Officer

Louisa Kennedy, Wife of Economic Officer, Moorhead Kennedy

Barbara Rosen, Wife of Barry Rosen, USICA Press Attaché

Gary Sick, NSC

Ray Jenkins, White House Press Office

Mrs. Kennedy briefed the President on the recent trip she and several

other FLAG members had made to Europe. They asked for Allied unity

and solidarity on the question of the taking of diplomatic hostages,

and they had the impression that the U.S. has Allied support. However,

the Allies must take action in their own way.

The President said that he had received private assurances of support

from the Allies, but public statements to the contrary were blown out

of proportion by the press, and there was an impression in the U.S.

that the Allies were not behind us. He thought the FLAG visit was

meaningful and helpful.

Mrs. Keough summarized their recent contacts with the TV net-

works. They are seeking support for coverage of five hostage families

and five Iranian families who suffered persecution under the Shah.

The objective is to show that communication is possible among ordinary

people and between governments despite very great differences.

The President said the project would be more effective if he was

not involved. However, he thought that anything the hostage families

did in a human way could be helpful. He wondered about family trips

to Iran. He had noted that Mrs. Timm was condemned when she

returned, and he regretted this.

Mrs. Keough also noted their efforts to get an opportunity to make

a brief appearance before the Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference in

Islamabad. They had contacted a number of Mid East Ambassadors,

and they had sent telexes to Muscat, Jidda and Islamabad.

The President said he was inclined to support the effort, though the

hand of the U.S. Government should not show. He suggested that

FLAG might also consider getting in touch with Archbishop Capucci,

who is close to Khomeini.

Mrs. Kennedy said the Vatican had asked them not to publicize

its role.

The President summarized U.S. efforts presently underway. Secre-

tary General Waldheim had contacted him yesterday and there was a

chance that one or two members of the UN Commission might return

to Tehran. This had resulted from Waldheim’s conversation with Ghot-

bzadeh, who is the only one in Iran with any political courage—

although he came across on TV as a sleazy character. Bani-Sadr was

just nothing, and it had been a serious mistake for us when he was

elected. He delayed carrying out his commitments to us and had per-

mitted Beheshti and others to undermine the negotiations. The Presi-

dent said he saw no immediate prospects for the Majlis to release the

hostages since they were disorganized. There were four tracks which

could go on simultaneously: (1) the UN; (2) Islamic religious leaders

who could be in contact in Tehran; (3) the European allies; and (4) the

human side with the hostage families. He was pushing the first three,

and he would leave the fourth to FLAG. If FLAG needed help with

the TV networks, Ray Jenkins, Jody Powell, or Hodding Carter at State

would help. He asked that they keep his comments private.

Mrs. Keough said they had found it was better that they do it

themselves. One problem is that they are accused of being a “front”

for the U.S. Government. If they constantly deny that, the President

should understand that this does not mean that they do not appreciate

everything he is doing.

The President wondered how we could assist in getting them an

appearance at the Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference.

Sick said that he would work with Harold Saunders to give them

some assistance without evidence of U.S. Government sponsorship.

284.

Memorandum of Conversation

Vienna, May 16, 1980

SUBJECT

Meeting Between Secretary of State Muskie and Foreign Minister Gromyko

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie

William D. Krimer, Interpreter

USSR:

Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko

Viktor Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Foreign Minister Gromyko opened the conversation by suggesting

that he and Secretary Muskie conduct their talks in compact form since

they did not have much time at their disposal. It was his understanding

that there was no formal agenda for this meeting; thus they would be

free to choose whatever topics they wanted to discuss.

[Omitted here is material on topics unrelated to Iran.]

Iran

Turning to the question of Iran, Gromyko said that some political

leaders had frequently asked him why the Soviet Union had not pub-

licly advocated release of the American hostages, saying that this would

ease tensions throughout the world. Gromyko would tell the Secretary

that the Soviets had made very clear statements to the effect that the

holding of U.S. hostages by Iran violates international law and all

relevant international conventions. Moreover, the Soviet Union had

undertaken a private démarche with the Iranian leadership through

restricted channels, calling for the release of the American hostages.

At the time of this démarche Washington had been informed to that

effect; that was several months ago. But, instead of hearing thanks for

its initiative, the Soviet leadership had heard nothing but an avalanche

of unfriendly statements against the Soviet Union. True, there was a

minor assistant who had expressed appreciation, in passing as it were,

but the Soviet leadership had heard nothing from the President of the

United States or from the Secretary of State. Let no one throw stones

at the Soviet position with regard to hostages. But, the Secretary knew

very well that the Soviet leadership did condemn military methods of

liberating the hostages. It believed that such methods cannot help the

United States and can only damage U.S. prestige. That also applies to

the recent action undertaken by the United States. In his judgment,

had the mission proceeded, it would have resulted in the death of all

the hostages and probably in the death of many other people as well.

The Soviet Union did not need anything at all from Iran. Let Iran

develop its own country peacefully and live in peace with all its neigh-

bors and everyone else.

[Omitted here is material on topics unrelated to Iran.]

Iran

The Secretary said that he was aware of Soviet support and opposi-

tion to taking hostages last January. He appreciated that support in

spite of other difficult problems we have with each other. But he had

to tell Gromyko that two questions were being raised in the United

States in connection with Soviet actions with respect to Iran. First,

there was a feeling among some that the Tudeh Party of Iran was an

instrument of Soviet policy in that country, and that part of the problem

with the hostages was the fact that no one in Iran today had authority.

The Iranians have not finished structuring their government; perhaps

when they finish we might be able to do business with whoever

emerges. Secondly, the Secretary had been told of radio broadcasts

from the Soviet Union that were provocative in nature and fed anti-

American feelings in Iran. He would make one final point in conclusion.

The rescue effort we had undertaken was not regarded by us or

intended as4 a military effort against Iran. It was strictly a rescue

effort. It was his view that any government would be remiss in its

responsibilities if it did not consider and implement efforts to rescue

its citizens. It was unfortunate that our effort had failed, but no one

could say with certainty what would have happened had it succeeded.

In any case, the rescue effort had served a useful purpose in expiating

some of the frustrations felt by the American people. The hostages

have now been held for more than six months and it must be clearly

seen that the United States as a great power had displayed extraordi-

nary patience toward a much smaller power such as Iran. The course

of patience is what we must follow and hope that diplomatic contacts

Covert and Overt Operations

with Iranian authorities would demonstrate to them that their own

best interests dictated release of the hostages. The Secretary did not

know whether we will succeed or not. In any case, the failed effort

had bought us some time. This was an election year in the United

States and he did not know whether in the heat of the contest a policy

of patience can survive. Gromyko knew who the contestants were and

he could draw his own conclusions. Conservative opinion in the United

States is on the rise and it has had its effect on questions involving

détente, arms control, and defense spending. There are pressures on

the President who is running for reelection and he cannot ignore those

pressures. The Secretary suspected that he had been selected for the

office of Secretary of State precisely because he had a political constitu-

ency that would take pressure off the President. He was willing to do

that. In that spirit he had come to the present meeting in order to

explore possible solutions. He hoped that its result would be more

than simply he and Gromyko gaining confidence in each other. He

hoped that some ideas for solutions would emerge from this meeting,

enabling both sides to pick up the policy of détente, which in the

Secretary’s view was the only sensible and serious course to follow.

Both of them had said things to each other that were unpleasant, trying

to be frank. Perhaps they would be able to communicate some of these

sentiments to those they represented.

Iran

Gromyko first wanted to reply to the Secretary’s comments about

the Tudeh Party. This was an internal domestic political force in Iran,

and the Soviet Union had nothing to do with it. It seemed to be an old

habit of political leaders in Washington to refer to special relationships

between the Soviet Union and such forces as the Tudeh Party. He

could only say that these political leaders were victims of their own

inventions.

As for the Soviet radio broadcasts to Iran of which the Secretary

had spoken, Gromyko could only point out that these broadcasts stated

official Soviet policy, i.e., condemnation of the military means contem-

plated by the U.S., condemnation of the actions of the U.S. fleet of

contemplated blockade and mining. That was official Soviet policy and

it had been stated in the broadcasts. It was difficult for the Soviet Union

to understand why such military actions were being contemplated or

285.

Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

Tehran, May 19, 1980

1. Last night I met with my Algerian colleague Abdelkrim Gheraieb

(GB) and informed him on our position concerning carrying out our

respective mandates, a future examination of respective grievances and

a reconciliation of the countries in dispute. GB whose Deputy Foreign

Minister (and also Secretary General) is here at present was very much

interested and told me that his Deputy Minister had received a much

briefer note from Algiers about Algerian-Swiss cooperation. Our for-

mula was not only interesting but sound.

2. GB briefed me about steps undertaken by his country.

2.1. At Tito’s funeral, the Algerian president had two meetings

which underlie the present Algerian démarche.

Covert and Overt Operations

First, with Chancellor Schmidt, who said it is up to you Algerians

to help the whole world by keeping Iran-US conflict from further

deterioration. We know that the US has reached the end of its patience

and will not hesitate to undertake drastic measures and military opera-

tions with foreseeable consequences. Furthermore, Schmidt asked

Algeria to help Europe. Europe is in a conflict of conscience, for reasons

of principle, Europe cannot tolerate a continuation of the violation of

diplomacy represented by the seizure of hostages in Tehran. Europe

must show effective solidarity with the U.S. but Europe is also aware

of its own interests in the region, of the sacrifices involved for results

that are not immediate. Europe also worries over the consequences of

an isolation of Iran for whom the only salvation lies in Arab and

European countries in the face of the Soviet option. The second meeting

with Pertini was even more sharpened, Pertini spoke primarily on

behalf of Italy for whom the situation is tragic and for whom Algeria

is the one chance to lead Iran to its senses.

2.2. Both Schmidt and Pertini would like to get Algeria to act as

intermediary so that the government or the leadership of Iran will be

able to make “a decisive step” enabling the Europeans to postpone, or

not take at all, steps that no one wishes to take. This step should occur

before the 17th.

2.3. After his return to Algiers, the President summoned GB and

discussed the matter with his government. Not only was the Algerian

government impressed by the initiatives of Schmidt and Pertini, he

also decided to make them its own and dispatched Deputy Minister

(following GB’s advice) in order for him to meet with Ghotbzadeh and

if possible with Bani-Sadr.

3. GB is a member of the Central Committee of the Algerian

National Liberation Front and a member of the National Assembly. I

have a great deal of esteem for him, his children and my children play

together, for months he has been telling me: “if you wish to succeed

here, forget conventional diplomacy and call things by their name. It’s

the only way to get to some result, maybe.”

He gave the same advice to his Deputy Foreign Minister who

followed the advice, in part only, this being his first contact here.

This is what he said: “If any country can understand Iran, Algeria

is that country. We have suffered under colonialism and imperialism.

We know all about what AMERICAN imperialism can do and has

done but it is not the only imperialism. Hostage taking cannot be

tolerated. As it continues the situation becomes serious, far more serious

than you, the Iranians seem to realize. Indeed, if the US and most

European countries were to take drastic measures that applied to all

countries that would continue to trade with you or to help you then

you should know that in spite of our friendship for you, we shall place

our own interests above all else. This means that we shall not be able

to do anything for you. Furthermore, you claim to be the legitimate

government of the Iranian Islamic Republic but that is not enough. In

order for your legitimacy to secure international acceptance, it must

be translated into deeds. Words alone are not enough and no longer

suffice. If you are incapable of having your decisions implemented,

you must draw the consequences of this state of affairs, resign your

position and have the country confront its responsibilities. As you

know, you belong with the Arab countries and with Europe but you

are destroying your place. You must do something concrete and signifi-

cant to enable the Europeans not to take any measures on the 17th of

May and postpone them far into the future.”

4. This is what Ghotbzadeh answered (GB found him to be rather

dejected, just as I have found him to be): he understood the situation.

He had met with Waldheim in Belgrade and their talks boiled down

to three points: first, Waldheim is available; second, he offered to reacti-

vate the UN commission; third, the problem of a gesture enabling the

Europeans to put off their decision.

GB points out to me that a reactivation of the UN commission is

Waldheim’s wish because he wants to be re-elected and it also is very

dear to GH who had gone very far in that direction. GH says that he

is interested but he wants to wait and see how the atmosphere will be

at Islamabad and he wants some clarifications from Waldheim.

In this context one should point out that Ghotbzadeh would like to

enjoy the advantages of the commission without any of the undesirable

aspects meaning that where the visit to the hostages is concerned the

ICRC visit would be considered as having been made in its place. The

idea here is that the work of the commission, its report and its findings

will enable the parliament to discuss the hostages in a climate of moral

satisfaction (in addition we would have the non-aligned seminar and

the new Salamatian Commission set up by Bani-Sadr, as directed by

the Imam, to investigate “the American interventions in Iran following

the aborted strike of Tabass”).

Is that all, asked his interlocutors? And Ghotbzadeh then gave

them explanations similar to those he gave me (see my message 465).

Both GB and his Deputy Foreign Minister then said that that was

not enough. You must place the hostages under governmental control

never mind if it is in one or several locations. Then you must say to

the country from now on the Revolutionary Council is in control and

then you must effectively do this.

286.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran and Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

ICA

Warren Christopher

Robert T. Curran

David Newsom

White House

Peter Constable

Zbigniew Brzezinski

OSD

Hedley Donovan

W. Graham Claytor, Jr.

Office of the Vice President

Frank Kramer

Denis Clift

JCS

NSC

Lt. General John Pustay

Gary Sick

Marshall Brement

Justice

Thomas Thornton

John Harmon

Alfred Friendly

Judge Charles Renfrew

Treasury

Robert Carswell

Robert Mundheim

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

[name not declassified]

Charles Cogan

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. World Court Decision. Mr. Christopher said he thought we would

get a good decision from the World Court. At present, however, he

did not favor going back to the Security Council after the decision

since this would merely provoke additional debate and lead to another

Soviet veto. If the Soviet judge on the ICJ should vote for the decision,

we should review our position since we might be able to bring new

pressures on the Soviets. We should be able to use the decision effec-

tively for public presentation in favor of our position. All agreed that

we would not plan to return to the Security Council pending further

review after the decision is announced. (C)

Approve

Plan to return to the Security Council

2. Iranian Visas. There have been approximately 700 applications

for visas by Iranians. Approximately half of these have been granted on

the basis of medical needs, rejoining families, and other humanitarian

reasons. The other half have been rejected. We have not been swamped

with requests. Of those cases which have been granted, nearly half

have been minority applicants, and the conditions applied in those

cases are considerably more lenient than for other Iranians regardless

of their position. The sharp difference between minorities and other

Iranians is becoming very evident, and Mr. Christopher felt we should

adopt a more liberal standard for granting visas to non-minority Irani-

ans. Specifically, we should be more flexible in granting visas for medi-

Covert and Overt Operations

cal treatment. At present, we are allowing visas virtually only for

deathbed cases. Each case should be examined carefully in terms of

need, but we should be more flexible in permitting cases of real need.

He also suggested that we apply more liberal standards on permitting

families to rejoin. At present this is limited only to mothers, fathers

and children. He would propose extending this to include brothers,

sisters, uncles and aunts. All agreed that some liberalization of the

rules was justified, with careful verification of each case. (C)

Approve some liberalization, with close verification of

each case

Maintain very tight restrictions as at present

Iranian students are a special category composed of three different

groups. The vast bulk of Iranian students, perhaps 50,000, were admit-

ted on the basis that they could remain until they completed their

studies. They are not a problem from the visa point of view. About

7,000 students have visas with specific time limits, some of which are

expiring. Gary Sick noted that he had been contacted by the Provost

of MIT on behalf of the National Association of Foreign Student Affairs

pointing out several cases of students whose visas are expiring in the

near future despite the fact that they are about to complete work on

a PhD. The SCC asked for additional information to review this at a

later time. A third group of about 100 Iranian students had valid visas

for the duration of their studies but happened to be trapped outside

the U.S. (e.g. a weekend field trip to Canada) when the order was

imposed and they have not been able to return. Mr. Christopher found

the application of the rule in these cases capricious and recommended

permitting these individuals to return. The SCC agreed. (C)

3. Travel of U.S. Citizens to Iran. There are a number of possible

cases emerging, from individual family members wishing to travel to

Iran, to lawyers representing Iran who need to consult with their clients,

to Ramsey Clark who apparently intends to attend the forthcoming

conference in Iran related to the rescue mission. Dr. Brzezinski asked

State and Justice to examine the various cases, define some rational

distinctions, and provide recommendations to the SCC on those which

require high level decisions. (C)

4. Iranian Claims Legislation. Mr. Christopher noted that there is a

very real chance that the proposed legislation8 would lead to hearings

on the Hill and considerable pressure by various interest groups for

amendments to be attached either vesting assets or providing special

consideration for certain groups. The legislation itself does not provide

any real pressure on the Iranians and it may have the effect of complicat-

ing an eventual settlement by getting us tied up in legal constraints.

The families of the hostages are opposed to the legislation on the

grounds that it will make an eventual settlement more difficult. There

is no enthusiasm on the Hill and no pressure to proceed since it is

going to set off a lobbying campaign. There is no public pressure to

proceed. We may have been mistaken in recommending this in the first

place, but we are now committed since the President has announced

it. All agreed that there was no reason to hurry the process. Treasury

will proceed to put the finishing touches on the legislation, and it will

be reviewed next week by the SCC. (C)

[Omitted here is material on Afghanistan.]

Covert and Overt Operations

287.

Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary

of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

(Constable) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)

Washington, May 24, 1980

SUBJECT

Status of Initiatives

I. INTRODUCTION

Hal Saunders and Henry Precht will return May 24, after complet-

ing their consultations in Europe. They had good talks with the French,

the Germans and the British on ways in which their diplomats in

Tehran can be helpful in working to persuade the Iranian authorities,4

especially the clerics, that a quick solution of the hostage issue is in

Iran’s interest. In Vienna, Saunders discussed with Kreisky the latter’s

plans for a trip this weekend to Tehran with Olof Palme of Sweden

and Felipe Gonzalez of Spain. In Bern, Saunders and Precht had a

long session with the Swiss Team on Iran and Foreign Minister Aubert.

The Swiss offered to have their Ambassador Lang play a more active

role than would be normal for a protecting power. Lang will attempt

to keep abreast of and orchestrate the various initiatives and activities

of other parties on the scene in Tehran. Saunders also met with lawyers,

Bourguet and Villalon, and with Archbishop Capucci.

II. STATUS OF INITIATIVES ON IRAN

1. Socialist International Initiative

Kreisky, Palme and Gonzalez still plan to arrive in Tehran within

a few days. They expect to meet with Bani Sadr, Beheshti, the Revolu-

tionary Council, and Khomeini’s son, Ahmad. Their purposes are to

explore “cooperation with democratic Europe” and tangentially to have

a positive impact on the hostage question.

2. Capucci/Bourguet Initiatives

Capucci and Bourguet are in Tehran. Capucci will try to see the

leading authorities in Tehran to determine whether it would be useful

for him to try to generate démarches in Tehran by the Syrians, Saudis,

Emiratis, Kuwaitis, Algerians and Palestinians. His ideas are still

unformed, but he has in mind trying to develop a consensus for the

release of the hostages. Capucci and Bourguet hope to go to Damascus

this weekend, after seeing the leadership in Tehran, to discuss with

President Assad and possibly with Yassir Arafat ideas for resolving

the crisis. Capucci feels that it is urgent to stimulate some activity

before May 28, when the members of parliament first meet. We have

stressed to Capucci and Bourguet in the strongest terms that we oppose

trials in any form, and Capucci agrees with our position. The Vatican

has agreed not to interpose objections to Capucci’s travel to Damascus,

provided the USG obtains the agreement of Israel to look the other

way. Capucci and Bourguet are holding in reserve the idea of a seven-

nation conference. The conference would be sponsored jointly by Swit-

zerland and Algeria with the US and Iran attending. The Swiss have

decided to stay loose on this until Iranian reaction to such a conference

becomes more firmly known. The Swiss recognize that a detailed nego-

tiation of outstanding US-Iranian issues should come only after the

hostages’ release.

3. Iranian Conference Initiative

The Iranians are continuing their efforts to organize a June 2–5

conference of sympathetic organizations and individuals from Euro-

pean and Third World countries. The stated purpose of the conference

is to condemn US interference in Iran and the aborted rescue mission.

There have been some suggestions that Bani Sadr sees the conference

as an opening to build some support in Iran for a resolution of the

Covert and Overt Operations

crisis, but the reasons for his possibly believing so are unclear. So far

there appear to have been very few acceptances to participate in the

conference. The Iranians are attempting to persuade some Americans

to attend, but realize that there could be difficulties for these individuals

in obtaining validation of their passports for travel to Iran.

4. Bangladesh Initiative

The BDG at the recent Islamic Conference in Islamabad may have

floated the idea of putting together a “contact group” of a few Islamic

countries which would go to Tehran to try to be helpful in resolving

the US-Iranian crisis. We do not know at this point whether they

had any positive responses from other Islamic governments, but are

checking on it with our people in Dacca.

5. UN Initiative

The Syrian advisor to President Assad, Adib Daoudi, arrived today

in Tehran. His trip is at Waldheim’s request for the purpose of exploring

possibilities for the UN Commission to resume its mandate. Waldheim

has said that he will ask Daoudi to meet with religious leaders such

as Beheshti, as well as with government officials. Foreign Minister

Ghotbzadeh has publicly disassociated Daoudi’s visit from the hostage

issue. This stance probably reflects Ghotbzadeh’s doubts as to whether

it will be possible to use Daoudi’s visit to contribute to a solution.

Points to be Made

—I would like to reconfirm our understanding that the Daoudi

visit is truly exploratory, and that there can be no question of release

of the commission report except in an agreed framework for release

of the hostages.

—We hope you will keep in closest touch with us, especially as

regards the outcome of the Daoudi visit.

—Assistant Secretary Saunders has been in Europe this past week

consulting with our major Allies on ways in which their Ambassadors

in Tehran can be helpful.

—Saunders has also had long talks with the Swiss government,

which represents our interests in Iran. The Swiss have agreed to play

an active role and will attempt to be of assistance in connection with

various initiatives that are underway.

—Saunders has discussed with European social democratic leaders

their plans for visiting Iran. Hopefully such a visit can also have a

positive impact on the hostage question.

—Archbishop Capucci is in Tehran at his own initiative attempting

to explore the possibilities for Islamic countries playing a helpful role

in building a consensus for the release of the hostages.

288.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, May 28, 1980

289.

Memorandum for the Record by Director of Central

Intelligence Turner

Washington, May 29, 1980

SUBJECT

Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 28 May 1980 [portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran.]

2. On Iran, I asked for his reaction to our covert action paper that

I gave him last week. He said he thought it was a reasonable paper.

He had Gary Sick staffing it and would come back to us in writing. I

told him I needed a little more guidance on Bakhtiar and Oveisi. The

essence of his response was very much what my attitude has been on

this—keep the pot stirred; do not give substantial backing or direction,

however, that does not preclude giving either modest advice or money.

I described the “jerga” that will take place in Paris shortly. [1 line

not declassified]

3. I expressed a bit of concern that the “Saunders paper” was in

effect being carried out as a policy even though we had not discussed

it in the SCC meeting when it was presented. He acknowledged that

we were more or less moving by default in this case but he didn’t

think there was anything else we could do at this time.

I expressed our continued reservations on the possibility of any

good for the hostages coming out of the present semi-negotiations or

Covert and Overt Operations

the actions of the Majlis. He agreed but said there was a lot of optimism

around about the West German approach. I pointed out we had not

been clued in on this other than a brief reference to it at this morning’s

meeting. He said it came in a recent NODIS from Stoessel. The mes-

sage indicated there was a suggestion that the hostages might be

released within three weeks.

[1 paragraph (15 lines) not declassified]

4. I talked also about the rescue operation planning and how much

support we should give to it. His response is that it is not a dead

option but that we might have to look at it also in the event we come

to an impasse on negotiations. We are going to have to make our own

judgment as to how much of our effort we put in that direction. Basi-

cally, I think we have to go along with the DoD’s requests but we’ve

got to be rather selective, i.e., DoD will cook up all kinds of options

and be happy to have us explore each in great detail. We’ve got to

hold back until their enthusiasm calms down enough to know which

option is worth looking at seriously. We’ll also have to be pretty tough-

minded on what we are uniquely equipped to do for them and what

they can really do themselves. In short, we must cooperate. We can

footdrag, we can not volunteer, and we can insist that there be some

signs of seriousness and a reasonable probability of success behind

proposals that we expend much effort in supporting. [portion marking

not declassified]

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran.]

Stansfield Turner

Director

290.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State

for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to the

Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)

Washington, May 31, 1980

Message to Lang

In recent conversations beginning in Paris, Bourguet and Villalon

have been very close-mouthed about their plans. Bourguet is now in

Tehran working with Ghotbzadeh, but Villalon—through whom we

communicate—says only that they will tell us in due course what has

been worked out. We have said vigorously each time (a) that they

cannot confront us with a plan approved by the Iranians which we

cannot accept and, particularly, (b) that any plan which includes trying

some of the hostages would risk the most serious reaction in the U.S.

We want to tell Lang what is going on and ask him to try to find out

what is being discussed in Tehran to get us into the circuit.

Villalon says cryptically that four competing plans for dealing with

the hostages are being readied for submission to the Majlis:

1. The Bani-Sadr Plan. As we understand this from Italian, British,

and German reports—not from Villalon—this approach involves three

principal elements. First, an appeal by Khomeini to the Parliament

Members to release the hostages. In one version, this appeal is a public

Khomeini statement; in another version, it is made through private

messages delivered by Ahmad Khomeini. The second element is the

release of the hostages by the Parliament to unspecified third country

leaders. Whether these are leaders of the Non-Aligned Movement,

Islamic states, or others has not been spelled out. The third element

involves an understanding that the United States would agree to

unfreeze the assets, facilitate the recovery of the Shah’s assets, and

make a commitment not to retaliate or press claims against Iran.

2. A plan being devised by Ghotbzadeh’s group—Ghotbzadeh,

Moinfar, Tabatabai, Chamran, Habibi, two of Ghotbzadeh’s staffers,

and Bourguet working with them. This group opposes Bani-Sadr’s idea

Covert and Overt Operations

of releasing the hostages to the Non-Aligned Movement headed by

Castro because they feel this would play into the hands of the commu-

nist interests. Villalon also says Ghotbzadeh wants the U.N. Commis-

sion to complete its work while Bani-Sadr wants it to fail. Villalon will

only say that the Ghotbzadeh plan takes into account three elements:

(1) Bani-Sadr’s ideas; (b) the past scenarios agreed with the U.S.;

(c) the Islamic concept of forgiveness or pardon, pardon being one of

the Imam’s prerogatives. There also seems to be an idea—which

Capucci was pressing—of approaching Arab governments such as

Saudi Arabia and Kuwait and perhaps Syria to generate approaches

to Iran on behalf of Islamic countries to create a situation in which

Parliament would merely endorse the Imam’s decision which itself

would be folded into an Islamic consensus. A disturbing element men-

tioned by others than Villalon is the idea of releasing the hostages in

from the hostages, then 7–8 suspected of being spies. We have repeat-

edly argued against any breakdown which would leave a small group

behind to be tried. Villalon said Friday this plan will be submitted to

the Imam for approval before we are informed of its details.

3. A Beheshti plan on which we have no reports but which we fear

may include trials.

4. A plan devised by the militants which would be given to sympa-

thizers in the Parliament. Again, we have no details, but assume they

would repeat demands for the Shah and/or his wealth and for trials.

One reason Villalon gives for their uncommunicativeness is their

view that the U.S. is speaking with different voices. For instance:

—In arguing against any scenario that would lead to trials, we

have simply said that if there were trials of any of the hostages we

could not rule out military action. (The President told the families on

December 7 and was quoted in the New York Times that we would

interrupt Iran’s commerce if there were trials. As you know, this was

also conveyed in other ways.)

—German Ambassador Ritzel is being reported by Villalon as say-

ing in Tehran that Secretary Muskie told him the U.S. will adhere to

peaceful means to resolve the crisis under all circumstances.

If the Bourguet-Villalon approach does in fact include a trial-par-

don element, they may resent our persistent argument against trials

and feel we are speaking for ourselves.

the families at the Department of State was found, some relatives spoke with reporters

after the meeting and related Carter’s remarks. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Carter Says He

Plans a Trade Ban Against Iran if Hostages Are Tried,” New York Times, December 8,

291.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

White House

Edmund Muskie**

Zbigniew Brzezinski

David Newsom*

Lloyd Cutler

Harold Saunders

Hedley Donovan

Roberts Owen*

Jody Powell

Robert Fritts*

NSC

Treasury

Gary Sick

Robert Carswell*

OSD

W. Graham Claytor

Frank Kramer*

Covert and Overt Operations

Justice

John Harmon*

JCS

John Pustay

Frank Carlucci

ICA

Charles Bray*

Robert T. Curran*

* Not present for final item.

** Present only for last two items.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

1. Travel to Iran. The Department of State proposed guidance for

approval of certain categories of travel to Iran. It was agreed that this

issue needed additional work before presenting it to the President. A

working group of State, Justice, Treasury and Lloyd Cutler’s office will

examine the issue. (U)

2. Iranian Students. The Department of State summarized the pres-

ent situation. As of December, 1979, there were approximately 66,000+

Iranian students in the U.S. of which 56,000+ were registered. The

10,000+ who were not registered are in violation of the law; they are

being pursued and will be deported. Of those registered, 6,700 were

found to be out-of-status and deportation proceedings have been initi-

ated. Approximately 300 have departed to date. Approximately 42,000

students are in status and in good standing, with visas entitling them

to remain in the U.S. for the duration of their studies. They are not a

problem. However, there are about 7,000 Iranian students who were

granted visas with a specific departure date simply because that was

the type of visa being granted at the time. These students now face

deportation as their visas expire, terminating their course of study in

the middle of a degree program or even in the midst of exams. These

students are no different politically or otherwise than the 42,000 who

can remain, but they are caught in a technicality. We have been receiv-

ing numerous calls from university presidents around the country

asking that these students be granted the right to complete their courses

of study. They stress that these students are in many cases non-political

or friendly to the U.S., and they represent a new generation of Iranian

leadership. It is not in our interest to alienate these individuals simply

because of a technicality. (U)

Justice/INS pointed out that these students could have applied

for alteration of their status prior to the President’s announcement.

Normally, the specific time provision was assigned because of projected

periods of study. INS would prefer simply to enforce the President’s

initial decision and grant no extensions. Jody Powell observed that this

goes to the nature of the policy decision itself: are our interests served

by having more Iranians in this country? Do we want them to get out

or not? (C)

Dr. Brzezinski said he was inclined to be lenient in this case, which

he thought would serve the national interest. Mr. Cutler agreed that

these students should receive equal treatment. It was not necessary to

grant extensions on a near-permanent basis. Rather, he would favor

an option which would grant extensions for such students to complete

only their current course of study or degree level (e.g. Bachelor’s,

Master’s, PhD. etc.), at which point they would be required to leave.

Those individuals who have already been accepted to graduate schools,

law schools, medical schools and the like would be permitted to con-

tinue with those studies. Those students in this country on scholarships

or international exchange (“J” visas) would be accorded the same treat-

ment. Dr. Brzezinski, State, Justice/INS, Treasury, and Defense all

agreed that such an approach would be equitable, and the SCC unani-

mously recommended it to the President. INS agreed that it could

administer such a program. (C)

Approve

Insist that the 7,000 students depart as their present visas

expire.

3. ICJ Decision. Secretary-General Waldheim has not circulated the

ICJ decision as a Security Council document as yet, since he is waiting

for the official text of the decision to be forwarded to him by the Court.

Reportedly, the ICJ has sent the text, but it has not been received. We

will press this to insure that the ICJ decision is circulated in the immedi-

ate future. That is the first necessary step. The second step is consulta-

tions with the new President of the SC and other SC members. Don

Covert and Overt Operations

McHenry has begun that process in New York and will continue. The

third step is to propose a resolution. All agreed that State should

prepare a resolution comprising those elements of the ICJ decision

which were agreed unanimously by the Court. Since the timing of

such a resolution should be sensitive to events in Tehran and elsewhere,

the resolution would not be submitted to the SC until it had been

further reviewed by the SCC and the President. All agreed that this

matter would be reviewed by the SCC next Tuesday, with the idea of

submitting a resolution next week. (C)

Approve

Other

4. Tehran Conference. Developments concerning the Ramsey Clark

delegation and the Iranian release of a purported message from General

Huyser to General Haig were briefly reviewed. (JCS says the text of

the message is probably accurate. It is unclear how the Iranians could

have obtained a copy, although it is possible Huyser was working

through the Iranian generals at some point.) All agreed that we should

hold to our present posture of no comment on the Huyser message.

The Attorney General supports prosecution of the Americans in the

delegation on civil charges, rather than criminal charges, which would

Washington Post, the purported telegram from Huyser to Haig, January 22, 1979, released

by the Iranian Defense Ministry, was interpreted by the Iranian Government as proof

that Huyser had been sent to Iran to mobilize a military coup. (Stuart Auerbach, “Iran

and Jones, which is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, vol. X, 1977–1980,

Iran: Revolution, January 1977–November 1979.

involve a fine rather than jail terms. The Justice Representative noted

that “It is difficult to be a martyr over money.” (S)

5. Congressional Letter. Dr. Brzezinski read to the group a letter

which is circulating on the Hill11 as a possible message from Members

of Congress to the new Iranian Majlis. It was recognized that the

Congress could do whatever it wished on this issue, but all agreed

that the Congressional Liaison staffs should coordinate with the Con-

gressional leadership to insure that any letter would be consistent with

U.S. policy and coordinated with our own efforts. (C)

(At that point the meeting was reduced to principals and key

participants.)

6. Possible Trials of Hostages. Dr. Brzezinski recalled that in an NSC

meeting at Camp David last November, the President had authorized

sending a warning or ultimatum to Iran about possible trials of the

hostages. That message stated that any public trial of U.S. persons

would result in interruption of Iranian commerce; any harm to any of

the American hostages would result in direct retaliatory actions by the

U.S. Subsequently, on December 7, the President had indicated as

much publicly, and had used the phrase “interruption of commerce.”

The private message had been drafted by Dr. Brzezinski and Secretary

Vance and was transmitted to Bani-Sadr via the Swiss. That was in the

final days of Bani-Sadr’s term as Foreign Minister, and we have no

confirmation of what was done with the message or who in Iran may

have learned of it. This past Sunday, the President had again referred

to U.S. action in the event of trials. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski said it was necessary to distinguish between a show

trial which would publicly humiliate our people and a “farce” in which

the Iranians claim a secret trial had been held and then expel our

people. He thought we could live with the latter. Secretary Muskie

said we could not know in advance what might be done. What we

need is a way to justify our public posture so as not to strengthen the

hand of the hardliners and militants. Many are coming to believe that

action. We might wish to take a position, in light of the ICJ ruling, that

we would pursue the matter through the Security Council, at least in

the first instance. Jody Powell noted that the political situation here

was affected not only by the outcome of trials but also the process.

Some processes available to Iran, e.g. a trial of “U.S. crimes” in which

hostages are cited but not called, could be consistent with the ICJ

decision and we could probably stomach them politically. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski said we need to differentiate between deterring

certain actions by the Iranians and reacting to events. In the first

instance, we may wish to signal to the Iranians certain types of proce-

dures which we would protest but would be able to accept as a way

out. But we should also make clear our intention to react to public

humiliation of the hostages. (S)

Secretary Muskie said he was inclined to emphasize the ICJ ruling

and resort to the SC. The President’s Sunday statement was probably

sufficient to recall the seriousness of our warning. The hardliners now

appear to be in control; if we start with provocations or threats, we

may only feed the hardliners, while focusing on the ICJ will leave them

in some uncertainty about the November 23 message and force them

to respond to the ICJ ruling rather than direct threats. We would be

giving the hardliners less to attack, but our position would still be

there. The choice of intermediary would be extremely important in

delivering such a delicate message. The Syrian, Daoudy, on the UN

Commission is one choice. Another is the Swiss. Mr. Saunders noted

that the most delicate part is to give them enough room to grope their

way out without starting a process we do not want to happen. The

European ambassadors may be useful in putting some kind of protec-

tion around the hostages. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski agreed it was a terribly dangerous business, with

Iran still in a semi-revolutionary state and the possibility of a trial

process getting completely out of hand. He suggested that State draft

a message—or series of messages as appropriate—which would be

292.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Aaron)

Washington, June 5, 1980

SUBJECT

“Black Chamber” Meeting

The most important issue to be resolved today is an agreed strategy

on [less than 1 line not declassified] the objective of our political action

strategy for Iran.

You will recall that CIA did an initial paper which proposed U.S.

advice and support for the Bakhtiar/Oveissi efforts. They were asked

to reformulate their proposal [1 line not declassified]. We reviewed their

revised proposal last week, and ZB sent Turner a memo asking him

to put the proposal in the form of a memo to the President (Tab C).

The proposed memo to the President is at Tab B. All of the partici-

pants at the meeting will be familiar with the general thrust of this

Covert and Overt Operations

proposal, although they will not have seen the final draft. Frank Carlucci

would very much like to get authoritative guidance on this proposal before

he leaves on Sunday [less than 1 line not declassified].

—Can we reach consensus on forwarding this to the President?

—Do we need to have a further meeting of principals?

Guidance for Use With Contacts

In my memo to you and ZB last week, I proposed an action strategy

which would give CIA specific guidance on the “message” they can

use with their various contacts. I was authorized to contact the various

participants of this meeting in advance to try out this idea. I have talked

with Frank Carlucci, Bob Komer, and John Pustay. I am scheduled to

see Newsom this afternoon prior to the meeting.

Komer and Pustay agreed wholeheartedly with the general

approach of focusing our efforts on countering Soviet penetration and

the growth of radical leftist forces in Iran. Carlucci thought my original

formulation was too negative—stressing what we did not want rather

than what we hoped to achieve. I have tried to incorporate their com-

ments in the draft guidance at Tab A. I hope to get a preliminary reaction

from Newsom prior to the meeting.

The proposed guidance would serve three purposes:

—It lays out a general overview of the situation from the U.S. point

of view. In the past, our “message” to the various Iranian groups has

tended to be imprecise and confusing, and this has hampered our

credibility. Hopefully, this guidance would help us speak with one

voice.

—It makes clear our opposition to premature and ill-guided mili-

tary operations launched from Iraq (the “White Russian” syndrome).

Oveissi and his supporters are presently very active in this country

and elsewhere (they saw Sadat last month) drumming up enthusiasm

for a military coup.

—It focuses the objective of our efforts on the internal situation in

Iran, by encouraging the development of a coalition of forces to actively

resist Soviet penetration and the growth of radical leftist forces. This

will not be popular with Oveissi and others who have convinced them-

selves that they have the capability to go for Khomeini’s jugular. How-

ever, it provides a practical and realistic objective which is shared

by virtually all the dissident groups—and a large part of the Iranian

population.

An Azerbaijan Strategy

The greatest immediate danger of Soviet penetration is in Azerbaijan.

We have recently had reports that the Soviets are offering attractive

commercial credits to the powerful guilds in the bazaar in Tabriz. We

know that a Soviet intelligence infrastructure remains from the days

when a puppet Soviet regime ruled the region. We suspect that the

efforts of the Moslem Peoples Republican Party (MPRP—representing

a moderate Shariatmadari alternative to mullah rule) to build support in

the military in Azerbaijan was thwarted because of Soviet penetration.

[1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified]

[1½ lines not declassified] Azerbaijan is not only vulnerable to the

Soviets, but it is the historical center of political movements for change.

The Azeris are the largest minority group in Iran. They are not only a

regional force, since they dominate the Tehran bazaar and hold key

positions in government, military and commerce throughout Iran. They

have a potential alternative religious leader to Khomeini—Shariatma-

dari—who will be of supreme importance in maintaining order if and

when Khomeini’s regime collapses.

[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]

Propaganda and Disinformation

Bob Komer feels strongly that we should be more active and imagi-

native in discrediting the Soviet role in Iran and cynical Soviet support

for the Khomeini forces. You may want to ask him to speak to this

and suggest some ideas of how we could be more aggressive.

Turkey and Pakistan

In the long run, our best opportunity for developing ties to a hostile

Iranian regime lies through its two neighbors. This meeting is not the

place for a full-scale discussion of this issue. However, I recommend

that State, CIA and perhaps JCS be asked to develop some thoughts on how

we can begin to encourage closer ties between these three neighbors and how

we might best exploit such ties to promote some degree of political

stability.

Obviously, if a serious Azerbaijan strategy begins to develop, Tur-

key will be key. We have some indications that Turkey [less than 1 line

not declassified] may be willing to play this game.

293.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, June 6, 1980

SUBJECT

Political Action Options on Iran (S)

Some months ago, you approved several intelligence findings

authorizing a significant covert action program toward Iran. During

the February and March negotiations with Bani-Sadr, this program

was conducted in a very low key to avoid disrupting the talks, although

useful contacts were developed with a number of [less than 1 line not

declassified] individuals which may prove valuable in the future. After

the breakdown of the negotiations, all of our assets were devoted

almost exclusively to the rescue operation. (S)

Over the past month, we have again examined our options, with

the objective of becoming more active in political action. The draft

memorandum at Tab A represents the consensus of State, CIA, Defense,

the JCS and myself about the present situation and the options available

to us. Basically, it outlines a strategy for the long haul, in which we

would build an infrastructure of contacts [less than 1 line not declassified]

in order to maximize our ability to influence the course of events. (S)

This strategy represents a more realistic reflection of current politi-

cal realities and our actual capabilities. We are also aware of the danger

that a premature direct confrontation with Khomeini, so long as he

remains the symbol of the revolution, could give the Soviets and the

radical left an opportunity to intervene. (S)

Unless you disagree with this general approach, we would propose

using the paper at Tab B as guidance for the Agency in their discussions

and contacts [less than 1 line not declassified]. It has been reviewed and

approved by all of the appropriate agencies. (S)

[2 lines not declassified] We believe the program outlined in the

attached papers will provide the basis for a mutually consistent and

effective political action effort. (S)

Tab A

Memorandum for President Carter

Washington, undated

SUBJECT

Political Action Options in Iran [portion marking not declassified]

1. Political Situation. Despite the confusion in Teheran and the occa-

sional outbursts of minority unrest in the provinces, Khomeini’s hold

on power is relatively secure at this point. There is no opposition leader

ready to challenge him directly, and he remains capable of mobilizing

mass support to confront his opponents. [portion marking not declassified]

however, there are few functioning institutions capable of holding

the Islamic Republic together. An intense power struggle among his

lieutenants would be virtually inevitable. There is no mechanism for

this succession. [portion marking not declassified]

3. Over the longer term (beyond six months), there is some possibil-

ity that the Islamic Republic will be institutionalized and its leaders

will be able to consolidate their positions. If the Islamic right can impose

some order, the left may avoid a direct challenge. If the right falters,

however, the left will probably move quickly to exploit the situation.

The Iranian left is too weak at this point to seize power, but it is

aggressively trying to prepare for a showdown with the clergy some-

time in the future. Leftist leaders hope that the country will become

disillusioned with the failures and excesses of the mullahs and look

for an alternative. As chaos continues, the stronger the left is likely to

become. [portion marking not declassified]

4. Political Action Options. It is presumed that the political action

options we are seeking are to help prevent the left from filling a vacuum

created by the failure of the Islamic Republic experiment. At this time,

at least, it is not planned to use political action deliberately to under-

mine or attempt to overthrow the Khomeini regime. In attempting to

build a political base from which to be able to influence the course of

events in Iran, we have several options:

a. the so-called external option of dealing with expatriated Iranians

living in Europe and the United States;

Covert and Overt Operations

b. the ethnic option of dealing with some or all of the Azerbayjanis,

Kurds, Qashqai, Turkomen, Arabs, and Baluchis inside Iran;

c. the internal option of dealing with political figures inside Iran,

both within and without the government.

While each option can be described independently, we must recog-

nize that our activities in one area clearly affect those in another,

and success in one area will likely breed success in others. In short,

the options are interlocking and overlapping. [portion marking not

declassified]

5. The Internal Option. Since political institutions, aside from the

religious, have been destroyed or badly ripped asunder in the course

of the past 20 months, there seems to be little cohesion to the anti-

Khomeini political movement in motion, and indeed no such movement

may be capable of surviving as long as Khomeini lives. [portion marking

not declassified]

[14 paragraphs (88 lines) not declassified]

Tab B

Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff

Washington, June 5, 1980

GUIDANCE FOR USE WITH CONTACTS

1. The Khomeini experiment in theocratic rule is likely to fail, not

because of its “Islamic” nature but because the Iranian clergy will be

unable to deal with the economic, political, social and strategic prob-

lems of Iran. Their shortcomings are becoming increasingly apparent,

and dissatisfaction within the country is growing.

2. However, a large proportion of the Iranian population has been

radicalized by the revolution, and Khomeini continues to stand as the

ultimate symbol of the revolution. A premature direct attack on the

revolution or against Khomeini personally will probably fail.

3. The greatest threat to the long-term independence and territorial

integrity of Iran is not mullah rule, which is becoming increasingly

discredited, but the emergence of a radical left regime and Soviet

political or military domination under the guise of protecting the

revolution.

294.

Message From the Department of State to the Swiss

Ambassador to Iran (Lang)

Washington, undated

1. We would like to clarify as precisely as possible the thinking of

Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh, Habibi (and other leaders you might appropri-

ately contact) regarding the possibility of hostage trials. We would also

like them to understand our strong objections to that procedure but

our recognition that Iran will try to find a means to end the crisis that

Covert and Overt Operations

meets its political needs. The oral message transmitted herewith is

intended for President Bani-Sadr, and you may also give a copy to

Ghotbzadeh. We suggest that with others you simply use these ideas

in conversations.

2. Begin text of oral message for Bani-Sadr: The Iranian radio, TV

and various newspapers, as well as public figures, are again speaking

of the possibility of placing our diplomats on trial. You are aware of

our strong and very serious concern about the dangers of this proce-

dure. We are confident our view is fully shared by almost all other

governments who also reject the idea of further violations of the immu-

nity of diplomats. The International Court of Justice has clearly

expressed a unanimous judgment that our diplomats should not be

involved in judicial proceedings. We are also sure that Iran’s leaders

agree that it is essential to civilized international order to preserve the

principle of diplomatic immunity.

The American people and others throughout the world who have

shown their sympathy for Iranian feelings would not understand or

accept trials of innocent diplomats. By no standard of international

law, human rights or religion could our diplomats reasonably be placed

on trial.

In the interest·of the stability of Iran and of its region, we want to

see the present crisis urgently settled in a peaceful, honorable and

harmonious manner, at the earliest opportunity. We have said, and we

have understood Iranian leaders to say, that there is no wish to humili-

ate the other side. If the crisis can be resolved without acrimony or an

attempt to debase the other side, efforts can be made to remove the

damage to Iran which has resulted from the seizure of the hostages.

An official trial of the hostages would seriously impair international

respect for Iran for a long time to come and place in jeopardy diplomats

of all nations, including Iran, throughout the world.

We recognize the deep and abiding feeling in Iran that Iran’s griev-

ances are not being adequately reflected in world opinion. We have

said repeatedly that we have no objection to the provision of appropri-

ate means for expressing Iran’s grievances if that would help solve the

crisis. It was with this thought in mind that we cooperated in the

establishment of the UN Commission. We understand that Iran

intended the recent conference in Tehran for this purpose. We under-

stand further that the new Parliament will examine the hostage issue.

There should be sufficient opportunity in its deliberations for the

stated in his June 6 memorandum to Brzezinski (see footnote 1 above) that he thought

it was “gratuitous.” Brzezinski approved the telegram with this sentence deleted.

295.

Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

Tehran, June 13, 1980

Please find hereafter Ambassador Lang’s reply to your message

1. During the reception I tried to have the Director of the Cabinet

set up a meeting with Bani Sadr. He gave me little hope for the 7th,

be invisible. This wording really puzzled me.

Last night I was with my FRG colleague who has encountered the

same refusal in spite of the good offices of Tabatabai (?). He has heard

a crazy rumor from a usually serious source. According to it the test

of strength could occur in the coming days and Bani Sadr, Ghotbzadeh

and T. might be leaving the capital if not even the country.

2. But day before yesterday, Ghotbzadeh received me and was

most friendly.

2.1. He is against any kind of trial whatsoever and is struggling

in that direction. (If you analyze his statements his fallback position

would, if necessary, be to accept a trial condemning the United States,

but not the hostages.)

Covert and Overt Operations

He replied to my questions as follows:

2.2. Ghotbzadeh is of the opinion that the most useful contribution

to the release of the hostages is at present the unpublicized and discreet,

though long and tedious work which consists in rallying the greatest

possible number of members of Parliament to this thesis in order to

prepare the groundwork. He added that he is working in that direction.

2.3. I then asked him if this meant that there was no way to speed

up matters or bypass Parliament. Ghotbzadeh does not rule this out,

but he believes that Parliament must in any event take up the highest

priorities first and that “to bypass Parliament” is delicate and depends

upon circumstances which have not yet materialized (a figure of speech

to conceal the Imam’s permission).

2.4. Re scenarios, there are several in the air and it is not a bad

thing that there be several scenarios, but at the moment, of course,

there is no final version.

3. Given the climate of our discussion, I took it upon myself to tell

Ghotbzadeh that rumors had reached the other side (i.e., the U.S.)

accusing it of playing a political game with the scenarios, i.e., of giving

preference to one group over another. I assured him that this was not

the case at all, much to the contrary. The other party is anxious to have

the hostages released soonest, without trial, never mind what scenario

or what group. Furthermore the other side acknowledges the work

and courage of certain leading figures, including the Minister of Foreign

Affairs during the last few months. I added that this comment is even

more valid when my own country, as protecting power, is concerned

and that it does not want to meddle in any of these factional strifes

inside Iran. I added that speaking personally I could only express the

honor I feel at the confidence and spirit of cooperation that Ghotbzadeh

has shown me and assured him of my loyalty.

Ghotbzadeh replied that he appreciated my words very much and

he added that all this should be attributed to the apprenticeship of

democracy which is a long and difficult process.

4. Regarding Bani Sadr, I intend to try to see Sandjabi and if I do

I will hand over to him a non-paper.

296.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, June 12, 1980

SUBJECT

Meeting at Agency with Pentagon Panel to Study Rescue Attempt [portion

marking not declassified]

1. Subject meeting took place in the DCI Conference Room from

a. Pentagon Panel

ADM James L. Holloway, USN (Ret.), Panel Chairman

LGEN. Leroy J. Manor, USAF (Ret.)

LGEN. Samuel V. Wilson, USA (Ret.)

MGEN. J. L. Piotrowski, USAF

MGEN. A. M. Gray, Jr., USMC

COL. Doughty, USAF, Panel Assistant

b. Agency personnel

John McMahon

[name not declassified]

Bob Ames

[name not declassified]

Bob Gates

[name not declassified]

2. The Director opened the meeting by stating that he would briefly

cover those generic activities undertaken by the Intelligence Commu-

Covert and Overt Operations

nity in support of the rescue operation. He noted that he would skip

much of the detail and leave that, and any other questions the Panel

might have, for them to address after he finished his opening remarks

or to be followed up by the General Wilson-DDCI/John McMahon

channel. He then categorized our intelligence support into five dis-

tinct areas:

—Positive intelligence

—Training in the US

—Planning and preparation assistance

—Execution of the operation

—Effect of secrecy [portion marking not declassified]

3. The Director then proceeded to describe our role in each of these

five categories in more detail.

a. Positive intelligence

(1) He opened by saying that this was an undertaking shared in

by the entire Community (State, NSA, CIA, DIA).

(2) He stated that our primary requirement had been to provide

information on where the hostages were.

—He noted that we had high confidence that the hostages were,

in fact, in the embassy. [5 lines not declassified] Prior to this windfall

information we did have good confidence in the knowledge that the

hostages were in the embassy, though there was always some question

as to exactly how many hostages were in which specific building. The

Director noted that the embassy compound was a very hard target

to penetrate.

(3) We also had a requirement to provide intelligence on the com-

pound and its environs.

—We were very good here. [4½ lines not declassified]

—[6 lines not declassified]

—[1½ lines not declassified] we were able to obtain the great amount

of detail regarding the physical layout and conditions of the embassy,

the stadium and other areas of interest to the planners of the operation.

(4) NSA support.

—He commented that NSA did a fine job of getting all the necessary

information with regard to the Iranian radar and communications

networks.

—[4½ lines not declassified]

—[3½ lines not declassified]

(5) CIA/DIA military reporting.

—He mentioned that a lot of collection, analysis and reporting had

been done on the status of the Iranian military.

—A general conclusion, which proved very useful, was that we

judged that the military was not in a very effective or high state of

readiness, especially for night air combat missions.

(6) Finally the Director mentioned that, in early January, he directed

that a biweekly SITREP be provided to the Delta force.

—The purpose of this was to provide, at least biweekly, our best

estimate as to the hostage locations.

—This was not represented as gospel, but rather provided to the

task force commander in order to give him something concrete to factor

into his planning.

b. Training. (The DCI noted this as primarily a CIA function.)

(1) He mentioned that we provided a secure site for 42 days during

the November-December timeframe.

—We provided the entire logistics support for Delta during this

time.

—He noted that their stay at our facility was kept entirely secret,

both while Delta was there and even when they made three trips in

and out.

(2) He noted that our personnel stayed with Delta force during the

entire time that they were in training.

(3) He mentioned that, included in our logistical support, we pro-

vided the helicopter pilots with navigational training [1½ lines not

declassified]. He said that this helo support was continuous and was

even provided on the Nimitz, where our personnel zeroed all the equip-

ment just prior to lift-off. (The Director then remarked to ADM Hol-

loway that he had been somewhat surprised that our people were able

to provide this type of service and training to qualified military pilots.)

(4) In addition to the above the Director mentioned that all Delta’s

requirements, e.g. arms, equipment, etc. were provided by the Agency.

c. Planning and preparation assistance

(1) [3½ lines not declassified]

(2) [1½ lines not declassified]

—[4 lines not declassified]

—[4½ lines not declassified]

(3) In another vein, the Director commented on our role in selecting

Desert 1.

—He noted that, while this was a military operation, we were able

to offer some ideas or suggestions at various points.

—In January, the planning centered around staying overnight at

a captured airfield. This would have entailed holding the airfield, and

all those therein, for about 32 hours. We, as well as some others at

DoD, were somewhat leery about whether this could be done with the

required secrecy.

Covert and Overt Operations

—The Agency then began examining photos of desert areas to see

if another alternative might be possible. This led to the identification

of Desert 1 as a possibility.

—The Director then described the OTTER mission. [4½ lines not

declassified]

—He noted that while this (the OTTER flight) was conceived of in

January, permission to carry out the mission was not received until

the March full moon timeframe.

(4) Communications support

—[3½ lines not declassified]

—[9 lines not declassified]

(5) Farsi-speaking drivers.

—He noted that we had provided the force with this capability.

—[1½ lines not declassified]

—[2½ lines not declassified]

d. Execution phase

(1) The primary intelligence contribution was that provided [less

than 1 line not declassified].

—This enabled us to know that one of the aircraft (a C–130) had

been detected.

—[less than 1 line not declassified] the Iranian report was confused

and it subsequently got lost in the air control network.

—After the landing at Desert 1, and the subsequent unfortunate

events, [less than 1 line not declassified] indicated that the word had

gotten out.

(2) [2½ lines not declassified]

—[1½ lines not declassified]

e. Secrecy

(1) The Director alluded to the fact that he had just read a report

(on 9 June) from John McMahon3 that raised an interesting issue: that

the operation may have been so secretive that undue risks may have

been incurred.

—The Director commended to ADM Holloway that he and his

group look into what price needed to be paid for a given level of

secrecy involved in any future joint task force operation.

(2) The DCI stressed that only two individuals in the Agency knew

that an official “go” had been given.

—He noted that many more, however, had been told to be ready

to “go,” but stressed that even among those in the room, only he knew

that a specific decision had been made.

(3) Again the Director asked, rhetorically, whether we could have

blown the whole operation because of too much secrecy (he again

commended Holloway that some comment in their report dealing with

this would be useful).

(4) Further on this, the Director noted that we were lucky that NSA

had been tipped off and used for the OTTER operation.

—Thus they already knew which nets, etc. to monitor when they

were told at the last minute to man up.

—The Director noted in passing that, for subsequent phases of the

operation, NSA had not had the benefit of any rehearsal; but since

those phases were not undertaken, we do not know how the absence

of such a rehearsal would have affected NSA’s performance.

(5) On this secrecy matter, however, the Director noted that the

White House was very pleased with the secrecy that was maintained.

[portion marking not declassified]

4. At the completion of the DCI’s remarks, ADM Holloway made

the following points:

a. They were working for the Joint Chiefs.

b. Their ultimate objective was to recommend to the Joint Chiefs

an organization and procedure for dealing with this type of thing in

the future, i.e. whether and how to maintain a permanent joint task

force in the field.

c. Regarding disclosure policy, he noted that the Panel had been

aware of this as a problem for them to address from early on in their

review of the operation.

—He noted that they had found that the people closest to the

problem (Beckwith and Vaught) had a greater appreciation of tight

security.

—They viewed the possibility of a leak with real concern, seeing

that it could perhaps culminate in an ambush situation. [portion marking

not declassified]

5. There then followed a brief period of questions and answers

(summarized below).

Q (Holloway): [4 lines not declassified]

A (DCI): [3 lines not declassified]

—[2½ lines not declassified]

—[4½ lines not declassified]

—[9 lines not declassified]

—[5½ lines not declassified]

—He mentioned his concern that, as the military viewed the “suc-

cess” of team “A” as a “piece of cake,” it could pose problems in this

regard and lead them to be overly optimistic.

—Holloway, and some of the others, expressed sympathy for this

point of view.

Covert and Overt Operations

Q (Holloway): Noting that one of the reasons for their visit (and

one of their charges in general) was to explore what interfaces (with

a future joint task force) would be necessary. He asked for our view

on this (while noting that he felt that such Agency-JTF interface would

be essential).

A (McMahon): He described both the routine interface with DoD

and the specific involvement on this mission.

—[2 lines not declassified]

—He also described that our terrorist branch works regularly with

the Delta force both in terms of providing information and in training.

—For the rescue operation he noted that we expanded our liaison

with the Delta force in order to provide training and logistical support,

and that we provided [less than 1 line not declassified] liaison to the

Pentagon for planning assistance.

—Further on the rescue support he noted that we virtually opened

our warehouses as far as paramilitary stocks, operational devices,

equipment, etc. were concerned in order to ensure that the team had

everything it needed for advance training.

Q (Holloway): He advised that the Panel’s preliminary view was

that any future, permanent Task Force would be a field organization

and would include the Delta force, dedicated transport, some Navy

personnel and equipment (e.g. SEALS, possibly a submarine) and a

command liaison cell in Washington (most likely in the JCS special

operations area). He wondered how we thought the interface would,

or should, be carried out in this case.

A (DCI): He stressed that there are a number of areas for interface,

at different levels, and that such interface with the Agency is essential.

—He noted that future operations involving this JTF would be run

as a military operation; but he mentioned that there is a need for the

incorporation of clandestine skills [3 lines not declassified].

Holloway then made the following comment:

—He said the Panel had discussed (but they had not yet reached

any firm resolution) the fact that the JTF would most likely be a military

organization.

—The JTF was to be prepared for an NSC decision that a given

operation was to be a DoD responsibility as opposed to (a) a negotiation

approach to the problem (Holloway referred to this as a State responsi-

bility); or (b) a clandestine approach to the problem (Holloway referred

to this as an area of CIA responsibility).

—i.e. their focus to date was to determine how, when the Chiefs

were told to execute an operation, they could best do it.

Q (Manor): He asked whether the initial detection by the Iranians

had been picked up by their radar and whether it was a C–130 or a helo.

A (DCI): It was a visual sighting of a C–130; it was not a radar

detection.

Q (Manor): He was very interested in the lighting which had been

installed at Desert 1 and asked for some more details.

A (DCI): [8 lines not declassified]

Q (Manor): He asked if we were involved in the choosing of

Desert 1.

A (DCI): He responded that we were and that the Desert 1 site

was the result of our own initiative.

Q (Gray): Referring to the Director’s comments on security he noted

that there must clearly be some sort of balance between secrecy and

potential compromise. He asked whether the Agency could monitor

the scope of activity in order to determine if the number of those aware

of an operation, or the activity involved, was getting too great.

A (DCI): [3 lines not declassified]

Q (Piotrowski): Further on this question of monitoring security he

asked whether we could provide information as to whether ten versus

eight helos could or should be used (this from a security standpoint).

A (DCI): He suggested that this was more something for the Delta

force to do; that they could perhaps best perform the mathematics and

be the judge of what was detectable versus what was necessary.

John McMahon then commented that we were, however, carefully

monitoring various communications nets in order to ascertain whether

any security breach had occurred, but all we found was “business

as usual.”

—The Director then mentioned an incident at Diego Garcia where

some sailor commented to a Navy commander and one of our people

that he had figured out why all of this activity was going to the Nimitz;

he told them he guessed that they were going to be conducting a rescue

of the hostages; at this point the Navy commander took the sailor with

him to the Nimitz, thereby preventing his discussing his “educated

guess” with anyone else.

Q (Piotrowksi): He noted that the arrival of the fuel trucks and the

bus at Desert 1 proved to be an unfortunate circumstance; he then

asked whether this site, so close to a road, was the only site or whether

there were alternatives.

A (DCI): He responded that this was the only site that we had seen

in photography and subsequently checked out on the ground.

—He said the plan was initially to land on the road, but that when

the OTTER made its reconnaissance the crew found that they could,

in fact, land on the desert.

—He said that we had seen nowhere else that we were as confident

of for use as a landing zone.

—He mentioned that we were, at the time the “go” was given,

looking at another option which involved the dropping of fuel bladders

into the desert, but that there had been no time to organize for, or

explore, that option further before the operation was ordered.

Covert and Overt Operations

—As regards the concern for traffic in the area, he noted that when

the OTTER landed, several autos went by; he emphasized, therefore,

that it was no surprise that traffic was on the road—in fact, that that

is why a special Ranger unit was taken in on the 130s: to deal with

any traffic that did come by.

Q (Gray): He wanted to return again to the operational security

issue. As they conducted their review of the planning process, he had

become concerned that this operation was so compartmentalized that

there was insufficient participation in the review of the plan through

its various stages, noting that the Panel had been unable to find anyone

except the DoD and JCS principals themselves who were aware of,

and briefed on, the entire plan. He asked whether we thought that,

with more leeway on the security issue, we could not have had a

greater sense of confidence in whatever plan was developed.

A (DCI): Noting that he wanted to be candid, he said that, at least

three times during the plan’s development, he had not been entirely

sure of what was going on; and he was concerned because he wanted

to make sure that we were providing what was both wanted and

needed in order to enhance the plan’s success.

—He said that he saw Vaught on several occasions, but that Vaught

was expressing a need for many things at once, whereas what we

needed to understand was a priority listing of what was wanted

so that we could dedicate our resources accordingly (since our lim-

ited resources did not permit meeting all of Vaught’s requests

simultaneously).

—He mentioned that on several occasions he had to ask CJCS to

go over the plan in order to see if we were providing what was needed.

—He commented that he had never seen a written plan, and men-

tioned that the closest we got to this was simply as a result of our [less

than 1 line not declassified] liaison assigned to the Pentagon.

—He mentioned that one of the unfortunate results of this (una-

wareness of the details of the entire plan) was that we did not know,

nor did anyone ask us about, the taking of [less than 1 line not declassified]

communications equipment and imagery products along in the helos

which were going to be left behind; he opined that the resulting compro-

mise of these materials may have been the result of the absence of any

detailed review of the plans by all concerned.

Q (Gray): He underscored his concern for what the Director had

just described (the lack of adequate review which led to the unnecessary

compromise of classified material). He stated that he was all for an

unconventional JTF, one which, of necessity, would be small and well-

trained; but he stressed that it was his belief that we (the USG) must

always be reliant on other forces, whether attached to CINCs or whether

belonging to the CIA. He was concerned that the JTF might migrate

into the “roles and missions” of other agencies or organizations (noting

that any JTF that tried to do all that some were considering doing

would, in fact, be bigger than the CIA).

In this same vein, John McMahon commented that, early on in

our relationship with Delta force (pre-rescue), Charlie Beckwith had

wanted a CIA capability integrated into Delta which would provide

for total world and regional expertise. He mentioned that he had told

Charlie that we could not have two CIAs, and the matter was dropped.

A (DCI): He said that he recognized that, generally speaking, the

Agency is not in the business of being operators in the unconventional

field; he did note that our involvement was primarily in two areas:

(a) we do get involved in clandestine reconnaissance; and (b) our para-

military involvement has primarily been as advisers of others, who in

fact form the bulk of any force, e.g. the operations in Laos.

—He recommended that as the Panel look at what they want a

JTF to do, that they start at the very beginning, and look at the full

spectrum of what might be required, e.g. infiltration, sabotage, clandes-

tine penetrations, etc., and not just focus on the military phase.

—He opined that if, when dealing with hostage rescue, there is an

alternative to a military operation, it might be an operation which relies

on stealth and clandestine activities. He said that the country needs to

have this capability; the question is the where and the how.

Holloway then commented that he thought the Director had made

a good point: that a capability gap now exists between the application

of force and the application of stealth.

—He said that the more people with helos and guns, etc. that get

involved in an operation, the more like an act of war such an operation

becomes, and this has its own problems, and that therefore numbers

become important.

Further on this the Director commented that he was not necessarily

anxious to put our paramilitary capability into an operational mode,

but, since he felt the country needed this option, it was something that

he commended the Panel to look into. He also suggested that they

might need to check the legal aspects of this as well.

Q (Wilson): He asked whether there had been an intelligence judg-

ment of the Iranian reaction which would follow a “successful” rescue

of the hostages.

A (DCI): He replied that this had been looked into and that analysis

of this had been provided to those involved in planning the operation.

—He noted that there was a possibility of action being taken against

other US persons who might be in Iran (e.g. news media representa-

tives), but that it was not clear that the government of Iran would take

this action (since it was the militants, not the government which had

seized the compound). [6 lines not declassified]

—He then described some of the other likely reactions, including

the possible strengthening of the left, the almost sure strengthening of

Khomeini’s position with an attendant anti-American focus, and the

fact that we did not believe that such an operation would necessarily

result in direct Soviet involvement.

297.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to the Under

Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Newsom)

Washington, June 13, 1980

SUBJECT

Contacts with General Oveissi

General Oveissi left Iran shortly before the Shah—exhausted and

in flight as one of the most hated figures in the Shah’s government.

During his career as a military officer he was unpopular with his

subordinates and owed his success primarily to his close relationship

with the Shah. After a period of retreat in the U.S., he became active

again among opposition figures and is now becoming—even more than

former Prime Minister Bakhtiar—the most prominent oppositionist.

The CIA began [less than 1 line not declassified] contact with Oveissi

following the hostage crisis. DOD officers have been in touch with him

since his arrival here. CIA disclaims that any tangible support is being

provided to him and insists that we “need to stay in touch.” The

impression in the Iranian exile community, however, is increasingly

that the U.S. is supporting Oveissi. This impression has caused previ-

ously timid Iranian money to come forth for his cause and may have

contributed to the decision of the Iraqis to give him facilities for a

radio station.

There are rumors that Oveissi was recently in Washington and

that a group in DIA is seeking to arrange a meeting with Secretary

Brown and General Jones. Beginning with the appearance of the recent

New York Times article2 on Oveissi we can expect more and more

attention to him and an increased perception that we are backing him.

Oveissi has, particularly with the appearance of U.S. backing, the

capacity to cause serious trouble in Iran. No analyst we know of believes

he has a future as a political leader in Iran. He is still in Iranian eyes

probably the most hated of former Shah supporters. Before we go

further in our contacts with Oveissi, or, rather, whether we continue

them at the present level, we owe it to ourselves to examine the probable

consequences of his activities.

—What are the consequences for hostage release? Will the increased

turmoil produced by Oveissi’s agents (with our perceived backing)

work for or against release?

—What are the likely effects on the creation of new institutions

and a return to stability to Iran?

—How will the perception of our backing for Oveissi affect current

or potential opposition groups (e.g., Madani)?

—How do his activities relate to the growth in strength of the

Iranian left?

—How will his activities affect regional peace, i.e., Iran-Iraq, and

what are the implications for oil supply and Turkey?

Those agencies who believe in contact with, or support for, Oveissi

should be asked to respond to these questions. You may wish to discuss

them with the intelligence community. In our view, there is a good

case for closely restricting our contacts with Oveissi.

Iranian opposition and quoted him as saying there would soon be a counter revolution

in Iran.

Covert and Overt Operations

298.

Memorandum for the Record by the Deputy Director of

Central Intelligence (Carlucci)

Washington, June 17, 1980

SUBJECT

Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 17 June 1980

299.

Paper Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)

New York, undated

SAUNDERS TALKS WITH DAOUDI AND WALDHEIM

I spent two hours Thursday morning with Daoudi, Waldheim, and

Don McHenry and then another hour alone with Waldheim. Waldheim

is seriously considering submitting to the Security Council a report

from Daoudi to him on Daoudi’s recent mission in Tehran, and he

would appreciate our views on the pros and cons of doing this.

In the course of our long discussion with Daoudi on his mission,

he made the following points:

—Ghotbzadeh in talking with Waldheim in Belgrade had appar-

ently agreed to Daoudi’s coming in hopes that announcement of that

mission would head off European sanctions. When it did not, he was

less than enthusiastic about the mission.

—The departure of the UN Commission from Tehran at the end

of March has left a certain bitterness with Iranian officials. Both Bani-

Sadr and Ghotbzadeh have developed a mythology about the Commis-

sion’s last day there which adds up to the belief that the situation

would have been markedly better if the Commission had stayed.

—Ghotbzadeh’s main strength derives from his influence with

Khomeini, who likes him, supports him, and sees in him the image of

his lost son. Ghotbzadeh’s attitude is influenced by two factors, the

international attitudes to which he is exposed in situations ranging

from the Kreisky visit to the Islamic Conference and the Imam’s change

of attitude on the hostages.

—On this last point, Bani-Sadr and Tabatabai both say they sense

a change in the attitude of the Imam. His position has now moved

Covert and Overt Operations

to wanting the hostage matter resolved. The Imam reportedly wants

no trials.

—Ghotbzadeh says the March scenario is a dead letter. With regard

to the mandate of the Commission, he continues, as we know, to

maintain firmly that the Red Cross visit with the hostages took the

place of a visit by the UN Commission.

—Beheshti was pleased by the Secretary General’s attention in

asking Daoudi to see him. His view is that the hostage issue will be

solved by the parliament. He did not want to talk about how the parlia-

ment would solve the problem but he spoke of determination to resolve

the problem. He said it must be left to the Iranians with no threats,

sanctions, or military action.

—Bani-Sadr remains committed to finding a solution. He believes

that whether the parliament decides or not, the issue will go back to

the Imam—either for confirmation or for decision.

—Ghotbzadeh very much wants the UN Commission’s report

available when the parliament begins to consider the hostage issue.

Bani-Sadr did not want the report now. He felt that his enemies would

see the Commission’s report simply as a cover-up for the release of

the hostages. He felt that premature submission of the report would

close out the Commission from a future role as an organ for conducting

a dialogue between the U.S. and Iran to resolve the crisis.

—The Iranian authorities have not reached agreement on a plan

or on timing for presenting the hostage issue to the parliament. The

timing is very much related to resolution of the formation of a cabinet.

Against the background of his assessment, Daoudi said he felt

strongly that “something must be done” as a result of his mission. The

mission cannot be left as a failure because that would tend to close the

door on a future role for the UN. He said he had considered as one

option an interim report by the entire Commission, but he had ruled

that out as too complicated since it would involve all members of

the Commission. He had, therefore, come to a second option, namely

submitting his own report on his mission to the Secretary General to

serve some of the functions of an interim report. The remainder of our

discussion with Daoudi and the bulk of my discussion with Waldheim

centered on what might be accomplished by Waldheim’s sending a

report from Daoudi to the Security Council.

In outline, a report by Daoudi on his mission would cover the

following ground:

—He would describe whom he had seen on his current mission

and the instructions he had from Waldheim.

—He would then describe the background of his mission by stating

where the previous work of the Commission had left off. He would

begin by explaining that the Commission could not fulfill the second

part of its mandate because it was unable to see the hostages because

of the position the students had taken. He would report that the Presi-

dent and Foreign Minister thought the situation would have improved

if the Commission could have stayed longer.

—He would explain that the Commission had observed evidence

presented to it on the activities of SAVAK, violations of human rights

and other excesses during the reign of the ex-Shah. He would also say

that the Commission was informed of grievances held by the Govern-

ment of Iran about U.S. involvement in Iran.

—He would state that the Commission had, therefore, completed

the first part of its mandate but not the second. He would report

Ghotbzadeh’s present view that the second half of the mandate had,

in effect, been completed by the Red Cross visit to the hostages.

—He would report the Iranian leadership’s repetition to him of its

grievances in two areas—the excesses of the Shah’s regime and the

involvement of the U.S. in Iran.

—He would report expressions of intent by Iranian leaders to

resolve the crisis by peaceful means despite USG efforts to release

the hostages by force and economic sanctions. He would report their

determination, as described to him, to continue the course of the revolu-

tion. He would report emphasis by the Iranians on the importance of

avoiding pressure on Iran and the use of force and their hope that the

Secretary General would encourage a peaceful solution.

—He would state that the Iranian leaders expect parliament to take

up the issue and believe submission of the Commission’s report would

be valuable when that takes place. He would report Iranian views that

the Commission could resume its work in New York.

—He would conclude by reiterating that Iran’s leadership wishes

to reach a solution which will not compromise the basic course of the

revolution.

Waldheim’s view is that some such report would serve a useful

purpose. He felt that if the UN does nothing it would undermine the

UN’s opportunity to play a further role. When I asked Daoudi what

purpose such a report could play in the political dynamics of Tehran,

he said that the main members of the “team in power” in Iran have

to be backed. Involvement of the UN was their idea and should not

be seen to be a failure. The Daoudi report would not contain any

findings on behalf of the Commission but would simply report what

he and the Commission before him had been told.

When we asked whether this would not in some way provide the

legitimization of Iranian complaints that the Iranians had been seeking,

Waldheim thought not because the report would simply contain what

Covert and Overt Operations

Daoudi and the Commission had been told in broad descriptive cate-

gories without passing judgment one way or another or presenting

detail.

We will be providing separately our thoughts on this particular

question and on how it might relate to other possible initiatives.

300.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

Algeria

165006. Subject: Iran Hostages Conversations With Algerians

(addressee please handle as Stadis).

1. Secret–Entire text.

2. In your conversations with leading Algerians following your

return, you might want to consider the following themes and points

in describing attitudes in Washington toward the Iranian hostage crisis:

—The frustration level seems to be rising again. After the rescue

mission which tended to relieve the popular feeling that “something

must be done,” the public seems to place a great deal of hope in quick,

positive action by the Iranian Parliament. Several weeks have gone by,

however, and the Iranians seem no closer to the day in which the

Parliament will address the hostage issue. The public is still patient

but clearly the idea is growing that key Iranian leaders are willing to

exploit the hostages for their own internal political purposes and that

other leaders who want to end the crisis are powerless to do so. Out

of that kind of perception could again come the demand that the U.S.

“must do something.”

—The press, radio and television have been giving less prominence

to the hostage issue, partly because there is less news coming out of

Iran and partly because the administration is working to keep public

anxiety about the hostages at a restrained level. The issue has not

figured recently in the political campaign.

—Next month, however, the Republicans have their convention

and in August the Democrats will meet. Then the campaign will be

fully under way. The hostage issue will inevitably move to a place of

prominence as election activity heats up. Thus, we have only a relatively

few weeks before the hostage issue will become increasingly difficult

to manage in the U.S.

—There is a growing feeling in informed circles that the Iranians

are putting the hostage issue aside while they indulge in the intense

301.

Memorandum From the Commander of the Joint Task Force

(Vaught) to the Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs

of Staff (Pustay)

Washington, June 24, 1980

SUBJECT

Hostage Rescue Mission (Operation SNOWBIRD)

1. (TS) Summary. Due to the lack of definitive intelligence, adequate

force proficiency and available launch bases, development of a specific

operational plan to rescue the American hostages held in Iran is not

possible at this time. Force proficiency is expected to be realized by 15

July. Action is ongoing to produce an adequate intelligence base and

some effort is being made to assure the availability of staging facilities

near enough to Iran to enable the secure launch and recovery of the

rescue force.

2. (TS) Intelligence. The location and security conditions of the hos-

tages remain largely unknown. [4 lines not declassified] Several innova-

tive technological approaches to improve intelligence gathering are

being pursued. Despite the possible near-term future release of some

of the hostages, it is expected that others will experience protracted

detention and possibly trial.

3. (TS) Launch Bases. It is essential to at least obtain an indication

that one or more of Iran’s neighbors would ignore our use of its soil

for a rescue mission. No such indication is in hand. A survey is being

made with a view towards the possible use of Turkey and Pakistan.

[2½ lines not declassified]

Secret. All tabs (A–G) are attached but not printed.

4. (TS) Cover. JTF procurement and training is being covered by

project DOUBLESTAR. [2 lines not declassified] Although the security

risks are greater than with the previous rescue operation, it is believed

that security aspects of preparing and deploying another rescue force

can be managed.

5. (TS) Force Selection. The ground element of the previous task

remain with the force. The helicopter air element has been revised and

expanded. A newly available Air Force helicopter unit with improved

capabilities has replaced the Navy-USMC helicopter force. Addition-

ally, a newly available Army helicopter unit is being trained for possible

inclusion in the JTF force structure.

6. (TS) Training. The lack of definitive intelligence has forced the

JTF to produce a variety of concept plans (see Tab B) as opposed to a

precise operational plan. The attainment of several capabilities is being

pursued so we can quickly adapt a selected, trained force to a set

of known circumstances (hostage location and security) when those

circumstances become known to the JTF. By mid-July, a trained and

adaptable rescue force should be available.

7. (TS) Costs. Due to the expanded force and protracted training,

SNOWBIRD costs are somewhat larger than those associated with the

previous organization. Problems are being experienced by the Services

in identifying sufficient funds for several categories of expenditures. By

mid-July, costs incurred should total approximately 26 million dollars.

Approximately two thirds of these expenditures would occur in any

event to support routine programmed activities although they would

be incurred over a more protracted period.

James B. Vaught

Major General, USA

JTF Commander

Covert and Overt Operations

302.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Acting

Secretary of State Christopher

Washington, June 26, 1980

before his plans are too far advanced. A suggested cable replying to

Cairo 14368 is attached for your approval.

We believe we should make a distinction between participation of

an official nature that could have adverse consequences in Tehran and

observances of a more personal nature that could be sustained without

aggravating the Iranian crisis. Our decisions now appear to include

the following:

—whether to authorize Roy Atherton to attend an official funeral;

—whether to send an official emissary or delegation;

—whether to convey condolences to the Empress;

—whether and how to observe official mourning ceremonies;

—how to handle a request by the Empress to come to the United

States; and

—advice to private Americans regarding funeral attendance.

304.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci) and

the Deputy Director for Operations, Central Intelligence

Agency (McMahon)

Washington, June 30, 1980

SUBJECT

Iranian Successor Regime after Khomeini

1. Reviewed the prospects for Iranian political action with [name

not declassified]. He feels both Bakhtiar and Oveisi are not good bets

because they have become so public. Oveisi, for instance, has advertised

that he is working with the Iraqis. This is not going to endear him to

the Iranian population who can’t see much good coming for Iran out

of working with Iraq. He felt the basic principle was that there had to

be a religious element in whatever group succeeded Khomeini. He

thinks Khomeini, however, cannot be challenged as long as he is alive.

The overall conclusion from this discussion would be that if he is right

that any new government cannot be secular only, Iran is in for an

indefinite period of the same kind of struggle that Bazargan had

between the secularists and the clerics and it has been going on ever

since with Bani Sadr, etc. [portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is material unrelated to hostage crisis.]

Stansfield Turner

305.

Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

Tehran, June 30, 1980

I believe that I have lived through another unforgettable day . . . .

After the Imam’s thundering tirade, the holy cohorts of low-level

officials—all hardliners—at the ministries have gotten going. They are

taking it upon themselves to bring their own small-minded theories

into the offices, with total disregard for rank—the minister is entitled

to no more respect than the secretary—and they are launching an

assault on drawers, desks, and other furniture, emptying them of their

contents, taking them into the corridors . . . there they begin sorting

what is satanic from what is not satanic. Ostermann’s catalogue is

Covert and Overt Operations

satanic, the writing paper with the imperial emblem is satanic, even

the brochure of North Korean propaganda showing female gymnasts

in sport outfits is satanic . . . .

I remarked to the Chief of Protocol that he still had the Iranian

flag with the lion and sun in his office . . . he replied, “Thank you for

pointing it out to me, but anyway who knows whether I will still be

here tomorrow.”

That’s nothing. Although it is difficult to understand how can it still

be possible, drastic purges are beginning again. The criteria applied,

it seems, to the National Iranian Oil Company, include the fact of

having studied in the West, here the look of the client, there the opinion

of a hard-line committee which considers that you do not pray fervently

enough . . . Sic patria salvanda est . . . [Thus the country is being

Lang

306.

Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the

Department of State

I was called in last night at 11: and asked to give immediate

assistance in the following matter:

1. The Iranian government attaches the utmost importance to the

state of the ex-Shah.

2. If possible, get specifics on health situation and bulletin.

3. Ghotbzadeh (GH) stresses that it is of paramount importance

for the Iranian government to be informed—through GH—before the

mass media, if the ex-Shah were to die or be on the verge of dying.

The Iranian government would have to take domestic measures and

not be caught short to the benefit of others. This matter is of some

importance with respect to the hostage issue.

4. In conclusion, GH stressed once again the importance of this

point and apologized for calling me so late.

had seen GH but he said nothing about this. But at 11: pm I was

instructed by GH’s secretariat to call him at a telephone number

unknown to me where background noises indicated that some meeting

or some conversation was going on.

6. Anything may happen. I refused to believe in the most positive

hypothesis which would be too good to happen, that of a gesture

of clemency on the occasion of the death of X. Less positive though

interesting would be the pretext to the matter of the hostages thanks

to the emotion generated by the disappearance of the tyrant. Remem-

bering a conversation with B&V, I would say that it could also be a

desire to have Iranian officials issue an official death certificate. Indeed

the ex-Shah is supposed to enjoy such a “baraka” (escaping all attempts

in 1953, leaving Iran without any problems in 1979, etc.) that he must

have some evil powers. Therefore, in a mix of religion and superstition,

it is indispensable to have evidence of his death and of his immediate

burial so that he cannot come back to haunt Iran. This may sound

irrational, but B states that he has observed this aspect in several of

his interlocutors and this helps explain the determination to have the

ex-Shah returned to Iran alive so that his burial may be supervised

and that he may no longer harm the country.

Finally, the most prosaic explanation albeit the most likely one, is

that the government wants to use the death of the former sovereign

to the utmost and not let the fundamentalists or anyone else you may

think of, benefit from it.

Lang

[Omitted here is a follow-up to the message.]

307.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Warren Christopher

Roberts Owen*

Harold Saunders

Richard Cooper*

Treasury

Robert Carswell*

OSD

W. Graham Claytor

Frank Kramer

Justice

Benjamin Civiletti*

Charles Renfrew*

JCS

John Pustay

Stansfield Turner

OSTP

Frank Press**

Benjamin Huberman**

White House

Lloyd Cutler*

Hedley Donovan

NSC

David Aaron

Gary Sick

Al Friendly*

*Not present for last two items.

**Present for first item only.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Mr. Aaron opened the meeting by noting that there had been no

SCC meeting on Iran for a month. He reminded all participants to brief

agencies on the importance of continued cooperation and coordination

since many of the issues involving Iran were of considerable political

sensitivity. (U)

1. Iranian Attendance at Scientific Conference. Frank Press summa-

rized the case of a legitimate Iranian scientist who is to present a

paper at a recognized scientific conference in Colorado. The National

Academy of Science has asked that he be allowed to attend. Dr. Press

pointed out that we have used the rules of the International Scientific

Union to persuade the USSR to permit Israelis and Taiwanese to attend

conferences in the USSR. We have been criticized for refusing access

of Soviet scientists to conferences here after the Afghanistan crisis. If

we reject Iranians for political reasons, we will again be subject to

criticism. The numbers of Iranian cases are extremely small (only two

known cases this year), and he felt that the U.S. national interest was

served by granting visas in these cases. The SCC agreed that the specific

case he raised should be approved. Other cases in the future which

differed significantly from this case would be reviewed on a case-by-

case basis. (C)

2. Iranians With Third Country Nationality. Iranians who are also

nationals of a third nation (Italy, France, etc.) have been denied visas

to enter the U.S. on the grounds that they are Iranian nationals, even

though they carry legitimate passports of another nation. This rule

has been enforced in order to prevent Iranians from simply buying

passports of convenience from nations such as Monaco, Bahamas, Do-

minica, etc. and using them to circumvent U.S. rules. The SCC agreed

unanimously that individuals with legitimate third country nationality

(e.g. someone who has acquired British citizenship) should be treated

as a citizen of that country, even if born in Iran or of Iranian parents.

However, visas should continue to be denied in cases of “convenience”

passports for circumvention. (C)

Agree that an Iranian dual national who presents a third

country passport shall be treated as a third country national unless the

passport was acquired illegally or otherwise does not reflect a bona

fide acquisition of third country nationality.

No. Continue to deny visas to Iranian dual nationals.

Covert and Overt Operations

3. Payment of Interest on Blocked Iranian Accounts. Banks and other

institutions holding blocked Iranian accounts have the use of this

money without paying interest on it, which is a clear case of “unjust

enrichment.” The Treasury Department believes that interest should

be paid into these blocked accounts in order to increase the amount

available for claims by hostage families and others at some future

point rather than letting the holding institutions reap the benefits. The

amount of interest on these blocked funds is very large, up to about

$1 billion per year. The SCC agreed that it would be preferable to have

the interest available to claimants rather than oil companies and banks;

however, the public perception would probably be that we were forcing

U.S. companies to pay interest to Iranians. In fact, Iranians might

acquire some or all of this interest at some future date depending on

the negotiations leading to release of the hostages. The SCC agreed

that there was no logical basis for starting accrual of interest at this

point, eight months after the freeze. Beginning at this point would

constitute a windfall of about $600 million for the institutions holding

blocked accounts. The Attorney General believes that a retroactive

order will be tested in court and will probably fail eventually. However,

all agreed that the outcome of litigation was uncertain, and there was

no adequate explanation for why we should begin accrual of interest

today as opposed to last month or next month. It would be better to

make it retroactive and take our chances in court. Treasury has already

informally advised companies that interest would probably be

required. (S)

All agreed that those institutions holding blocked Iranian accounts

should be notified that they are required to pay interest on the Iranian

funds retroactive to the date of the freeze, with the interest to remain

in the frozen accounts. Treasury will take all possible steps to insure

that this is understood as making these funds available to future claim-

ants rather than the banks and oil companies holding these funds and

explain that the timing of our decision is related to the preliminary

completion of our census of frozen assets. (C)

Approve.

Disapprove payment of interest.

Disapprove retroactive payment of interest.

4. Sanctions Against Iran. Through intelligence, we have identified

132 cases of material being transshipped to Iran via third countries as

a means of circumventing the sanctions. Six of these involve U.S.

companies. We are unable to determine from the intelligence the size

of these transactions. Also, because of legal rules on use of intelligence,

NSA will not provide the names of the U.S. companies to Treasury for

possible enforcement without a prior ruling by Justice. The SCC agreed

that the DCI should make available to the State Department the names

of foreign companies involved in this trade, and State will raise the

issue on a classified basis with the governments concerned. The SCC

also agreed that Treasury should be provided the names of the compa-

nies for purposes of a preliminary investigation to determine the magni-

tude of the trade by U.S. entities. Based on this preliminary investiga-

tion, a further decision will be taken by the SCC about any possible

enforcement action. (TS)

Approve.

Disapprove contacting foreign governments.

Disapprove use of intelligence information for a preliminary

investigation of illegal U.S. trade by Treasury.

5. Security Council Resolution on ICJ Decision. Ambassador McHenry

has been conducting consultations in New York about the possible

introduction of a SC resolution incorporating the ICJ decision ordering

Iran to release the U.S. hostages. McHenry believes that, if we are

willing to press the issue, we can probably get nine votes in the SC

for such a resolution. However, he has been advised against such a

resolution by the Chinese, the British and Bangladesh. The Soviets have

also indicated that the SC debate—and possibly the resolution—would

have to deal with the U.S. rescue attempt as well as the ICJ decision.

Other nations have also mentioned the likelihood of the rescue mission

being discussed. Mr. Christopher said, based on these findings, he

would not recommend going ahead with a SC resolution at this time.

Such a resolution would almost certainly do nothing to help the hos-

tages, and there is nothing which would justify proceeding at this time.

We might wish to proceed with a resolution in the event of an action-

forcing development such as the Iranians starting trials. Mr. Cutler

said it had been five weeks since the ICJ decision. That was surely long

Covert and Overt Operations

enough for the Iranians to act if they intended to. If we do nothing,

we run the risk of sleeping on our rights and of trivializing the ICJ

decision by not following up in the SC. Mr. Donovan commented that

since the Iranians did nothing in response to the previous SC resolution,

he anticipated no public question about why we were not going to the

SC again in this case. Mr. Claytor said he would prefer to stand on

the ICJ decision; we could be worse off if we went to the SC. All agreed

that we should not introduce a SC resolution at this time. (S)

Agree.

Introduce a SC resolution based on the ICJ decision.

6. Iranian Claims to the ICJ. Mr. Cutler pointed out that we could

suggest the ICJ as a proper forum for Iran to present claims against

the U.S. Mr. Saunders noted that the problem was not the lack of a

forum—it was Iranian unwillingness to take advantage of the forums

available to them. Mr. Owen, the Legal Advisor of the State Depart-

ment, noted that he opposed encouraging use of the ICJ for such claims.

If the Iranians decide to use the ICJ, we could only accept. However,

there is always the chance that we would lose a case charging us

with illegal interference in Iran’s internal affairs. This could set an

unfortunate precedent and could even involve massive reparation judg-

ments. All agreed that this was not something we should suggest to

the Iranians at this point. (S)

Agree.

Other.

At

that

point

the

meeting

was

reduced

to

the

restricted

membership.

7. Diplomatic Strategy. Mr. Christopher summarized the results of

our recent contacts as indicating that “All roads lead to the Parliament.”

We now have the most active acknowledged channel we have had

through the Swiss. Ambassador Lang meets with Bani-Sadr and Ghot-

bzadeh, but both of them say nothing will happen until the Majlis

convenes. That will probably be around the end of July. We are trying

to analyze the composition of the Majlis, but it is likely that any decision

will come as a result of internal dynamics, not because of what we can

do from the outside. The Iranians have to sort out their own power

struggle, including the choice of a Prime Minister, before they can

address the hostage question. Even if a decision is taken, it will probably

have to go back to Khomeini. The formula they are considering is for

the Majlis formally to empower the government to work out the prob-

lem, rather than the Majlis itself working out the details. Most of the

Iranians—even Beheshti—now say that the hostage crisis should be

put behind them; but they cannot figure out how to do it. We are

poised to play an active role, including good working contacts with

European governments, but we are unable to act until the Iranians

have sorted out their problem. (S)

Mr. Aaron noted that the hostage situation is a very serious problem

in this country. A total of 70% of the American people believe that the

foreign policy of this Administration is not successful, and that can be

traced directly to the hostages and to the Cuban situation. It appears

the Iranians are learning to live with the problem indefinitely. If we

can think of any additional action, we should try. Mr. Christopher

doubted we could help the situation by increasing the visibility without

a solution. Mr. Aaron said the problem now is there is no hope. There

is the feeling the hostages have vanished. We should do everything

possible to locate them. Admiral Turner said that we suspect many

of the hostages remain in Tehran. We are fairly confident some of them

are at two former U.S. consulates, although they may be at 5–6 other

places. We are using all our capabilities to locate them. (S)

8. Shah’s Illness. Ghotbzadeh believes that the Shah’s death would

improve the political situation. Others think it would be of no signifi-

cance. We have a series of decisions to make about our public posture

and response in the event of his death. State was preparing a cable to

Roy Atherton, and State and the NSC staff would coordinate on work-

ing out a public position. (S)

308.

Editorial Note

In early July 1980, the impending death of the Shah and whether

the United States should have an official presence at his funeral, as

well as the kind of statement the United States should issue on his

death, became an issue of discussion between the Department of State

and the National Security Council Staff.

Zbigniew Brzezinski, the President’s Assistant for National Secu-

rity Affairs, wrote President Jimmy Carter a July 2 note advising that

he should be aware of the draft telegram with instructions to U.S.

Ambassador to Egypt Alfred (Roy) Atherton (see footnote 3, Document

303). Brzezinski suggested that the United States not send an official

delegation to the funeral, but that Atherton attend the funeral. Carter

approved these points, writing “ok” beside the first point, and “I agree”

in the right margin beside the second. Carter also approved contingency

draft letters of condolence. (Note from Brzezinski to Carter, July 2;

Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

The revised instructions were sent in telegram 175165 to Cairo,

July 3, in which Atherton was instructed to attend an official funeral.

He was also instructed to consult with influential members of the

diplomatic corps in Cairo, especially EC–9 members. If only a few

Chiefs of Mission planned to attend the Shah’s funeral, then Atherton

was to request additional instructions from the Department and inform

Egyptian President Anwar Sadat of U.S. concerns before Sadat made

“definite and possibly elaborate arrangements for funeral and mourn-

ing.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–

2626) The draft of this telegram is described in footnote 3, Document

303.

Carter’s decisions were also conveyed to Henry Precht, Director

of the Office of Iranian Affairs in the Bureau of Near Eastern and South

Asian Affairs and member of the Iran Working Group, through Gary

Sick of the National Security Council Staff. At Sick’s request, Precht

prepared two letters of condolence and a press guidance to be used in

the event of the Shah’s death. Sick approved the condolence letters,

but informed Brzezinski that the press guidance specifically linked

Atherton’s attendance at the funeral to a decision by the diplomatic

corps in Cairo. Sick noted that his own understanding had been that

“Atherton was instructed to attend at the invitation of President Sadat”

without mentioning the diplomatic corps. Brzezinski agreed with Sick.

(Memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski, July 5, condolence letters and

Press Guidance attached; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

copy of this same memorandum, David Aaron, the President’s Deputy

Assistant for National Security Affairs, wrote: “Tell Precht to do what

Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 65, Outside the System File, Iran

North Africa Cluster evening report to Brzezinski, the Cluster noted

that Precht had been nominated as the new U.S. Ambassador to Mauri-

tania. In the margin Brzezinski wrote: “good riddance.” (Carter Library,

National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 42, Sub-

The NSC Staff and Department of State then prepared different

statements to be issued by the Department on the event of the Shah’s

death. The NSC’s undated draft statement referred to the Shah as a

“strong leader of Iran and a good friend of the United States,” whose

“place in history will not be determined by the impassioned judgment

of his contemporaries,” but “for guiding Iran’s emergence as a modern

state,” an Iran that was a “powerful, stabilizing, and progressive force

in a vital region.” Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David

Newsom informed Muskie, July 13, that the Department had “serious

problems” with this statement. Newsom thought the “tone of defense

of the Shah” and “efforts to mention precise accomplishments of the

former ruler” were unhelpful. Newsom’s undated alternative statement

referred to the Shah as “the leader of Iran for 38 years” of “profound

changes,” and “acknowledged” the “friendship and cooperation”

between Iran and the United States during this period. After discussion

with Sick, the final draft statement, which closely followed Newsom’s

version, with the added statement that the Shah’s death “marks the

end of an era in Iran, which all hope will be followed by peace and

stability,” was approved. (All drafts in Department of State, Records

of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs,

Panama Jan–March 180, Egypt Jan–July 1980, Vol. V) The final official

statement, issued on July 27 after the Shah’s death that day, is in

Department of State Bulletin, September 1980, page 55. See Docu-

ment 326.

Covert and Overt Operations

309.

Letter From Congressmen Guyer, Fascell, Gilman, and

Broomfield to Acting Speaker of the Iranian Parliament

Yadollah Sahabi and Members of the Iranian Parliament

Washington, July 2, 1980

310.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to

President Carter

Washington, July 3, 1980

SUBJECT

Possible Approach from Bani-Sadr

We have just received a report of a meeting yesterday in Madrid

between Khomeini’s nephew, Reza Pasandideh, (the son of Khomeini’s

older brother) and Washington attorney Stan Pottinger. The meeting

was arranged at Pasandideh’s request. According to Pottinger, Pasandi-

deh claimed to be acting as Bani-Sadr’s emissary. He stated that Bani-

Sadr was now interested in beginning talks in Europe between his

representative and a U.S. representative, to discuss a possible settle-

ment, including release of the hostages.

Pasandideh told Pottinger that his approach had been authorized

by Bani-Sadr, and that Khomeini was aware of it. He claims to be a

close friend and ally of Bani-Sadr, and our information indicates that

this is probably correct. He also says that he has been used as a channel

of communication between Bani-Sadr and Khomeini. Pasandideh sug-

gested that this proposal for discussions had arisen out of a consensus

among Khomeini, Bani-Sadr, Pasandideh’s father (Khomeini’s brother),

and Pasandideh himself that the time has come to end the crisis. Pasan-

dideh said that Bani-Sadr is seeking through these talks to develop a

proposal to put before the Parliament. He reportedly believes that a

majority of the Parliament will support him on this issue.

Until we have been able to obtain some additional information,

we should not exaggerate the importance of this apparent overture.

311.

Editorial Note

On July 3, 1980, the President’s Assistant for National Security

Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski, Secretary of Defense Harold Brown,

Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General David Jones, Director of

Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner, and Brzezinski’s Military Assist-

ant and Crisis Coordinator William Odom met to discuss special opera-

tions contingencies for Iran. According to the account of the meeting

Odom prepared for Brzezinski, the participants made four decisions:

“the Aaron Special Intelligence Group will prepare a short paper”

on U.S. “intelligence policy toward Iran;” the CIA would “prepare

proposals for accelerated development of general purpose intelligence

resources as well as resources for the hostage” contingency; CIA and

the Department of Defense “will make an intensified effort to overcome

the intelligence gaps for ‘special contingency planning’ now in progress

in Defense,” and these two agencies would proceed “with a trucking

endeavor.” Odom recounted that Brzezinski asked for the first two

actions “when you discovered that CIA has no accelerated programs

designed to put us in a competitive position for the political and civil

war likely to develop in Iran. Turner’s plans seem designed to replicate

a traditional in-country capability, not a multi-tiered effort ranging

from key access at the top to low-level cadre penetration into mass

organizations and other social, political, and military institutions.” As

a last development, Brzezinski asked Odom to “join the Aaron group

and to follow the preparation of the CIA plan for general purpose

resource development.” (Memorandum from Odom to Brzezinski, July

3; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office Files,

10/80) No other account of this meeting has been found.

As a result and at Brzezinski’s request, the Aaron group planned

to meet on July 11. In preparation for the meeting, Gary Sick of the

National Security Council Staff wrote the President’s Deputy Assistant

for National Security Affairs David Aaron that “the purpose of the

meeting is to look ahead at our plans and prospects for developing

covert action and other intelligence capabilities and resources in Iran.

From Odom’s memo, the objective of the meeting is to explore how

we can broaden and deepen our penetration of Iran in preparation for

an anticipated collapse into political and civil war.” Sick suggested

that Aaron structure the meeting “as a review of CIA planning to date

and pressing for development of a paper which identifies the targets we

wish to go after and how we can create and manage the resources necessary.”

(Memorandum from Sick to Aaron, July 11; ibid.)

Both Odom and Carlucci wrote about the July 11 meeting. See

Documents 314 and 315.

312.

Message From the Department of State to the Swiss

Ambassador to Iran (Lang)

Washington, July 5, 1980

Please convey the following information to Foreign Minister Ghot-

bzadeh in response to his request for information about the health of

the former Shah.

Covert and Overt Operations

Information reaching us indicates that the condition of the former

Shah is serious. We have not received any information forecasting the

progress of his illness and we are not in a position to make any judgment

ourselves in this regard.

Our ability to provide information on the state of the health of the

former Shah is limited by the absence of any direct contact with him.

Although we are in touch with Egyptians who are informed on the

state of the Shah’s health, there is necessarily a delay in receiving this

information and we are not in a position to evaluate it accurately.

313.

Editorial Note

On July 9, 1980, an attempted coup against the Iranian Revolution-

ary Government unraveled. The original plot was for 12 pilots with

their F–4 and F–5 planes to defect to Iraq, but the plot grew in scope.

Ultimately, it included units of the Iranian Air Force, ground forces,

members of radio and television organizations, and tribal leaders

including from the Qashqai. The plot called for Iraq to create an incident

at the border between Iran and Iraq as a diversion under which Air

Force supporters would bomb the Tehran Air Base, Mehrabad Airport,

the home of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, and Pasdaran headquarters

and training centers. Ground forces would take over the airport and

radio and television stations, then broadcast material, including a

speech from Ayatollah Kazem Shariat-Madari, saying opponents of the

coup were anti-Islamic. After 72 hours, control of Iran would pass to

Shahpur Bakhtiar, the former Prime Minister and leader of the exile

opposition group, the National Resistance Movement of Iran. Bakhtiar

himself, the extent of whose role in the coup is unclear, moved the

coup from its original August 13 date to July 10, and then again to

July 9, when it became evident that the Tudeh Party had information

of the plot’s existence. The plot unraveled when the initial attack,

moved from Tehran to Hamadan, resulted in premature gunfire. (Intel-

ligence Information Cable, [document number not declassified], August

14; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle

In a July 10 memorandum, Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff wrote David Aaron, the President’s Deputy Assistant for

National Security Affairs, that the Iranians had been tracking the plot

for about a month, [less than 1 line not declassified]. Sick had reservations

about the plot, and expressed his concern about the hostages. He felt

that “the ominous part is the drum fire of propaganda lately associating

various plots and conspiracies with the U.S.—and particularly with

the hostages. The campaign appears to be directed—by design or coinci-

dence—towards laying the justification for trials.” (Carter Library,

National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 65, Outside

In Iran, the government moved on a variety of fronts. Public state-

ments targeted the United States and the hostages. President Abol

Hassan Bani-Sadr publicly announced that Iran had forestalled a coup

and accused the United States, Israel, and Iraq of being in league with

the conspirators. Two days later Khomeini accused the United States

and the Soviet Union of plotting a coup against him in an effort to

crush his Islamic movement. (“17 Iran officers accused of coup tied to

member of the Revolutionary Council stated that the conspirators had

planned to free the U.S. hostages. (Doyle McManus, “Iran Arrests 100

Officers in Purge of Armed Forces,” Los Angeles Times, July 13, 1980,

page OC1)

More concretely, Iran arrested two former generals, who confessed

to the plot, their direct links to Bakhtiar, and the bombing targets. More

than 500 members of the armed forces were subsequently arrested as

part of the plot, including 20 Air Force pilots. (Iran Sitrep No. 373, July

14; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle

to the coup were also arrested in a wide crackdown. (Intelligence

Information Cable, [document number not declassified], August 14; Carter

Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box

executed by firing squad. (“Iran Executes Five Accused of Plot Against

In Paris, Bakhtiar escaped an assassination attempt, apparently

retribution for the intended coup. He told French radio that Iran had

sent professional killers to get him. Newspaper accounts noted that

314.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Aaron)

Washington, July 11, 1980

SUBJECT

Meeting with Carlucci et al.

I spoke with Gary Sick this morning about the agenda for this

meeting. He asked for some comments from me which might give

focus or direction based on the ZB/HB/Turner meeting. Although

the meeting was about special contingencies, Zbig raised the question

of our capabilities for political combat within the country as it drifts

toward civil war. He got the impression that we are not developing

resources as rapidly as we must if we are to compete with any chance

of success.

Two points emerged from the discussion thereafter. First, in our

development of resources for special contingencies, we shall keep in

mind their use for other purposes as well. Thus we should have less

hestitancy about investing in one-time use capabilities if we can see

other possible uses later on.

Second, Zbig asked that we investigate the possibilities of accelerat-

ing our resource developments for “political combat” as things get

worse in the country. Can we cast our nets wider? Do we have an

effective strategic objective? He, of course, considers regaining Iran as

key to the northern tier, more important than Pakistan and Afghanistan

by far.

There are three possible futures for Iran. First, it can become a

radical left pro-Moscow state. Second, it may break into pieces with

Pakistan, Turkey, Iraq, and the USSR drawn in. Third, it may survive

with its borders intact with an anti-Soviet regime which is not pro-West

but objectively inclined that way for economic and security matters.

Our objective should be to ensure the third outcome.

The first phase of a strategy for achieving this outcome must be

the development of a resource base within and without the country. I

do not pretend to know how much is enough or which resources to

prefer over others in the particular case of Iran.

[Omitted here is material on resources.]

315.

Memorandum for the Record by the Deputy Director of

Central Intelligence (Carlucci)

Washington, July 11, 1980

SUBJECT

Meeting of the Aaron, Komer, Pustay, Newsom and Carlucci Group,

a. More intelligence on religious groups would be very welcome.

b. A high priority was the decision-making process (some argued

that one did not exist). If we could describe the process consumers

would welcome reports on the atmosphere that surrounds those in

authority.

c. Newsom laid considerable stress on more information from

the Bazaaris.

d. In connection with our efforts to penetrate the hostage holders,

Newsom renewed an earlier suggestion. If we had the names and

backgrounds of some of those involved and could identify the educa-

tional institutions in Iran that they attended, State could seek Aid

people who may have taught at those institutions. They might have

known those involved. The group asked that we update our informa-

tion on the hostage holders and make it available to them. I would

appreciate it if NFAC could do a paragraph or so on the nature of the

group and enclose biographic information on those individuals we

have identified.

e. Komer asked if we had some [less than 1 line not declassified]. He

suggested we explore trading information with them on the Soviet

external threat for their assessment of Soviet activities inside of Iran.

I said we would explore this possibility.

f. Some discussion took place on obtaining better intelligence on

the newly-formed Parliament. I said we were placing attention on this

group as a target. It was suggested that we draw up a list of the

members and include whatever information we might have. I said I

was sure something along these lines was under way.

3. Komer asked that we think about a program which is separate

from a) FI collection; b) covert action and c) hostage rescue infrastruc-

ture which would be directed toward the possibility of U.S. military

intervention in southern Iran in response to Soviet intervention. The

program would entail grouping assets in localities that would be key

to such an operation. I suggested Komer send me his priority list and

we would initiate such a program noting that although developing

human assets would take a considerable period of time we could start

our technical collection immediately. [portion marking not declassified]

4. [13 lines not declassified]

5. The only problem that arose during the discussion on covert

action was Aaron’s continuing belief that we can somehow erect a

structure inside without reference to the exile group. He asked about

doing this with labor unions, the Bazaaris, etc. I pointed out that in

each case there was no identifiable leadership with which we could

work. We were not adverse to working with these groups, indeed we

were trying to target on them, but in many instances the best lines

inside came from those on the outside. I told him I saw no phoenix in

Iran about to arise from the ashes. [portion marking not declassified]

6. State was asked to go out to its posts with a request for stepped-

up reporting on Iran. [7½ lines not declassified]

7. I talked with Newsom about access [less than 1 line not declassified].

I told him we were prepared to send [less than 1 line not declassified]

over. Newsom agreed that we should have access but said the first

priority was to have him meet with his family. He might very well be

on his way back to the U.S. within 48 hours. If so he much preferred

we interview him here. I told him he would unquestionably get requests

from other intelligence components for access [less than 1 line not declassi-

fied], but that he could tell them that CIA would handle their require-

ments. I suggest we convey this to the Pentagon, including General

Vaught. [portion marking not declassified]

Frank C. Carlucci

3 [name not declassified] signed for Carlucci above this typed signature.

316.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Operations,

Central Intelligence Agency (McMahon) to the Commander

of the Joint Task Force (Vaught)

Washington, July 11, 1980

SUBJECT

Feasibility Study

1. Before he left town, the Director asked that I reply to your memo

of 2 July on developing plans to infiltrate a hostage rescue force into

Iran. We want to help all we can with this. We are concerned, however,

that complying with the full scope of your request might take us into

activities beyond the bounds of the Intelligence Community. That is,

operational planning which involves considerations of the capabilities

and tactics of U.S. forces is normally beyond the purview of intelli-

gence agencies.

2. We therefore feel that all we can and would be most happy to

do in support of your rescue planning is to provide opinions on and

support for the infiltration plans which your joint task force develops.

For instance, we can and should estimate the probability of detection

under a given plan. We should estimate what our clandestine resources

may be able to do in support. As a general comment in response to

your 2 July memo, we do not believe that the governments of Pakistan,

Saudi Arabia, or Turkey would agree to permit the use of their territory

for a base of operations or through-port for a rescue operation. More-

over, none of these governments should be relied upon to safeguard

knowledge of a planned rescue operation. [2 lines not declassified] Insofar

as clandestine, or black, infiltration of the rescue force from any of the

four countries is concerned (that is without the knowledge of the host

government), we would not offer any hope that this is possible.

3. In sum, we want to avoid treading where it is not proper for us

to be, while at the same time wanting to be as helpful to you as possible

in checking out and supporting the plans that you’ve developed.

John N. McMahon

Deputy Director for Operations

Covert and Overt Operations

airport where he was handed over to the Swiss. That was his first

knowledge that he might be released. He had been concerned about

his

health—unsteadiness,

dizziness,

and

recently

nausea—since

December. His condition had become acute in the last week or so.

—Queen said he had a good relationship with most of his captors

although he could not abide a few of them. He thought his adjustment

had been as successful as any of the hostages he knew of. He said one

of the captors told him privately just before he left that the others

would be released in three or four months.

—Queen is anxious to come back to the U.S. and interested in his

next assignment. He cares deeply, of course, for the hostages left behind.

At this point, we believe unless there are strong medical reasons to

the contrary that he should be moved to the U.S. rather than Germany

for further tests. This would emphasize the fact that he was turned

over to his parents rather than to the U.S.G. and could lay a basis for

subsequent releases in the future.

—At White House initiative, Henry briefed the President, and the

President also spoke to Queen in the afternoon from Georgia.

—The Swiss were told by Sanjabi that the Iranians have found

another body at the Tabas site. We checked with DOD and there is

absolutely no possibility that the body is that of an American or an

Iranian associated with us. We told the Swiss that the body should not

be turned over to them or to the Red Cross for us unless there was

information we were not aware of to indicate that the body was an

American.

—Ghotbzadeh told Richard Cottam last night that he had been

responsible for the fast action to release Queen. Ghotbzadeh said he

was afraid Queen might die while in Iranian custody and Iran would

be blamed for having tortured him.

—Ghotbzadeh said again that he would not take part in the new

government under Habibi. When Cottam asked if the installation of a

new government would be a setback for hostage release, Ghotbzadeh

answered quickly, there was no question; the hostages would be

released. He had fixed it so that would happen.

—We attach an analysis of the new Parliament prepared by Bruce

Laingen and submitted yesterday through the Swiss.

—We also attach cables received today from the Swiss.

318.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, July 18, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran

The low profile policy2 which we have followed since late April

has yielded some benefits. Despite the intense in-fighting within Iran’s

leadership factions over the seating of the Parliament and selection of

a Prime Minister, the hostage issue had not been the political football

it was in the past. Khomeini has ceased referring to the hostages during

his speeches and attacks on the U.S. A consensus appears to be building

within Iranian political circles that the hostage issue has been milked

for all it is worth and that it is increasingly a political (and economic)

liability which must be resolved. Even Beheshti has been prepared to

refer publicly to the possibility of settling the hostage issue in accord-

ance with the “humanitarian tradition” of Islam. (C)

319.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Aaron)

Washington, July 22, 1980

Covert and Overt Operations

320.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Summary of the President’s Meeting with Katherine Keough and

Louisa Kennedy

PARTICIPANTS

President Jimmy Carter

Captain Gary Sick, NSC Staff Member (notetaker)

Katherine Keough

Louisa Kennedy

The President opened the meeting by remarking about how wonder-

ful Richard Queen looked and how excited he was to be back. Both

visitors agreed that he was a wonderful young man. Unfortunately, his

personal experience as a hostage was limited and may not be typical

of the others.

The President agreed that the experience of each hostage may be

unique. Queen was obsessed with the different attitudes of the different

militants. Some he despised. Others were much better.

Katherine Keough said they had requested the meeting to assure the

President of their support. Although some members of their family

organization occasionally stray off—as was unfortunately the case at

the Republican National Convention where some members “slipped

through our fingers”3—the President could be assured that he has 53

hostage families behind him. That emphatically includes Richard

Queen and his family who lead them all in support.

The President said that was good to hear. He complimented the

two visitors on their remarkable diplomacy and courage. If this turns

into a partisan issue, it will detract from the overwhelming commitment

of the American people. The President had seen Secretary of State

Muskie and had told him to talk to you (the visitors) on a confidential

basis about a move which might be desirable in relation to the new

Iranian Majlis. There were some problems involved, but we could

probably find ways for some Americans to go to Tehran. Even Beheshti

had referred to the need to deal with the U.S. “people” rather than the

government. If this could be evoked by private citizens, members of

Congress, or even members of FLAG, it might dramatize the hostage

problem to the Majlis. The President emphasized that he was not trying

to impose an idea on them, but he thought they should discuss the

idea with Secretary Muskie.

Katherine Keough noted there are things they could do which the

government cannot, and vice versa. They wanted to try and be more

in synch with policy in order to protect you (the President) and to help

the families. They thought there was a possible opening for some

movement after the release of Richard Queen to his parents.

The President agreed and noted that even Beheshti had repeated

this formulation.

Katherine Keough thought this might offer the possibility of a role

for them. However, she was leery about the families going to Tehran

where they were extremely vulnerable to being run through cemeteries,

having crutches waved at them and the like. However, that may be

necessary.

The President said he was thinking more toward a family visit to

the UN to meet with the Iranian UN Representative, or perhaps to

Switzerland for a meeting with some Iranians.

Louisa Kennedy said she had seen Farhang (the former UN Repre-

sentative) in New York on June 20. He had told her he was going back

to teach in Iran, but it was evident that he is going back to try to help

Bani-Sadr. She told him that if the families can be helpful at some point

or if the Iranians develop some scenario utilizing the families—which

would have to be highly organized—we could possibly be helpful.

The President said if there was a meeting in Switzerland, then a

judgment would be required whether it should be secret or whether

it should be done with fanfare. What is probably not possible is to deal

with representatives of Ghotbzadeh or Bani-Sadr. It should preferably

be a representative of Beheshti or the Majlis, with the Iranian leaders

guiding the operation with the help of the Swiss or perhaps Austrian

governments. The U.S., of course, should avoid direct association with

such a move.

Katherine Keough opined that the Iranians would probably prefer

doing it publicly. This would provide an opportunity for the families

to be seen pleading for the release of their sons, etc.

The President added “because Jimmy Carter could not do it” (i.e.

the public line which the families would take in their plea). He asked

Gary Sick to follow up on his note to Secretary Muskie. The FLAG

Covert and Overt Operations

officials should sit down with the Secretary. They should plan to by-

pass Bani-Sadr, Ghotbzadeh and the U.S. Government. The sooner the

better. The Iranians seem to be on the verge of choosing a Prime

Minister.

Katherine Keough said she would rather not rush. It would be worth

waiting a bit to see if the new Prime Minister lasts.

Gary Sick noted that the end of Ramadan may provide an appropri-

ate moment for initiative.

The President observed that Khomeini appeared to knock down

anyone who sticks his head up in Iran. He recently criticized Beheshti

and the clerics. Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh were not aware that Richard

Queen was going to be released until they were asked to arrange

transportation.

Katherine Keough mentioned that the families had recently written

a letter to Ahmad Khomeini on a person-to-person basis when there

appeared to be a chance that he might become the Prime Minister. The

letter is being carried to Tehran with Professor Ricks who is presently

on his way.

The President said that if they saw some positive sign or an opportu-

nity, they should call him directly.

Katherine Keough said one final point they wished to make was to

propose the establishment of an international commission to deal with

questions such as the sanctity of embassies, the inviolability of diplo-

matic immunity and the like, perhaps under the auspices of the UN.

The President said we would certainly join such a commission.

Katherine Keough said she hoped, if such a commission were formed,

that the leadership of FLAG would be considered for membership in

the U.S. delegation.

The President asked how the families of the hostages get along

among themselves.

Katherine Keough joked that they fight. There is a continuing prob-

lem of those outside Washington vs. those inside. When those from

other locations are brought in, they have unrealistically high expecta-

tions about what is known and what can be done. When their expecta-

tions are not realized, they are frustrated and tend to think that the

government is doing nothing. By the time a meeting is over, they

usually go away with a positive attitude which lasts 2–4 weeks before

frustrations again begin to mount. Seventeen families were represented

in the meeting with Richard Queen.

Louisa Kennedy added that there was flak from those who were not

there. It had been hard to arrange quickly for everyone. Richard Queen

plans to call all the families.

The President said that it was obvious that Queen was weak. Even

though he was quite animated and excited during his hour visit with

321.

Editorial Note

On July 23, 1980, the Special Operations Review Group, chaired

by Admiral J. L. Holloway, III, submitted the Final Report of the Special

Operations Review Group, often referred to as the Holloway Report,

to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In the Forwarding Statement, Holloway

wrote that the report was a “professional critique” for the Joint Chiefs

and not an after-action summary or a white paper. In this context and

as a result of hindsight, he felt that the report would appear to be

“highly critical, more so probably than a wider review from a national

perspective would deserve.” But he added that the review group had

“seen infinitely more to be proud of than to complain about.” The

operation, he concluded, had been “risky and we knew it, but it had

a good chance of success and America had the courage to try.”

The Final Report contained an Executive Summary, 5 chapters

(Introduction, Chronology, Issue Analysis, Conclusions, Recommenda-

tions), and annexes. The Executive Summary listed specific and general

conclusions. In the specific conclusions, the main points were: 1) that

the operation had been conceptually valid and feasible, but high-risk;

322.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, July 24, 1980

323.

Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central

Intelligence Agency

[cable number not declassified]

Washington, July 25, 1980

COUNTRY

Iran

SUBJECT

Recent Developments in Oveisi Movement [date not declassified]

SOURCE

[2 lines not declassified]

1. During mid-July, Buick Saber, a trusted aide of Iranian exile

leader Gholam Ali Oveisi, made two trips to Cairo to meet with the

Shah and members of the royal family at the behest of Ardeshir Zahedi,

the Shah’s former Ambassador to the United States. Zahedi advised

Oveisi that the Shah was attempting to fund other Iranian exile leaders

and was informing these leaders that Oveisi was a tool of the United

States and was not to be trusted. Zahedi felt that such activity was

divisive to the exiles and suggested Oveisi send a representative at

once to clear up the matter. When Saber saw the Shah, he proceeded

to refute the Shah’s claims that Oveisi was being used by the United

States to denigrate him and prevent the royal family from returning

to Iran. The Shah told Saber that if Oveisi would announce publicly

that he wished to restore the 1906 Constitution to Iran, that would be

sufficient to appease him. The Shah said he knew he could not return

to Iran but still hoped that his son could. If Oveisi agreed, he would

provide his movement with U.S. dollars 20 million, the assistance of

the royal family, and would attempt to gain Jordanian support for him.

Saber then returned to Paris and delivered the message to Oveisi.

Oveisi refused to accept the offer and told Saber to go back to Cairo

and make clear to the Shah that Oveisi harbored no personal animosity

toward him or his family. However, he felt the Shah and the royal

family were no longer really an issue, and his only real concern was

getting Iran away from Khomeini and the mullahs and preventing it

from falling into the hands of the Communists. Once this had been

accomplished, the people could determine if they wanted a return of

the monarchy. Also, he felt that the Shah’s involvement with the exiles

Covert and Overt Operations

and his offers of money to certain leaders among them was disruptive

to the whole effort. ([less than 1 line not declassified] Comment: Oveisi

believed that an apparent loss of interest in him by the Egyptians was

the result of the Shah negatively influencing President Anwar Sadat.)

Saber returned to Cairo with Oveisi’s message and carefully presented

it to the Shah and the royal family. The Shah told Saber that he appreci-

ated Oveisi’s explanation, would heed his words, and wished Oveisi

well. Shortly after Saber left, Zahedi called an aide of Oveisi and said

that the Shah and the royal family had agreed to stop supporting the

various factions. Zahedi explained further that in fact only one exile

leader had actually been given money, and that was General Ariana

in Paris who had received U.S. dollars 100,000.

Hojat, a religious leader from Qom, and a number of his followers.

Hojat had reportedly been closely associated with Ayatollah Khomeini

but recently had become disillusioned with the course of events in Iran

and decided to go into exile. Hojat used a medical problem as an excuse

to travel to Switzerland and now plans to base himself in London and

eventually lead an anti-Khomeini publicity campaign. Hojat accepted

U.S. dollars 20,000 from Oveisi to cover his living expenses in London

until he is ready to begin his anti-Khomeini campaign. He also agreed

to provide Oveisi with religious contacts in Iran. After the meeting,

Hojat’s followers returned to Iran. During the Geneva meeting, Hojat

told Oveisi that one of the major causes of his disillusionment with

Khomeini was Khomeini’s policy of crushing any form of opposition

to him. Hojat had once told Khomeini that while he was not opposed

to selective executions, he felt that they should go unpublicized, and

that widespread awareness of the killings was promoting a poor image

of Iran in the world. Khomeini had responded to Hojat that world

opinion meant nothing to him and that the killings would continue.

Khomeini went on to explain that mercy was interpreted as weakness

and that killing was necessary for the revolution to survive. Hojat also

said that Khomeini was using Palestinians to eliminate opposition to

him outside of Iran and was providing these members with the names

of those to be eliminated and the support to carry out the missions.

3. On 22 July Oveisi and an aide departed for Cairo at the invitation

of Anwar Sadat. After the completion of the Cairo visit, Oveisi intends

to travel to Hamburg where he will meet with the son of Ayatollah

Shariat-Madari in an attempt to gain more active support for his move-

ment from Shariat-Madari.

4. ACQ: [date not declassified]

5. [Omitted here is dissemination information.]

324.

Message From the Swiss Chargé to Iran (Kaiser) to the

Department of State

Tehran, July 25, 1980

PURGES IN THE FOREIGN MINISTRY: A SITUATIONAL SKETCH

An official in the Foreign Ministry told me that they had a great

purge there yesterday. This operation, which must be seen in connec-

tion with Khomeini’s latest appeal for the Islamization of every aspect

of daily life, was directed against persons as well as objects.

325.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, July 26, 1980

326.

Editorial Note

On July 27, 1980, the former Shah of Iran, Mohammed Reza Pahlavi,

died in Cairo. The Department of State issued a press statement con-

forming to its final draft. See Document 308. The press statement is in

Department of State Bulletin, September 1980, page 55. President Anwar

Sadat announced that Egypt would hold a State funeral for the Shah

with full military honors, but would not invite other governments or

the diplomatic corps to participate in funeral ceremonies. U.S. Ambas-

sador to Egypt Alfred (Roy) Atherton reported that most members of

the diplomatic corps would not attend, some intended to put their

flags at half-mast, and others had decided not to fly their flags at

all. On the upper right corner of Atherton’s telegram, Carter wrote:

“Atherton not attend service. Do not fly US flag. C.” (Telegram 16446

from Cairo, July 28; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff

On July 28, Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff wrote

the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brze-

zinski, that the Ambassadors of France and the United Kingdom would

attend. He wrote:

“As you know, it was my view that our position on sending Roy to

the funeral should be made independently of the rest of the diplomatic

corps. I never liked the idea of hiding behind others’ skirts on this

issue. However, I think we will look both foolish and cowardly if other

Western nations send ambassadorial representatives to the funeral and

we do not.”

In the upper right corner of this memorandum, an unknown hand

wrote: “ZB thinks the President should be aware of this right away.”

I told Ed [Muskie] to let Atherton attend. J.” (Ibid.)

The Shah’s funeral took place on July 29. In attendance were former

President Richard M. Nixon, exiled King Constantine of Greece, Ather-

ton, and diplomats from the United Kingdom, France, China, Israel,

Australia, and Morocco. According to an August 11 Time magazine

article, “An Exile Laid to Rest,” on his deathbed, the Shah “asked to

be buried ultimately in Tehran near his executed generals, named son

Reza as his successor and prayed for the overthrow of the Ayatullah

Khomeini.”

A Central Intelligence Agency National Foreign Assessment Center

Spot Commentary on the Shah’s death noted that reaction in Iran

had been “low key,” although Tehran radio had reported that “the

bloodsucker of the century has died.” The Spot Commentary con-

cluded: “The Iranians are unlikely to change their fundamental position

on the hostages in reaction to the Shah’s death. The hostages will

remain pawns in Tehran’s continuing power struggle.” The report

noted, however, that Iran’s reactions might change depending on

actions of the Shah’s family and the exile opposition, prominent mem-

bers of which gathered in Cairo. Some of the exile opposition “report-

edly suggested that the Crown Prince name himself Shah. Such an

announcement could aggravate tensions in Iran.” On the Spot Com-

mentary, an unknown hand wrote: “and in the U.S. since he is resident

at Williams College.” (Department of State, Records of David D. New-

som, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–

birthday, Crown Prince Reza Pahlavi proclaimed himself Shah Reza II

and called for an uprising against the current government. (“Son of

327.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

State

Office of the Vice President

Warren Christopher

Denis Clift

David Newsom

White House

Harold Saunders

David Aaron

Treasury

Hedley Donovan

G. William Miller

Lloyd Cutler

Robert Carswell

Jody Powell

OSD

NSC

Frank Kramer

Gary Sick

Justice

Benjamin Civiletti

John Shenefield

JCS

David Jones

Stansfield Turner

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

This meeting was intended as a general update of the situation in

Iran and any outstanding issues in advance of the PRC on our Iran

policy scheduled later in the week. The DCI opened the meeting with

a general review of the hostages and the political situation. We cannot

pinpoint the location of the hostages. Beheshti and the hardline Islamic

militants are winning, while Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh are losing

power. The DCI foresees a gradual drift toward civil strife, probably

with no decisive outcome of the power struggle for some time. There

is recent information that Admiral Madani may have gone under-

ground with the Qashqais, which may portend the beginning of a

dissident formation with some potential on the ground. Khomeini

appears to be motivated by a hatred for President Carter, and there is

a possibility that the hostages may be used to embarrass the President

prior to the elections, possibly by some form of trials. The Department

of State is preparing a cable to nations throughout the world asking

for an approach to the Tehran regime urging release of the hostages.

Mr. Christopher noted that many of the countries will make their own

judgment about the timing of any démarche, and they may insist on

waiting until a new government has been formally installed. (S)

Interest Sections

The FBI has been investigating the killing of Ali Tabatabai. Some

lines run to the Iranian Interests Section of the Algerian Embassy in

Washington. The FBI wishes to interview Mr. Sajadi, the Iranian

national (but American resident alien) who runs the section. It appears

this will be worked out. There were some mixed signals initially, and

the Iranians thought we wished to close down the Interests Section

and eject Mr. Sajadi. They threatened to retaliate by closing the U.S.

Interests Section in Tehran. The State Department pointed out that the

Iranian Interests Section in Washington is of greater importance to us

(because it handles the myriad cases of Iranians in this country) than

is the U.S. Interests Section in Tehran, which is primarily a convenience

and an investment in the future. All agreed that if the FBI investigation

develops solid information leading to the conclusion that the Iranian

Interests Section was involved in the Tabatabai murder, we should act

promptly to close it or take other appropriate action. The Attorney

General will keep the SCC informed as the investigation proceeds. (S)

Iranian Students

The Attorney General reported on the deportation proceedings

against Iranian students. Since the review of students was initiated on

November 14, 370 Iranian students have either been deported or have

chosen voluntary departure. A total of 9,000 students were found out

of status. Proceedings are underway against all of them, but it is a

slow process. 2,000 of this group have requested asylum, and their

cases are pending. (U)

Of the approximately 160 Iranian students arrested over the week-

end in connection with the pro- and anti-Khomeini demonstrations,

It expresses particular concern that the allied nations urge Iran not to put the hostages

from various countries are listed by country and telegram response number in an August

Covert and Overt Operations

about 80% were pro-Khomeini. Although a modest bail was set, the

vast majority refused to identify themselves, and the judge ordered

them to remain in jail until they presented proper identification. The

failure to identify themselves may render them out of status and subject

to deportation. The combination of this fact together with possible

criminal prosecution in connection with the demonstration, may

shorten the tortuous deportation process. All of the jailed Iranians have

hired a U.S. lawyer to represent them. (C)

Iranian Claims Litigation

Justice is intervening as a “friend of the court” in a claims hearing

against Iran in New York. Our objective is to persuade the court not

to make judgment on the case because of its possible implications at

a delicate moment in the hostage situation. Regardless of how the judge

decides, it could complicate eventual negotiations for the hostages’

release. Mr. Christopher executed an affidavit last night and is prepared

to testify in person if essential. The Attorney General does not favor

using IEEPA to attempt to prevent the court from issuing a judgment

in the case. He believes that such an effort would ultimately fail

and would undermine the authority to use IEEPA in other areas. No

decision on IEEPA is required until we see if the amicus approach is

successful. (C)

[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

With regard to the assets of the former Shah, there is no way to

determine the extent of his holdings in this country. Property and other

assets can be held in forms which do not reflect identity of ownership.

The Iranians have filed a claim in New York to retrieve these assets,

but thus far they have been unable to figure out where to look. Mr.

Aaron commented that we might wish to issue a public call for such

information at some point if it appeared necessary as part of the hostage

negotiations. (S)

328.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the Deputy Director for the National Foreign Assessment

Center, Central Intelligence Agency (Clarke), and the Deputy

Director for Operations, Central Intelligence Agency

(McMahon)

Washington, July 29, 1980

SUBJECT

Possible Policy Options: Iran

1. I have your respective submissions on possible policy options

in Iran [document numbers not declassified] as requested by Dr. Brzezinski

on 17 July. First, we have to put this into context. We submitted a

paper outlining possible policy options in Iran that we would be willing

to develop for Brzezinski if he wanted. He responded by ignoring

that general request but asking for papers on two specific areas. I’m

afraid I don’t think that either of the papers we have developed is fully

responsive to his request for a survey of the options that are available

to us. Such a survey really should include (as he asked for) both the

costs and the benefits of these actions. [portion marking not declassified]

2. With respect to the DDO paper [less than 1 line not declassified]

we really are primarily giving him an inventory of what we have done

or will do. Much of this is fine, but what he wants to know is what

we could do against either of these and what the costs and benefits

would be. I think he really wants to help us. If we give him three or

four covert actions that we could do [less than 1 line not declassified] and

what they might produce at what risk, he might help sell those. In

short, I think we should have a rather short paper on each which says

that we can continue with the present kind of propaganda operations

(and a list of those we have done and are planning to do as appended),

but that we also could undertake more forceful actions against Kho-

meini. [4 lines not declassified]

Covert and Overt Operations

3. On the NFAC paper, it seems to me we have real trouble writing

a pro and con paper—I think our analysts all belong in the policy end

of the business! Perhaps the situation is absolutely as bleak as [name

not declassified] paper makes out—that is, there simply is no benefit

whatsoever to be had from any of the non-lethal military options. I

frankly doubt that. I really would like to see us lay out both sides of

the story, or otherwise we surely will be accused of being subtle advo-

cates. For instance, mining of exports as well as imports will surely

have some substantial financial impact. In the past, we have judged

this to be insignificant because of all the money the Iranians have

banked outside of the country. I think that analysis is a little overdone

in view of the fact that it would certainly cause some short-term disloca-

tions if their income was cut off. Beyond that, I sense from intelligence

reports of late that the Iranians may be having greater financial prob-

lems than we thought they would. Another benefit, it seems to me,

would be a demonstration of U.S. resolve. In fact, rather than being a

sign of political maneuvering if such a move were executed on 5

November, it could be a clear sign of U.S. determination to solve this

problem when there was no political gain to be had (all assuming that

the President is re-elected, of course). Still another benefit, it would

seem to me, would be a clear demonstration to the anti-Khomeini

elements that the United States was basically behind them. Isn’t there

still a residue of suspicion in Iran that the United States has been behind

Khomeini all along? Beyond this, I think we have stretched a little bit

in some of the “anti” points just to be sure we make them. Let’s pare

the “con” down to those that are most important and realistic. Finally,

I don’t think we need our encyclopedia to review what everybody in

the world is going to think about this. We’ve got to put our response

in as succinct a form as possible if it is going to be useful. I’d appreciate

your turning people loose on this quickly as I’d like to take a revised

response down to Brzezinski on Wednesday, 30 July. [portion marking

not declassified]

Stansfield Turner

329.

Message From the Swiss Chargé to Iran (Kaiser) to the

Department of State

Tehran, July 30, 1980

Letter from U.S. Congressmen

1) The delivery, which was delayed by the resignation of the chief

of protocol, and which finally could be arranged by one of his deputies,

took place last night at 7 p.m Since Rafsanjani speaks only Persian and

Arabic, I had taken along one of this Embassy’s translators to the

appointment. In accordance with State Department instructions, I

stressed the independent initiative of the 187 congressmen, who had

by no means acted on the orders of the Executive, and emphasized

that the reader of this letter must become aware of the serious desire

of these congressmen to end this crisis situation as quickly as possible

and in a peaceful manner protecting the honor of all sides. Finally, I

requested the speaker to bring the letter to the attention of all parliamen-

tarians at the most suitable moment. After Rafsanjani had been read

the content of the letter in Persian, he agreed to acquaint the Parliament

with the text at a favorable opportunity, and then began a monologue

lasting almost half an hour in answer of the letter. He then asked me

to transmit this reaction to the congressmen.

Rafsanjani declared that if the U.S. Government were really inter-

ested in a peaceful solution, it would have had to take a much more

Covert and Overt Operations

sensible attitude. It had attempted numerous actions which had wors-

ened the atmosphere constantly and widened the gulf between the two

countries. He cited the following examples:

1. The freezing of Iranian assets in U.S. banks had been an illegal

action. These assets derived from the sale of oil which had been con-

cluded at low prices, about 1/10 of the actual value.

2. Also illegal is the blockage of delivery of spare parts for projects

which had been forced on Iran in the first place, with a guaranty of

ongoing supplies. Fortunately, in the meantime, Iran is in a position

to make its way even without these, partly vital, spare parts.

3. He referred to the strong U.S. pressure on its satellite countries

to join the economic boycott. But Iran can stand on its own feet and

bravely withstand the effects of the economic boycott.

4. The military offensive in Iran (Tabas), of which there are still

many details missing. This act could in no way be put in a favorable

light before the eyes of the world.

5. The continued active support of the Shah before and after his

overthrow and to the very end, and the support for the minions of his

regime in Iran and abroad constitutes an unfriendly act towards the

Iranian people.

6. Extensive propaganda activities in the whole world with the

object of defaming the Iranian revolution. After all, it is obvious that

the Iranian revolution must be considered the most humane revolution

in recent times, marked by the spirit of mercy and forgiveness.

7. U.S. support for leftist groups active in Kurdistan, Khuzestan,

Azerbaijan, and Turkestan trying to weaken the Iranian revolution,

although supporting these groups can certainly not be in the interest

of the Western World.

8. Active subversive propaganda by the Farsi service of the VOA

with the goal of bringing about a military coup as planned by Bakhtiar

and other accomplices of the Shah. General U.S. support of all those

who are actively considering a coup.

9. Active American involvement in the recent abortive coup. This

coup was the work of all counterrevolutionary groups (Bakhtiar/the

Shah’s people, etc.) as well as the United States and its mercenaries

(Israel, among others). The names of those involved had been found

in the U.S. Embassy. Only thanks to God’s mercy and the vigilance of

the people, this sinister attempt had failed.

10. The U.S. Government is putting cruel and unjust pressure on

faithful Islamic Iranian citizens who live in the the United States and

are therefore guests of the country. The most recent example for this

is the brutal attack by the police on the Islamic pro-Khomeini demon-

strators in Washington, which Rafsanjani condemned publicly in Parlia-

ment. The day before, that same police force had tolerated the demon-

stration by the exiled criminals who had insulted Iran’s “sacred

leadership.”

Returning to one of the basic arguments of the letter, Rafsanjani

asked how an atmosphere of understanding could possibly be created

in view of all that had happened in all these years and was still happen-

ing, and how could the Majlis understand it. Would it not have been

better for the United States to fulfill at least the minimal demand of

the Iranian people: the extradition of the corrupt Shah who had plun-

dered the country. The trial of this felon would at least have helped

soften the revolutionary anger. The non-extradition, however, was tan-

tamount to a flagrant insult to the people and the government. Rafsan-

jani continued that it had not been wise that the United States had

changed its motives vis-à-vis Iran. The U.S. was still dreaming, as in

the past, of an Iran under its control and colonial yoke.

In order to achieve an improvement in the atmosphere between

the two countries, it is necessary that the United States does everything

in its power to heal the unjustices of the past. However, if the United

States does not change its attitude and the old unfriendliness and

enmities are allowed to continue, how can the Iranian nation, which

is so forgiving, forget all the mistakes of the past and the injustice it

has suffered. With this, Rafsanjani concluded his comments.

2) Last night, after the ambassadors of the PLO, Lebanon, and

Romania, it was my turn to talk with Rafsanjani. The President of the

Iranian Parliament seems to be a very charming man. But in conversa-

tion or negotiations he clearly reveals himself as a hardliner of the

Beheshti circle in the IRP.

His monologue listed routinely—and as if learned by heart from

a catechism—the all too well-known charges vis-à-vis the U.S. His

doctrinaire fixation on this question made any factual discussion of

the matter, which was not sought by Rafsanjani anyway, appear hope-

less. His entire disposition makes it unlikely that he could be the man

who could or would at this point effectively preach understanding to

the Majlis moving in the dangerous direction of possible clerical-fascist

tendencies. Therefore it is most doubtful whether he should be

entrusted with any more messages for the time being.

While I myself did not have an opportunity to mention the hostage

problem (time for presentation), the Austrian Ambassador, who had

delivered a letter of the President of the Austrian Parliament to Rafsan-

Covert and Overt Operations

jani two days earlier, the main concern of which had been the hostage

problem, told me that Rafsanjani had told him that the question would

be submitted to Parliament soon. This will depend first of all on how

long and with what consequences the domestic power struggle (prime

minister and subsequent formation of a cabinet) will drag on.

Kaiser

330.

Memorandum for the Record by the Chief of the Near East

and South Asia Division, Directorate of Operations, Central

Intelligence Agency (Cogan)

Washington, July 31, 1980

SUBJECT

President’s Tasking of State Department for an Update on Options Being

Developed in the Hostage Crisis Other than a Rescue Mission

1. You will recall that at a meeting at the Pentagon on 23 July the

question of [less than 1 line not declassified] designed to create a means

331.

Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee

Meeting

SUBJECT

Minutes of PRC Meeting on Iran (S)

PARTICIPANTS

State

Secretary Edmund Muskie

Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher

Under Secretary David Newsom

Assistant Secretary Harold Saunders

Ambassador Vanden Heuvel

Treasury

Robert Mundheim

William Anawaty

OSD

Secretary Harold Brown

Frank Kramer

Justice

John Shenefield

John Harmon

JCS

General David Jones

General John Pustay

Bruce Clarke

Robert Ames

Covert and Overt Operations

White House

Zbigniew Brzezinski

David Aaron

Hedley Donovan

Lloyd Cutler

NSC

Gary Sick

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Secretary Muskie opened the meeting by reviewing for the PRC

an options paper for an Iran strategy over the next two months (Tab

B) and a proposed memorandum to the President reporting the recom-

mendations of the PRC. Some participants expressed doubt that the

course of action would succeed in achieving the release of the hostages;

however, all agreed that the strategy proposed was necessary as a first

step toward developing the contacts and channels of communica-

tion required for further progress. After some minor revisions, the

PRC unanimously recommended approval of the memorandum at

Approve

As Amended

The bulk of the discussion related to the question of possible trials

of the hostages. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that it may be useful to have

a trusted intermediary on his own raise with or suggest to the Iranians

a possible resolution of the crisis involving a swift trial and immediate

expulsion of the hostages in no more than 48 hours. Although we

should continue to stand by our public and private position of Novem-

ber 1979 that we would respond to trials by an interruption of Iranian

commerce, we should also recognize that some form of trials may

for a brief period in order to resolve the crisis if there were assurances

that a trial will be followed by release. (S)

Secretary Brown noted that prearrangements in the past had always

come apart, and this kind of scenario would be no different. In his view,

the most realistic course would be to leave our position of opposing

all trials as it is. He felt that Beheshti and Khomeini are determined

to bring down the U.S. government, and they would use the situation

against us. Bruce Clarke commented that the Iranians would be able

to agree on having real trials more easily and more quickly than they

could agree on such a scenario. (S)

Mr. Cutler commented that the ICJ ruling forbids all trials involving

the hostages, and he did not accept that the U.S. could sit still for

trials of any nature. Since we would have to misrepresent our position,

it was not an honorable course. The United States should never lie. (C)

Mr. Christopher also disagreed with the proposal on the grounds

that it would suggest U.S. acquiescence in trials, thereby opening that

issue to negotiation. It is also possible that the Iranians would lose

control of the process and the scenario would get out of hand. Secretary

Muskie commented that the Iranians would probably take our proposal

and then escalate to a discussion of additional concessions they may

want. If we have to offer some bait in advance to the Iranians, he would

prefer consideration of monetary inducements or a carefully drafted

apology of some sort rather than accepting trials. In any event, we lack

a credible interlocutor in Tehran. (S)

Mr. Donovan disagreed with the notion of trials or an apology, on

the grounds that it would promote hostage-taking elsewhere around

the world. (S)

All agreed that this should be regarded as a preliminary discussion

of possible alternate courses of action. The issues had not been exam-

ined sufficiently to permit any decision or recommendation. The nature

of the discussion should be reported to the President for his informa-

tion, and a small working group should examine in more detail the

kinds of contingencies we may face suddenly and how we might deal

with them. (S)

Mr. Cutler noted that we are progressively losing control of any

ability to return the frozen assets. The court cases are proceeding and

he believes we will not be able to stop a judgment. Mr. Shenefield

commented that this issue was really a lawyers’ discussion that had

332.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to

President Carter

Washington, August 1, 1980

SUBJECT

A Strategy for the New Phase in Iran

The Issue

The purpose of this memorandum is to report to you as Chairman

of the PRC the views and recommendations from the PRC meeting on

Iran. A draft of this memo and the attached options paper (“Strategy

for Iran—The Next Two Months”) were circulated before the PRC as

a basis for discussion.

The purpose of this exercise is to establish a strategy for approach-

ing the new situation in Iran which you have described—the function-

ing of the new parliament, the formation of a government, the focus

of the parliament’s attention on the hostage issue, Queen’s release and

the end of Ramadan. Some elements of this new situation already exist;

others may come fully into play in a couple of weeks; still others may

not jell for a month or more. The strategy discussed incorporates the

steps you have already directed as well as other possible initiatives.

The attached options paper analyzes what we have done since you

trends in Iran (pp. 6–8), and the full range of options available to us

(pp. 10–17). Each of those options is argued in that paper and was

considered by the PRC.

This memorandum explains my recommendation to the PRC that

we broaden the immediate effort already begun with your telegram

to friends around the world to probe the Iranian situation from every

angle and generate approaches in light of this new situation urging

the Iranians to resolve the crisis. As the results of those initial probes

begin coming in, we will sharpen specific initiatives of our own, such

as hostage family6 and Congressional contacts with the Iranians. Even

before the results of those probes are in we can begin laying the founda-

tion with possible family and Congressional groups while avoiding

immediate public identification with them.

The discussion in the PRC, as you will see from the minutes,

produced general agreement that we should begin by pursuing the

course outlined in this memo. There was detailed discussion of such

issues as how we might handle a trial situation as it arose, and it was

agreed that this should be the subject—along with other specific ideas—

of some follow-on work7 which will be done by a very small group

for the next PRC meeting on this subject. The course of action outlined

in this paper, in addition to introducing the new ideas mentioned

above, is designed to develop a range of active approaches on which

we could call as the situation in Tehran clarifies. It was agreed in the

PRC that the work that we will next be doing will focus on refining

further the ideas which we may have to put into such exchanges.

The Last Three Months and Where We Stand Now

The strategy you approved on May 8 was designed to broaden

our channels and range of contacts in Tehran in preparation for the

moment when the top Iranian authorities would be devising their

approach to the parliament on the hostage issue. A number of

exchanges took place with new contacts, but the internal power struggle

so preoccupied the key figures that no one in Tehran in the end was

able to give systematic thought to how they would manage the decision

on the hostage issue with the new Iranian parliament.

The power struggle is now approaching one of its climaxes over

the selection of the Prime Minister and his cabinet. Whatever the out-

come, it is expected to signal a further weakening of Bani-Sadr and

the moderates, and at least the temporary ascendancy of the clerics.

Covert and Overt Operations

The latter may well be even more intransigent on the hostage issue

than the moderates; there is however at least a chance that their victory

in this key phase of the ongoing struggle and their assumption of

responsibility for the functioning of the government will lead them to

want a final resolution of the hostage issue.

We believe there is an opportunity for new efforts to resolve the

crisis. We have concluded that—after reviewing the six options identi-

fied in the attached study8 —we should put together a new diplomatic

effort, combined with family and Congressional initiatives. There is

no assurance of success by this route, but given the fact that Khomeini

has said the parliament would decide, it seems wise to act for the

moment on the assumption that we have something new to work with

and that we should pick the Iranians up on Khomeini’s prescribed

approach. We will be refining approaches for the specific further steps

that we may want to consider in the next few weeks.

Elements of a Proposed Strategy

The main objective of the proposed strategy would be to try to

encourage the new government to take control of the hostage issue as

it is put before the Iranian parliament so as to assure to the extent

possible that the parliament’s decisions on the issue do not preclude

a reasonable settlement.

In pursuing this objective, we would work on two parallel tracks:

—encouragement of private and Congressional initiatives to test

the potential for a people-to-people approach such as you discussed

with hostage wives10 and

—a series of approaches through diplomatic and private channels

to key Iranians to establish a negotiating channel with the most power-

ful elements in the new government.

At the same time, we would try to generate renewed support from

enough other quarters outside Iran to keep the Iranians alert to their

stakes in resolving the crisis. During this period, we would continue—

and would press our allies to continue—the economic and psychologi-

cal pressures on Iran.

Hostage Families. As you instructed, I am discussing with the leaders

of the hostage family organization ways in which they might propose

and Bellmon11 have been considering the idea, and they might be an

appropriate nucleus for a small group. We would have to tell them

that we would publicly distance ourselves from their effort to increase

the likelihood of its acceptability in Tehran and its independence of

the Executive. Their first objective might be to arrange a meeting with

counterparts simply to explore how issues between Iran and the United

States might be worked out. They might go prepared to agree—in

the context of an understanding on a scenario for the release of the

hostages—that hearings would be held in the U.S. examining Iran’s

grievances and past U.S. involvement in Iran. From our perspective,

it would be more desirable for them to trade the commitment to hear-

ings for release of the hostages than to agree that the report on the

hearings would be issued concurrent with the release.

The advantage of both the Congressional and the hostage family

initiatives is that both provide independent mechanisms for dealing

with the hostage situation which would be available should Khomeini

decide the time is right for release. They could be complemented by

exchanges between our two governments to the extent that would be

necessary to lend credibility to these non-Executive initiatives and to

provide a channel for working out arrangements for such steps as

unfreezing blocked assets.

A Proposed Scenario

We have divided our proposed scenario, somewhat arbitrarily, into

three steps. The further approaches under Step #1—some of which

have already begun at your direction—would be taken at an early date,

once it becomes more probable that the formation of a new government

is underway. This is a stage of probing and exploration designed to

Covert and Overt Operations

give us a wide and immediate picture of what is possible in Tehran.

We will assess the results of those probes as they come in to determine

how to shape follow-on approaches. Those approaches under Steps 2

and 3—outlined below as illustrative of the kinds of moves we could

make—would likely follow the actual formation of the government

and our assessment, as the information from the first probes becomes

available, of the best way to approach key individual leaders in the

government and the new parliament.

Step #1. As a first step, we would continue immediately to encour-

age a new series of approaches to key Iranian officials, i.e., the new

Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister, Beheshti and other leaders of

the religious party, and Bani-Sadr. Specifically, we would instruct the

following approaches:

—The telegram that you have already directed13 instructs ap-

proaches to EC–9 members to ask them, now that the formation of a

new government may be near, to reconsider a statement of their own

along the lines of their Middle East statement14 and sending an emissary

or a message to Tehran. We laid the groundwork for this approach in

June by asking the EC to study such an approach. They replied that

they were prepared to consider such an approach but did not feel the

time was ripe in early July. We agreed. The advantage of our June

approach is that they have now done their homework and should be

prepared to move quickly at the right moment.

—Also via the telegram you directed, we would approach key

governments represented in Tehran, important members of the Islamic Confer-

ence, and other Europeans and ask them either to make direct approaches

in Tehran or to make public statements appealing to the authorities in

Tehran. The substance of these approaches would be an appeal to

the Iranian government to take advantage of the convergence of the

formation of the new government, the end of Ramadan, the death of

the Shah, humanitarian concerns generated by Richard Queen’s illness

and release to bring an end to the hostage crisis.

—Ask Kreisky and his Socialist International group to consider an

approach of their own either by going back to Tehran to visit the new

leadership or by sending a message to the new leadership.

—Urge both Waldheim and the President of the UNGA (if we can

manage this without offending Waldheim) to establish either direct

or indirect contact with both the new Foreign Minister and Beheshti

(Waldheim) and the leadership of the parliament (UNGA President).

The substance of the approach would be much the same as that

described above. The appeal might not have all that much effect, but

it might have some freshness for officials who have not been previously

European policy toward the Arab-Israeli dispute. The full text is in the New York Times,

involved with the UN. Waldheim might explore whether the return to

Iran of a member of the UN Commission or some other unpublicized

emissary from him might be useful.

—We might again approach Agha Shahi and Habib Chatti as leaders

in the Islamic Conference and members of the Standing Committee on

Afghanistan, urging them to make a special approach urging the Irani-

ans to put the hostage crisis behind them in order to be able to concen-

trate on the Soviet threat from Afghanistan.

—Ask the Algerian Government to instruct its Ambassador in Tehran

to make his own probes, particularly among the religious leadership,

to provide us with analysis of what the demands and objectives of that

leadership are with regard to resolving the hostage crisis. In asking

the Algerians to make this approach, we would probably have to

provide them with a short statement of our own position so that they

could have that to draw on in their conversations. Such a statement

would be drawn from the position paper which you approved in

November and reconfirmed in January. The Algerians might even

raise the question of whether the Conference earlier discussed by them

with the Swiss chaired by the two of them or other neutrals might be

useful in bringing Iranians and Americans together to resolve bilateral

issues which will have to be dealt with when the hostage issue is

resolved.

—We would crank up private individuals such as Richard Cottam

here in the U.S. or Bourguet and Villalon in Paris to make whatever

contacts they could. We would particularly ask Cottam to try to open

a channel to Beheshti.

—We would inform the Swiss of what we are doing but reserve

them for the next step.

Step #2. Following relatively soon after we have some feedback

from the above approaches, we would launch approaches of our own

by sending direct messages to key figures in Iran. These messages

would as much as possible take advantage of the efforts of intermedi-

aries during Step #1 to determine how a resolution of the crisis might

be shaped. These messages might include:

—A letter from me to the new Foreign Minister through the Swiss

stating readiness for discreet exchanges or discussions through an

agreed channel in order to manage an acceptable conclusion to the

crisis. This could include our positions on key issues.

—The hostage families have just sent via a visiting minister a letter

to Ahmad Khomeini. They could send a follow-on message either to

Ahmad Khomeini or to Beheshti or perhaps copies to both introducing

the idea of contact between the hostage families and an appropriate

Iranian group, and possibly a visit by a family delegation to Iran. This

would follow through on your conversation with Mrs. Keough and

Mrs. Kennedy, which I am further exploring with them.

Covert and Overt Operations

—We might work out a direct message to Beheshti from a private

or Congressional group to be delivered by the Algerian Ambassador

or through their own contacts. One purpose of approaching Beheshti

through the Algerian Ambassador would be to try to determine the

basis for Beheshti’s participation in an agreed final solution.

—A letter from Members of our Congress has been delivered to

the new President of the Iranian parliament by the Swiss Chargé and

he has reacted substantively. There might be a role for a more pointed

Congressional message to him or to other members of the Iranian

parliament. Once we have gauged Iranian receptivity, we might con-

sider proposing to the Congressional leadership a bipartisan Congres-

sional delegation to visit Tehran to seek the release of the hostages from

the parliament. The delegation, as noted above, would presumably be

in a position to assure an appropriate Congressional investigation of

U.S.-Iranian relations once the hostages are released.

—It is also possible in addition to the private approaches described

above to make a substantive public statement at an appropriate

moment. A written message to an individual may not be sufficiently

dramatic or may not be politically useful in the Tehran context to catch

the attention of the Iranians or to develop a situation in which those

who want to resolve the crisis can proceed. We have hesitated to make

public statements which would fall on deaf ears in Tehran, but if we

thought the time was right we might say something about our policies

toward Iran after the release of the hostages. Now that the Shah is

dead, a statement incorporating our position that we will not stand in

the way of Iranians who wish to seek assets in this country might have

a political impact.

Step #3. As these various approaches progress, our purpose would

be to narrow the field and to identify a target in Tehran for a negotiating

effort and to identify the best channel for communicating with that

individual or group. Depending on responses to our more general

approaches, our purpose at this stage would be to introduce a specific

package on which the Iranians could focus and which could become

the basis of a negotiation. We would try to design the approach and

the package in such a way as to include a suggestion for the Iranians

on how the hostage issue might be presented to the parliament. Our

staff work will continue in a very small group to develop short papers

on each of the main elements of a possible package so we will be ready

to move promptly.

In proceeding through these steps, we would start with the position

paper which you approved early in the crisis and which we have used

repeatedly throughout (attached). We will weave that into messages

we send ourselves as well as trying certain language which might

encourage the Iranians to open a dialogue.

Hostage Trials

In addition to the above, we will have to prepare ourselves to deal

with what may be the increasing likelihood that there will be trials of

some kind.

We are on record as telling the Iranians in November privately and

in December through the press that we will interrupt their commerce

if any of the hostages are tried. We have also gained the ruling of

the International Court of Justice that the hostages may not be subjected

to trial. There is the grave danger that we have worried about continu-

ously that even a trial which started out as a show trial could turn into

one which would jeopardize the safety or even the lives of some of

the hostages.

Against that background, we will continue to do everything we

can to discourage trials of any kind, but it is possible that we will at

some point have to consider the possibility of accepting a scenario in

which some sort of trial/pardon element is introduced. Clearly there

would be risks in any such situation, but we will be developing a

separate paper in order to help think through ways in which we might

manage such a situation so as to build in the maximum number of

safeguards.

The Hostages

We have used every opportunity to keep open the possibility of a

medical or humanitarian visit to the hostages, but these approaches

have been flatly rebuffed since the rescue mission. At the moment of

a new diplomatic initiative, it seems to me that we should concentrate

our energies and those of the Iranians on release of the hostages rather

than settling for a visit to them.

Meanwhile, extensive efforts by the Agency and our Iran Working

Group continue in an effort to locate the hostages. As you know,

Richard Queen’s account tended to confirm both that some of the

hostages remain in the Embassy and that a number of them had been

moved away from the compound, either elsewhere in Tehran or out-

Covert and Overt Operations

side. While we have indications of where some of them might be, we

still cannot be sure where they are at any given moment since we

suspect they may be moved around periodically.

Public Affairs Strategy

It will be crucial for the Administration to enlist the support of the

American people for its strategy.

I believe that it will be possible to mount an effective defense of

this strategy in the weeks to come, but we need an agreed and consistent

position that will be used by all members of your administration who

speak about it publicly. It will be important to stress that our overriding

objective in dealing with Iran remains the release of the hostages while

protecting this nation’s honor. There is a new situation in Iran (forma-

tion of a new government, death of the Shah, release of Queen, establish-

ment of the parliament, end of Ramadan) which should be analyzed

and explained by Administration spokesmen. It should then be possible

for us to outline in general terms our strategy for pursuing the matter

without holding out false hopes for an early resolution—and without

identifying ourselves with family and Congressional initiatives which

depend for their success on remaining independent of us. The problem

in dealing with the Iranian authorities and terrorists should also be

frankly stated.

The rescue attempt has, I believe, made it less likely that you will

be criticized for not taking further military action to try to free the

hostages. If you are criticized for failing to take strong enough measures

to obtain the hostages’ release, I believe that we are in a strong position

to challenge the detractors of our policy to come up with alternatives

that will produce safe and early release of the hostages. We can empha-

size that our purpose is the return of the hostages with honor. We will

not act in irresponsible ways. Any attempt to use this issue for partisan

advantage would be irresponsible.

I believe that you will continue to enjoy the private and public

support of the hostage families if you adopt the strategy that I outlined.

Recommendation:

That you approve the strategy outlined above as the framework

within which we will work in the weeks ahead with the understanding

that we will continue to refine each of the steps on a contingency basis

and as we begin to hear responses to our approaches.

333.

Paper Prepared by the Head of the Iran Working Group,

Department of State (Saunders)

335.

Memorandum From the Commander of the Joint Task Force

(Vaught) to the Director of the Joint Staff Hanson and

Service Operations Deputies

Washington, August 5, 1980

SUBJECT

SNOWBIRD Training and Preparation Program (TS)

1. (TS) General: Operation SNOWBIRD, the planning and prepara-

tion of a joint task force to accomplish the rescue of the American

Review. Top Secret. The 15 enclosures are attached but not printed.

Covert and Overt Operations

hostages in Iran was tasked to the undersigned by competent civil

authority on 26 April, 1980. In order to provide the best chance of

securing operational security, a cover operation involving DRE was

preparation for SNOWBIRD was placed under the cover operations,

HONEY BADGER and ICE BOX. Since definitive intelligence has not

been available, it was necessary for the Joint Task Force to design a

number of possible options and train a wide spectrum of forces. To

date, these forces include 2,477 personnel and 136 various aircraft. Most

of these forces were incorporated into a July 80 training program that

was briefed to the Service OPSDEPS on 2 July. This document recapitu-

lates the major training events, lessons learned, costs and future needs

to provide a reasonable assurance of future SNOWBIRD success. The

HONEY BADGER exercises incorporated many of the training and

validation tasks that had to be accomplished to prepare the Joint Task

Force to execute SNOWBIRD Options One through Eight. ICE BOX

activity was to evaluate the feasibility of Option Nine. Before and

during the July training, a number of increased aviation and communi-

cations capabilities were attained, a number of techniques were devel-

oped and a number of force deficiencies identified. These deficiencies

are incorporated into the overall future training program. An addi-

tional, separate activity was the coordination and planning for Option

VII and VIII, the use of commercial or USN ships as launch platforms.

Finally, this document includes conclusions and recommendations con-

cerning future actions for SNOWBIRD and Special Operations in

general.

[Omitted here is a description of Honey Badger and Ice Box, with

projected costs.]

9. (TS) Conclusions: (See Inclosure 14). Due to the lack of definitive

intelligence, approval for the use of launch bases, the absence of an

existing means to infiltrate the release force and the lack of total force

proficiency, it is not possible to execute the SNOWBIRD mission at

this time. Progress will be paced by intelligence production, but is also

dependent on procurement and training. It is believed that launch

bases can be obtained, given approval to seek the necessary authority.

Force proficiency must be maintained and improved or a substantial

delay in mission execution will occur should it be ordered. Currently

it is believed that the mission could be executed within three weeks

given the requisite intelligence. Although compromise of the mission

through continued training and procurement activity is possible, there

is no known disabling compromise to date.

The JTF staff of 32 personnel is inadequate to handle a number of

administrative tasks such as budgeting, since operational functions

must have the priority. Should additional administrative requirements

be levied, an augmentation of both personnel and working space would

be required. The current relationship with the CIA is unsatisfactory but

a practical solution has been reached to support the mission. Currently,

SNOWBIRD IX, the LOH option, is considered to be the most probable

and is thus being used as a model for force structure and equipment

decisions. Option X, designed for multiple, dispersed targets may be

more appropriate and is currently under consideration as a model.

[Omitted here is material on JTF achievements and CTJTF.]

In the final analysis, it must be concluded that the United States

is ill-prepared to conduct any sort of Special Operation. The Army has

subjected its Special Operations forces to a 70% reduction from their

pre-Vietnam level. A further cut of 10% is forecasted for FY 81. The

Air Force has cut its Special Operations forces by 75% during the same

period. CIA apparently stands without either the Special Operations

personnel or funds to support sizeable clandestine, military endeavors.

Currently, almost any unprogrammed CIA action activity has to be

approved by seven committees of Congress. Special Operations has

been an unhealed casualty of the Vietnam war. The events of the last

year have clearly indicated that immediate remedial action is essential.

The JTF has accomplished much but the continued lack of an adequate

national Special Operations capability may well plague the United

States in the future.

10. (TS) Recommendations: (See Inclosure 15). It is recommended that

the JTF be provided with $34. million to fund SNOWBIRD activities

through 30 Sep 80. It is also requested that JCS press the intelligence

community to use all available resources to fulfill outstanding SNOW-

BIRD requirements. In order to secure authority and essential informa-

tion concerning a launch base, it is recommended that the JCS approve

a JTF approach to the [2 lines not declassified]. It is further recommended

that the JTF be dissolved between 1 and 15 November and the SNOW-

BIRD mission passed to the CTJTF. In order to capture experience and

properly brief the new commander and staff, it is recommended that

Covert and Overt Operations

the CTJTF commander and staff be phased in beginning on 15 August,

participate in the JTF training during September and assume the

SNOWBIRD mission on 1 November 80.

In order to further define the JTF relationship with other organiza-

tions, it is requested that the OPSDEPS consider providing guidance

as to a continuation or revision of JTF coordination with both the

Department of State and the J–5 of the OJCS. Heretofore, the [2 lines not

declassified]. Additionally, the JTF has been restricted in its coordination

with J–5.

Finally, it is recommended that the OPSDEPS consider actions to

improve the national capability to conduct Special Operations. The DJS

could be requested to task OJCS to identify specific deficiencies in the

CIA’s ability to support the armed forces in clandestine operations

and make specific remedial recommendations. This action could be

forwarded to the NSC by the JCS on or before 1 November 1980. The

OJCS might also be tasked to identify the necessary actions to expand

and improve our military Special Operations capabilities by 1 October

1980. This action could be presented to the Secretary of Defense by the

JCS by 30 October 1980.

James B. Vaught

Major General, USA

336.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 6, 1980

MEETING WITH SARESHTAHDARZADEH MOHSTOFI

(SHAHPAR)

FROM: WILLIAM G. MILLER

337.

Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth and Marshall Brement of

the National Security Council Staff to the President’s

Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the

President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Aaron)

Washington, August 8, 1980

SUBJECT

Exploiting the Soviet Threat to Iran

We believe it would be useful to launch a concerted political-

diplomatic campaign aimed at heightening attention to the Soviet threat

to Iran. Such an effort was made in the Spring with NATO allies. This

time a broader effort, perhaps at some point including pointed warning

to the Soviets, should be considered. The attached paper2 outlines the

rationale and structure of the kind of effort we have in mind. Although

this notion was triggered by the recent Soviet exercises, we would

have to be careful to protect the sources involved when developing

our threat story. (S)

338.

Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for

Near East and South Asia (Ames) to Director of Central

Intelligence Turner and the Deputy Director of Central

Intelligence (Carlucci)

NFAC 5634–80

Washington, August 12, 1980

SUBJECT

Iran—Hostages, Options, Etc.

1. Action Requested: None; the following is for your information.

[portion marking not declassified]

2. Background: As I begin my third year as NIO/NESA (or end my

second) I have forwarded to you a series of papers that looked at areas

of concern, principally the Arabian Peninsula and the Arab-Israeli issue.

339.

Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State

for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to

Acting Secretary of State Christopher

Washington, August 13, 1980

340.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, August 13, 1980

SUBJECT

Soviet Military Threat to Iran

Yesterday senior intelligence and policy officials reviewed the accu-

mulating data on Soviet military preparations for operations into Iran.

341.

Message From the Joint Chiefs of Staff Intelligence

Directorate (J–2) Snowbird to the Deputy Director for

Operations, Near Eastern Affairs, Iran Task Force, Central

Intelligence Agency

SUBJ

60–90 Day Situation Projection

REF

A. JCS/Snowbird/J2 Cite 0274

B. JCS/Snowbird/J2 NBR 0652

1. (TS) Messages cited above provided JTF assessment of hostage

Recent political events in Iran and CONUS plus renewed reports of

the possibility of hostage trials warrant a reexamination of the situation

and the dissemination of a 60–90 day events projection. This message

provides such an assessment.

2. (S) A major goal of Khomeini is to establish a pure Islamic

government devoid of Western influence and at the same time humili-

ate the United States, obtain U.S. acknowledgement of its “sins” during

Assessment. Top Secret.

the regime of the Shah, and punish the U.S. President who protected

the Shah (an avowed target of Khomeini’s hate). The protraction of

the hostage situation achieves some of these objectives specifically;

humiliation of USG, and punishment of the President by theoretically

reducing his potential for reelection.

3. (C) Based upon ongoing events in Iran, such as the continuing

purge of military and political leaders with Western backgrounds,

increasing control by IRP, and selection of IRP Islamic hardliner as

Prime Minister it is clear that secular (moderate) influence is declining

as the power of the hardliner and clerics rises. These influences are not

likely to assist in obtaining a political solution to the hostage situation.

4. (TS) Based upon the foregoing the following projection of events

is provided for planning purposes.

(A) No hostages will be released prior to U.S. Presidential elections

unless USG meets Iranian demands or another hostage medical prob-

lem occurs.

(B) Reporting on possible trials will increase, but actual trials of

individuals is unlikely although a “grand jury style” of indictment

proceedings is possible.

(C) Tempo of activity will pickup with the approach of U.S. elec-

tions, reaching a peak in mid-late October.

(D) If President Carter loses the election, Khomeini thru the Majlis

may direct the incremental release of most of the hostages, retaining

some number (5–10) as spies and war criminals, hoping to obtain

concessions from the new President in January. However, if President

Carter were to be reelected it is extremely doubtful that any of the

hostages would be released without significant concessions by the USG.

5. (TS) In summary, the current JTF analysis is that no breakthrough

is likely prior to the U.S. Presidential elections and knowledge of actual

locations will continue to be extremely restricted while extensive decep-

tion actions will continue to be employed.

estimated a 50 percent likelihood of individual hostage trials and incremental release

of hostages before the election. Trials would make the location of some hostages available.

He added: “A concerted [less than 1 line not declassified] collection program in Iran remains

the ‘sine qua non’ for a successful rescue operation.” (Department of Defense, Joint

Covert and Overt Operations

342.

Memorandum From Acting Director of Central Intelligence

Carlucci to the President’s Assistant for National Security

Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, August 14, 1980

SUBJECT

Possible Policy Options—Iran

Our response to the second part of your July 17 memorandum on

this subject was conveyed in a paper handcarried to you by the DCI

on U.S. non-lethal options. This paper was dated 30 July. I am attaching

a paper responding to the first part of your memorandum requesting

an evaluation of possible stronger covert action against Khomeini.

Frank C. Carlucci

Acting Director

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

343.

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated

SUBJECTS

1. Views of Iranian Exile General Oveissi that Control in Iran Could be Claimed

by the Radical Left Within the Next Six Months

2. Funding and Support Provided to General Oveissi

1. In early August 1980, Iranian exile oppositionist General Gholam

Ali Oveissi remarked that the pace of Iran’s unraveling has accelerated

to the point where the country in all likelihood will be claimed by the

radical Left unless action is taken within the next six months to stop

it. In Oveissi’s opinion, six principal factors are responsible for the

current crisis:

a. There is an apparent concerted effort by Ayatollah Khalkali, a

revolutionary cleric who is a member of the Islamic Republican Party,

and by what Oveissi called Palestine Liberation Organization-inspired

elements to destroy and demoralize what is left of the officer corps

through a systematic program of trials and executions. These are carried

out arbitrarily, frequently without formal charges. Selected officers are

arrested almost daily while at work or at night at home, and the

next day they are executed. Random killings occur of other Iranians

imprisoned for one reason or another, or for none, under the aegis of

Khalkali. These killings also serve as part of a program to terrorize

potential opposition to the current regime into submission or into exile.

As a result, according to Oveissi, a mood of fear and despair is sweeping

the country; more and more people are coming to accept a radical

Leftist takeover, or even a Soviet takeover, so long as the present regime

is removed.

b. Inflation and increasing unemployment both fuel political

discontent.

c. The U.S. Government is perceived by Middle East leaders as

being indecisive. There is almost a universal view among these leaders

that the U.S. Government is weak and undependable, and few have

confidence that the U.S. is willing and able to take steps necessary to

shore up Western interests in the region. Many of these leaders are

equivocating with traditional allegiances and feel obliged to come to

terms with the “new Left.” Oveissi said his conclusions are derived

from recent conversations with leaders and senior intelligence officers

Covert and Overt Operations

in the region, i.e., Saddam Husayn in Iraq, Suleyman Demirel in Turkey,

Anwar al-Sadat and Director, Egyptian General Intelligence, General

Muhammad al-Mahi in Egypt, and unspecified individuals in the Gulf.

d. An “Arab revolution” is underway that may sweep away many

of the highly personalized, idiosyncratic, and largely unrepresentative

elites in such countries as the shaykdoms in the Gulf, Saudi Arabia,

Jordan, Morocco, Syria, and Egypt. The Soviets and their surrogates

are behind this revolution and are motivated by the need for new

energy sources and foreign exchange and by the opportunity to fill the

vacuum created by the U.S. Government’s weakness.

e. The Soviets are moving large numbers of their supporters into

Baluchistan, Azerbaijan, Kurdistan, and other regions around the Cas-

pian Sea. These supporters are drawn from ethnic groups and new

recruits. In many villages, the Soviet flag is flaunted openly with little

recourse to government forces.

f. The Palestine Liberation Organization is playing an increasingly

important role in training the Pasdaran, in working closely with the

Fedayeen-al-Khalq, and in providing praetorian guards for Iranian

leaders such as Ayatollahs Khomeini and Beheshti.

2. Oveissi also observed that economic sanctions are being circum-

vented through sales by European and other producers of merchandise

brokered via third-national invoicing, primarily in the Gulf.

3. Regarding Oveissi’s own political endeavors, he cited the

following support:

a. From the Iraqis, he has received 21 million U.S. dollars and a

promise of more to come if he can show progress. He is also receiving

from the Iraqis sizeable quantities of RPG’s, light and heavy machine

guns, rifles, mortars, explosives, ammunition, and some transport.

b. [7 lines not declassified]

c. He [less than 1 line not declassified] counts among his supporters

a number of ayatollahs, including Shariat-Madari, Qomi, Shirazi,

and others.

d. He claims to have assets among the military, including the entire

“Rezaiyeh Division” (presumably the 64th Infantry Division headquar-

tered at Urumiyeh—formerly called Rezaiyeh—West Azerbaijan). He

also has the support of most of the Air Force pilots but not the Homafars

(Air Force technicians).

e. He says that the [2 lines not declassified].

344.

Message From Secretary of State Muskie to

Prime Minister Rajai

Washington, August 20, 1980

Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I write to you as one who in my position as Secretary of State has

only newly been confronted with the problems which currently beset

relations between our two countries. I know that these problems will

be but one aspect of the heavy new responsibilities you will be assuming

as Iran’s first Prime Minister under the Constitution of the Islamic

Republic. It is my earnest hope that we, together with the Foreign

Minister you will appoint, will be able to work towards constructive

solutions to the difficulties between our nations.

With the death of the former Shah, a chapter of Iran’s history is

now definitely closed. With the establishment of your Government, a

new chapter is opened. I believe this is the moment to take a fresh

look at the problems between Iran and the United States.

The United States recognizes the reality of the Iranian Revolution

and the legitimacy of the Islamic Republic. In a series of successive

steps, the Iranian people have had the opportunity to participate in

the process of creating new institutions. I assure you that the United

States has had no wish to interfere in that process. We believe that no

outside power should interfere with the right of the Iranian people to

make their own political decisions.

Fifty-two of my fellow Americans remain held in Iran after nine

months of captivity. I have met with their families. I cannot express

to you adequately the deep and desperate suffering these innocent

people have experienced. Americans of all political persuasions and

strata of society are united in concern for their early release. I hope

that you will agree with me that it is time now to bring an honorable

end to their ordeal and to send the hostages home to their families.

I recognize that Iranians have suffered, too. The continuance of the

impasse can only lead to further bitterness and suffering on both sides.

The cups of anguish are now full. Let us empty them and begin anew.

Covert and Overt Operations

I assure you that we will show the fullest respect for your independence,

your territorial integrity and for the principle of non-interference.

We recognize that the decision on dealing with the hostage crisis

has been entrusted to the Iranian parliament as representatives of the

Iranian people. We also recognize that in Iran, as in the United States,

there are deep feelings as a result of grievances perceived in the past.

There are many difficult issues between the United States and Iran.

For our part, we are willing to proceed fairly and to approach each of

these issues on a basis of mutual respect and equality.

In order to begin the process of understanding each other better,

I think it would be useful to establish a regular channel of communica-

tion. I would personally prefer that this be done directly, very discreetly

if you wish, between representatives of our two Governments. Speak-

ing frankly and directly is the best way of removing hostility and

suspicion. If you would prefer, however, we would be pleased to deal

through third parties who could transmit messages between us on a

regular basis. The Swiss or the Algerian Embassies could play this role

as they are already the protecting powers. Other persons, either official

or private intermediaries, could perform the same function.

I would hope that you would be prepared to give us your thoughts

on points which might be usefully discussed in such an exchange.

I look forward to hearing from you in the interest of our two

peoples.

Sincerely,

Edmund S. Muskie

345.

Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the

Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Jones)

Washington, August 21, 1980

Dear Dave,

When Jim Holloway and his group asked for my support, I unhesi-

tantly agreed, assuming the final report2 would be a helpful, objective

assessment. I asked in return only to see the sections of the final report

Frankly, I am appalled at the content and tone of these sections.

Issue #3 clearly implies that the Intelligence Community was slow

off the mark. [2 lines not declassified] The report’s allusion to delays in

responses [less than 1 line not declassified] indicates a lack of understand-

ing of the HUMINT function. The discussion even leaves the impression

that intelligence support may have delayed execution of the rescue

operation in November–December. I saw no sign that a military opera-

tion was anywhere near feasible in November–December; indeed, I

believe our mutual perception was that military and intelligence capa-

bilities developed in parallel—neither could be brought to 100% effec-

tiveness instantly after the seizure.

Issue #3 recommends that in any future similar effort the Director,

DIA, be placed in charge of an Interagency Intelligence Task Force.

This is an unworkable and inappropriate suggestion. The Director,

DIA, clearly does not have the authority, statutory or otherwise, to

organize and coordinate Community intelligence assets. That is the

responsibility of the DCI under statute and Executive Order.

Issue #18 implies that casual conversation with a CIA officer on

board Nimitz may have negatively influenced a helicopter pilot. If

that were in fact the case, it would indicate highly unprofessional

performance by the pilot. In any event, the report goes on to state that

Covert and Overt Operations

“. . . the (mission) abort . . . cannot be related to any alleged enemy

radar intercept capability. . . . ” Why, then, was this point germane to

the investigation? The facts are that [4½ lines not declassified].

I am dismayed if these two misleading references to intelligence

are the only references in the report to the intelligence role in the rescue

effort. The positive role of intelligence in making the mission possible—

from hostage location to arrangements in Teheran [less than 1 line not

declassified] and more—surely could not have been overlooked. A one-

sided, negative appraisal of the intelligence role—as suggested by the

parts of the report I have seen—would be unwarranted, inaccurate and

unacceptable. I hope my concerns are misplaced, but what I have

seen of the report is not encouraging. Accordingly, I’d appreciate an

opportunity to read the entire report before reacting further.

Yours,

Stansfield Turner

346.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Followup on Security Framework in the Persian Gulf—XV

PARTICIPANTS

State

CIA

Secretary Edmund Muskie

Admiral Stansfield Turner, Director

Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher

Rae Huffstutler, Director, Office of

David Newsom, Under Secretary

Strategic Research

for Political Affairs

OMB

Defense

James McIntyre, Director

Secretary Harold Brown

Edward Sanders, Assistant Director

Under Secretary for Policy,

for National Security &

Robert Komer

International Affairs

JCS

White House

Chairman, General David Jones

Zbigniew Brzezinski

General Paul F. Gorman, Director,

NSC

Plans and Policy

M. General Jasper Welch

B. General William E. Odom

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting with a statement of its purpose,

reviewed intelligence on Soviet exercises and their implications for

State and Defense actions. (TS)

Threat Assessment by the DCI

Turner explained that we have seen an upgrading of the Transcau-

casus Military District throughout the spring. [4½ lines not declassified]

Turner offered a caveat about his information. It is piecemeal, far

from the full view of the July exercises2 (see the map at Tab A). [4½

lines not declassified]

[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

[less than 1 line not declassified] After suggesting a number of reasons,

the possible collapse of Iran, our Persian Gulf activities, and the rescue

Covert and Overt Operations

mission, Turner said that it is more likely a general upgrading of

contingency planning for the region to bring it to the level that we

have observed for Europe and the Far East. [3 lines not declassified]

There are, however, constraints on Soviet action: the weakness of the

Turkestan Military District, adverse effects on détente, and problems

in Poland. (TS)

Turner estimated that an attack is not likely now, but if the U.S.

enters Iran, or if there is an internal collapse, these external events

might provoke the Soviets to move. [1 line not declassified] this will be

an indication of much greater readiness and of offensive rather than

defensive thinking on the Soviet part. (SNIE on which Turner’s briefing

was based is at Tab C.) (TS)

Discussion of the DCI’s Briefing

Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we are dealing with a Soviet contin-

gency plan which likely depends on the internal collapse in Iran. There-

fore, we need a better assessment of the Iranian political situation. (TS)

General Jones disagreed with the contingency plan notion. The

Joint Chiefs believe there is a 50–50 possibility that the Soviets are

themselves trying to control the timing, not just preparing to react to

outside events. One of the Chiefs is sufficiently disturbed to recommend

immediate deployment to the region in an effort to deter the Soviets.

The Chiefs are more concerned with time than the DCI. (TS)

Dr. Brzezinski summed up that we have reached no overall conclu-

sions about Soviet intentions. (S)

He then stated the next two issues: what to communicate to our

friends, and what to communicate to the Soviets. (S)

Communications to Our Allies in Europe

[2 paragraphs (9 lines) not declassified]

Muskie is seeing Francois-Poncet and Genscher on Monday. He

agreed to have a general analytical discussion about the possible inter-

nal collapse of Iran, but he does not want to be sufficiently explicit on

our concerns to encourage Francois-Poncet’s inference that we [less

than 1 line not declassified]. (TS)

[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

Communications with Countries in the Region

Komer emphasized that only three countries in the region are

significant, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Turkey, for U.S. military reactions

to the Soviets. The Saudis are at present more concerned with the

Yemenis than the Soviets. The Egyptians suspect the worst of the Sovi-

ets. The Turkish Prime Minister could use this information. Newsom

added that we have difficulty with all three, and that we should use

this one card to overcome their resistance. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski tasked Newsom to convene a meeting with Komer

and the NSC staff to develop possible talking points [less than 1 line

not declassified] with these countries for review at the next SCC. (TS)

Communications with the Soviets

Dr. Brzezinski recommended that either the President or Muskie

in a public speech reconfirm the President’s State of the Union Address

strictures on Southwest Asia and the Persian Gulf. He expressed doubt

that bilateral communications would have much effect in light of our

many such previous communications which we have more or less

allowed the Soviets to ignore, e.g. Cam Ranh Bay. (S)

Muskie suggested that the President could do this at the United

Nations General Assembly in September but that at some point we

must be specific with the Soviets. Until we reach the point beyond

which their actions will become unacceptable that should be done

privately. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski responded that a two-step approach flows from

Muskie’s points: a speech at the September United Nations General

Assembly for the public, and a Muskie/Gromyko bilateral meeting

when Gromyko comes to the United Nations. (S)

All agreed that we could tell the President that this is our prelimi-

nary thinking, not a firm recommendation. (S)

Defense Actions

Muskie asked, “What is the bottom line”? Can we defend if the

Soviets actually invade? Harold Brown admitted that we cannot defend

militarily but we might save the Saudi oil and deter the Soviets from

going further, or perhaps deter their invasion in the first place. Our

one and one-third divisions moved to Iran in 30 days would confront

16–20 Soviet divisions. (TS)

Covert and Overt Operations

Muskie was concerned that a defense of only part of the region

would hurt our political credibility everywhere. Dr. Brzezinski agreed

that this point is critical. Our credibility in the region and in Europe

hangs on our willingness and ability to fight the Soviets on the ground

in Iran and elsewhere, if horizontal escalation is necessary. (S)

General Jones explained that there are two schools on how to

defend Iran. One argues that we should put ourselves on a defense

line in the Zagros Mountains and hold the Khuzestan oil fields. Another

school, more interested in deterring the Soviet invasion, argues that

we must begin to interdict their entry into Iran, making it impossible

for them to invade without direct combat with U.S. forces. (TS)

Dr. Brzezinski structured the discussion on this point with three

military options: first, credible deterrence; second a confined defense

within Iran; and third, a Persian Gulf strategy, which defends primarily

Saudi Arabian oil. (TS)

Dr. Brzezinski and others favored the first category, but they admit-

ted that we do not have the capabilities. General Jones emphasized

that not only do we not have them, they decline every day because

we are trying to do things on the cheap. In comparison, the Soviets

have done a great deal more in a region where they already have

tremendous advantages. We plan for five years hence. They are upgrad-

ing for operations today. (TS)

Dr. Brzezinski tasked Defense to prepare a point paper around the

three military options for the next SCC. (S)

347.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to Secretary

of Defense Brown and the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, August 27, 1980

SUBJECT

Strategy for Southwest Asia

As tasked at the August 22 SCC meeting, we are providing draft

talking points for possible use with Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Egypt

on the increased Soviet threat to Iran and the need for accelerated

cooperation. As indicated below, we do not believe they should be

used in the form prepared.

Our view is that the new intelligence is not sufficiently persuasive

to be the basis for an extraordinary effort to gain enhanced regional

cooperation. Instead, we think this intelligence, properly scrubbed,

should be integrated in the following way into the comprehensive

diplomatic strategy we are developing:

1. We should, subject to the constraints of protecting sources and

methods, pass our latest intelligence through normal intelligence chan-

nels to the British, French, Germans, Turks, Saudis, and Egyptians.

(Italians?) (Japanese?).

2. General Jones should use this intelligence in his planned consul-

tations with the Saudis, following its use in the scheduled September

intelligence exchange. It should be incorporated in a statement of our

long-term purposes and concerns about the growing Soviet threat,

however, and not emphasized as a near-term emergency requiring

immediate Saudi action. We should not press our specific cooperation

needs upon the Saudis now: to do so would produce a negative

response before our longer-term security dialogue has had any chance

to have an effect on their outlook.

3. With other regional states, we ought to pursue the “baseline

strategy” (separately distributed), which is aimed at creating an endur-

ing sense of common interest and confidence that we have a credible

Covert and Overt Operations

strategy. We should build into the baseline strategy a somewhat sharper

concern about improvements in Soviet capabilities opposite Iran.

4. We should make no special effort with Turkey at this time. Any

implication of trying to draw Turkey into Southwest Asian controversy,

confrontation, or conflict e.g., the notion that we would use Turkey in

an Iranian contingency to threaten the Soviet “flank” with dual-capable

aircraft, would produce not the desired results but a new bilateral

problem and possibly more insistent and unmeetable quid demands.

(We believe the role of Turkey in our military strategy for Southwest

Asia needs further interagency analysis).

5. Once the intelligence has been shared with our key NATO Allies,

I should discuss our growing concerns with my counterparts in the

course of regular contacts, including the September 24 Quadripartite

meeting at the UNGA.

6. Our upcoming talks with the British, Germans, and Portuguese

concerning “enroute access” should include our concerns about the

Soviet threat to Iran.

7. In the interest of reducing the chances of Soviet miscalculation,

I should convey to Gromyko in New York next month a clear mes-

sage that:

—We have no intention of invading Iran or intervening in its inter-

nal affairs.

—By the same token, we would expect the Soviet Union to maintain

its commitment to non-intervention in Iran’s internal affairs.

—We have no offensive intentions in the region; our only purpose

is to protect our vital interests.

I propose that we address this plan at Friday’s SCC meeting.

348.

Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, August 29, 1980

SUBJECT

Alternative Option for Iran

Stan Turner’s memo (attached) is not, in my view, particularly

perceptive or accurate in portraying our existing action policy toward

349.

Message From Joint Task Delta to 1st Special Operations

Ranger Regiment

Nr 002

SUBJECT

Intelligence Assessment.

REF

1. (TS) This message provides a hardcopy follow-up to the intelli-

gence assessment presented at the 29 Aug 80 JTD planning conference

and is a supplement to reference.

A. The American-Iranian hostage situation remains as it did in

November and during the intervening months, it is a political problem

without a political solution. Political solutions are the product of com-

promises. In the current situation, the positions of the opposing parties

the USG and the Iranian entities are non-negotiable.

B. Although a humanitarian solution is possible the political

impasse is likely to continue past 4 November before a major change.

Assessment. Top Secret.

After 4 November Iranian options include a release of some hostages

while requesting concessions from the new US administration (if there

is a new administration), or the continued detention of most of the

hostages and the initiation of a grand jury type trial heading to the

indictment of the USG and several of the hostages.

C. A major unknown in the projection equation is the health of

Ayatollah Khomeini. He is currently a major stabilizing force; if he

were to die of natural causes and his death acknowledged as such no

significant change in the hostage situation is likely to occur as the

hardline clerics now possess a far greater degree of control than they

did prior to the election of the Parliament and naming of the Prime

Minister. However, if Khomeini were to be assassinated or his death

claimed to be the result of an American plot then chaos and confusion

would result and within three–five days the lives of the hostages would

be at serious risk.

2. (TS) In reviewing the threat, five entities warrant discussion.

A. The conventional Iranian military continues to deteriorate due

to internal purges of the professional leadership and difficulties in

maintaining some of the more sophisticated weapons systems. How-

ever the air defense network and associated alert aircraft and point

defense ADA systems together with the gendarmerie reporting struc-

ture provide a persistent potential for detecting and interdicting mis-

sion aircraft.

B. The Revolutionary Guard structure is becoming more structured

and is unquestionably a tool of the clerics. In the rural areas the Guard

has attempted to replace the army but integration has not occurred.

In the larger cities particularly Tehran reports now indicate Guard

members have taken to bullying the population at the slightest opportu-

nity and some have established a neighborhood protection payout

mechanism.

C. The composition of the militants seems to have changed some-

what with the hard core radicals, many with Marxist influenced back-

grounds, continuing to control the fate of the hostages, although there

is no question that they have received assistance from the Revolutionary

Guard and hardline clerics such as Ayatollah Beheshti.

D. The U.S. media and self proclaimed political moralists pose a

significant danger to any prospects of a political solution and a tremen-

dous threat to military planning with false leaks and compromises.

Their real danger lies in their potential for creating a dangerous degree

of instability in both hostage location and security.

E. The fifth threat entity is the intelligence apparatus of the USSR

and its allies. The Soviet intelligence services were embarrassed by the

degree of their ignorance regarding the April attempt. They do not

Covert and Overt Operations

want to be caught unawares again. In addition the Soviet Union is

preparing to take advantage of several possible opportunities regarding

Iran. It is preparing to move military forces into Iran if anarchy and

chaos erupts. Similarly the USSR is preparing to react if U.S. military

forces are introduced into Iran in any size, and while awaiting the

advent of one of these possibilities, the USSR is busily laying the propa-

ganda groundwork to capitalize on the above and justify a unilateral

move on the pretext of countering the alleged presence of counter

revolutionary forces operating in Iran against the Government of Iran

and the Government of Afghanistan.

3. (TS) Hostage Situation:

A. Dispersion outside of the Embassy compound must be accepted

as fact; planning must consider multiple targets. Precise locations

remain unknown due to tight security and deception measures

employed by militants and clerics. During the past month most hostage

relatives have received a letter from their loved ones. The letters indi-

cate long periods of small group isolation, very little outside activity,

no physical abuse, allowed to receive some mail, and at least three

hostages, military and civilian, have implied they plus another 6 to 9

are being held in a prison or prison-like environment.

B. Current estimates put upwards of a half probably in Tehran as

prison/jail or villa in northern Tehran (16–18). The balance, according

to [less than 1 line not declassified] reporting are apparently scattered

listed ten possible locations, this HQ believes the actual number is less

than that, probably no more than 3–5 locations at any given time. The

typical site is probably a 2-story house within a walled compound

located in a quiet residential neighborhood.

4. (TS) Operational Planning. During the review and crosschecking

of possible locations we have located at least one potential fixed-wing

landing zone within 100NM of each of the more likely hostage detention

locations, and at least one active airhead with extraction potential

within 12–15 miles. Of all the locations Tehran offers the greatest num-

ber of possibilities for insertion and extraction.

A. In the city proper both Mehrabad and Doshan Tappeh [Airports]

hold possibilities with D/T being within 5–6 minutes driving time of

the compound and M/B within 20–25 minutes driving time.

B. In the immediate suburbs at least two additional sites have been

identified as C–130 capable and two others have been identified within

C. Farther out Manzariyeh still holds a potential for use. In addition

three fixed-wing capable sites (one C–141) have been identified in the

Semman area.

350.

Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for

Near East and South Asia (Ames) to Director of Central

Intelligence Turner and the Deputy Director of Central

Intelligence (Carlucci)

NFAC–6021–80

Washington, September 3, 1980

SUBJECT

1. Action Required: None; the following is for your information.

[portion marking not declassified]

ski was another in the series of meetings held on the Security Frame-

work of the Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean. This meeting focused on

the DoD paper on possible responses to a Soviet threat to invade Iran.

[portion marking not declassified]

3. Dr. Brzezinski stated he believed the paper was a good one and

would serve as a useful starting point for discussion on how to deter

the Soviet threat. Most of the discussion centered on the methods that

could be used to signal our determination to the Soviets to oppose any

incursion. Secretary Brown stated that since the Soviets could bring

16–20 divisions into Iran while we could only bring two, indicated that

we must go the deterrence route. While we would use those two

divisions, we should insure the Soviets knew of our determination.

[portion marking not declassified]

4. Brzezinski said that he believed we must develop a horizontal

escalation capability4 since we did not have a meaningful vertical esca-

lation capability. We could close the Black and Baltic seas, blockade

Murmansk and Vladivostok, challenge their fleet at sea and levy proxy

penalties by involvement in PDRY, Cuba, Ethiopia, Libya and Angola.

The Soviets must be made to realize that Iran would not be a limited

conflict. Secretary Muskie said this all sounded like World War III—

a view not shared by the Europeans. If we assessed the CPX in such

drastic terms we should share these views with the Europeans. If we

did, this would get out and might provoke the Soviets. [portion marking

not declassified]

5. Brzezinski stated that in the past we had a kind of unwritten

understanding with the Soviets—neither side moved directly into the

“other’s” area. The Soviets might have some ambiguity over Iran

because of our acquiescence to events there and the question is how

do we let them know our position without provocation? Should we

send them a secret message that says, “we have no designs on Iran,

but if you move in we’ll counter you?” A statement such as this does

not impose any limits on our actions. The DCI said that perhaps we

should not consider such a message because if the Soviets are not ready

to enter Iran such a message might indicate we have a plan of our own

and cause them to move. If they do have a plan, such a message,

without any teeth in it, could cause them to discount it. We should give

more thought to this idea of a message. [portion marking not declassified]

6. Muskie reiterated that if we are confident that our CPX assess-

ment indicates probable Soviet action, we have to get Europe on board.

Newsom added that Europe still does not accept that the loss of the

Gulf to the Soviets would put them under Soviet control. They must

be made to see that. Brzezinski did not believe we should go to the

Europeans yet. The message should be to the Soviets and it should be

clear: their involvement in the Gulf will set them on a collision course

with us. We must make sure that the Soviets do not miscalculate our

determination—we must minimize Soviet uncertainty. DoD should

have a look at horizontal options given the fact that the Soviets do not

have any exploitable external weaknesses such as the Persian Gulf is

to the West. [portion marking not declassified]

Covert and Overt Operations

7. We must consider what we want to say to the Soviets and how.

We cannot give the Soviets “expressions of concern.” These are no

longer credible. Aaron suggested that when Muskie meets Gromyko

he should say something along the following lines: “In my short time

in office I have come to realize that among the differences between us,

nothing is more likely to lead to World War III than your miscalculation

of our determination to keep the Persian Gulf for the West.” Muskie

can also hand Gromyko a non-paper on this matter. It was agreed

that the Newsom/Aaron/Carlucci/Komer group would work on some

language for this statement and paper. [portion marking not declassified]

8. For the Friday meeting (5 September) the following items will

be reviewed:

a. Horizontal actions we can take;

b. What we can tell our allies and how we might get this message

to Iran; and

c. Gen. Jones briefings—are there any action add-ons to these

briefings.

CIA was also asked, during the course of the meeting, to prepare

a paper on European and regional reactions to a Soviet invasion. [portion

marking not declassified]

Robert C. Ames

351.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

Sweden

352.

Memorandum for the Record by Director of Central

Intelligence Turner

Washington, September 3, 1980

SUBJECT

Conversation with Secretary of State, 2 September 1980

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran.]

2. We spent a lot of time on Iran (the Secretary mentioned to me

afterwards he thought we were handling our position and presentations

on Iran in the SCC well). Ron Spiers and I both expressed our concern

at the possibility of trials for the hostages. The Secretary made a consid-

erable argument that he thought there were more favorable signs that

would mitigate against that. He said there had been four contacts with

the Iranians in the last few days that indicated a desire to find out

what the United States position on the hostage situation is:

a. There was the initiative, through either the Swedes or the Swiss

(he couldn’t remember which), from Rafsanjani (not certain but he

thought that is who it was) asking if the Swedes/Swiss could obtain

our position and relay it. The Secretary said that the President had

approved a response to this.

b. Beheshti had made an approach to the United States indirectly

just today for the same objective. He could not recall through whom

the approach came.

c. He then referred to his letter to Rajai, the Prime Minister, but

it wasn’t clear whether Rajai had responded to it.

d. Finally, there was the response of the Majlis to the letter from

several members of our House of Representatives.

He feels the situation in Iran is different today because a govern-

mental apparatus is evolving and through it the position of the militants

is weakening. Beheshti has adroitly accumulated power and now he’s

talking in terms of resolving the hostage situation. It remains to be

Covert and Overt Operations

seen whether he will exercise his power to do that. But the situation

is generically different than it has been over the past 10 months.

I responded that I still didn’t think there was a critical mass of

power in Iran; that Khomeini really didn’t want to make a decision on

the hostages for fear of losing his constituencies; that the Majlis would

not make a decision without Khomeini’s approval; and that hostage

trials were an easy delaying and escape tactic for the Majlis. I further

reiterated my feeling that Khomeini wanted to bring down President

Carter and would move toward trials or other ways to embarrass

the President between now and the elections. [portion marking not

declassified]

3. I described the fact that we are working with Ambassador Spain

in Ankara with respect to rescue option possibilities on the border with

Iran. [portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran]

8. We talked about the [2½ lines not declassified]. I did express my

alarm, however, at two things: First, the Soviets apparently were willing

to [less than 1 line not declassified] (though we didn’t know where and

whether this was part of a general scenario against NATO or perhaps

whether it was purely a military worst-case operation); secondly, I was

concerned at the extent of their planning ambitions, particularly [less

than 1 line not declassified]. Muskie was clearly skeptical that the Soviets

would [less than 1 line not declassified]. We had a debate as to whether

this would be more risky from their point of view than going into

Poland. [portion marking not declassified]

[Omitted here is material unrelated to Iran]

Stansfield Turner

353.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, September 2, 1980

SUBJECT

Comments on the Holloway Special Operations Review Group

My comments, based upon reading the complete text of the Report

by the Special Operations Review Group, are meant to answer these

questions for you with candor that the Holloway Group could not

afford.

—What were the major flaws in the planning and execution?

—Where does the fault lie?

—What are the implications for follow-up actions?

The evidence in the Report is very disturbing. Unless it is inaccu-

rate, it compels one to devastating conclusions about the JCS’s adequacy

for planning and conducting such operations. It also has implications

for basic and structural changes in Defense in the longer run.

Major Flaws

Of 23 issues chosen for extensive review, the Holloway Group

singles out 11 as major. I find it difficult to quarrel with any of them,

and some strike me as indicative of serious faults in the operation.

They are each worth a short elaboration to give you a sense of the

evidence in the Report.

1. Operations Security (OPSEC)

The Holloway Group says the requirements of secrecy were

imposed too extensively to permit adequate coordination, first of intelli-

gence, later of training, and finally of command and control during

the execution phase. Their Report is too hard on some aspects of secu-

rity, but OPSEC restraints exacerbated most of the other ten major

Covert and Overt Operations

issues. The Report avoids being personal, but the finger is pointed at

Vaught on OPSEC. In fact, General Jones and others share this burden

as well.

2. Independent Review of Plans

The lack of an independent review group is underscored as a source

of trouble. The Chiefs acted like their own “action officers” in the words

of the Report. Sitting in one Sunday when the Chiefs were briefed, I

wondered myself how they could know what they pretended to know

about feasibilities.

3. Organization, Command and Control, and the Applicability of JCS

[less than 1 line not declassified]

[1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified]

—The Marine Colonel in charge of the helicopters had no staff,

believed he was in charge of helicopters, but was never appointed as

head of helicopters. He was an officer from Jones’ special staff group.

Thus no Marine helicopter unit and commander were ever selected.

Jones’ choice of Colonel Pittman insured an ad hoc approach to helicop-

ter operations (one of the minor issues in the Report).

—General Gast, USAF, was made a consultant on air operations,

but his role in air operations, planning, and training was never clarified

with the Marine Colonel, the Air Force, or the Navy. Again he was the

Chairman’s ad hoc appointment.

—The Air Force component commander, who managed the C–130

training, was given “on the scene commander” responsibility just prior

to the mission with no chance to plan or rehearse.

—No Navy component commander was ever designated. This is

standard Navy practice to avoid being entangled in truly Joint organiza-

tions (the RDJTF today has no Navy component commander).

Here you have the “joint system” at its traditional best: one or two

of the services do not participate fully, usually the Navy, and the

Chairman tries to by-pass the CINCs because he does not command

them by law. The Holloway Report makes it seem that Vaught is at

fault for the confusion in the air operations responsibilities. Gast as a

consultant, however, and his special relation with Jones probably made

it difficult for Vaught to manage Gast. No reason is given for no Navy

component commander and staff. The Report also leaves the impression

of a chaotic “Joint” air operations and training endeavor. The JCS has

Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 1.

always dodged the issue of “Joint” training responsibility. Whose is it

for the RDJTF? That is still undecided!

4. Comprehensive Readiness Evaluation

Training and readiness evaluation was decentralized. No overall

rehearsal of the Desert One took place. The Report sees this as a major

weakness for the phase at Desert One. Again, this is a “Joint” train-

ing problem.

5. Size of the Helicopter Force

Based on statistical data from RH–53 performance history, the

Report argues that ten helicopters were needed. This problem, of

course, is related to the confusion in the organization for air opera-

tions—Navy and Air Force components and staff support. No truly

competent air staff examined the issue for the JTF.

6. Overall Coordination of Joint Training

Vaught, based in the Pentagon, let two officers, who were not fully

in the JTF, run the joint training at the Western Training site. The

Report considers this a mistake. Gast, as Deputy Commander JTF,

should have moved to the training site and taken this responsibility.

The Report fails to tie this issue to inherent weaknesses of the “Joint”

system of training under JCS procedures.

7. Command and Control Desert One

The late designation of the Air Force component commander as

in command at Desert One, his lack of a command post location, a

deputy, and other command techniques, including communications on

the ground, are cited as major flaws. In my view, the Report understates

this problem, and it is related to the lack of full Desert One rehearsal.

It is also part of the Air Force and Naval component problem.

8. Centralized and Integrated Intelligence Support External to the JTF

The ad hoc and piecemeal effort by CIA in the early phase, the

late tie to NSA, the failure to use DIA fully, and State’s reluctance to

supply data from hostage mail are some of the points made by the

Report. I saw this problem in detail in November. The Report is correct

and perhaps too mild in its criticism. The episode is a preview of what

you will see if we ever have to transit from peace to war as the results

of PRM–11 prescribe.

Covert and Overt Operations

9. Alternatives to Desert One

As the Report indicates, the road traffic at Desert One made com-

promise during the following day highly probable. An alternative,

without this road problem, would have been preferable, but the intelli-

gence does not readily reveal an alternative. The road problem was

evident from the OTTER reconnaissance flight, but the JTF assessed

the risk as acceptable—wrongly.

10. Handling the Dust Phenomenon

The Report is comprehensive in exploring ways to anticipate and

deal with the dust. Had any of a number of other weaknesses been

absent—communications among the helicopters and with other aircraft,

with the air weather service, inadequate navigation aides, the lack of

a reconnaissance pre-run flight, or a pathfinder—the dust would not

have caused at least one abort. I find the lack of a pre-run for weather

reconnaissance surprising given the conditions.

11. C–130 Pathfinders

weather navigation aids to guide the helicopters. The failure to include

such pathfinders in this operation is surprising, and in my view wholly

inexcusable. It violated basic tactics for moving a force anywhere,

ground or air.

Where Does the Fault Lie?

The Report puts lots of emphasis on flaws in command procedures,

particularly OPSEC being excessive and rigid, in training, and in air

operations planning. The finger is pointed unambiguously at Vaught.

The Report also, however, gives a thoughtful reader enough evidence

to infer a number of other culprits as well.

First, the Navy component of the JTF is no credit to the Navy. I

suspect some strained relations between Vaught and the Navy are

hidden. The Navy’s initial fear of a “witch hunt” is now more under-

standable. There really is a “witch” in this case.

Second, Gast’s role, the confusion in air operations responsibility,

and Gast’s relations with Jones are other places the fault may be shared.

Third, the DCI and the Intelligence Community share some of the

blame. They dragged their feet, and they hid behind interagency bar-

riers in the early phase.

Hanoi was the first joint military operation run by the JCS Chairman.

Fourth, the failure to use the [less than 1 line not declassified] and

its JTF concept should be blamed on the Chiefs and General Jones.

Interservice rivalry and the sacred cow, the Unified Command Plan,

prevented the emergence of an effective JTF in 1977. Precisely these

same obstructions are now blocking our recommendation for a Mid

East Command.

Fifth, although the Report gives the NCA link high marks, when

fault is considered, the Secretary of Defense cannot be blameless. The

weak JTF structure was ultimately Brown’s responsibility.

What Are the Implications for Follow-up?

The President could easily use this report for a number of changes:

a. A Mid East Command is imperative if this Report is accurate.

The RDJTF will fail miserably as the JCS now has REDCOM/RDJTF/

PACOM/EUCOM linked to paralyze planning, training, and deploy-

ment. Nor is there a Navy component commander. Nor is there a

“joint” training evaluation scheme.

b. An outside review group of retired officers, a proposal by the

Holloway group, is not a bad idea. One could be set up.

c. Practice transitions from peacetime to wartime operations for

the Intelligence Community are imperative. PD–586 exercises offer this

potential, but other things should also be practiced, particularly within

the DOD and DIA.

A longer run implication of this Report is found in the necessities it

shows for a major change in our Defense Department organization.

The JCS is too weak vis-à-vis the services. And DIA is too weak vis-

à-vis CIA. The recommended special operations JTF is actually of

doubtful legality because it would operate under the NCA and JCS

directly, not through a CINC as required by the 1947 National Security

Act. More and more we have the need for a national level military

operations staff with directive authority over CINCs and services. The

same requirement is dictated by the new PD–598 staffing capability as

well as the PD–58 COG/C3I capabilities for the President to control

the military forces.

Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 23.

Covert and Overt Operations

A second major implication is found in the Report’s comments on

readiness and training evaluation. The only way we will get greater

“factor productivity” in Defense is to look at the “output” of the Depart-

ment more effectively. Exercises geared to real contingency planning

are the single promising instrument for such output measurement. The

JCS annual and five-year exercise program, already institutionalized,

is the embryo for a future testing system.

Finally, let me add a personal note. From the viewpoint of a military

officer who has seen commanders relieved, and who has sent soldiers

to jail, this Report is justification for forced resignations at a very high

level. Such a sweeping step, of course, may be of dubious wisdom at

present, but it is clear that the authors of the Report must have found

themselves feeling as I do. They have hedged their judgments to avoid

forcing the blame into the open, but the evidence encourages the

unpleasant inferences.

I feel that some of the blame should fall on me insofar as I encour-

aged you to have confidence in the operation. I rendered that judgment

on too little first-hand observation of the rehearsals and staff organiza-

tion. In the final stages, however, I was cut out of the briefings and

NSC meetings so that I had a very imperfect view of the details of

the operation.

If you want a memorandum for the President on the Report, I shall

prepare one, but you may want to reflect on this step for a time while

you digest the full import of the Report.

354.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and South

Asia Division, Directorate of Operations, Central

Intelligence Agency (Cogan) to Director of Central

Intelligence Turner

Washington, September 3, 1980

355.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, September 3, 1980

SUBJECT

Vaught’s JTF

I attended a meeting with General Vaught and his intelligence

staff, CIA, NSA, and DIA this morning. The following points will be

of interest to you.

356.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Followup on Security Framework in the Persian Gulf—XVII

PARTICIPANTS

State

CIA

Secretary Edmund Muskie

Director Stansfield Turner

Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher

Ray Huffstutler, Director, Office of

Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary

Strategic Research

for Near Eastern & South Asian

OMB

Affairs

John White, Deputy Director

Defense

White House

Secretary Harold Brown

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Ambassador Robert Komer, Under

NSC

Secretary for Policy

General William E. Odom

JCS

General Jasper Welch

Chairman General David Jones

Captain Gary Sick

Lt. General John Pustay

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting with a review of the agenda

items: first, the non-paper for Gromyko; second, the intelligence brief-

ing for the Allies; and third, Defense actions which may be taken. (TS)

Non-Paper for Gromyko

A lengthy debate took place between Dr. Brzezinski and Harold

Brown on the one side and Muskie and Christopher on the other about

being explicit in the non-paper for Gromyko that Soviet military action

in Iran would lead to a direct military confrontation with the United

States. (TS/S)

Dr. Brzezinski argued that to promise the Soviets as the draft non-

paper2 does, that we will not intervene in Iran, and at the same time

to be ambiguous about U.S. resort to military actions if the Soviets

invade Iran, would possibly be read by the Soviets as an invitation to

invade. Brown made more or less the same argument. (TS/S)

Muskie and Christopher argued that we should not surrender the

future option to avoid confronting the Soviets militarily over Iran

because in some cases, such as one or two Soviet divisions in Tabriz

only, Congressional and public support might not be adequate for a

U.S. military action. Muskie argued that we risk bluffing because we

do not have the military capabilities to defeat the Soviets in Iran.

Christopher argued that we should not be so specific to the Soviets

when we are not sure what we have in mind for military actions even

among ourselves. (TS/S)

Thus the argument was joined. (C)

Dr. Brzezinski and Brown cited the example of Berlin as a place

where we were not capable of a successful defense but nonetheless

deterred the Soviets by ruling out ambiguity about whether we would

respond. (TS/S)

Brown insisted that we do have some idea of how we would

respond militarily. We could arm the Chinese. (TS/S)

Dr. Brzezinski responded that the Chinese are unlikely to enter

the fight with the Soviets if the U.S. is not willing to fight in Iran. (TS/S)

Muskie returned to what the JCS had said at the previous SCC

about our ability to conduct a defense in Iran. The absence of an

effective military capability disturbs Muskie. When Brown and Dr.

Brzezinski once more cited that we were not in military shape to defend

Europe in the early years after World War II, Muskie insisted that that

was different. We at least had some forces on the ground in Europe.

If it only takes a trip wire, as Komer had insisted about the role of two

or three platoons of U.S. troops in Iran, then why do we have all those

U.S. divisions in Europe? Perhaps we should withdraw some of them.

Dr. Brzezinski tried to change the line of analysis by asking what

would happen if we leave the situation ambiguous for the Soviets and

in fact if the Soviets intervene in Iran. We will be in the soup! Will the

dilemma about whether to respond militarily be any easier in that

event? (TS/S)

CIA and DIA would brief on what the United States could tell its European and regional

allies about the Soviet threat; the Aaron group would develop talking points and draft

the non-paper for Muskie’s September meeting with Gromyko; and Defense would

report on horizontal escalation possibilities. On an attached September 3 note, Brzezinski

wrote to Carter: “These minutes are unusually important. An NSC meeting may be

needed. Zbig.” Carter then wrote in the upper right corner of the SCC Summary of

Conclusions: “Zbig—Set up an NSC meeting next week when all principals can be

present (incl. VP). JC.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office

Covert and Overt Operations

Muskie insisted that he can reduce the ambiguity for Gromyko in

his oral statement, but he does not accept this non-paper because of

its explicit promise of a military reaction. Christopher called it “danger-

ous.” Muskie explained that he would make the following points to

Gromyko orally:

—We are extremely troubled by the military activities of the Soviet

Union on Iran’s borders.

—This region is vital to us.

—Gromyko should understand the dangerous consequences that

could follow from Soviet military activities. (TS/S)

Muskie again insisted that we do not have a real military capability,

and Christopher added that we must preserve the President’s option

to judge what is in the United States interest at the time of such an

intervention if it occurs in the future. (TS/S)

Muskie offered the political judgment that the Congress would ask

whether or not a nuclear war would be worth it for 11 percent of our

Brown asked what would happen if the Soviets invade Iran and

we do nothing. Do we really believe that our losses would be only 11

percent of our oil supply? (TS/S)

Muskie retorted that if it means losing Europe, the American people

might even accept that loss rather than risk nuclear war. (TS/S)

Harold Brown countered, but what about a Soviet attack on Europe,

would we accept the loss or attempt to defend it? (TS/S)

Muskie insisted that NATO is different; we have forces there. If

we cannot defend Europe, he added, we ought to ask what the Defense

Department is all about. (TS/S)

Dr. Brzezinski asked Muskie if he accepts the proposition that the

loss of the Persian Gulf would lead to the loss of Europe. (TS/S)

Muskie agreed that it would. (TS/S)

Dr. Brzezinski then asked what the Soviets will see as their options

in such a case if the U.S. leaves some ambiguity about whether it would

respond militarily. (TS/S)

Muskie insisted that he could remove all the ambiguity in his oral

statements to Gromyko without the explicit text in the non-paper, in

particular by telling Gromyko that there is a “high risk” of a military

confrontation. (TS/S)

Dr. Brzezinski pointed out that we have given these kinds of warn-

ings to the Soviets before but have failed to act when the Soviets ignored

Muskie admitted that he did not know the record. (TS/S)

Dr. Brzezinski said that Gromyko has heard all this talk before

about Afghanistan—several weeks in advance of the invasion—but

that did not deter the invasion. We were equally explicit about the

high risk if the Soviets increased their naval activities in Cam Ranh

Bay. They did not heed that warning, but we have yet to respond. We

have a credibility problem with the Soviets which must be taken into

account in communicating our judgments to the Soviets about the

stakes in Iran. (TS/S)

In the end, agreement was reached to propose to the President the

text of a non-paper (attached at Tab A) which included the following

sentence as an acceptable compromise: “Any military attempt to gain

control of the Persian Gulf, including specifically any Soviet military

action in Iran, could lead to a direct military confrontation with the

United States.” It was agreed to submit the non-paper for Gromyko

to the President for his review (Tab A). (TS/)

Intelligence Briefing for the Allies

Turner and General Jones will work out a final version of the

intelligence briefing text which was tabled at the meeting this morning.

It will be circulated next week for their comment and reaction. Unless

there are strong reservations, the final version will be used by General

Jones for briefing the NATO allies. (TS/S)

[1 paragraph (7½ lines) not declassified]

Thus, the intelligence indicates that the Soviet threat is less imminent

but more ambitious than we originally recognized. (TS/S)

Possible Defense Actions

The JCS recommendations of actions to consider doing now were

reviewed (attached at Tab B). It was agreed that most of them are

already in progress and need no SCC attention. Discussion centered

mainly on whether to brief Congressional leaders now (in addition

to members of the intelligence committees who already have some

awareness [less than 1 line not declassified]), and how to approach the

question of a Defense supplemental budget request, both in size and

the time for its submission. Brown and Muskie expressed concern that

a supplemental budget request could escalate the situation with the

Soviets and create political excitement within the United States. (TS/S)

[heading and 6 paragraphs (15 lines) not declassified] (TS/S)

357.

Letter From the Family Liaison Action Group to President of

the Consultative Assembly of Iran Rafsanjani

Washington, undated

Dear Mr. President:

We, the families of the American hostages, write to you, Mr. Rafsan-

jani, as the leader of the Islamic Consultative Assembly of Iran, the

body of representatives of the Iranian people. We understand that

you have been instructed by Iran’s supreme spiritual leader, Imam

Khomeini, to find a solution to the problem of our beloved relatives,

the fifty-two American hostages.

We are writing to you privately as parents, wives, children, and

brothers and sisters most directly and intimately affected by the

enforced separation we and our loved ones have endured during these

past long months. While we trust and pray that the hostages are being

treated well in the true spirit of Islam, the grief and hardship imposed

by such separation are barely manageable for us all. By saying that,

we are, at the same time, aware that you and the people of Iran, a

people with a profound sense of family ties, understand our anguish.

We hope that this letter conveys a sense of our own sincere desire to

communicate these family feelings common to us all.

We understand the people of Iran have suffered untold indignities

and wrongs in the past. We share your confidence and hope that the

new times in Iran soon will bring about a better life for all your people

and their families.

We are writing to you at this point in time because we realize that

you spearhead, in its vital beginnings, a new Parliament capable of

overcoming and righting the wrongs of the past. We wish you well

and pray that your efforts will achieve the goals you have set forth for

your people.

We are writing to you at this time, too, with the idea that there

might be some way in which the hostages’ families could participate

personally and directly in the solution of the problem which now

divides the Iranian and American people. Might we be the bridge that

brings the hostages home? Our families are prepared to come to any

location you and your colleagues deem suitable. We feel our mutual

concerns can best be discussed face to face, in an atmosphere of

human trust.

Please know that our hearts and minds are open and that we are

willing to meet on any appropriate occasion where an open dialogue

might be useful.

We thank you for receiving our letter and the thoughts contained

in it. We are anxiously awaiting your reply.

Sincerely,

The family of Thomas L. Ahern

The family of Gary Lee

The family of Clair Barnes

The family of Paul Lewis

The family of William Belk

The family of John Limbert

The family of Robert Blucker

The family of James Lopez

The family of Donald J. Cooke

The family of Michael Metrinko

The family of William Daugherty

The family of Jerry Miele

The family of Robert Englemann

The family of Michael Moeller

The family of William Gallegos

The family of Bert Moore

The family of Bruce German

The family of Richard Morefield

The family of Duane Gillette

The family of John McKeel

The family of Alan Golacinski

The family of Paul Needham

The family of John Graves

The family of Robert Ode

The family of Joseph Hall

The family of Gregory Persinger

The family of Kevin Hermening

The family of Jerry Plotkin

The family of Donald Hohman

The family of Michael Ragan

The family of Leland Holland

The family of David Roeder

The family of Michael Howland

The family of Barry Rosen

The family of Charles Jones

The family of William Royer

The family of Malcolm Kalp

The family of Thomas Schaefer

The family of Moorhead Kennedy

The family of Charles Scott

The family of Steven Kirtley

The family of Donald Sharer

The family of Kathryn Koob

The family of R. V. Sickmen

The family of William Keough

The family of Joseph Subic

The family of Frederick Kupke

The family of Elizabeth Swift

The family of Bruce Laingen

The family of Victor Tomseth

The family of Steven Lauterbach

The family of Phillip Ward

Covert and Overt Operations

358.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Brzezinski)

Washington, September 9, 1980

SUBJECT

Clandestine Option in Iran

1. Several weeks ago I delivered a proposal to you for a clandestine

option for helping to resolve the situation in Iran. [3½ lines not

declassified]

2. A recent intelligence report on Iran has made it clear that the

Iranians are seeing the development of an internal opposition to the

Khomeini regime which is separate from the external elements that

are generally tainted by association with the Shah. The following is a

quotation from that report:

“Because of the deteriorating situation in Iran, [less than 1 line not

declassified] rumors of plotting were widespread. [less than 1 line not

declassified] the recent televised trial of alleged coup plotters had further

incited rumors that nationalistic groups were conspiring against Kho-

meini. [less than 1 line not declassified] Iranians who saw the trials had

been particularly impressed by the comportment of the younger defen-

dants. They had not asked for forgiveness, but defended their actions

by stating they were acting on behalf of the country. Their sincerity,

outspokenness and the fact they did not have any apparent ties to the

old regime had convinced people that there were still nationalistic

elements in Iran who were working to bring down the regime. [less

than 1 line not declassified] the government had erred in broadcasting the

trials. [less than 1 line not declassified] the stories regarding the activities

of nationalistic groups were only rumors and [less than 1 line not declassi-

fied] no firm evidence to confirm their existence [portion marking not

declassified]

3. Another recent intelligence report states, “With respect to the

economic situation in Iran, Beheshti conceded that the impact of the

American embargo and freezing of Iranian funds in the United States

has been far more effective than the Government of Iran had antici-

pated. Beheshti stressed the point that the Iranian Parliament must

begin solving economic problems immediately or face the prospect of

civil unrest as food and fuel shortages become acute.” [1 line not declassi-

fied] Bazaari merchants are growing increasingly anti-Khomeini as a

result of the chaotic economic conditions in Iran. [less than 1 line not

declassified] the leaders of a large group of Iranian “homofars” (military

non-commissioned officers who are technical specialists), who were in

the vanguard of the anti-Shah revolution, recently approached former

Prime Minister Bazargan complaining that the revolution was being

“betrayed.” The homofar leaders, who claim control over 5,000 armed

military personnel, asked Bazargan to suggest a means by which they

could “seize control” of the revolution. [portion marking not declassified]

4. The above two paragraphs are examples of a general trend in

the erosion of support for Khomeini among the key segments of Iranian

society that brought him to power. If the elements required to bring

about a change of government in Iran—a credible opposition leader-

ship, an organization inside Iran, and the erosion of support for Kho-

meini among the dynamic elements of society—the latter was always

perceived as the most difficult. This erosion may have begun and it

might be possible to speed up the process [less than 1 line not declassified].

5. In sum, I continue to believe that it would be to the U.S. advantage

to reinforce this impression of patriotic internal opposition to Khomeini,

but that if we don’t start soon we will not have such a capability for

some time to come. [portion marking not declassified]

Stansfield Turner

359.

Editorial Note

On September 10, 1980, the Iranian Majlis gave an overwhelming

vote of confidence to the government of Mohammed Ali Rajai, who had

become the Prime Minister in August, and approved the 14 members

he had nominated to his Cabinet. (Telegram 241776 to all diplomatic

and consular posts, September 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central

Foreign Policy File, D800433–0232) Mohammad Karim Khodapanahi

became Minister of Foreign Affairs. Following the appointment of the

Covert and Overt Operations

Cabinet, the Islamic Revolutionary Council, which had ruled Iran since

January 1979, dissolved. The Council’s legislative powers had been

handed over to the Majlis in May, and its executive powers were now

transferred to the new government as of September 10. (Telegram

243049 to all diplomatic and consular posts, September 12; National

Simultaneously, the Majlis Foreign Affairs Committee recom-

mended to President of the Majlis, Hajatolislam Ali Akbar Hashemi

Rafsanjani, that the Majlis discuss the hostage issue. (Telegram 240485

to all diplomatic and consular posts, September 10; National Archives,

med Khomeini, spiritual adviser to the militants and Deputy Speaker

of the Majlis, stated to the press that Iran “harbors no particular feelings

of ill will toward the hostages” and suggested that the seizure of the

Embassy must be viewed as “merely a minimal reaction” to years of

U.S. oppression. As preconditions for release of the hostages, Khomeini

said the United States should apologize and repent for its past crimes,

eliminate the freeze on Iranian assets, stop the harassment of Iranian

students in the United States, and end the economic sanctions against

Iran. (Telegram 241776 to all diplomatic and consular posts, September

0232) His statement closely mirrored Rajai’s speech in Qom on Septem-

ber 8 which served as his response to Secretary of State Edmund Musk-

ie’s letter. (See Document 344.) Reiterating America’s transgressions,

Rajai stated that “we do not compromise or make deals.” However,

he suggested that “if we are sure that you had repented, we would

talk.” (Telegram 240485 to all diplomatic and consular posts, September

0291)

Watching the American diplomatic approaches to Iran and the

unfolding of the Iranian political situation, Chargé Bruce Laingen

wrote: “We are allowing ourselves a glimmer of guarded optimism.”

(Message from the Swiss, September 9; Carter Library, National Secu-

rity Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 33, Iran Update
