230
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
For decades, the central problems of our foreign policy revolved
around antagonism between two coalitions, one headed by the United
States and the other headed by the Soviet Union.
Our national security was often defined almost exclusively in
terms of military competition with the Soviet Union. This competition
is still critical, because it does involve issues which could lead to war.
But however important this relationship of military balance, it cannot
be our sole preoccupation to the exclusion of other world issues which
also concern us both.
Even if we succeed in relaxing tensions with the U.S.S.R., we could
still awake one day to find that nuclear weapons have been spread to
dozens of other nations who may not be as responsible as are we. Or we
could struggle to limit the conventional arsenals of our two nations, to
reduce the danger of war, only to undo our efforts by continuing
without constraint to export armaments around the world.
As two industrial giants, we face long-term, worldwide energy
crises. Whatever our political differences, both of us are compelled to
begin conserving world energy and developing alternatives to oil and
gas.
Despite deep and continuing differences in world outlook, both
of us should accept the new responsibilities imposed on us by the
changing nature of international relations.
Europe and Japan rose from the rubble of war to become great eco-
nomic powers. Communist parties and governments have become
more widespread and more varied and, I might say, more independent
from one another. Newly independent nations emerged into what has
now become known as the Third World. Their role in world affairs is
becoming increasingly significant.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union have learned that our
countries and our people, in spite of great resources, are not all-
powerful. We’ve learned that this world, no matter how technology has
shrunk distances, is nevertheless too large and too varied to come
under the sway of either one or two super powers. And what is perhaps
more important of all, we have, for our part, learned, all of us, this fact,
these facts in a spirit not of increasing resignation, but of increasing
maturity.
I mention these familiar changes with which you are familiar be-
cause I think that to understand today’s Soviet-American relationship,
we must place it in perspective, both historically and in terms of the
overall global scene.
The whole history of Soviet-American relations teaches us that we
will be misled if we base our long-range policies on the mood of the
moment, whether that mood be euphoric or grim. All of us can re-
