September 18–December 16, 1978
319
2. The Egyptians then gave us their proposed redraft of Annex III
on normalization of relations.3 As we had expected, the Egyptian text
details a more gradual establishment of the various enumerated ele-
ments of a normal relationship. In commenting on their text, El-Baz
said there were two considerations that led the Egyptians to this ap-
proach: first, there had to be “parallelism, between the phased nature of
Israel’s withdrawal and the establishment of relations; and, second, it
was pragmatically impossible for Egypt to “throw the door open” all at
once to the Israelis. He emphasized again the problems this would
cause Egypt with the other Arabs.
3. I told El-Baz frankly that if the text were handed to the Israelis in
its present form it would come as a considerable shock and disappoint-
ment to the Israelis, in particular stretched-out Egyptian phasing for
establishment of full diplomatic relations which envisage an early
announcement, then after some delay opening offices in capitals at
Charge level, with Ambassadors being exchanged after six months. I
said I thought President Carter would also be disappointed in this ap-
proach. We felt that this issue had been resolved at Camp David,
namely, that in the general sense normal relations would be established
immediately following completion of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim
line. Using “gradual” to qualify normalization process would inevi-
tably convey a sense of Egyptian reluctance to take these steps. As for
El-Baz’s concept about the need for parallelism, I said this ignored the
essential imbalance between the tangible and physical nature of Israel’s
withdrawal, which could not be reversed without going to war, and the
intangible nature of implementing Egypt’s commitments to peace and
normal relations. I told El-Baz that I thought it would be helpful if we
could sit down again with them over this text before they presented it
to the Israelis. El-Baz stressed Egypt’s commitment to everything
agreed to at Camp David and to full and permanent peace. He said
Egypt’s interpretation was that “immediately” relates to starting pro-
cess of normalization by phases, not to completion of process.
4. We then had a bilateral meeting with the Israelis, both Dayan
and Weizman present. Dayan reported on a lengthy dinner conversa-
tion he had had with Boutros Ghali the night before. He was clearly de-
pressed by this meeting. Boutros Ghali had discussed with him Egypt’s
desire for rather extensive language in the preamble of the treaty re-
flecting the two sides’ continuing commitment to a comprehensive
peace and to resolution of the Palestinian problem. They talked about a
possible Begin-Sadat exchange of letters to supplement this preamble
language, but Dayan said the Egyptians wanted to choose selectively
and extensively from the Camp David Framework in a manner that
3 No copy of the Egyptian redraft has been found.
