300 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III On January 13, in a memorandum to Blumenthal and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, Charles Schultze, Carter noted that he wanted “to be informed and involved in the preparation of plans to deal with the dollar problem should further difficulties arise” and requested “a joint memorandum which identifies the options open to us in meeting contingencies that might occur during the period ahead,” to be submitted by January 18. In particular, Carter requested information on foreign currency-denominated securities issued by the U.S. Treasury, an idea suggested to him by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Arthur Burns; further means of curtailing oil imports, if necessary; and “other options you think we ought to consider.” Carter promised to meet with Blumenthal and Schultze to discuss their memorandum once he had reviewed it, proposing that they “also discuss what our basic objectives ought to be, under various circumstances.” (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection, 1977–1980, Chronological File, Box 3, 1/1/78– 1/16/78) 95. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and Robert Ginsburg of the Domestic Policy Staff to President Carter1 Washington, January 9, 1978 SUBJECT Strauss Memorandum on Steel Decisions Section 301 Complaint We agree with the unanimous recommendation of Ambassador Strauss and the interagency committee that the STR discontinue its review of the steel industry’s Section 301 complaint.2 The essence of the complaint is that the EC/Japanese voluntary restraint agreement on steel has caused the diversion of a substantial amount of Japanese steel exports from the EC to the U.S. However, the interagency committee has not found a causal relationship between that 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 283, Steel (O/A 6237). No classification marking. Ginsburg did not initial the memorandum. 2 See Document 90.
