524  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
exchanges can convey valid and useful impressions about relative US 
and Soviet strategic nuclear capabilities.9
17. The Director of Central Intelligence believes that both forms of 
analysis have their merits for the purpose of informing national deci-
sionmakers about trends in the relative capabilities of forces. In his 
view:
—It is highly desirable to proceed with the SAGA simulation of 
wartime capabilities.
—The Intelligence Community welcomes an opportunity to partic-
ipate as a partner in such an endeavor.
—Ultimately, what is needed is a net assessment effort under the 
direction of the National Security Council, with participation by the 
Department of Defense, the Department of State, the Intelligence Com-
munity, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the prospective 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, and perhaps others.
Implications of Trends in Soviet Air Defense and ASW Capabilities
18. Air Defense. In light of the trends we anticipate in intercon-
tinental offensive forces, the effectiveness of Soviet air defenses 
against aerodynamic penetrators will become even more important 
to US deterrent and striking capabilities in the 1980s than it is today. 
At present, the massive Soviet air defense forces would have good 
capabilities against aircraft at medium and high altitudes. There are, 
however, major technical deficiencies in their ability to intercept pen-
etrators at low altitudes, and these are compounded by the low level 
of proficiency the air defense establishment has demonstrated to date. 
The Soviets are now working to develop improved systems for low-­
altitude defense. In the early 1980s, they will probably begin to field 
lookdown/shootdown fighters, an improved low-­altitude SAM sys-
tem, and an AWACS capable of detecting and tracking low-­altitude 
targets at least over water.
19. Chart 7 displays estimated trends in the Soviet potential to per-
form functions essential to low-­altitude air defense over the next 10 
years.10 It illustrates this potential for the region of the USSR west of the 
Urals, which contains much of the nation’s population and economic 
and military assets, and in which the bulk of Soviet air defense forces 
are concentrated.
—As illustrated in the top left-­hand graph, beginning in the early 
1980s, the numbers of improved Soviet weapon systems will probably 
grow fairly rapidly if, as we anticipate, the USSR places considerable 
9 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the 
Senior Intelligence Officers of each of the military services. For an elaboration, including 
views and commentary on preliminary results of the SAGA study, see part E, paragraphs 
198–201. [Footnote is in the original.]
10 Chart 7 is attached but not printed.
