1286 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement On the political side, one of our major problems in Venezuela is the prevalent belief there that the United States is partial to dictatorships in Latin America and, more specifically, in Venezuela. Inability or unwillingness on our part to respond affirmatively to requests of the present constitutional government for technical assistance would tend to strengthen this belief. Moreover, it is in the best interests of the United States to support the present Venezuelan Government insofar as possible and to maintain and improve our relations with it, as a bulwark against a recurrence of military dictatorship on the one hand or the establishment of a far left-­wing regime on the other. So far, most of the matters which the Venezuelan Government has taken up with us have been such as to preclude U.S. acceptance of Venezuelan proposals, and therefore the U.S. attitude toward Venezuelan requests has had to be largely negative since the inauguration of the present Venezuelan Government. We are consequently most anxious to find ways in which the Venezuelan Government can be accommodated and the negative impression which the Venezuelan Government has can be dispelled. I therefore believe that we should keep the door open for technical cooperation with Venezuela and should examine each request from the Government of Venezuela on its merits, in the hope that we may be able to accede to some of them and in so doing take advantage of opportunities for increased U.S. influence in Venezuelan economic development and planning. I agree with your view that the GOV can probably afford to pay for much of the cost of these programs and I regard this fact as a positive aspect of the possible future expansion of technical cooperation activities there. However, in the interest of maintaining and extending U.S. influence in Venezuelan economic development, I believe that cases may well arise which would justify the expenditure of U.S. funds. No action should be taken at this time which would tend to preclude freedom of action in such cases. Recognizing, however, that the rise of the program in Venezuela at this time may not justify the administrative and supervisory overload presently devoted thereto, I concur in the suggestion contained in your last paragraph that for the present, at least, the program be limited to responding affirmatively to Venezuelan requests for short-­term services of experienced U.S. technicians. R.R. Rubottom, Jr.
