1018 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Collateral peace issues. These include oil (now hopefully resolved, though the terms of the agreement have been reported to us by the two sides in different terms), Sinai observer arrangements, etc. (S) 311. Briefing Memorandum From the Senior Adviser to the Secretary of State (Habib) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, November 17, 1979 SUBJECT Lebanon—Discussion with Dobrynin As instructed,2 I called on Dobrynin today to inform him of our views on the situation in Southern Lebanon and our support for the Lebanese initiative in that regard. I outlined for him the nature of the Lebanese initiative and its purpose, emphasizing that we believed it was worth supporting for humanitarian as well as political reasons. I noted the existence of a fragile ceasefire which we sought to make permanent, the relationship to Security Council Resolution 425,3 and the dangers of confrontation and escalation if the situation in Southern Lebanon was to heat up again. I then gave him a brief account of my recent visit4 to the region and ended up by referring to the forthcoming discussion of this problem at the Arab Summit meeting in Tunis. Dobrynin had obviously been informed of Soviet conversations on the subject with the Syrians and with the PLO. He said that the Syrians 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall D. Shulman—Jan 21, 74–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 2, Memorandums of Conversation, 1979. Confidential. Copies of the memorandum were sent to Christopher, Newsom, Saunders, Shulman, and Vest. 2 On November 14, Hunter presented the proposal for the Habib-Dobrynin meeting to Brzezinski in a decision memorandum for the latter’s approval. Brzezinski initialed his approval, but asked in a handwritten notation, “Won’t this scare Sadat-Begin?” In a typed response on the back of the memorandum, Hunter wrote, “Habib thinks it will not scare Sadat and Begin—since it is kept separate from the autonomy talks (which he will not discuss). In fact, he says that the Israelis and Egyptians probably expect that we will be briefing the Soviets in a low-key way on what we are doing in Lebanon. The reason for doing it is to avoid the misimpression that it is a full-scale effort to get the Syrians out, etc.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 58, Lebanon: 11/79–3/80) 3 See footnote 3, Document 306. 4 For a summary of Habib’s visit to the region, see Document 306.
