372
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
understanding between the United States and United Kingdom are es-
sential, NEA has no objection. However, if the sentence means that
there is no circumstance in which the United States or the United
Kingdom should carry out a course of action alone in Iran, there is
ground for much discussion. It is entirely possible that the Anglo-
Iranian dispute might reach such a phase of deadlock and animosity
that it would be in the interest of the free world for the United States to
remain capable of independent action vis-a`-vis Iran.
4(b) If there is no implication that an anti-nationalist dictator could
be successful, NEA has no objection to this statement. A “suitable
figure” in NEA’s opinion must be someone capable of identifying him-
self with nationalist issues and emotions although he might gradually
deflect the present course of nationalist fanaticism.
4(c) There is a tendency today utterly to disregard the Shah’s im-
portance in the Iranian political scene. As a matter of fact, although he
certainly does not exert any independent influence, he is of consider-
able usefulness to Dr. Mosadeq at this time as an ally. There is still re-
portedly considerable loyalty to the Shah in the armed forces, and,
throughout Iran, there remains the ancient identification of the Central
Government with the figure of the Great King. The Shah does not exert
independent influence on the course of events but he is and will con-
tinue to be an important pawn in any political maneuvers.
4(d) NEA concurs in the belief that a tribal revolt prior to the estab-
lishment of a Tudeh regime would only create further chaos and would
probably end only by serving communist interests in Iran.
4(e) It has been NEA’s understanding that a campaign of “covert
propaganda aimed at stiffening the government and increasing its anti-
Tudeh activities” has been in progress for some time. Certainly this
course of action should be continued.
4(f) The British paper appears to avoid a fundamental problem in
the Iranian situation which, in summary, is that any foreign financial
aid to Iran necessarily affects the course of the Anglo-Iranian oil dis-
pute. While the paper admits that Iran “will certainly eventually need
external help” it insists “it is essential that there should be complete
Anglo-United States solidarity”. If this “solidarity” supports a policy
which resists giving “external help”, there is a paradox which should
be pointed out in any discussions with the British. It is suggested that
the British be asked to explain exactly what they mean in Paragraph
4(f).
There are possible courses of action which are not listed in the
British paper, because they could not develop from a position of ob-
vious and absolute Anglo-United States solidarity. Two such courses of
action are listed below:
