Venezuela 1305 bolivars, and to reduce expenditures further not only is difficult but could be politically and socially explosive. President Betancourt is our best bet to achieve kind of government in Venezuela that would best promote and protect U.S. national interests. He stands for what we stand for. He recognizes the dangers of Castroism and can be counted upon to assist in blocking its spread. He has come long way in being able be openly critical in his November 1 speech what is happening in Cuba. This would not have been possible six months ago. Venezuela is thus beset with serious political, social and economic difficulties. President Betancourt needs help and Embassy considers it vital that U.S. give him all possible assistance along following lines: 1) Expanded technical assistance for remainder this fiscal year. Request for technicians are still pending, even those for which GOV willing cover costs. If necessary, contingency funds should be provided. President commented bitterly to me about inability obtain technicians. 2) Urgent reconsideration of policy limiting Venezuela to very restricted ICA program. President Betancourt informed me his government is definitely interested in expanded ICA program coming fiscal year and would welcome discussions about such program. However, Embassy is reluctant approach GOV unless USG policy is such that we can follow through on any reasonable program. 3) Prompt action on loans. President made strong plea for urgent action on GOV money needs. He said he did not want grant aid; that his country would be able to repay loans. What is needed, he said, is financial assistance at this time since government is in trouble. 4) Embassy has been pushing GOV for some indication what PL-4802 assistance will be wanted from U.S. President said country still interested and experts working on program. Embassy is aware U.S. agencies concerned are interested in a PL–480 program for Venezuela and only asks that when request are made they be given sympathetic prompt action. In conclusion, Embassy again emphasizes that special conditions exist in Venezuela at this time; that our stake in Venezuela amounts to some four billion dollars and that our best bet is President Betancourt. If Venezuela’s inexperience in applying for assistance makes it impossible to meet normal economic criteria of our government then assistance must be provided on political grounds. With the imminent breakup of 2 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of
