wished to telegraph immediately to his consul at Canton to inform the Cantonese authorities that the British Government would give its acquiescence to the new taxation, provided it was completely placed under the supervision of the Customs Administration. He inquired whether I was prepared to take similar measures. I replied to him in the negative, explaining that my Government’s policy was to protest for purposes [of record?], and was apparently not favorable to having the new taxes collected by the Customs, which it was believed were not involved in this matter in any way. The Minister then asked whether I believed my Government would be inclined, considering the Washington Conference agreements, etc., toward taking exception if he acted independently in the way he desired. My reply was that his question was somewhat difficult to answer but that I rather was of the opinion that such a feeling would be held by my Government. Sir Ronald declared he would not act independently in these circumstances, at least before presenting the whole matter to his Government. He said he would at once do the latter by telegraph and suggest in a most urgent manner to the Foreign Office that there be an exchange of views immediately among the British, American, and Japanese Governments. In his opinion, and I consider rightly, this latest Cantonese move to inspect personal outgoing and incoming luggage, cargo, etc., makes even harder the collection of the customs and brings the whole Canton situation before us in such a way that at the earliest possible time it must be effectively dealt with. In accordance with the earnest recommendation made in paragraph 4 of my number 449 of October 2 [3], I support the British Minister’s suggestion that there be an immediate exchange of views among the three aforesaid powers for the purpose of reaching some common decision upon what action should be taken in the premises. 3. Parenthetically, I ought to add with reference to Department’s telegrams 240 of October 22 and 243 of October 23 and to my number 507 of October 23, that although the Government of Japan agreed quite unexpectedly to the new draft of the protest, agreement was not given by the British Government which, I understand, preferred to make no categorical protest against the new taxation out of fear that such protest would work against their desire to safeguard the Customs by every possible means. It was the belief of the British Government that acquiescence in the new taxes and
