860 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV proceeding to improve the automatic error-­detection and correction capabilities of the NORAD data communications system. Specifically, NORAD will: —­put monitor devices on output lines set to alarm whenever a warning message (whether valid or not) is being sent so as to speed confidence checking —­improve the error-­detection routines throughout its computer and data communications system —­make continuous and comprehensive records of system performance to be used to improve its troubleshooting capability —­analyze its computers and communications equipment to find (and fix) other places where a single failure could produce a false missile attack indication. Until these corrective actions are implemented (about 60 days) NORAD will operate primarily on the [less than 1 line not declassified] completely bypassing the equipment that caused the recent incidents. The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) have assessed that this temporary mode of operations can be tolerated, although it does have certain operational limitations, notably [1 line not declassified] The JCS-­directed procedural changes to [3 lines not declassified] (S) Congressional Reaction (U) The Chairmen of the Armed Services and Appropriations Committees of both Houses of Congress were notified of the false alerts less than 24 hours after they occurred. Congressional interest has remained high ever since. We have briefed the House Armed Services Committee and several Senators individually, and we continue to respond to many letters on the subject from members of Congress. Congress seems to have been mostly reassured by our explanations, but continues to express concern about [9 lines not declassified] Press Reaction (U) Our approach to the news media has followed that which I outlined to you in my June 13 memorandum on false missile alerts. Most of the newspaper stories which appeared immediately after a June 18 press briefing by my Assistant Secretary for Communications, Command, Control, and Intelligence, Gerry Dinneen, correctly reflected the points in that memorandum. However, television network follow-­up stories appearing June 24–26 have attempted to sensationalize (mushroom cloud) the incidents or to link them to unrelated matters. We continue to receive many press inquiries and requests for interviews on the subject. We will have to continue to emphasize that there is no chance that any irretrievable actions would be taken based on ambiguous computer information, nor do the precautionary survivability measures in any way reduce the absolute human control over nuclear weapons.
