3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
324
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ferences on a number of items emerged and were made public. These
differences were three in number:
1. The meaning of UN Resolution 242. The position of the present
Israeli Government is that 242 does not necessarily cover withdrawal
from the West Bank. This is contrary to our view that 242 applies on all
fronts. It had also been the constant position of all Israeli Governments
since 1967 that 242 applied to all fronts. Thus, the position of the
present Israeli Government had changed from that of previous gov-
ernments. If Israel adhered to the position that Resolution 242 did not
apply to the West Bank, then in the Secretary’s view no solution is pos-
sible. We had reaffirmed our position to this effect publicly on a
number of occasions. The Secretary knew that the Soviet Union held
the same view; in fact, it was a view almost universally held by world
public opinion.
2. The second area of difference concerned the Palestinian question
and how to resolve it. We believe, as we indicated in the Joint Statement
issued with the Soviet Union, that the Palestinian question had to be re-
solved in all its aspects, that the legitimate fights of the Palestinian
people had to be recognized, and that the Palestinians have the right to
participate in determining their own future. There is a difference of
views between us and Israel on this question. That difference appears
in two respects:
a. our reference to legitimate rights; and
b. the question of whether or not the Palestinians are entitled to
participate in determining their own future.
3. The question of settlements. Our view is that settlements in the
Sinai, the West Bank and Golan are contrary to international law as re-
flected in the Geneva 4 Conference, that all further work on settlements
must stop, and that there should be no new settlements. The Israelis
take a different view of the legality of the settlements. They say that
they will not stop all construction on existing settlements and will not
agree to refrain from starting new ones. When Begin was in the United
States, he had said that in the future, insofar as the West Bank was con-
cerned, no new settlements would be started without a Cabinet deci-
sion. Since that time he has changed his position, no longer requiring a
Cabinet decision, but merely a decision by the Defense Council. Israel
has informed us that it would refrain from establishing new settle-
ments in the Sinai, but would continue work on expanding existing
settlements.
The Secretary said that these three differences were fundamental,
had surfaced and were now known in our country, in Israel, and, in
fact, throughout the world. We supported the principle of reaching
agreement on a Declaration of Principles to create the framework for re-
convening a conference of all the parties in order to achieve a compre-
