893.74/581: Telegram
[Document 751]
The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, July 1, 1925—noon.
[Received July 1—11:53 a.m.]
117. Yesterday the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Dan of Mitsui, and MacMurray,19
discussed the Federal wireless situation. I was present with Neville.20 MacMurray
explained that the Japanese memoranda of December 24th and June 1st last assumed
that the Mitsui monopoly is valid and exclusive, that the Federal contract is a monopoly
of traffic between China and the United States and finally proposed an adjustment on
the basis of a monopoly of China’s radio communications being shared among the
British, French, Japanese and American companies.
The American Government does not admit or support the Federal contract as a
monopoly. Its position was set forth in the memorandum of July 19, 1923, to the British
Government.21 The American Government does not wish to disturb vested interests but
cannot acquiesce in any arrangement which would have the effect of allowing French,
British and Japanese interests to maintain radio communication with China while
preventing the United States from so doing.
Shidehara replied that the Japanese objection to the American attitude was three fold: it
created a monopoly, it affected vested rights, and caused unnecessary expense to China.
The proposed American radio would be expensive and there is no prospect that it
would make enough money to repay the 13,000,000 Mexican dollars that it would cost
China. The Japanese wish to put all facilities of communication in the hands of China,
putting wireless on the same basis as the post offices and the Shantung Railway, for
example.
MacMurray stated that the United States desired earnestly to come to some settlement
that would protect vested interests and would injure no one but which must place the
United States on terms of equality with every other nation having radio interests in
China. He was not suggesting a program but placing our case before the Japanese and
assuring them of our wish to cooperate.
Shidehara said that he realized the necessity of cooperation and desired it. Japan
however is committed to a certain extent to the British and French through an
agreement made in London in February 1924, a copy of which he understood had been
given to the Radio Corporation; the situation is further complicated on account of the
