58
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
vinced,” Amstutz wrote, “that had we not spurned him, the Taraki
regime would not be in power today nor would Afghanistan have
fallen within the Soviet sphere of influence.” Amstutz counseled a
middle ground “of providing encouragement and advice to this organi-
zation without getting involved in another Korea.” (Ibid.) The telegram
was attached to a covering memorandum from Peter Tarnoff, Executive
Secretary of the Department of State, to Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant
to the President for National Security Affairs, dated June 22. The memo-
randum informed Brzezinski: “We are consulting with CIA on this
message with a view to formulating recommendations on how the
approach should be handled.” President Carter initialed “C” in the
upper left-hand corner of the memorandum. (Ibid.)
The following day, Amstutz received a response in telegram 160507
to Kabul, instructing him that the issue was being actively considered
and that Amstutz “should take no initiative to contact the anti-Commu-
nist group.” (Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Intelligence Liaison Files, TIN 980643000018, Box 14, Kabul, 1965–79)
On June 28, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence Frank Carlucci sent
a memorandum to Deputy Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs David Aaron, spelling out the CIA position on aiding
the anti-Taraki group, which was “that no official encouragement
should be given the coup plotters.” But, Carlucci wrote, “we do recom-
mend that contact be maintained for intelligence collection purposes,
and that the CIA be given responsibility for this.” Carlucci reasoned
that this middle course could help the United States “influence events”
and, while acknowledging that the “Soviets will react very vigorously
to any counter coup; it behooves us to have as much advance know-
ledge as possible in order to better manage U.S.-Soviet relations in the
wake of such an event.” (National Security Council, Carter Administra-
tion Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 8 May 1978–7 Dec 1978)
The possible value of maintaining contact with the coup plotters
implicitly acknowledged the poor state of intelligence collection in
Afghanistan at the time. In a May 25 memorandum to Brzezinski,
National Security Council Staff member Thomas Thornton summarized
an attached CIA report entitled “Collection Coverage of Post-Coup
Afghanistan,” stating, “it simply points out that things are pretty tough
in Afghanistan collection-wise.” (Ibid.)
Two weeks later, the CIA produced two detailed evaluations on the
state of Afghan opposition groups, both dated July 14, which Thornton
attached as Tab A and Tab B to a memorandum to Aaron and Brzezin-
ski, also dated July 14. The memorandum at Tab A referenced Am-
stutz’s latest assessment that Taraki retained control both of Kabul and
the Afghan countryside, but that violence posed a threat to the current
government, and the influx of Soviet advisers to Afghanistan (totaling
