376
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
climate.” “I have tried to be as precise as possible,” Fischer concluded,
“perhaps a bit brutal but nevertheless realistic.” The Secretary
responded that we, too, believe in realities and realize that our relations
can have a positive or negative effect on Europe. We hope, he said,
that that effect will be positive, since we favor detente. We realize, he
said, that we have differences but we should seek more common
ground in the future.
Fischer then said that he wanted to raise two additional economic
items. To be in a better position to realize the trade opportunities about
which he had just spoken, Fischer said that the GDR needed a trade
post in New York. Beil, he said, had left the U.S. with that very strong
impression. Fischer then asked about the possibility of long-term
multiple-entry visas for business and commercial travelers. At the Sec-
retary’s request, Assistant Secretary Vest informed Fischer that the
question of trade offices had been under review for some time.4 At the
moment, he said, we were not in a position to allow the opening of
new offices, since our general relations have “not sufficiently devel-
oped.” Vest then told Fischer that we had recently begun the process
which would lead to the granting of six-month multiple-entry visas to
GDR business travelers. Fischer asked if that process might be carried
out faster.
Concluding their conversation, the Secretary said that it had been
useful to talk directly. He said he would again examine Fischer’s pro-
posed text and review the other matters raised by him. He also said
that he looked forward to Assistant Secretary Derian’s visit to Berlin.5
Fischer told the Secretary that he proposed to characterize US/GDR
relations to the press as “normal but capable of development.” The
Secretary did not disagree.
4 The idea of the East German Government opening a trade bureau in New York
was brought up during Beil’s visit to Washington. Cooper told Beil that the United States
was unwilling to consider allowing the German Democratic Republic to open an official
trade representation without an agreement on the Consular Convention. However, the
Department was willing to consider allowing East German companies to open trade
offices. (Telegram 140489 to East Berlin, June 16, 1977; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770215–1088)
5 See Document 123.
