544
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
policy favoring maximum expansion of heavy industry at the expense
of the consumer which is increasingly seen as the major cause of the
lagging standard of living.
Against this background, the earthquake that struck Romania last
March provides a useful focal point for an assessment of Ceausescu’s
leadership.
Ceausescu’s Leadership in Action
Ceausescu faced his most dramatic leadership test in years when
an earthquake measuring 7.2 on the Richter scale struck Romania on
March 4, 1977. More than 1,500 persons were killed and 35,000 families
made homeless; Bucharest and some provincial centers were damaged
extensively. The extent of the disaster drew all elements of the party
and government leadership into relief and reconstruction activities,
but it was Ceausescu who directed and completely dominated the
process. No other official was delegated meaningful authority or per-
mitted to receive public recognition for his contribution.
When the earthquake struck, Ceausescu was in Nigeria completing
a five-country African tour; thus the initial emergency actions were
taken by others. Ceausescu, who was on the scene within 18 hours,
lost no time in publicly criticizing “certain responsible factors for short-
comings in the organization of urgent acting to eliminate the effects of
the earthquake.” Privately, according to a clandestine report, Ceausescu
angrily reproached most of the top party leaders, accusing them of
being “utterly confused” after the earthquake struck. The earthquake’s
initial effect on the leadership was, therefore, not to promote solidarity
in the face of disaster, but to increase the gap between Ceausescu and
his colleagues.
Ceausescu’s subsequent management of the relief effort provided
further evidence of his ingrained distrust of party institutions. On
March 5, it was announced that the nine-man Permanent Bureau of
the party’s top-level Political Executive Committee (Polexco) would
“function as command center” for all earthquake-related activity. That
decision was never implemented; instead, the full 34-man Polexco,
acting as a “political staff,” met daily to “lead and organize the struggle
against the effects of the earthquake.”3 The language of the Polexco
daily communiques left no doubt, however, that on key decisions the
Committee merely rubber-stamped Ceausescu’s “recommendations.”
3 The reason for the change is unclear, but it probably reflects Ceausescu’s known
dislike for anything that smacks of collegial leadership. [Footnote is in the original.]
