218 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement a lower standard of living as the result of the economic stabilization program imposed on Bolivia by the IMF. IMF policy, he said, is too strict and does not allow sufficient flexibility. He then said that, as a labor leader, he was concerned with the permanent condition of strikes in the mines. These strikes occur not because the Bolivian Government is a Communist government (which he denied), but rather because the workers do not have sufficient tools, food and equipment with which to perform their tasks. These negative condition, Lechin said, have created an atmosphere favorable to enemies of the Bolivian Government. He identified these elements which threaten the Government at present as not the “reactionaries or conservatives” but rather the Communists. He said Cuban intervention and the Soviet offer of a tin smelter have contributed much to the deterioration of the situation in Bolivia. He said the Communists were trying to gain control of the rank and file of the labor movement and to displace the MNR which has had leadership of labor for the past sixteen years. He also said the Communist drive for control in Bolivia is directed towards interests and ends akin to those of Bolivia. [text not declassified] He then turned to the United States aid program. While a great deal of money has been spent in Bolivia, he said, the results of this assistance have not been as effective they might have been because not enough emphasis has been placed on industrial and agricultural development projects. The only exception, he noted, is in the Department of Santa Cruz, where the United States aid program has made possible a substantial increase in sugar and rice production in the past year. Santa Cruz is the only province which has not suffered from the current economic crisis. While he said he did not consider that the United States was responsible for the current crisis in Bolivia, he nevertheless urged that our aid program be modified in such a way as to eliminate some of its draw backs. He said that our aid program should be directed toward reestablishing a favorable atmosphere for economic development as existed prior to 1957 when our aid became tied in with the IMF stabilization program. According to Lechin, the USSR offer of a tin smelter and economic aid has spread a false belief that the Soviets could solve all the problems of Bolivia. This concept is false, he added; help to the mining and petroleum sectors of the economy such as is proposed by the Soviets will not benefit the people for sometime to come. Mr. Lechin then returned to his original premise that the crisis in Bolivia is real and that there is an immediate need for emergency aid to tide the economy over until the middle of 1961 when the benefits of the reorganization of the mining industry will begin to become effective. He emphasized that, in order to restore confidence and re-­establish political and economic stability, the
