454 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 tal with the allies on this issue. The effect of removal would be that subsidiaries of American corporations abroad would not at this time be involved in the sanctions against Iran.3 (S) [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 5. Iranian Oil. The Department of Energy reported that it is their understanding, particularly on the basis of talks with Shell executives, that the problem of declining oil production in Iran is not so much a need for drilling to reduce water in the wells as it is morale, labor, and mismanagement. The Iranians have not requested drilling equipment, so the decision to provide it or not is moot. Secretary Miller said he had quite a different story from Exxon who has requested a license for spare parts on oil drilling equipment4 and who claims that there is a critical situation. It was agreed that Energy and Treasury would get together to try and get the true story and report back to the SCC. (S) [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 3 Carter approved the item with a checkmark, underlined the phrases “American corporations abroad” and “in the sanctions against Iran,” and then wrote in the left margin: “Legally, no—strong persuasion, yes.” Aaron relayed this Presidential decision to Vance, Miller, Brown, Civiletti, Klutznick, Duncan, and Turner in a February 1 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 99, Meetings File, 1/30 and 31/80 SCC re Iran) 4 Carter underlined the phrase “a license for spare parts on oil drilling equipment” and wrote in the margin “no.” 173. Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the Department of State1 Tehran, February 1, 1980 1. I asked this morning for a brief meeting with Ghotbzadeh which was immediately granted, although my colleagues have waited several weeks for an appointment. (I think that he values these contacts because they are businesslike and always brief.) Ghotbzadeh received me with a somber and detached air that eloquently expressed his miserable score of 38,000 votes, that is 1/4 of 1% of the electorate. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 8. Confidential. The text is a typed copy of the Swiss telegram from Tehran bearing no identifying number or time of dispatch. All subsequent messages from Lang went by this channel.
