International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
539
The French are negative and Giscard is specifically upset over our
failure to extend the waiver of countervailing duties. In addition to the
issue, he probably is using this as an excuse to delay the successful con-
clusion of the Tokyo Round which has been the goal of the French
throughout the negotiations.
Schmidt had been with Giscard the week before and had talked
with him by phone since that time. He confirmed the hard negative atti-
tude of the French and specifically suggested that a call from you to
Giscard would be particularly effective.4 He further suggested that if,
in connection with the call, you were inclined to accept the invitation to
join them in the meeting they are having shortly after the first of the
year,5 it would be particularly flattering. If you do talk with him, please
keep in mind that we have a December 15 closing deadline which we
badly need for Congress. It will still take at least 7–8 months for a vote.
Chancellor Schmidt also specifically requested that I advise you
directly that he personally would be appreciative if the percentage of
German marketing of U.S. bonds abroad be kept cloudy.6 He advised
that he was under considerable criticism directed toward his permit-
ting German investment capital leave the country at a time when they
are having their own problems.
I am leaving today for Geneva where we will spend the week with
all nations represented. If the French don’t veto action, we can com-
plete these negotiations on schedule.
on Strauss’ conversation with Jenkins, and telegram 7336 from Copenhagen, November
13, recounted Strauss’ meeting with Danish Prime Minister Anker Jorgensen. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780465–0709 and D780467–0256,
respectively)
4 In a November 13 memorandum to Carter, Owen recommended that Carter tele-
phone Giscard as “Schmidt is anxious for us to convince Giscard ‘that the failure to pass
the waiver was an accident due to last-minute maneuvering in the Congress and was not
a deliberate plan to pressure the EC.’” According to Owen, Carter’s call to Giscard “could
be decisive.” Carter indicated his approval of Owen’s recommendation. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File,
Box 12, France: 1978) Carter and Schmidt discussed Giscard and the MTN during a tele-
phone conversation on November 20. (Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal
Foreign Affairs File, Box 1, Germany, Federal Republic of, 9/77–1/80)
5 Carter, Giscard, Schmidt, and Callaghan met for informal discussions at Guade-
loupe January 4–9, 1979.
6 Carter highlighted the section of this paragraph containing this sentence and
wrote in the adjacent margin “Schultze.” In his November 13 memorandum to Carter
(see footnote 4 above), Owen wrote that he would advise “Treasury of Schmidt’s point
about bond sales.”
