790 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 4. The British have financed Dr. Baghai in the past and they are paying him at present through Hassan Arab,7 who is very close to Dr. Baghai. 5. Dr. Farokh Faroud8 has organized a new party for engineers and scientists in Iran.9 The new party’s directing committee is composed of the following members: a. Hoseyn Pirnia, Undersecretary of Finance. b. Dr. Ahmed Houman,10 who is considered by Source to be the most important member of the committee. c. Adeshir Zahedi, son of Prime Minister Zahedi. d. Major Houshang Afshar.11 e. Dr. Farokh Faroud. 6. The committee intends to organize sub-committees throughout Iran, particularly among engineers who administer factories. 7. Ardeshir Zahedi was invited to join the committee in order to allay his father’s suspicions, but according to Source, Ardeshir Zahedi may be unable to control the overwhelming British influence within the group. 8. Ali Mansur,12 a pro-British political figure, has been holding political meetings with “many Iranians who are not trusted by Prime Minister Zahedi.” 7 Washington Comment. According to a report from a qualified American observer, date of information 12 January 1953, Hassan Arab is a “low grade mobster” who is supported financially by the British, and is the leader of a small, inconsequential group. [Footnote is in original.] 8 Washington Comment. According to a report from an Iranian with good contacts in pro-British circles, date of information 26 September 1953, Dr. Faroud is a member of a political faction reportedly sponsored by Seyfollah Rashidian and led by Kazem Sayah, pro-British political leaders. See CS–21530. [Footnote is in the original.] 9 Field Comment. This engineers’ party is not to be confused with the club recently organized by pro-British Sharif Imami, the Kanun Mohandessine (Engineer’s Club). See Paragraph 8 of CS–20968. [Footnote is in the original. Paragraph 8 of CS–20968, cited in footnote 5 above, reads: “Imami, who has long been favorably disposed toward British policy, has organized a new club, Kanun Mohandessine (Engineers’ Club), which includes as members several well-known engineers. Amir Reza Afshar, Managing Director of the Iranian Airways, is a member.”] 10 Washington Comment. Houman was Assistant Minister of Court in 1951. See SO’s–73845 and –75198. [Footnote is in the original. SO–73845 and SO–75198 were not found.] 11 Washington Comment. Hooshang Afshar is Technical Manager of the Iranian Airways. [Footnote is in the original.] 12 Washington Comment. Ali Mansur, who has served as Prime Minister, Governor General of Khorassan and of Azerbaijan, and as Ambassador to Italy, had dropped out of political activities prior to this report. According to a report to another Government agency, Mansur has been supported by the British and by the Soviets at various times. [Footnote is in the original.]
