1957 1397 820. Telegram 138 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 8, 1957, 8 p.m. 138. For Johnson. Two hour and five minute meeting this morning. I opened with long statememt reviewing renunciation of force ­discussions closing this portion of statement with “I am prepared to discuss this vital issue as long as necessary to reach agreement, and when this has been accomplished we can go on to discuss other ­topics under agenda item two.” I concluded statement on implementation strongly noting no prisoners released since Dec 1955 prior to comple­ tion of sentence and asking him “cite one single measure” taken to carry out agreed announcement with respect to remaining six. His reply on renunciation added up to no further interest or intention of seriously discussing unless and until basic US policy of “hostility” toward PRC changed. “Futile wishful thinking to expect PRC will ever recognize under guise of right of self-­defense US occu­ pation Taiwan.” “If US not going give up policy of hostility and sub­ version and aggression against PRC and indulges in empty talk of renunciation of force this can only be termed as a deceiving tactic.” He repeated usual charges on implementation alleging Tseng Kuang-­chih “always desired to return” and was thrown into mental hospital as “act of reprisal” and to frighten other Chinese students; briefly mentioned Hsiao Chi-­mei as example of “detaining funds to discourage return; and Yi Teh-­yun who deported from New York March this year and “nearly lost life because serious stomach ailment not properly cared for during his detention.” During course give and take I returned hard to theme Americans had derived no benefit from agreed announcement and situation of imprisoned Americans remained same or even worse than situation prior to announcement. His refutation weak and consisted primarily of counter-­attacking with respect Chinese in US. “Under circumstances in which Chinese residents in the US continue meet obstructions in departure one cannot demand anything extraordinary” with respect to Americans in China. Next meeting Sept 12. Full record by pouch leaving Geneva August 10. Gowen 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–857. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.
