600  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
long-­range submarines (18 “Z,” 4 “F,” and 237 “W” class) and about 35 
medium range submarines (“Q” class). They are grouped in four major 
forces: the Northern Fleet, located in the Barents Sea area; the Baltic 
Fleet; the Black Sea Fleet; and the Pacific Fleet, concentrated largely at 
Vladivostok.
185. The surface forces are supported by Soviet Naval Aviation, 
which comprises more than 15 percent of total Soviet air strength and is 
now the second largest naval air force in the world. Approximately 3,200 
aircraft are assigned to the Soviet fleets, including about 1,750 fighters, 
600 jet light bombers, 250 jet medium bombers and nearly 700 miscel­
laneous types. The combat aircraft are the same types as are assigned 
to Tactical Aviation: FAGOTs, FRESCOs, FARMERs, FLASHLIGHTs, 
BEAGLEs, and BADGERs. We believe that selected naval bomber units 
have been assigned an atomic delivery role and there is evidence of 
a developing air-­to-­surface missile capability in naval BADGER units. 
Lack of aircraft carriers limits the operational effectiveness of Soviet 
Naval Aviation to the combat radius of its shore-­based aircraft.
186. The operating efficiency and equipment of Soviet naval forces, 
while still below US standards in some fields, are quite high and will 
continue to improve. The great increase in world-­wide unidentified 
submarine contacts in recent years probably reflects the intensified 
training of the Soviet submarine force, particularly in long-­range oper­
ations. In the naval weapons field, in addition to the development of 
submarine-­launched guided missiles, the Soviets have vigorously 
pushed the production of more effective mines with magnetic, acoustic 
and pressure actuated firing devices. We estimate that the USSR has 
stockpiled mines of advanced types as well as conventional mines. It 
is technically capable of adapting nuclear warheads to mines, torpe­
does and depth charges. Nuclear tests in the Novaya Zemlya area have 
probably included the testing of naval weapons. The Soviet Navy has 
become increasingly aware of its initial failure to keep pace with the 
rapid postwar technological advances in antisubmarine warfare. In 
recent years there has been a steady improvement in its ASW tactics 
and equipment and a major effort has been made in the construction 
of escort ships in order to overcome this deficiency. The Soviet Navy is 
also quite limited as to amphibious capability. To meet the lift require­
ments of divisional-size units the USSR would have to rely almost 
exclusively upon merchant ships.
187. Several important developments in Soviet naval forces are 
likely during 1959–1963 as a result of changing weapon systems and 
new concepts of naval warfare. In addition to conversion of some sub­
marines for the launching of surface-­to-­surface missiles, new subma­
rines specifically designed for this purpose probably will enter serv­ice. 
Some Soviet cruisers and destroyers will probably be equipped with
