Negotiating Channels 505 if elected and even to support some of them himself. Thus it can be expected that the parliament will not be as manageable as might have been thought at first. The fact still remains that the future cabinet will at least have the advantage of not being a dead weight, frightened, bogged down by inertia like the Revolutionary Council. 5. B and V have observed as we did long ago that the economy is increasingly paralyzed and that the country is literally living off its oil and according to what V has observed is not even selling it well. There is nothing on the horizon to trigger a takeoff of the economy. The crisis is responsible to a large extent but bogeymen and incompetents are also responsible. So the authorities, even Bani-Sadr, trumpet that it is the fault of the West, the West which is strangling Iran, is not sending it enough foodstuffs or spare parts. B and V are trying to dramatize this situation to wake up Bani-Sadr, Moinfar, and anyone else who has some understanding. Let us not forget one important fact. Although Bani-Sadr is moderate in the political field, he will be less so in the economic field where he wants to apply theses which, to say the very least, have never been tried by fire. 6. The Imam, who is getting stronger, sometimes appears to regret having given Bani-Sadr too much power (df. the demonstration) and seems to be playing a role which runs counter to national stabilization, by favoring the opposition forces in order to strike a balance. In this context, B and V are wondering whether Ahmed Khomeini, the son, might not be playing a two-faced game and while pretending to help Bani-Sadr isn’t really playing the fundamentalists’ game. The Imam has really never given his total confidence to anyone. Recent history gives us several examples of this: elimination of Yazdi, then Bani-Sadr, benefitting Ghotbzadeh, etc., etc. The person who seems to have his greatest confidence—by his very nature!—is Ghotbzadeh. This is a happy circumstance to the extent that Ghotbzadeh has given himself body and soul to reaching a solution. V’s question is how far will he go if he feels that the sands are shifting too much. To this jealousy and sensitivity must be added the aspect of the “folqar” which is now replacing the role of the “fu¨hrer” that the Iman used to play. 7. Bani-Sadr now realizes that after having dreamed of overturning the imperial regime for more than ten years, the leadership obtained power without fighting, but especially without being prepared to take it. Aside from the unanimity on the question of overturning the imperial regime, there is total disagreement regarding the kind of system to be created, and this again adds to the total lack of structural organization. 8. Likewise, Bani-Sadr’s method of government and work does not favor a change in the direction of strong leadership. Bani-Sadr is a thinker, a loner, who, like the Imam, does not trust anyone entirely. It
