United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 29 up an institution that would in any way handicap American industry in competing with lower-­cost foreign industries. Mr. Stambaugh continued that if Latin American economic problems could be solved simply by providing more credits, a new institution would not be needed. The Export-Import Bank believed there was need for a new institution with functions different from those of the existing institutions. The problems of obtaining the local currency for development projects and for budgetary financing, were chronic in Latin America. The new Institution could usefully confine its financing to such internal expenditures, and should also be able to give technical advice and to assist the Latin American countries in planning their development programs. Mr. Williams inquired as to the need for the proposed Institution, and whether Dr. Milton Eisenhower and Vice President Nixon had been consulted. The Commerce Department had also considered whether the Institution might not more appropriately be a Latin American than an Inter-American Institution with the function of providing local currency for local currency needs. The Chairman commented that the Latin American feeling of having a special relationship with the United States had been weakened by U.S. participation in regional organizations in other areas, such as NATO and SEATO. On several occasions during the past several years, the Latin American countries had proposed a regional Inter-American Bank, to include the United States. The United States had opposed such a bank on the grounds that resources could not be increased simply by multiplying institutions. The recent determination of the President to offer the support of the United States for an Arab Bank involved for the first time U.S. support of such a regional financial institution.4 Accordingly, it was decided to announce support of a new Institution before the announcement concerning an Arab Bank was made in the United Nations. The Chairman then stressed the importance of avoiding failure of the new Institution. It should be thought of as a financial institution subject to a minimum of political influence. Mr. Martin questioned the need for the proposed Institution, and agreed with Mr. Stambaugh’s remarks about existing institutions. He added that a financial institution to be successful should be divorced 4 In his address to the third emergency special session of the U.N. General Assembly on August 13, 1958, President Eisenhower proposed, inter alia, consultations between the Secretary-General and representatives of the Arab states of the Near East to determine whether they could reach agreement on the establishment of a regional development institution, and he also indicated that the United States would support a “soundly organized” institution. For text of the President’s address, see Department of State Bulletin,
