Human Rights 145 to other departments. The directions include requiring, in the case of specific countries, 3, 6-month and 1 year and beyond time frames. (b) Identify what constitutes “a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights”, listing those nations which currently fit this definition. The proverbial “hit list”, it is the single area in the PRM where no formal action has been undertaken. However, at the same time, it should be noted that D/HA has been in touch with the authors of the language and with legal scholars to provide a tentative analysis of the words involved. (c) Evaluate actions, etc.: 1. “Diplomatic actions, public statements, and various symbolic acts.” RESPONSE: All of these elements are contained in the directions previously submitted by D/HA to regional bureaus for consideration in preparation of country action plans,4 2. “Changes in levels of security and economic assistance and food aid—as both sanctions and incentives.” RESPONSE: Again, specifically cited in directions to Bureaus in preparation of country action plans. Inter-Agency Committee and Arms Export Control Board now engaged in developing procedures for consideration of existing programs, loans, grants and sales under those programs, and future budget proposals. 3. “Initiatives in International Financial Institutions of which the U.S. is a member.” RESPONSE: Inter-Agency Committee has not begun to deal with current loans in IFI’s but to establish procedure for early action within IFI’s to link loan activity to promotion of human rights. 4. “Use of overseas radio, and later television, broadcast facilities.” Preparation of specific human rights action plans by USIA, CU and PA will be completed for consideration by Coordinating Committee and by Inter-Agency Committee. 5. “Improved access into the U.S. etc.”: Previously mandated and recommendations submitted. Being considered by White House. Although, if the last recommendation from State was negative on amending the law, perhaps this can be viewed as the basis for a new evaluation. 6. “. . . international forums.” 4 On May 13, Schneider provided the regional bureaus with guidance concerning the preparation of action plans. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 19, Human Rights— Tasking Memos)
