Summary of Print Volume  XLVII
June 22, the OCB presented the Council an “Operations Plan for the 
West Indies” to guide U.S. policy in the region (140).
U.S. relations with Argentina between 1958 and 1960 remained 
friendly. The Eisenhower administration welcomed the election in 
February 1958 of Dr. Arturo Frondizi as Argentina’s President after a 
period of military rule (140).
Argentina’s economy was a shambles in early 1958, and U.S. pol-
icymakers recognized the role that wisely administered economic aid 
could play in securing the Frondizi government’s friendship. Argentina 
might otherwise be tempted to seek assistance from the Soviet bloc 
(154, 155).
Frondizi made an official visit to Washington in January 1959 
during which President Eisenhower congratulated him on his efforts 
to restore his country’s democracy and rejuvenate its economy (167). 
Frondizi used the occasion to request more economic aid and to ask for 
credits with which to purchase U.S. military equipment (168). The ques-
tion of military credits to Argentina occupied policymakers for much of 
the first half of 1959. $10 million in credits was finally approved (177).
President Eisenhower visited Argentina during his four-­nation tour 
of South America in early 1960 (204). He met with President Frondizi in 
Buenos Aires and the resorts of Mar del Plata and San Carlos Bariloche. 
They discussed U.S.-Argentine economic and political relations as well 
as larger global issues.
By August 1960, the Frondizi government had survived two 
attempted military uprisings and was beset by political pressures from 
both the left and the right. Argentina’s economy was still ailing. On 
August 9, Frondizi wrote personally to President Eisenhower to request 
more financial aid (218). The President replied that he would welcome 
the opportunity for U.S. officials to discuss the matter further with their 
Argentine counterparts (221).
U.S.-Brazilian relations in the last 3 years of the Eisenhower era 
were driven largely by Brazil’s requests to the United States for help to 
remedy its terrible domestic economic situation and external debt. The 
ability of the United States to satisfy these requests only partially, con-
ditioned upon stringent Brazilian austerity measures, strained relations 
between the two nations. Further tensions resulted from the Brazilian 
perceptions that U.S. policymakers had become obsessed with Cuba at 
the expense of its relations with other Latin American nations and that 
they did not accord Brazil its proper respect on the global stage.
On June 20, 1958, Brazilian President Juscelino Kubitschek pro-
posed “Operation Pan America,” an ambitious plan to reaffirm hemi-
spheric solidarity and remedy the chronic underdevelopment which 
plagued Latin America (247). U.S. policymakers, including Secretary of
