656
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
267.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Moscow, March 29, 1977, 4:30–7:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
Middle East, Arms Control
PARTICIPANTS
UNITED STATES
USSR
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Deputy Chairman of the Council
Mr. Paul Warnke
of Ministers L.V. Smirnov
Assistant Secretary Arthur
Deputy Foreign Minister G.M.
Hartman
Korniyenko
Mr. William Hyland
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. Leslie Gelb
Notetaker—Name Unknown
Mr. William D. Krimer,
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to conventional arms
transfers.]
ARMS TRANSFERS
The Secretary suggested they now take up the question of arms
transfers to third world countries. He said that we were concerned that
arms transfers by the US and USSR to other countries, into the third
world, could in the long run only lead to misunderstandings and diffi-
culties. In our judgement, we had to find a way to exercise restraint in
transferring arms to third world countries. Our restraint would depend
on restraint by the Soviet Union, and it seemed to us that we should
also enlist the cooperation of other sellers of weapons. As President
Carter had said, we would be prepared to take unilateral steps in this
direction. But in the long run, unilateral action could not succeed
without the cooperation of other countries supplying arms. He pro-
posed to use a specific example. In our judgement, providing arms to
countries in southern Africa would fuel the flames and possibly lead to
a broad conflict. We believed that this was not in the interest of either
our two countries nor in the interest of people in the area. We believed
that such actions could only strain relations between our two countries,
which was not in our mutual interest. Therefore, we wanted to get the
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 8, Vance to Moscow, March 28–30, 1977. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Krimer; approved
in draft by Hyland; and approved by Twadell on May 9. The meeting took place at the
Kremlin. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, So-
viet Union, Document 20.
