Bolivia 217 BL–43. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Bolivian Affairs (Weise)1  Washington, December 29, 1960. SUBJECT Courtesy Call of Vice President of Bolivia Juan Lechin on Acting Secretary of State Livingston T. Merchant PARTICIPANTS Juan Lechin, Vice President of the Republic of Bolivia Victor Andrade, Bolivian Andrade Ambassador the United States Mr. Livingston T. Merchant, Acting Secretary ARA - Mr. Mann WST - Robert W. Weise, Jr. Lechin said that the purpose of his visit was to strengthen relations between Bolivia and the United States. He said he wished to discuss two problems with Mr. Merchant—­the first was related to the situation of anarchy which prevailed among labor in the Bolivian mining industry. The reason mineral production has not declined more in the past year, he said, is due solely to the dedication of the individual miner and his desire to maintain output. However, in order to increase production, the miners need food, tools, machinery, and prompt payment of wages, elements which are lacking under present conditions. Lechin said that many of the difficulties confronting the Bolivian mining industry were created by Patiño and the former mine owners because of their failure to plan long range production and to make provision for an adequate supply of electric power. The principal cause for the decline in minerals production is, however, the lack of capital. Lechin then said that United States aid to COMIBOL (for modern concentration facilities) was a step in the right direction and that it would help increase production, although it could not be expected that production would reach the 1952 level in the immediate future. He estimated that mineral production could be increased by about 30% within a year after the reorganization of COMIBOL. The shortage of electric power was still a factor which would continue to limit production. The second problem raised by Lechin concerned the difficulties with which the mine workers themselves were confronted. These difficulties included 1) lack of pulperia (commissary supplies); 2) terminal benefits for excess miners; and 3) the inability of COMIBOL to meet payrolls when due. He claimed the workers have had to accept 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 824.25/12–2960. Confidential.
