Covert and Overt Operations
843
309.
Letter From Congressmen Guyer, Fascell, Gilman, and
Broomfield to Acting Speaker of the Iranian Parliament
Yadollah Sahabi and Members of the Iranian Parliament1
Washington, July 2, 1980
Dear Sirs:
As you begin to fulfill your duties as Members of the new Iranian
Parliament, the undersigned Members of Congress of the United States
of America share with you a deep understanding of the magnitude of
the responsibilities which you have assumed as the elected representa-
tives of your people. It is this sense of duty and responsibility that
motivates us to express our sincere hope that our two nations and
peoples can reach a better understanding of each other’s goals and
aspirations for the future.
For this reason we express to you our deep concern about the
deterioration of our relationships as a result of the continued holding
of American citizens as hostages. Not only has this crisis resulted in a
serious breach of U.S.-Iranian relations, but its continuation has created
a critical global issue.
At a time when free nations are under attack from the forces of
growing hegemony and expansionism, it is in the best interests of both
of our nations to resolve this serious bilateral issue in order to confront
the more imposing threats to world peace. Accordingly, while we
are aware of all of the important domestic issues confronting your
government, we urge you to give the hostage issue your highest and
earliest priority as the first step in solving the more immediate and
crucial threats that free nations face in the world today.
Sincerely,
Tennyson Guyer
Dante B. Fascell
Benjamin A. Gilman
William Broomfield
1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-
tary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update Aug 1980. No classification
marking. Attached to a July 8 briefing memorandum from Saunders to Muskie, Christo-
pher, and Newsom entitled “Iran Update, July 8, 1980”. The letter was co-sponsored
and signed by 187 Congressmen, whose names are appended to the memorandum.
According to Saunders, Gilman initiated the letter. He asked that the letter, if approved, be
sent through the Swiss, with prepared talking points. The talking points are not attached.
