260
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“I will seek ratification of these covenants by the Congress of the
United States at the earliest possible date.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977,
Book II, pages 1734–1735)
Following the signing ceremony, the President hosted a working
luncheon for officials of Asian nations. The text of the President’s
remarks at the luncheon are ibid., pages 1735–1737. The President sum-
marized
the
event
in
his
diary:
“I
met
privately
with
[UN
Secretary-General] Kurt Waldheim [and] signed the Human Rights
Covenants, then had a reception with the specialized agency heads, a
very good group who do tremendous work around the world but are
often not recognized as being part of the UN. They help with health,
refugees, civilian air safety, atomic energy supervision, and so forth.
We probably waste a lot of money and effort in our own government
by not coordinating better with these standing groups, where more
than 85 percent of the UN budget goes. The only part we hear about are
crazy resolutions pushed through the General Assembly.” (Carter,
White House Diary, page 114)
80.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 10, 1977
SUBJECT
Possible Human Rights Initiatives
(1) Creation of a Human Rights Foundation
This would be modeled on the Inter-American Foundation which
is a quasi-governmental organization that receives its money through
Congressional appropriation, but has very loose ties with the gov-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: Policy Initiatives: 1/77–10/78. No classi-
fication marking. Tuchman did not initial the memorandum. Tuchman sent the memo-
randum to Brzezinski under an October 11 covering memorandum; Brzezinski wrote the
word “urgent” on the covering memorandum and added: “I think this is pointed in the
right direction. 1) I suggest you quickly talk to a few NSC staffers (Hunter, Huntington,
Armacost) to get their reactions. Also maybe Owen. 2) Give me a memo to the President,
suggesting these [unclear] for his approval, or a modest human rights program. ZB.”
(Ibid.)
