Chapter 2, January–June 1989  159
protects U.S. options to extend the range of missiles on both heavy 
bombers and on tactical aircraft to offset improved Soviet air defense, 
without having such missiles count as ALCMs under START. Although 
there are no current programs for nuclear armed cruise missiles with 
ranges between 600 and 1500 kilometers, some believe there is a clear 
military requirement to protect the option to deploy such systems in 
the future. Moreover, the 1,500 km range better protects U.S. options 
for future cruise missiles pending resolution of how future nuclear and 
nonnuclear cruise missile are to be distinguished from each other.
The U.S. has indicated some flexibility on the range issue in return 
for Soviet acceptance of the remainder of the U.S. ALCM- heavy bomber 
positions, although we have not specified what range we might accept. 
Some believe this flexibility should be withdrawn, either permanently 
or until satisfactory resolution of the ALCM distinguishability problem 
and definition of the military requirements for theater standoff nuclear 
weapons in a post-CFE environment.
Options—ALCM Range. The following options exist:
— Option 1—Accept a 600 kilometer range cutoff, contingent on 
resolution of:
— (Option 1A) the ALCM distinguishability issue; or
— (Option 1B) all remaining ALCM issues.
— Option 2—Accept a 1000 kilometer range cutoff, contingent on 
resolution of:
— (Option 2A) the ALCM distinguishability issue; or
— (Option 2B) all remaining ALCM issues.
— Option 3—Maintain the existing U.S. position of a 1500 kilome-
ter range cutoff, but continue to indicate flexibility in return for Soviet 
acceptance of other elements of our ALCM position.
— Option 4—Maintain the existing U.S. position of a 1500 kilome-
ter range cutoff; do not indicate any flexibility.
Discussion—ALCM Distinguishability. This issue is related to the 
previous two. We have agreed with the Soviets that all currently exist-
ing long-­range (with the range threshold still unresolved, as noted 
above) air-­to-­surface cruise missiles will be considered to be nuclear 
armed, and that future conventionally armed long-­range air-­to-­surface 
cruise missiles will either be distinguishable from nuclear-­armed cruise 
missiles by NTM or will be considered to be nuclear armed.
In establishing this position, the United States recognized that it 
provided no assurance against supposed conventional cruise missiles 
being illegally equipped with nuclear warheads. Some believe this is a 
serious problem, since it provides the Soviets with an option for deploy-
ing “conventional” cruise missiles (which we could not reliably verify
