Negotiating Channels 4. Farhang described the proposal as follows:3 A commission would be formed and sent to Iran; meanwhile action in the SC would be postponed. The Commission would return after a week in Iran and there would be a “symbolic” resolution adopted by the General Assembly that would “recognize” the Iranian grievances and claims to assets removed from Iran by the Shah. Once this resolution were adopted, the hostages would be released.4 Farhang expressed the view that the situation in Iran was more favorable for a solution than ever before. It was important to delay any action in the SC on sanctions, as there were elements in Iran that wished to exploit it. It was a war of nerves. 5. Amb McHenry pointed out that the proposal was vague and did not guarantee immediate release of the hostages. Moreover, there were procedural problems, as the GA was not in regular session and could not be convened easily. The current emergency session, he noted, had been called under a very special procedure following a veto in the SC.5 He saw other practical problems. Once the commission were formed it would have to arrive at conclusions regarding the claims to assets. Moreover, in order to delay action in the SC on the basis of such a proposal it was necessary to have confidence in the authority of those making the proposal. He was afraid the FonMin did not have the necessary authority. It appeared to us that only Khomeini and/or the group holding the hostages had the necessary authority. 6. McHenry suggested that it would be useful for Farhang to work out a package proposal with the SYG and then have it announced as having been approved by Khomeini. In the absence of something tangible we could not pull back from our sanctions proposal. Otherwise those in Iran who opposed the GOI policy and had been predicting its adverse effects would be undercut. Pointing out that he had in the past several times persuaded his govt to delay action, McHenry said he had difficulty now in convincing himself personally that further delay was warranted. 7. McHenry said he would inform Secretary Vance of the proposal and fully protect the confidentiality of Farhang’s direct approach to him. He repeated that he saw both substantive and procedural problems with the proposal, however. Moreover, if the commission idea
