Negotiating Channels
373
4. Farhang described the proposal as follows:3 A commission would
be formed and sent to Iran; meanwhile action in the SC would be
postponed. The Commission would return after a week in Iran and
there would be a “symbolic” resolution adopted by the General Assem-
bly that would “recognize” the Iranian grievances and claims to assets
removed from Iran by the Shah. Once this resolution were adopted,
the hostages would be released.4 Farhang expressed the view that the
situation in Iran was more favorable for a solution than ever before.
It was important to delay any action in the SC on sanctions, as there
were elements in Iran that wished to exploit it. It was a war of nerves.
5. Amb McHenry pointed out that the proposal was vague and
did not guarantee immediate release of the hostages. Moreover, there
were procedural problems, as the GA was not in regular session and
could not be convened easily. The current emergency session, he noted,
had been called under a very special procedure following a veto in
the SC.5 He saw other practical problems. Once the commission were
formed it would have to arrive at conclusions regarding the claims to
assets. Moreover, in order to delay action in the SC on the basis of
such a proposal it was necessary to have confidence in the authority
of those making the proposal. He was afraid the FonMin did not have
the necessary authority. It appeared to us that only Khomeini and/or
the group holding the hostages had the necessary authority.
6. McHenry suggested that it would be useful for Farhang to work
out a package proposal with the SYG and then have it announced as
having been approved by Khomeini. In the absence of something tangi-
ble we could not pull back from our sanctions proposal. Otherwise
those in Iran who opposed the GOI policy and had been predicting its
adverse effects would be undercut. Pointing out that he had in the past
several times persuaded his govt to delay action, McHenry said he had
difficulty now in convincing himself personally that further delay was
warranted.
7. McHenry said he would inform Secretary Vance of the proposal
and fully protect the confidentiality of Farhang’s direct approach to
him. He repeated that he saw both substantive and procedural prob-
lems with the proposal, however. Moreover, if the commission idea
3 According to telegram 127 from USUN, January 12, Farhang told Waldheim that
Iran would release the hostages as soon as the UN recognized the legitimacy of Iranian
demands for the return of the Shah and his assets. Waldheim suggested to Farhang that
a UN Commission of Inquiry might be the vehicle to achieve this end. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 1/11/80–1/
31/80)
4 An unknown hand underlined this sentence and, in the right margin, wrote: [text
not declassified].
5 The General Assembly was meeting in emergency session to discuss Afghanistan.
