January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1257
lieved that even a unilateral US assurance that the bill would not go for-
ward would suffice. Both Mobarak and Khalil expressed dismay over
Israeli settlement activity and actions on the West Bank but did not go
so far as to make Israeli assurances in these areas a pre-condition to re-
suming the talks.
Muskie
378.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to
President Carter1
Washington, May 23, 1980
SUBJECT
Oil Supply Agreement to Israel
At your request, the Israelis were told on May 2 that we wanted to
defer talks scheduled for May 4–6 on the U.S.-Israeli Memorandum of
Agreement on oil supply so that you and I could have a chance to
discuss this problem. I have now reviewed the issue and have exam-
ined the memorandum of May 1 sent to you by Charles Duncan and
Warren Christopher.2 I think we should move quickly to resume dis-
cussion of this issue with the Israelis. As Ambassador Lewis explained
in your meeting on May 1,3 further delay on our part in discussing the
terms for activation of the Agreement is likely to introduce an unneces-
sary irritant into our relationship with the Israelis. If you agree, I would
like to send a negotiating team to Israel sometime in June. Before we
approach the Israelis to propose specific dates, we need your approval
for our position.
The two basic principles which our negotiators will convey to the
Israelis are: (1) that the MOA is a supply unavailability agreement, and
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P860146–1165. Se-
cret; Nodis Attachment. Carter wrote “Ed. C.” in the upper right-hand corner of the
memorandum. Brzezinski returned the approved memorandum to Muskie under a May
27 covering memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P860146–1164)
2 Attached but not printed. The memorandum recommended a threshold formula
for the activation of the U.S.-Israel oil agreement and recommended that if the United
States provided foreign oil to Israel it would charge Israel the acquisitive cost plus han-
dling charges.
3 See Document 366.
