entering into a general funding arrangement for the relief credits be taken
up.
On December 14 the Department was informed by Mr. Leffingwell of J. P.
Morgan and Company that discussions were going on in London between
the Austrian Government and the European Relief Creditor States. It will be
remembered from Reparation Commission Annex 3258 B–1, a copy of
which was transmitted to you by a letter of October 21, 1927,31 that an
International Relief Bonds Committee, representing the Governments of
Denmark, France, Great Britain, Holland, Italy, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland met in Treasury Chambers, London, and, on or about July 14,
1927, agreed with the Austrian Government to replace the bonds of Relief
Series B of 1920 with renewal bonds maturing January 1, 1943, and bearing
5% interest. You will recall that a secretary of the American Embassy at
London attended meetings of this Committee during the last half of 1924.
The Department, however, has since that time not been in direct touch with
the proceedings of the Committee. It may be noted, in passing, that the
settlements which this Committee has negotiated with relief debtors have
been much more favorable to the creditor governments than the settlements
which the United States has negotiated with its debtors.
The Department has orally assured the Austrian Minister that his formal
proposal for the funding of the relief debts would be given prompt
consideration by this Department and by the Treasury Department. In this
connection, you will note the statement of the Austrian Minister that his
Government has made the same proposal to the governments of the eight
other relief creditor States.
Since substantial unanimity of action on the part of these governments will
be required if the proposed funding is to be carried out, there is no occasion,
pending further developments, to consider making at this time any
affirmative commitment regarding the eventual attitude of this Government.
This Department, however, feels that, if you concur, the Austrian Minister
might now be informed that this Government is in principle disposed to
consider at this time an arrangement for payment of the relief obligation
commencing in 1943, but that it desires a more specific statement of the
proposal before a further expression of views can be given him. Before
