552  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
interest groups upon which the functioning of the society will increas­
ingly depend as its industrialization proceeds. Another could be inabil­
ity of the Party to maintain its intellectual and ideological authority as 
awareness of the gap between reality and ideology increases, a process 
which will be accelerated as contacts with the West are extended. We 
consider that the effect of factors like these cannot now be reckoned to 
have any assured outcome. At present, we see no prospect of change on 
the Soviet domestic scene so fundamental as to diminish the motiva­
tion, will, or capacity of the regime to project its rapidly growing power 
externally.
II. TRENDS IN THE SOVIET ECONOMY
General
46. The performance of the Soviet economy has become a vitally 
important element in the impact which Soviet policy has on the world 
situation. This importance derives from an extraordinary record of 
growth over the last decade, a growth which is certain to continue at a 
rate faster than that of the US economy. The strength of the Soviet econ­
omy has provided a foundation of great national power for Soviet policy, 
first and foremost military power: the USSR has had available the means 
to maintain military programs and to develop advanced weapons on a 
scale which no other state except the US can undertake.
47. However, apart from its function as a basis for Soviet military 
power, there are three other ways in which the impact of the Soviet 
economy on the world situation is already observable to a greater 
or lesser degree, and is certain to increase. First is the direct politico-­
economic impact, arising from the ability of the USSR to initiate and 
support programs of economic aid or credit to foreign countries, to 
import goods from countries which would otherwise be hard-­pressed 
to find markets, and to export various materials in quantities which 
(if the Soviet leaders so desired) could disrupt previously existing 
patterns of world trade. In this connection, manipulation of prices is 
a key weapon of the USSR. Second is the political and psychological 
effect on underdeveloped countries, achieved through the exhibition 
of successful and rapid economic development by Communist meth­
ods, and through the encouragement of such countries to do likewise 
under Soviet advice—­the Soviet leaders attach great importance to this 
aspect. Third is the economic impact in a narrower sense, arising inev­
itably from the appearance in the world of a great new producing and 
trading unit, the influence of which could not fail to be great even if it 
were not deliberately used for political purposes by the Soviet leaders. 
In all three ways the Soviet economy will present a growing challenge 
to the Western world.
