1140 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement was try create difficulties for China. Objective of US was pursue own selfish interest. However things had not turned out exactly in accor­ dance reasoning my govt. Reason either side proposed abolition pol­ icy trade embargo was not one which could be explained by saying this policy had caused tremendous difficulty to his govt. The policy embargo had actually not created any great amount difficulty to his country; fact turns out to be new and industrialized China being built up. This fact already been recognized by the world. Because policy embargo unreasonable and violates interest all peoples of world includ­ ing ­Americans that they propose its abolition. Fact that even among US authorities there also some people who recognized necessity abolish­ ing trade embargo proved that this policy damaging to interest of all concerned. Number of people in US didn’t understand construction of new and industrialized China. These people deliberately creating false stories this regard. Now very good opportunty afforded to American correspondents and newsmen to report on this regard personally. 18. Wang charged US had consistently made propaganda saying his country iron curtain country or what we have termed bamboo cur­ tain country—and that his country didn’t offer access to people of other countries to visit it. They had continually been receiving many requests from American newspapermen to come China report news. General principle to deal with this matter now being adopted by most countries that visiting by newspapermen be reciprocal. This principle which should be followed is that same time American newspaper­ men being admitted to China, ­Chinese newspapermen should also be admitted to US. Might ask if US such a free country as we term it, would it have been able admit Chinese newspapermen. His gov­ ernment had not asked such question. His govt had acceded request newspapermen to visit his country. Might say this particularly lenient step his govt. would offer opportunity for correspondents of those American newspapers which in past had constantly slandered his country to be able visit his country themselves. This visit would also serve to promote mutual understanding and friendship between peo­ ples these two countries. 19. Wang said now that his govt accepted request various journal­ ists and commentators to visit his country, any attempt offer obstruc­ tio to these newsmen or to raise absolutely unreasonable demand in this regard he could only consider improper. This would amount to deliberate obstruction on part my govt against those American cor­ respondents to make personal tour his country and have facts. This would amount to deliberate attempt on part US Govt to continue refuse face facts on China. All this would make US by its own volition what it always calls an iron curtain country. This would show US Govt deliberately creating futher obstructions rather than removing exist­ ing obstructions between China and US. Action taken by US Govt that regard would inevitably invite condemnation of all people including
