1384  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
12. I continued Wang had this morning mentioned and his radio 
had carried reports making entirely erroneous statements concerning 
Mr. Tseng Kuang-­chih. Purport statements was after Tseng indicated 
desire return Wang’s country, Tseng arrested and falsely handled as per­
son mentally unsound. Facts of matter were quite different. Mr. Tseng 
entered U.S. on January 30, 1948 and originally entered as student 
Maryland University. In somewhat more than a year he showed signs 
of mental illness. Between June 1949 and March 1950 he was treated 
in Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore and Spring Groves State 
Hospital in Maryland. He improved and was released and entered into 
study at Ohio State University, then Illinois University, then Purdue 
University. Although visa for admission into US expired Sept. 1955, he 
was permitted remain. Although Wang had included his name on list 
given Feb. 9, 1956 as person who desired return Wang’s country, Tseng 
himself in March 1956 formally and specifically applied for extension 
his stay in U.S. It became evident to authorities at Purdue University 
where he studying that he again becoming mentally ill. They made 
arrangements for his admission to Wabash Valley Sanatorium on 
April 18, 1956. At recommendation of doctors in that hospital, he was 
admitted to Logansport Indiana State Hospital on May 25, 1956. At 
time moved from Wabash to Logansport he placed under restraint at 
recommendation of doctors for own protection. The restraint imme­
diately removed on admission Logansport Hospital. Any implication 
that this done on recommendation Immigration Service entirely false. 
It done entirely on recommendation doctors for own protection and 
those around him. Student advisor at Purdue remained in touch with 
him to see what could be done for him. After admission to hospi­
tal, he indicated to student adviser that he desired return to Wang’s 
country. Student adviser communicated with Dept. of State and there 
was also communication with Indian Embassy concerning his case. 
Doctors treating Tseng certified not advisable nor was he compe­
tent to travel alone. Thus there arose question payment for attendant 
for him during his travel. Indian Embassy said not authorized pay for 
an attendant. I would not go into details, but in January of this year 
Mr. Tseng informed the Indian Embassy that in order to facilitate ques­
tion of attendant, he had informed U.S. Immigration Service of desire 
leave country. Embassy replied they had no objection if he desired use 
facilities INS rather than Embassy. INS then arranged for an attend­
ant to accompany him. INS paid cost of such an attendant as well as 
cost of travel. He now returned safely to Wang’s country and arrived 
there. I thought handling this case by authorities my country showed 
utmost care in assisting him as well as facilitation his return to Wang’s 
country. Rather than ill-­considered complaints, I should have felt an 
expression of appreciation would be more in order. I regretted that 
cases of Americans imprisoned in Wang’s country desiring to return
