92 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —Deputy Secretary is mandating D/HA—assisted by SCA, H, L, S/P, and other concerned bureaus—to assure follow-up on Executive Branch action, legislation, and necessary administrative action to modify Section 212 (a) (28) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, expand refugee and asylum policies and protect US citizens abroad. 9. Public Diplomacy In the best of all worlds, promotion of human rights should stand on its own merits and speak for itself. We can, however, maximize impact and understanding for US policy on human rights by taking the following actions: —Mandate representation by USIA on the Department’s Human Rights Coordinating Group. Both PA and CU already participate. —Authorize preparation of human rights action plans by CU, PA, and USIA and subsequent review by the HRCG. See Tab 5 for illustrative outlines of such programs by CU and USIA.44 —PA should be tasked with preparing a plan which helps you and other senior-level officials of this Administration explain US policy on human rights. That plan should include projection of major speeches to be made (with an eye for optimal timing and impact vis-a`-vis other contemplated measures on human rights) and preparation of materials for mailing to important opinion leaders/groups and use by State Department employees speaking throughout the United States. A special effort should be made to encourage influential US intellectuals to speak out in behalf of human rights. —Authorize one member of the D/HA staff to be the point of coordination for those elements of the foreign affairs agencies dealing with human rights via press/media statements, programs for information, cultural or academic exchange, etc. Actions Being Taken —S/P is drafting a speech on human rights as a possible presentation for your “Law Day” appearance in Georgia, April 30.45 —The Deputy Secretary is asking CU and USIA, with the cooperation of other concerned bureaus, to draw on the action program outlines at Tab 5 for final HRCG review by June 1.46 44 Not found attached. The undated “CU Action Program on Human Rights” and “USIA Action Program on Human Rights” papers are attached to an undated version of the memorandum delivered to Habib’s office. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770118–2014) 45 Christopher bracketed this point and wrote in the margin: “I am back-up in case Secry c/n attend.” 46 For Christopher’s requests to the functional bureaus regarding preparation of a human rights action plan, see Document 52.
