Inasmuch as the Government of the United States is broadly interested in
the effecting of a suitable agreement on this subject, which will have
considerable moral force as condemning recourse to prohibitions and
restrictions, the Department would consider it unfortunate if conditions
were stipulated which would make unduly difficult the coming into effect
of the convention. Inasmuch as the decision of the conference on this head,
however, will depend to a considerable extent upon the attitude of the
European Governments, the Department does not give you precise
instructions on the point at this time but suggests that you discuss the
situation informally with your colleagues at the earliest practicable
opportunity and report the situation with your recommendations and a
request for instructions.
It may be suggested that the United States should be one of the parties
whose adherence to the convention would be requisite for its entering into
force. Should this question be raised, you might informally point out that
the United States does not apply prohibitions or restrictions of the character
that would be prohibited by the convention and that accordingly it would
seem unnecessary to stipulate that the adherence of the United States should
be prerequisite to the convention coming into effect. Nevertheless, if your
colleagues feel definitely that the United States should be mentioned, the
Department sees no ground on which objection to such a course could be
maintained.
With respect to paragraph (c), the Department would be glad to see the
convention come into force at the earliest practicable date inasmuch as its
object is to remove burdensome and arbitrary interferences with commerce.
As has already been suggested, any compromise that may be found
necessary might take the form of fixation of a date until which temporary
restrictions might be continued under the first paragraph of Article 6. Such
date should be the earliest practicable date.
During the course of the conference you will, of course, keep the
Department closely informed of important developments. The Department
will endeavor to instruct you promptly in relation to matters that may be
presented.
