Chapter 5, May–June 1990  685
d. Information about which types of surface ships and submarines 
are capable of deploying nuclear-­armed SLCMs. (S)
e. An annual exchange of data on nuclear SLCMs with ranges 
between 300 and 600 km. (S)
f. A statement that nuclear-­armed SLCMs with multiple inde-
pendently targeted warheads will not be produced, or deployed. (S)
2. Verifying Non-Deployed Mobile Missile Production. The U.S. 
may offer an approach to Perimeter Portal Continuous Monitoring 
(PPCM) based on the following principles:
a. Numerical reciprocity. (S)
b. Up to approximately four facilities in each country may be sub-
ject to PPCM. (S)
c. The Soviet facilities at which PPCM should be established is a 
combination of up to approximately four solid propellant rocket motor 
production facilities and final assembly facilities that would give us the 
highest confidence in monitoring the production of mobile ICBMs. (S)
Solid rocket motor production facilities in both countries at which 
PPCM is not established should be subject to an annual quota of man-
datory, short-­notice inspections if they are determined to be capable of 
producing first-­stage motors for mobile ICBMs. All other solid rocket 
motor production facilities in both countries at which PPCM has not 
been established should be subject to periodic, scheduled tours to con-
firm that they have not been given the capability to produce first-­stage 
motors for mobile ICBMs. (S)
The U.S. and Soviet Union should first exchange lists of all their 
facilities that currently produce first stage motors of mobile ICBMs 
and other facilities at which they are prepared to accept PPCM. These 
lists will be mutually agreed. The two sides will then agree to establish 
PPCM at specified facilities on these lists. (S)
The U.S. and Soviet Union will also exchange lists of all solid pro-
pellant rocket motor production facilities. Following the identification 
of those facilities at which PPCM will be established, an exchange of 
data and one-­time tours of all solid propellant rocket motor production 
facilities in both countries should be conducted to determine which 
facilities will be subject to mandatory short-­notice inspections, and 
which will be subject to periodic, scheduled tours. (S)
In order to implement this regime in the Soviet Union as soon as 
possible, the U.S. may accept the simultaneous implementation of such 
a regime in the United States, even if mobile ICBMs are not yet in pro-
duction in the U.S. at that time. (S)
The U.S. should propose that questions about activities at facili-
ties that are not subject to either short-­notice inspections or periodic, 
scheduled tours may be raised in the Joint Compliance and Inspection
