1140 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 3. that a Department Notice on this subject be distributed to all employees in the foreign affairs agencies.4 Attachment Draft Telegram5 Washington, June 27, 1980 All Chiefs of Mission The events of the past year have made us all more conscious of the risks of war, and therefore more committed to the tasks of peace. The traditional threats to peace—violation of national borders, seizure of hostages, civil strife, terrorism—are easy to recognize. But there are other threats to the health and well-being of people and nations which can erode and ultimately destroy the chances for a peaceful and prosperous world. The condition of hungry, frustrated people, many of them torn from home, family, or country; inflation; energy shortages; drought; lack of economic opportunity—all are problems which demand our urgent attention. Discrimination against women must, I believe, be placed among these threats. It is clearer today than ever before that the advancement of women’s status is an indispensable aspect of the overall development and social and economic well-being of nations. The United States has given prominent attention to the role of women in developing nations. The 1973 “Percy Amendment” to the US Foreign Assistance Act requires that US foreign aid programs encourage and promote the integration of women into the national economies in the developing countries. The United States was the first country with such legislation governing its overseas aid and encouraged OECD–DAC donor countries to take similar positions. Some of them now have adopted similar language governing their foreign aid programs. But the issue extends far beyond that of the developing nations. In May 1979, the US Department of State announced and issued as a joint directive to its missions in every country that “a key objective of US foreign policy is the advancement worldwide of the status and conditions of women.” At this midpoint in the UN Decade for Women, marked by the Copenhagen conference, it is extremely important to reaffirm our strong 4 Muskie placed a check mark on the approval line on July 3. There is no indication that the message was sent. 5 Unclassified.
