Afghanistan planning for the operation began in earnest about a month before it was carried out—i.e., during the latter part of November. At that time, the Soviets may have perceived: —That SALT II was at death’s door anyway. —That prospects for obtaining MFN treatment from the U.S. in the near future were non-existent. —That NATO was not going to heed Soviet warnings about the dangers of the impending decision on long-range theater nuclear forces. —That the U.S. administration was committed to a defense buildup, whether or not SALT was ratified. —That the U.S. was actively expanding its military presence in the region and, if it succeeded in obtaining basing for the Rapid Deployment Force, would be in a better position later to oppose something like the Afghan invasion than it is right now.3 —That the present slump in U.S.-Soviet relations would last at least until after U.S. elections, with or without Afghanistan. —That the just-ended first round of Sino-Soviet negotiations showed that relations with China were no better, but also no worse. —That the crisis in U.S.-Iranian relations would tend to minimize the impact of Iran’s negative reaction and, at a minimum, prevent Iran from turning to closer relations with the U.S. in reaction to the move into Afghanistan. —That the U.S. cut-off of military aid to Pakistan would leave Pakistan little alternative but to accommodate to the Soviet move. —That the weakness of India’s caretaker government would minimize the likelihood of a sharp shift in Indian foreign policy as a result of the Soviet move, while the good prospects for Mrs. Gandhi’s return to power give the Soviets hope for continued good relations with India over the longer run. 8. In sum, the world scene as viewed from the Kremlin offered no overriding deterrent to moving now. Action would stave off future dangers, and circumstances combined to minimize the losses. Yet taking this major step still would have been a hard-fought decision, and it is tempting to speculate that one or another constellation of leaders in the Politburo gained the upper hand and decided to move on their own. There is, in fact, speculation in Moscow that runs along the lines that Brezhnev would not have concurred had he been in the thick of 3 Carter established the Rapid Deployment Force under PD/NSC–18, “U.S. National
