Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
131
hensive peace with minor territorial changes but transitional security
arrangements and with a homeland for the Palestinians, and by doing
so publicly you have made a real breakthrough. The need is now for the
parties concerned to understand that we are committed to these basic
principles and that they provide the point of departure for more sub-
stantive negotiations among themselves. Again, this is a significant
step forward from almost everything that the United States has said on
the subject for at least ten to fifteen years, but persistence on our part
will be required.
Latin America
We are still shaping our basic approach, but I am hopeful. I use the
word “approach” advisedly; it will not be a new policy, something
which every new Administration has tended proudly to proclaim—
and then forget. Instead of focusing on Latin America as something
special, to be protected by the Monroe Doctrine (which most Latin
Americans resent) you are moving towards an approach which stresses
bilateral relations, of various types, with individual Latin American
states, and which deals with their broader problems in a wider global
context. I believe this is responsive to their pride and to their needs.
The major cloud is the deterioration in our relationship with Brazil,
something which ought to be repaired, given Brazil’s present and po-
tential role in the Western Hemisphere. Brazil is an emerging super-
power and it is clearly in the U.S. interest to have it on our side. It can be
a source of stability and influence not only in regard to Latin America
but even in regard to Africa, in which it is likely to become increasingly
engaged.
Trilateral Relations
We have made an excellent start, especially with the Mondale
visit3 which put so much emphasis on genuine consultations. This re-
flected your emphasis on the primacy of these relations; and was fur-
ther underlined by your meetings with Callaghan and Fukuda, and by
your phone calls to Giscard and Schmidt.4 However, the nuclear prolif-
eration issue has become a serious bone of contention. Your statement
3 See Document 16.
4 The President met with Callaghan on March 10 and Fukuda on March 21. The
memoranda of conversation of these meetings are scheduled for publication in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe, and Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
XIV, Korea; Japan. The memoranda of the President’s March 3 telephone conversation
with Giscard and his conversation with Schmidt are scheduled for publication in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
