National Security Policy 927 States Intelligence Board. The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of the Navy, estimate that the Soviet pro­ gram is likely to provide about 140 ICBMs on launcher in mid-­1961. The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, and the Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, believing that Soviet planners would regard the advantages to be gained as justifying additional effort, estimate that the number of Soviet ICBMs on launcher in mid-­1961 is likely to be towards the high side of the 140–200 range. The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, also estimates that the number of Soviet ICBMs on launcher in mid-­1961 is likely to be towards the high side of this range, but it should be noted that he estimates the character­ istics of the Soviet ICBM to be considerably better than those estimated by the majority. All members of the United States Intelligence Board believe a Soviet force of more than 200 ICBMs on launcher in mid-1961 to be unlikely. (Para. 47) H. The development of the Soviet ICBM force beyond 1961 would be likely to be affected by such considerations as the actual development of the target system to be attacked, the prospects for a greatly improved Soviet ICBM, and the prospects (on both sides) for an effective anti-­ICBM, as well as by the general development of the world situation and of rela­ tions between the US and the USSR. Any figures for future years should be reviewed in the light of such considerations and of evidence on the actual progress of the Soviet ICBM program. Based on our estimate of the USSR’s present program and intentions, we believe that the number of Soviet ICBMs on launcher is likely to be in the range of 250–350 in mid-­ 1962, and 350–450 in mid-­1963.6 (Para. 48) 6 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not concur in the last sen­ tence of Conclusion D, Conclusions E and F, and the last sentence of Conclusion H. He does not believe that Soviet behavior, as we have observed it, warrents the judgment that their objectives would be satisfied by attainment of only substantial deterrence. At any rate, he does not believe that the economic and physical difficulties involved in attaining “decisive military superiority” would be or are determinative. (See also his footnote to Annex B) Rather, he believes that the Soviet leaders, perceiving the potentialities inherent in ICBMs, are attempting to achieve a capability for decision through exploitation of this force or actual launching, if necessary. Assuming the improved reliability, accuracy, and war-­head of the Soviet ICBM as he estimates them, the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF believes that the Soviet leaders will assign a high priority to building an ICBM force which would give the USSR a reasonably high assurance of being able to inflict severe damage on SAC operational air bases and at the same time a somewhat lower degree of assurance of similar damage on US ICBM sites. He believes that such an objective could be attained with an operational ICBM force of about 250 (185 on launcher) by mid-­1961 and 500 (385 on launcher) by mid-­1962. It is generally agreed that the Soviets have both the technical and industrial capability to produce such a force.
