526  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
DR–30.	
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the 
President1
 
Washington, December 8, 1960.
SUBJECT
Application of Additional Economic Measures against the Dominican Republic
Within the next several days it will be necessary for the Department 
of Agriculture to estimate consumption of sugar in the United States. It 
appears that it will be legally necessary to continue purchases of sugar 
from the Dominican Republic for the first three months of calendar year 
1961. Such purchases will include approximately 28,000 tons under the 
regular quota which must be purchased at the United States price and 
somewhere in the neighborhood of 200,000 tons extra-­quota which it is 
planned to purchase at the world price. A separate memorandum on 
this subject will be forwarded to you shortly.
While we hope that it will be possible to temper the effect in 
Venezuela of an announcement concerning sugar purchases with an 
indication that the Administration intends to recommend that the next 
Congress grant discretionary authority to the President to forego such 
purchases, this will nevertheless create a strain on our relations with the 
Betancourt regime and will possibly strengthen communist-­inspired 
opposition to Betancourt.
At the same time we are faced with the necessity of taking a 
position on the question of whether the American States should on 
a multilateral basis apply additional economic measures against the 
Dominican Government. The Council of the Organization of American 
States was requested by the San José Foreign Ministers Meeting to 
study the desirability and feasibility of extending economic sanctions 
to other commodities. A special committee was created by the Council 
for this purpose and any further delay on our part in taking a position 
will expose us to Venezuelan charges of bad faith.
In view of this situation I recommend that you authorize the 
Department of State to suggest to the special committee that the United 
States will be prepared to cooperate in a multilateral program prohib-
iting the exportation of petroleum and petroleum products, trucks and 
spare parts to the Dominican Republic. A statement which it is pro-
posed that Ambassador Bonsal make before the special committee 
early next week is enclosed for your consideration.2
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project CleanUp, “Dominican Republic.” Confidential.
2 Philip W. Bonsal, U.S. Ambassador to Cuba from March 3, 1959, to October 28, 
1960. The text of the statement is printed as Document DR–30, Enclosure.
