134 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I provide definite and clear-headed leadership, and our weaker allies (and all of them are much weaker than we) will be looking to you for personal leadership. [Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.] 33. Address by President Carter Before the Permanent Council of the Organization of American States1 Washington, April 14, 1977 Mr. Chairman, members of the Permanent Council, Mr. Secretary General,2 Permanent Observers of the OAS, Chiefs of the Specialized Organizations and Agencies, members of the press, distinguished guests: Hace tres an˜os, tuve el honor y placer de hablar ante la Asemblea General de la OEA celebrada en mi estado de Georgia. Igual que en Atlanta, hoy seguire´ el consejo de mis compan˜eros, que opinan—para el beneficio de buenas relaciones—serı´a mejor que no hablara en espan˜ol hoy. [Three years ago I had the honor and pleasure of speaking before the General Assembly of the OAS held in my State of Georgia.3 As I did then in Atlanta, I will today follow the advice of my friends, who have the opinion that, in the interest of good relations, it would be better for me not to speak in Spanish today.] Since I can also speak English, I will shift to that language. [Laughter] That day in Atlanta, 3 years ago, I shared with you some of the thoughts that my wife and I had brought back from our visits to several of the American States. I spoke particularly for the need for constant cooperation, consultation, and harmony among the nations of this hemisphere. I believe that just as strongly today as President of the United States as I did 3 years ago as Governor of Georgia. I am delighted to be with you in this beautiful House of the Americas. For nearly three decades the OAS has stood for mutual re- 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 611–616. All brackets are in the original. The President spoke at 12:26 p.m. at the Pan American Union. The Department forwarded Carter’s remarks to all American Republic diplomatic posts in telegram 85145, April 15. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770132–0029) 2 Reference is to OAS Secretary-General Alejandro Orfila and OAS Permanent Council Chairman Juan Pablo Gomez-Pradilla. 3 The OAS General Assembly met in Atlanta during late April–early May 1974.
