980 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II of drinking water for the entire population and to the final disposal of waste water; and should also actively involve, encourage and support efforts being undertaken by local voluntary organizations; (b) That Governments reaffirm their commitment made at Habitat to ‘adopt programs with realistic standards for quality and quantity to provide water for urban and rural areas by 1990, if possible’; (e) That in 1980 the national programmes which have been implemented for that purpose, and the extent to which the countries concerned have succeeded in mobilizing local and national support should be reviewed by an appropriate mechanism to be determined by the Economic and Social Council and based on the use of existing machinery, with a view to attaining coordinated action toward agreed targets;” Extent of Present U.S. Assistance Efforts Direct AID funding for community water supply and sanitation has had an irregular pattern varying between $16 million to 79 million between FY 76 and FY 78. In FY 78 AID is funding $43 million directly for community water supply and sanitation (CWS). In addition some $29.7 million is being spent on projects in which there is a CWS component. (These are mostly well sinking and farm projects.) In addition some $96.5 million in Supporting Assistance (SA) is funded for CWS largely in Egypt for the “Canal Cities Water and Sanitation” project. ($12 million also is going to Portugal.) However, AID is tentatively only budgeting $23.4 million in FY 79 for CWS development assistance and $60 million for SA. Funding for projects in which CWS is a component and SA programs similarly will experience a major decline. An important reason for this is the inclusion in FY 78 funds of new major projects especially those in Egypt. However, the overall marked decline projected for FY 79 will impact untimely upon total amounts devoted to this sector. Multilateral Programs A number of international development lending institutions (IDLIs) have programs relevant to community water systems. In particular, the World Bank has projects in water supply and sewage. They also support some programs dealing with the related problems of population and nutrition but little in other areas of health. (They only have a Onchocerciasis Control Program in West Africa.) The Bank decided not to fund health programs directly but to incorporate health questions into the basic design of projects. Character of US Initiative In keeping with the importance of the problem for human health and productivity and in following up on the relevant UN resolutions,
