252 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III that the industry would balk and simply continue to file anti-dumping cases. The most we could get agreement on was that the report would reference the fact that the steel industry’s problems were not solely due to imports but that costs were also a factor and some very general language would be put in about costs. In addition, the statement will be made that it is the hope of the Administration that the reference price system will be used for increased production, with the implication that it should not be used for price increases (although Charlie Schultze feels that the industry will use this to increase their profit margins). Barry Bosworth pointed out that since the reference price is based on the cheapest foreign production costs, there is a built-in pressure on price restraint.9 8. Shift to Fabricated Products—In its memo STR raised the concern that since the reference price would not apply to certain steel imports, such as carbon steel plate and fabricated steel products, foreign governments would simply shift their imports to these lines.10 It was agreed that a general statement would be made in the report concerning a monitoring effort by Customs on such products. 9. Exchange Rates—OMB in its memo had raised the question of whether the recent changes in exchange rates may reduce the need for industry protection.11 It was felt that the reference price system was still needed but that exchange rates would be one of the factors that would be reviewed when the reference price was evaluated.12 10. Fixing the Reference Prices—After the meeting, Tony Solomon indicated that he had reasonable confidence in the ability of Treasury to fix the “right” level of reference prices. They will use data developed by COWPS in their study of the steel industry.13 II. DOMESTIC PROPOSALS 1. Reduction in Guideline Life—Questions had been raised about reducing the guideline life of steel equipment from its current level of 18 years to 15 years. You had questioned its impact on other heavy industry in your note.14 Treasury mentioned the following: 9 Carter wrote “Business-Labor-Govt task force should address productivity question” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. 10 The STR memorandum was not further identified; however, Strauss discussed his concerns about the Steel Task Force report in a November 29 memorandum to Carter. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [6]) 11 The OMB memorandum was not further identified. 12 Carter wrote “Don’t eliminate this factor” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. 13 Carter wrote “Consult & let me see ref price & comments” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. 14 Not further identified.
