3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
873
systems in Europe. We maintain our proposal to this effect but for it to
be translated into reality it is necessary, of course, to restore the status
which existed prior to the December session of the NATO Council.2
It is also known to You, I believe, that in order to overcome the im-
passe created as a result of the said NATO decision we are ready to
adopt yet another alternative, whereby the questions concerning
medium-range nuclear missile systems in Europe would not be subject
of separate negotiations but would be discussed, after the SALT–2
Treaty enters into force, in the framework of SALT–3 negotiations and,
naturally, on the basis of those principles which are agreed between
our countries for the SALT–3 negotiations.
Although there followed no formal objection from the US side and
the other NATO countries against such an alternative, it has proved im-
possible of practical realization since the United States does not ratify
the SALT–2 Treaty.
Having thoroughly weighed up the existing situation and being
guided by broader interests of peace and international security we de-
cided to undertake one more step.
Without withdrawing our former proposals we expressed our-
selves in the course of the Moscow conversations with FRG Chancellor
H. Schmidt in favor of starting negotiations to discuss simultaneously
and in organic relationship both medium-range nuclear systems in Eu-
rope and American forward-based nuclear systems.
That these weapon systems are to be considered as being interre-
lated and also in connection with the question of their locations i.e. the
bases, is determined by the factual state of affairs. After all, the Soviet
Union cannot disregard hundreds of American nuclear carriers which
due to their location can reach the territory of the USSR and its allies
and which thereby constitute a substantial and integral element of the
general strategic situation. The same is also true of the bases per se
which not only expand operational capabilities of the systems already
there but make it possible in a short time, additionally and on a great
scale, to increase the number of such systems.
It is not a new question at all. This question was already subject of
discussion in the process of negotiations on strategic arms limitation. It
was touched upon by us too when we met in Vienna last year.
We are prepared to begin right now the negotiations that we are
proposing, without waiting for the SALT–2 Treaty ratification. How-
ever, practical implementation of agreements that could be reached
during these negotiations, as is understood, would be carried out only
after the Treaty enters into force. This is necessitated by the fact, that
2 See footnote 2, Document 277.
