National Security Policy  1089
the thing doesn’t work in January, then what should we do, get a new 
SAC commander? Maybe it’s the man. That’s not it. Douglas said that.
23. The President listened. I really don’t know whether I made the 
points well or not. There’s no doubt about it, after two hours you get 
tired of clawing your way up the cliff over and over again.
24. I think the President was the only one there who would listen 
at all. The other people, they just don’t want to see—I’m afraid. Our job 
now is to get this paper ready. I suspect they’ll call a special meeting 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Gates and Twining will probably go over 
this, [illegible in the original] “copy everything down that you can”. 
The only thing I care about is the final result, that the final decision 
will not be made until the two [illegible in the original] been tested and 
checked and analyzed by every agency that knows how to do it, and 
everybody that wants to do it. If the Joint Chiefs of Staff want to do this 
thing, they can do it, but it must be done quickly. So we’ve got to get 
our corps of experts here and this is the most important thing we’ve got 
to do. Not to tear it to pieces. We want to make this thing work because 
if it does work, it will be helpful, but I don’t think it can work. But if it 
does God bless us, let’s make it work. What I didn’t say to Twining was: 
Supposing this thing is lousy (and I think it will be) in January, that’s 
the reason why you don’t want to give it a trial, that you want to make 
the decision now because you feel you don’t want to let it all show the 
light of day.
25. I am afraid I used my quota of mercy with the President— 
which is all right. I think he took the only decision he could take 
under the circumstances because he could not decide to throw this 
into the Joint Chiefs of Staff now. He could not have decided that with 
the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense and the 
Chairman all against it. What disappointed me a little bit was he used 
so many of their arguments back in trying to persuade me. I know 
that’s a technique.
26. I came away with the same opinion I had when I went in there. 
I didn’t get mad. Nobody got mad. Twining got a little emotional.
27. Captain Aurand, who had been present at the debrief, made the 
following comments: I think one of the most important points is this 
business is just the first strike. From there on the Unified Commands 
do their own planning and also consideration must be given in the 
initial plan for this posture that it will leave and which the Unified 
Commanders will be left. Twining cannot ignore that. It can’t be that 
all out.
