552
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
225.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 9, 1979
SUBJECT
Non-Proliferation and the CTB (C)
In the attached letter,2 Gerry Smith states his view of the linkage
between US non-proliferation goals and a CTB. He concludes that the
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) will be seriously endangered if a CTB
agreement is not reached before the international NPT Review Confer-
ence scheduled for June 1980. (C)
It is already clear that there will be two contentious issues at the
NPT Conference: the failure of the nuclear suppliers to live up to their
obligations under Article IV and Article VI of the Treaty. Article IV in-
volves the “right” of all parties to the “fullest possible exchange” of ma-
terials and technology for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The ef-
forts of the London Suppliers Group and of unilateral US policy make
this a particularly sensitive issue. Article VI pledges the parties to
pursue measures to end the nuclear arms race. Debate will focus on the
success or failure of the major powers in reaching SALT and CTB agree-
ments, and on the adequacy of the provisions of these agreements.
Some countries will argue that enough time has now elapsed to prove
that by failing to control the nuclear arms race, the weapons states do
not intend to live up to their half of the NPT bargain, and that the
Treaty should therefore be abandoned. (C)
Certainly a CTB agreement will make the Review Conference
much easier for us. Beyond this, it is difficult to judge whether Gerry is
accurate in predicting the consequences if we fail to reach a CTB agree-
ment by then. (C)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you read Gerry Smith’s letter. (U)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 42, Proliferation: Comprehensive Test Ban,
1/79–10/80. Confidential. Sent for action. Aaron initialed the memorandum for Brzezin-
ski. Carter initialed the top right-hand corner of the memorandum indicating that he
saw it.
2 See Document 224.
