Chapter 2, January–June 1989 135 — When negotiations resume, we should retain the 3000–3300 ICBM warhead sublimit, which the Soviets have not accepted. At issue is whether the negotiator should indicate flexibility to the Soviets and seek a trade. — There is no consensus on whether we should modify our proposed ban on heavy ICBM production, flight-­testing and modernization. At issue is whether to satisfy the Jackson amendment on U.S.-Soviet equality by seeking the elimination of all heavies, or by giving the U.S. a de jure right to deploy heavy ICBMs. We recommend you confirm the consensus that the basic START levels (6000 warheads, 4900 ballistic missile warheads, and 1600 delivery vehicles) remain in our interest. (We understand you have reservations on the 1600 number that you may wish to raise at this point.) The discussion should also confirm that our shift in emphasis from “reductions” to “stability,” in our rationale for START, recognizing that it needs to be handled in a way that takes account of the political risks of appearing to abandon the goal of “deep reductions.” You may want to use this issue to return to the question (which you broached at the May 25 NSC meeting) of whether it is in our interest to encourage a long-­ term Soviet shift to air-­breathing systems. Alternatively, you may want to defer consideration of this question until next week’s NSC meeting that will consider our specific negotiating positions on air-­breathing systems. If you do decide to raise it in the context of our fundamental START limits, you could note that the May 25 NSC discussion of this issue did not reach a conclusion on the basic issue. — We have proposed counting rules in START for bombs and cruise missiles that encourages a shift to air breathing systems. (Bombs and short-­range missiles count as one per heavy bomber, regardless of how many are deployed; ALCMs count as ten per heavy bomber, regardless of how many are deployed; SLCMs are not limited.) — In order to maintain our own force flexibility we have also proposed to distinguish between bombers that can carry ALCMs and those that cannot; and between nuclear and conventional ALCMs. Neither of these distinctions can be verified with reasonable confidence. — The present loose limits on air-­breathers also gives lie to the argument that START will yield “deep reductions” to “6000” weapons,” an issue that could become a serious public relations problem in the future. — However, the alternative of proposing stricter limits on bombs and ALCMs could reduce significantly the number of weapons the U.S. could deploy under START, leaving us open to criticism that START is “undercutting deterrence.”
