Eastern Europe Region
151
back to the reality that we need the Russians pretty badly, chiefly in
arms control.
10. If that is where we are headed in the post-Polish intervention
period, be it in one, two or however many years, we should be sure
we do not make it tougher for the EE’s than we do for the Russians.
I and, I suspect, others who have been involved in US-Czechoslovak
affairs feel that we transferred some [of] our policy rage at the Russians
over 1968 to the injured party, Czechoslovakia. We should try to avoid
that policy pothole in a Polish 1980, or 1981.
11. I realize that history cannot be telescoped. We could not have
adopted the attitude to Kadar in 1956 that we did in 1966, or even
more in 1976. Polich [Poland] has to take its natural course, and it is
often inevitably slow. I would not go so far as to suggest that we
should be on the alert for Kadar equivalents in any Polish variation
on the Russian intervention theme, but we should be careful not to
paint ourselves too firmly into too many corners too quickly. Before
anyone yells “quisling,” it would be well to reflect on the irony that
Kadar, of all people, would be the last best hope left in EE of a mildly
progressive internal regime if the present Polish strivings collapse.
12. I have pointed to economic mismanagement as the root cause
of low-grade crisis through EE, and it is in the economic area that
we and others would face particularly sensitive decisions in a post-
intervention scene. That is, assuming that the Russians/EE’s do not
retreat into the bunker of strict autarky but continue to be interested,
as I tend to think they must be, in developing economic relations and
limited cooperation with the West.
13. It would not be easy for a USG, or other Western countries, to
extend economic assistance to a post-intervention Polish regime, yet
Poland in the aftermath of intervention would need economic assist-
ance even more desperately than it does now. We could adopt the
position that that is a Russian affair, and let it go at that, but I hardly
think that simply washing our hands of it will satisfy public opinion,
particularly American Polonia. I would not exclude our making care-
fully conditioned offers of assistance as a way of re-entering the Polish
situation and making our presence felt. This leaves it up to the other
side, Polish or Russian, to turn us down, and the onus would be on
them while we would look—and actually be—constructive.
14. Immediate food aid, as distinct from broader economic assist-
ance, would become particularly acute in a post-intervention situation.
I believe we would find ourselves under public pressure, on broad
humanitarian grounds, to try to help the Polish people in what would
doubtless be a time of distress. Although I have reservations about
