264  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
contradiction between our modernization plans to deploy two kinds 
of mobile missiles and our START proposal to ban them. Some see a 
similar contradiction between our START goal of enhancing stability 
and our proposal to ban mobile missiles that enhance stability through 
increased ICBM survivability. In an era of tight defense budgets, argu-
ments that we need to build these expensive systems in order to bar-
gain them away may fall on increasingly deaf ears.
Others argue that we should maintain our current START position 
to ban mobile missiles at least until we are more confident that Congress 
will support rail-­garrison MX and/or the new road-­mobile ICBM on a 
sustained basis. They also assert that we should keep the ban in place 
until we have a devised an acceptable substitute that protects our mod-
ernization program and meets our verification requirements.
If you do decide to drop our current ban, there are two broad 
alternatives. One would permit both sides to deploy rail-­mobile and 
road-­mobile ICBMs (Option 3), subject to numerical limits and other 
restrictions. This alternative would allow the Soviets to keep both of 
the mobile ICBMs they are now deploying, and would allow us to pro-
ceed with both of the mobile missile programs you have proposed to 
Congress. It would, however, pose the most difficult verification prob-
lems. ACDA supports this option along with advance consultations on 
the Hill to ensure support for U.S. mobile ICBM programs.
The second alternative (Option 2) would permit mobile ICBMs that 
carry only one warhead, but would ban mobile missiles carrying multi-
ple warheads (MIRVs). This option would allow us to proceed with our 
new road-­mobile “Midgetman” ICBM and the Soviets to retain their 
SS–25 missile. The rebasing of the MX missile from silos to trains that 
you recently proposed to Congress would be prohibited, as would the 
Soviet SS–24 rail-­mobile missile.
Many argue that the military risks associated with MIRVed 
mobiles are greater because for every Soviet missile that goes unde-
tected, ten warheads could have been covertly added to the Soviet 
strategic force. They argue that permitting single warhead mobile 
missiles and prohibiting MIRVed mobile missiles is the best way to 
reconcile our competing objectives of enhanced ICBM survivability 
and effective verification of a START Treaty. They also believe that 
this alternative would strengthen support for the ICBM moderniza-
tion program that is in trouble on the Hill.
Others argue that a ban on MIRVed mobiles would mean that the 
U.S. would not be able to deploy a mobile ICBM until the Midgetman 
was ready in the mid-­to-­late 1990s. They also worry about the afford-
ability of a mobile ICBM force composed exclusively of expensive 
single-­warhead missiles, and about the credibility of our deterrent if 
budget constraints restrict us to a very small number. Finally, they fear
