Department’s telegram No. 11, June 24, with instructions to advise Chamberlain informally of U. S. Government’s surprise concerning British attitude at Geneva, in view of repeated assurances that Great Britain would accept parity with the United States in all classes of naval vessels. includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59] June 26 (32) From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Optimistic view of American delegation that obstacles, such as satisfying Japanese amour-propre while maintaining Washington treaty ratio and acceding to British desire for no limitation on number of small cruisers, can be overcome; efforts to dispose as soon as possible of British suggestions concerning Washington treaty. 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59] June 27 (33) From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Information, for State and Navy Departments, that comparison of British and American capital ship tonnage on the Washington standard-ton basis shows that excess British tonnage is even greater than was previously indicated. 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 60] June 27 (35) From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Suggestion that British delegation might be aided in withdrawal from untenable position regarding revision of Washington treaty, if the Secretary would discuss frankly with British Embassy in Washington, U. S. interest in nonrevision of the treaty, insistence upon parity with Great Britain, and desire for curtailment of naval building program. 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61] June 27 (36) From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Expression of regret to Japanese delegate that his Government has revised its instructions to permit acquiescence in British proposals for discussion of capital ships. 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62] June 27 From the British Ambassador Information, supplied at Chamberlain’s direction and for communication to President Coolidge, that the British 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc.
