1346  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
including those now on Taiwan, to recognize that steps now being 
taken by U.S. were attempt enslave Chinese nation.
3. Wang continued Chinese people desire be kindly terms with 
American people. Chinese people not to blame for failure bring about 
improvement Sino-American relations. In discussions here his side 
already contributed series efforts with aim improve relations between 
two countries. Proposals made by his side calling for meeting between 
Chinese and American Foreign Ministers, removal of trade barriers, 
and peoples contacts and cultural exchange are just such effective steps 
for improvement in relations between the two countries. If there still 
any desire on part my government for improvement relations as well 
as resolution questions between China and America he did not see 
why there should be further delay our getting down to serious discus­
sions. Only by putting forward constructive opinions and display of 
good faith, rather than entangling talks by introducing side issues, can 
improvement in relations be effected. This what he had always tried 
achieve in these talks.
4. I replied he had spoken of what he alleged were attempts of U.S. 
entangle these talks with side issues. Impossible for me understand 
how he could make such statement in light history steps leading up to 
these talks and talks themselves. In fact I had been one who had been 
attempting keep us to resolution problems with which we given to 
deal. No amount such statements could change fact our governments 
gave us as first task question of return civilians.
5. I continued in Terms Reference setting up these talks his gov­
ernment had agreed that was first question. Even before meeting began 
his authorities stated this question would be easy to settle with respect 
Americans detained in his country, and my authorities, even before these 
meetings began, settled it with respect to Chinese in my country. When 
his authorities agreed to those Terms of Reference and made those state­
ments, they well knew from the talks which he and I had had here in 1954, 
and the subsequent contacts between respective consular officers, that my 
country not interested theoretical concepts or abstract theories; that it was 
not then concerned about Americans who appeared to have chosen to 
remain in his country or other irrelevant questions—what we might term 
side issues. It interested solely ensuring that a specific group Americans 
should be able return their country—Americans who being denied their 
right return either through refusal exit permits or through imprisonment. 
If there any possibility doubt this regard, it would have been entirely 
­dispelled by statements I had made at very opening our discussions 
here. Indeed our discussions respect Americans leading up to Agreement 
September 10, 1955 had to do entirely with that group Americans whose 
names I had given him. He had given me every reason believe agreement 
proposed by him would lead to “expeditious” resolution that problem, 
and on that basis I had entered into Agreed Announcement.
