3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1977 113 Gromyko said (facetiously) that he was really overenthusiastic, but since this was a “hot question” and “a hot list”, he would not even touch it but would ask Mr. Sukhodrev to take it along. What could he tell the Secretary in this regard? The Soviet authorities would consider the information contained in the lists in accordance with Soviet legislation. He would have to refrain from giving any promises in this regard. He thought he knew how these things were eventually resolved. He also knew that it happened sometimes that police organs, when they started to look into the persons concerned, found that in some instances these persons were not at all interested in leaving the Soviet Union. In one instance he knew of, one of these told the police that he had just been married, and asked them to leave him alone. The Secretary repeated that he would appreciate it if Gromyko had someone look at the list. The second issue the Secretary wanted to raise with Gromyko concerned radiation. He knew that the levels of radiation affecting our Embassy had been reduced, but they were still a matter of concern to the people working in our Embassy here. We would indeed be pleased if such radiation could be stopped completely. Gromyko said that he was really getting tired of this question. He had thought that this issue was some sort of joke, but then he had noticed that from time to time someone would raise it again. Apart from the reply he had repeatedly given the Secretary earlier, he could not say anything else. Who was he to accuse the city of Moscow or the city authorities in this regard? He knew that there were certain conditions here that did not exist in Washington due to the fact that the city here contained so many industrial enterprises. Some had already been taken out of Moscow, but some still remained. He would bear in mind what the Secretary had said, but, quite honestly, he knew that there were some in the United States who loved to raise this issue again and again. The Secretary said that the problem was that a number of people had become ill in ways somehow associated with radiation. It was for this reason that he had raised the issue with Gromyko. Gromyko replied that since he and the Secretary were discussing this, he would point out that he could provide some statistics showing how many Soviets returning from the United States had been taken ill. Among them were even some important officials; for example, one of his deputies had died of leukemia after returning from the United States. All he could tell the Secretary was that he would keep this in mind. Whether or not he would be able to say something new on the subject, he could not determine now. However, he knew that some people in the US liked to blow up these matters; of that he was firmly convinced. He also thought there was no question that Soviets living in the United States were actually exposed to higher levels of radiation
