1426 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement public relations because we have been slipping so badly. H. said Pres. had gotten into a jam with McCone. H. was asked to go over (WH) before press conference. Sec. said re peaceful uses it is only a matter of inter­ pretation. Killian says in document drafted in Geneva it very carefully covers all explosions. This statm. will have to be cleared today somehow. H. asked Sec. if he had seen two messages from Macmillan. Sec. said no and H. read one to Sec. Goodpaster has it and will show it to the Pres. Sec. said we can’t go all the way with military—if we have to H. and Sec. might as well quit. H. said Pres. is prepared to go ahead on this statm. and get full value. Sec. said he could come down to Washington for meeting. H. will call Sec. back after he talks with Pres. H. earlier said another way the statm. might be handled would be to take calculated risk on releasing this before report is submitted to UN. 366. Message From Macmillan to Eisenhower1 London, August 20, 1958 My Dear Friend, I am greatly obliged to you for your letter of August 19 in which you gave me the assurance that it is your purpose to be as completely generous with us in the matter of passing information “as the law will permit”. I gladly accept this assurance and I need hardly say that I have every confidence that you are determined to do your utmost for us. I am sure you will recognise that in this I have a very heavy respon­ sibility. During the past twelve years, we have made immense efforts to develop the nuclear weapons capacity which would enable us to play an effective part in the defence of the free world. We have made good progress and the tests that we are about to hold will take us a further step towards the solution of the two problems of invulnerability and reduction of weight which we must achieve. If our earlier work is not to be wasted, we must have the answers to these two problems. If you can provide us with the information you already have or will obtain in the future, then I can agree to suspension of tests, which I feel really means abandonment, with a clear conscience. Can I be assured that “the law will permit” you to give us this information if we are prevented from 1 Source: Seeks assurance on release of nuclear testing information. Top Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan to Eisenhower.
