Planning and Implementation of Operation
TPAJAX, March–August 1953
169.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Dulles
to President Eisenhower1
Washington, March 1, 1953.
SUBJECT
The Iranian Situation
Ever since the assassination of General Razmara in March 1951,
and the subsequent impasse and diplomatic break with Britain over the
oil negotiations, the Iranian situation has been slowly disintegrating.
The result has been a steady decrease in the power and influence of the
Western democracies and the building up of a situation where a Com-
munist takeover is becoming more and more of a possibility. However,
even the present crisis is likely to be unsatisfactorily compromised
without a Communist Tudeh victory. Of course, the elimination of
Mossadeq by assassination or otherwise might precipitate decisive
events except in the unlikely alternative that the Shah should regain
courage and decisiveness. The events of the past 48 hours have brought
a few surprises. The fanatical Moslem leader, Kashani, who is also Pres-
ident of the Majlis, has shown more power than expected both in influ-
encing the Majlis and in quickly marshaling for mob action his fanatical
followers. The institution of the Crown may have more popular
backing than was expected.
Today’s situation in Teheran remains tense and unresolved. Some
street demonstrations have occurred today, but the curfew is still in ef-
fect and general order is apparently being preserved.
The principal opposing forces are represented on the one hand by
Prime Minister Mossadeq and, on the other, by Mullah Kashani, with
the Shah apparently being used by Kashani.
The Communist Tudeh Party may be expected to capitalize on,
and increase, the tension in every possible way. The Tudeh Party,
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Intelligence, Job
80R01731R, Box 9, Folder 350, White House. Secret; Security Information. A shorter ver-
sion of this memorandum is printed with redactions in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol.
X, Iran, 1951–1954, pp. 689–691 (Document 310).
475
