818 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 189. Memorandum From the President’s Science and Technology Adviser (Press) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, June 6, 1980 SUBJECT Activities Report concerning Presidential Directive/NSC–24; Telecommunications Protection Policy (U) PD/NSC–242 was issued to establish a national policy to guide the conduct of U.S. Government activities in and related to the security and/or protection of telecommunications. Attached is the 1979 report of activities required by PD/NSC–24. (U) The Soviet Union continues to intercept U.S. domestic microwave telecommunications systems from their Embassy and other diplomatically immune locations in Washington, D.C., San Francisco, and New York City. We are also seriously concerned about their intercept activities of U.S. Domestic satellites from their collection site in Cuba and from vessels off each of our coasts operating in international waters. (TS) You may recall that the U.S. Government instituted a program called DUCKPINS which moved selected leased government circuits from microwave to underground cable facilities. When these targets dried up, [less than 1 line not declassified] reported the movement of Soviet targeting to other government agencies, economic targets and Defense contractors. The DOD was alerted and they began looking at possible solutions. (TS) The fact that Defense contractors were now a prime Soviet target was verified in the 1979 Threat Assessment I asked Stan Turner to conduct,3 the specifics of which were briefed to the subcommittee by Admiral Inman in July 1979.4 Defense gave an initial briefing to the subcommittee in August concerning how they would approach a countermeasures program. They very candidly advised that this area would require considerable time and study since a more complex dimension was now added to our protection concerns. I expect Defense to have their protection strategy plan available for review by mid-July and will 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Institutional File, Box 42, INT Documents, #4200s: 7/80. Top Secret. 2 See Document 40. 3 Not found. 4 No minutes of the meeting were found.
