16
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
3.
Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,
Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, March 9, 1951.
MEMORANDUM OF INFORMATION NO. 32
FOR
National Estimates Board
SUBJECT
The Situation in Iran
1. Information is still incomplete regarding the influences at work
behind the assassination of Premier Razmara of Iran. It appears, how-
ever, that the murder was an outgrowth of Iran’s internal stress and
strains and that Soviet influences were not directly involved. Little is
known about Fedi-i-a-Islam, the organization which planned to [the]
murder, but it is probably a band of religious fanatics similar to the
so-called Committee of Twelve responsible for the murder of Minister
of Court Ilajir in November 1949. Like the Committee of Twelve,
Fedi-i-a-Islam appears to be an extremist off-shoot of the small but vo-
ciferous troup of religious reactionaries and xenophobes in the Majlis.
This group has opposed Razmara especially for his “sellout” to the UK
on the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (AIOC) concession issues. Mem-
bers of group, however, have also accused Razmara of appeasing the
USSR and of coddling the pro-Communist element in Iran; although
there have been various unproved assertions that Mulla Kashani, the
leader of the ultra-reactionary clerical element, has covert ties with
the USSR, it is unlikely that the USSR could have had any direct influ-
ence on the murder. The pro-Soviet Tudeh Party was officially charged
with planning another act of terrorism, the attempted assassina-
tion of the Shah in February 1949, but the evidence to that effect was
unconvincing.
2. The assassination will have no immediate effect on Iran’s will-
ingness and ability to resist Soviet pressures. Nevertheless, it will pro-
mote a further weakening of Iran’s internal stability, both by adding to
the general sense of aimlessness, insecurity, and frustration and by
highlighting Iran’s lack of capable leadership. The Shah may well re-
spond temporarily to the challenge by attempting personally to pro-
vide the vigorous leadership that Iran needs, but it is doubtful that he
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79T00937A, Box 1, Folder 1,
Staff Memoranda—1951. Secret. There is no drafting information on the memorandum.
