Chapter 5, May–June 1990 669 and if so we will be able to agree with you on ceasing production and working with you on a technology for destruction. Shevardnadze: We understand your position very well. Personally, I believe that some reserve until others have joined the convention is something that makes sense. I would like to keep that as a personal view between us. I’ve asked our chief delegate at Geneva to sound out others on the idea of the reserve at two percent, and I must say unfortunately that the attitude of others was negative. So, maybe you might want to take a look at this again. Baker: You know, if you and I agree on it, I think that will make a big statement and that will have an effect on others. We really need to be leaders and not followers on this subject. [Omitted here are discussions not related to START.] 113. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, May 8, 1990, 1711Z 4955. Subject: START: Run-up to the Summit 1. Secret—Entire Text. 2. The sides continue to push hard on the 32 issues, with two meetings each day involving the ambassadors and numerous technical meetings supporting them. Results are mixed. Nazarkin has been reasonable, but unable to gain the support of his military or Moscow on some of the AD referendum deals he and Rick have made. The U.S. Del has been handicapped by the continuing lack of U.S. positions on key items on the list. Thus we have gone as far as we can pending further guidance on about 12 items. It will clearly be necessary for the ministers to deal with some issues we had hoped to settle here. 3. If we are lucky, we may be able, before the ministerial, to add to our list of Geneva triumphs, phasing of reductions, road-­mobile issues (if Moscow accepts our AD Ref Agreement), restructuring of the inspection protocol, basing terminology, cooperative measures to assist NTM, produce vs develop and pre-­inspection movement restrictions. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, D900419–0683. Secret; Immediate.
