1955  599
48. I said at time we issued agreed announcement, only Americans 
remaining Wang’s country concerning whom U.S. had no assurances in 
regard to departure were those in prison. Our long discussion of draft 
agreed announcement had revolved almost entirely about this group. 
I had at first suggested problem be resolved by permitting their return 
prior to any statement. When Wang not willing, I had suggested release 
be simultaneous with issuance agreed announcement. When Wang did 
not accept that proposal, I suggested at least private understanding 
concerning length of time that would be needed. Wang unable accept 
that position. However, Wang had told me many times, time required 
would be very short. I would not review entire discussion that led up 
to suggestion by Wang and acceptance by US of word “expeditiously”.
49. I said it was certainly clear in using that word concerning release 
of Americans in PRC we were talking about Americans in prison. It 
was also clear that phrase “further appropriate measures” pertained to 
measures within PRC sovereignty that would be taken to bring about 
release these Americans.
50. I said sometime before we issued announcement, Wang had indi­
cated review of number of cases had been completed. On ­September 10, 
he informed me of these 10 names whose review completed. I did not 
know how long review of 10 had taken, but presumably review started 
after August 1. As I had pointed out this morning, this made total of 
33 persons assured release in six week period between August 1 and 
September 10, including 12 names given me September 6 and 11 names 
August 1. In fourteen weeks since that time, only 5 additional released. 
As I had said, it appeared issuance agreed announcement has in fact 
slowed up resolution this problem.
51. I said I had not raised question of complete implementation of 
September 10 announcement. I thought it could and should have been 
completely implemented before this, insofar as this group of Americans 
is concerned. If it could have been, this certainly would have had ben­
eficial effects. Nevertheless, what I have been raising is only question 
whether statement has any real substance or meaning insofar as this 
group is concerned.
52. I said on basis of facts it is certainly understandable that my 
government has doubts concerning how much meaning statement 
really has. Apparently PRC had reservations with respect to meaning 
and substance of statement. Those reservations not apparent to my 
government when it agreed to enter into statement. What I was asking 
in all earnestness was that some action be taken by PRC which would 
remove doubts on part my government.
53. I said turning again to questions he had raised, I honestly did 
not see how they bore any relationship to question of implementa­
tion. As I had pointed out there are simple tests of manner in which
