376
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
108.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) and
the Legal Adviser (Hansell) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)1
Washington, January 24, 1978
Human Rights Reports and OPIC
Issue for Decision
Should the human rights reports the Secretary of State will submit
to Congress by January 31 include reports on five countries, including
Brazil, where the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) is
engaged in financing, insurance or guaranty activities, but which other-
wise are neither receiving nor proposed to receive assistance for which
human rights reports would be required?
Essential Factors
Statutory Requirements
Section 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended
(FAA), prohibits assistance under part I of that Act to the government
of any country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations
of human rights, unless the assistance will directly benefit the needy
people in the country concerned. As amended in 1977, section 116 also
requires that the Secretary of State report to Congress by January 31 of
each year on the status of human rights in countries that receive assist-
ance under part I of the FAA.2 The question here is limited to whether a
human rights report should be submitted on the five “OPIC only”
countries; no decision is required as to whether any of these countries
are engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations. The full text of
the statute is attached at Tab 1.3
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780027–0324. Lim-
ited Official Use. Sent through Cooper. Drafted by Michel on January 12; cleared by
Boerner, Schneider, Arellano, AID/GC, Roberts Smith, Hunt, Stahnke, Jennone Walker,
and Frank Bennett. Michel initialed for the clearing officials, with the exception of Arel-
lano, who initialed the document. Anderson’s initials appear on the memorandum.
2 Section 502(b) of the FAA establishes a similar reporting requirement with respect
to countries where security assistance programs are proposed. A single report will be
submitted on each country either receiving assistance under part I or proposed to receive
security assistance, or both. Exclusive of countries with only OPIC programs, reports will
be submitted on 109 countries. [Footnote in the original.]
3 Not found attached.
