1978 365 Kissinger’s war doctrine did not require it. The general idea appears again in the DOD targeting study. It seeks a “mechanism” that connects the military planners with the political leadership for appropriate guidance. You and the President began generating such a small group with the IVORY ITEM. I have encouraged Defense to accept that informal group as the “mechanism” they want in this targeting study. Their reactions are mixed, but Leon Sloss is willing to consider it as second best to a formal SCC for this purpose. As you drew out the LNO issue at SAC with General Ellis and suggested that we might review the LNOs with the President, I was reminded of a short passage from Clausewitz: “If war is to be fully consonant with political objectives, and policy suited to the means available for war, then unless statesman and soldier are combined in one person, the only sound expedient is to make the commander-­in-­chief a member of the cabinet so that the cabinet may share in the major aspects of his activities.” An SCC on LNOs, etc., puts the National Security Council in a position to share in the major activities of military planning with strategic and other forces. 2. The C3I Problem. The best approach here is to discuss it first with Charles Duncan. He is beginning to take interest in the National Communications System and the WWMCCS as the DOD’s major figure in that arena. Two topics for such a discussion are: —The problem revealed in the SAC study of our vulnerability to a C3I attack and the kinds of things that make sense as program responses. (There is a DOD program issue paper on this C3I.) —The institutional incentive structure for C3I budgeting: nobody wants to pay but everyone admits the need for someone to pay for WMMCCS. 3. The SACEUR and NATO Planning Problem for TNF. I am not abreast of the way PRM–383 is moving on this matter, but TNF policy is where the most immediate opportunity for follow-­up lies. Uninformed of the PRM–38 rationale, I would guess that Gray Area Systems arms control perspectives are driving our weapons program options. European “psychological” or political needs (to avoid the “de-­coupling” impression) probably rival the arms control concerns 3 Reference is to the interagency preparation of the response to Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–38, “Long-Range Theater Nuclear Capabilities and Arms Control,” which Carter approved on June 22, 1978. Documentation on PRM–38 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. V, European Security, 1977–1983.
