Arms Control and Disarmament  1667
only way cope with allegations this concept is proven one which viti­
ates test suspension agreement may be to reveal all its difficulties and 
uncertainties.
High altitude study nearing completion and will be passed UK for 
study as soon as available. At that time will make arrangements for 
appropriate consultation US and UK scientists in advance of any dis­
cussion with Soviets this matter.
Dillon
Acting
471.	 Telegram Tosec 145 to Herter at Geneva1
Washington, May 29, 1959, 8:57 p.m.
Draft Tactics Paper for Nuclear Test Negotiations
Upon resumption nuclear test negotiations June 8 Department 
believes USDEL should pursue tactics along following lines, incorpo­
rating substance of following in comprehensive opening statement in 
order maintain control debate.
(1) USDEL should establish continuity by recalling Wadsworth 
statement May 8. Should continue place focus on questions needing 
solution if effective control to be achieved continuing tactics along lines 
outlined NUSUP 337 in defining issues and eliciting SOV response to 
questions bearing on technical and organizational elements effective 
control.
(2) In this connection delegation should welcome Soviet readi­
ness to discuss high altitude detection and should propose establish­
ment technical working group this subject to convene Geneva June 
15. US will suggest Term of Reference for this study. Make clear that 
we consider this to be only one of the three technical areas essential 
to clarify the problems associated with the establishment of effective 
control system and our willingness to discuss high altitude problem 
should not be interpreted as abandonment efforts to explore other 
technical aspects control system identified by Lloyd and Secretary. 
Objectives of technical discussion should be to recommend specific 
1 Source: Transmits draft tactics paper for nuclear test ban negotiations. Secret; Lim­
ited Distribution. 5 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/5–2959.
