Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 437 The President: Why are you so pessimistic about the next six months? What’s so hard? Cheney: We have a better chance of agreement with this group of people than with any Administration in the last fifteen years. Baker: You can get a START agreement by June but you can’t get an actual treaty text by June. The President: Why? What’s stopping us? The Soviets are open, let’s talk to them. I’m worried that the world is in change, demonstrable change. The Congress is going to take this and screw us up. This is the opportunity to get something from the Soviets. Sununu: Can we iron out some principles with the Soviets? Baker: I’m ready. I’m leaving on the 4th of February. Scowcroft: Well, there are still unresolved issues. On CFE, the question is similar. Do we proceed as is or do we make an additional proposal on personnel—­the US and Soviets in the same time frame, money is a big issue. A week ago this was impossible. Now, though, Woolsey says he’s not sure we can’t do it. If we went to the Allies, we could say we wanted to negotiate a bilateral cut to 200,000. We want to get ahead of the Congress and sustain the level. Then we would go to the Soviets and propose a simple deal of going to 200,000. Nothing else would be added. There’s a chance we might get it as an add on. Baker: You’re right, “There might be a chance.” There are risks to the Alliance, US leadership and the continuity of the US presence. I worry that we are abandoning consistency if we go to 200,000 for domestic reasons. Congress will just go from there. Rather, we should stick with the formulation we have and emphasizing getting done what’s already on the table and talk quietly to the Alliance leaders about a bottom line of 200,000 in CFE II. Let us get CFE I or Congress will do more. The President: Why are they worried? Baker: To keep the US presence. Scowcroft: We should use that in coming down to the 200,000 as a level we can sustain with the Congress. Baker: Don’t abandon a good proposal too early. Get CFE I and then announce in June or perhaps in CFE II you are going to 200,000. This will make a major difference. Sununu: Can you get CFE I in 30 to 60 days? Director Darman: You could lose a lot through unilateral Congressional action. I’m certain of the politics. The gap in the budget to be closed is $36 billion or $70 billion according to the Democrats’ number. How much of that is coming out of DoD—$3.9 billion. Congress is expecting a big peace dividend. Should be $18 billion. But they don’t
