1978 415 production in their West Siberian fields. These measures also increase the likelihood of a longer-­term fall-­off in production, and an absolute decline in overall Soviet oil production seems very likely in the early 1980s. During the 1960s and early 1970s, total U.S. R&D expenditures declined steadily while Soviet expenditures steadily increased. During the past two years R&D expenditures have stabilized at about 3.0% of GNP for the Soviet Union and 2.3% for the U.S. In terms of military R&D, real Soviet spending during the past decade has increased at an annual rate of 6.6%, while real U.S. spending has declined at a rate of −2.2%. For 1977, both overall Soviet military investment expenditures and Soviet RDT&E expenditures were about 75% greater than U.S. expenditures. In terms of technological output, it is clear that the U.S. is still superior to the Soviet Union in many areas, particularly as a result of its superior ability to translate basic scientific knowledge into sophisticated and usable end-­products. The question thus remains whether the superior resources which the Soviets are devoting to research and development, both generally and in the military area, will, at some point, enable them to equal the U.S. in qualitative output. PRM–10 indicated that the Soviets benefitted substantially from their economic interaction with the U.S. and the West. PD–18 directed that the U.S. should capitalize on its economic and technological ­advantages to counter the spread of adverse Soviet influence and to induce the Soviets to be more cooperative in achieving solutions to global problems. During the past year, further studies have underlined Soviet dependence on the U.S. for energy-­related equipment (including submersible pumps, high-­quality drill bits, blow-­out preventers, gas-­lift equipment; advanced computers; large-­scale credits; and, less certainly, grain (particularly feed-­grain). During the past six months, the U.S. has begun to attempt to exploit these advantages by reforming administrative procedures on technology transfers and by placing oil equipment and technology on the Commodity Control List. F. Specific Soviet gains and increased polarization in the Persian Gulf, Middle East, and Africa. The PRM–10 net assessment concluded that the Middle East-Persian Gulf area was the most important region of the Third World for both the U.S. and the Soviet Union. PD–18 linked this region with Western Europe and East Asia as an area of critical interest to the United States. In addition, the net assessment argued that “From their viewpoint the Soviets would be hard-­pressed to find a better spot than Iran for a crisis-­confrontation with the U.S.” During the past 18 months, the Soviets have gained two new and important bridgeheads in this area, Ethiopia and Afghanistan, while losing a less important one in Somalia. These new gains bracket the major sources of oil for the U.S. and its allies.
