88 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI the same reasons, the U.S. has emphasized program and operational flexibility for its air-­breathing systems over verifiable limits on Soviet air-­breathing systems. (S) There are compelling reasons to continue this approach, despite the pronounced asymmetry in U.S.-Soviet air defenses and the fact that the Soviets are believed to be moving in the direction of a heavy bomber force which will have a greater role than before, with more weapons and greater force diversity. Today our bombers would deliver approximately 35 percent of our strategic nuclear weapons. With appropriate bomber counting rules, such as those in the current approach, and given the currently proposed ballistic missile warhead limits, we would require approximately 50 percent of our post-START strategic nuclear weapons to be bomber delivered to cover the Soviet targets. A further delay or cutback in the B–2 program, however, might require reconsideration of our ALCM/Heavy bomber counting rules to meet post-START requirements. Our success in meeting targeting objectives is somewhat attenuated by the elaborate Soviet air defense network, but continued modernization of our bomber forces allows us to cope with that problem. (S) The Soviets could also exploit this feature of a START treaty, but it would take them a good many years to effectively match the U.S. in bombers. And, as was discussed earlier, we have wanted them to shift the emphasis in their force structure from ballistic missiles to bomber delivery weapons which we consider less destabilizing. (S) As for the judgment reached in the preceding discussion that we should continue emphasizing looser constraints on air-­breathing systems, despite the pronounced asymmetry in U.S. and Soviet air defenses, several considerations have influenced this assessment. The U.S. traditionally has relied more heavily (and with greater confidence) on its bomber leg of strategic forces than has the U.S.S.R., and has lived with the asymmetry in air defenses. As pointed out earlier we depend heavily upon bomber weapons for target coverage. We have kept our bombers at a higher state of alert than the Soviets, and generally have remained ahead of the Soviets in technologies related to effectiveness of the bomber force. The Soviets can, of course, also exploit START’s looser constraints on air-­breathing systems, but it would take them a good many years to effectively match the U.S. in bombers. And (unlike the situation in ICBMs), if the Soviets attempt to break out of a START treaty by uploading bomber weapons, we could match or exceed them in this category over a period of time. (S) U.S. decisions in the past to pursue modest air defenses were arrived at in large part because of the absence of effective defenses against ballistic missiles. If the U.S. were to decide in the future to deploy advanced ballistic missile defenses, that would require a fundamental
