206 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement abroad President Cleveland destination China mainland. Tsien entered US as student in 1935, admitted for permanent resident in 1947. Has studied aeronautical engineering at institutes of technology of Massa­ chusetts and California. Has recently been engaged in research on rock­ ets and jet propulsion and has worked on classified projects. Also signifying intention depart same time same ship as Tsien are two other former restrainees, Li Cheng-wu and Lee Sun-hsiang. Kao Fa-ti (prevention order revoked March 24) departed August 27 abroad President Wilson destined Hong Kong. Presume his eventual destina­ tion is PRC. Chinese constantly being allowed freely depart US. From July 11, when initiative for Geneva talks occurred, to August 31, 83 Chinese Nationals departed US for Far East. No information now available how many these intended proceed Communist China, but obvious they completely free to do so, as far as US concerned. Information (FYI from Hong Kong authorities END FYI) indicates 47 Chinese passed through Hong Kong in transit status to Commu­ nist China from US between January 1 and August 31. Figure does not include Chinese who may have entered Hong Kong without specifying intention proceed PRC, then crossed border. Hoover 159. Letter 11 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 11 Washington, September 2, 1955 Dear Alex: Again there is a great rush on with just a few minutes to get this note to you in the pouch. The momentous telegram authorizing you to button up the Agreed Announcement at the next meeting on Tuesday the 6th is just going out. The Secretary personally reviewed, amended and approved this telegram before he left yesterday afternoon for a two week vacation at Duck Island. As this request I flew to Richmond yes­ terday afternoon to get WSR’s approval. I had an hour and a half with him in Richmond. He readily gave his clearance. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal.
