640
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
206.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the
Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Tarnoff)1
Washington, November 10, 1980
SUBJECT
List of Issues for Transition Briefing Papers
The perception exists that the Reagan Administration plans to re-
verse policies to promote respect for internationally recognized human
rights. The human rights policy is based on domestic and international
law and occupies a central place in U.S. foreign policy. The following
list of issues will therefore require decisions during the 90-day period
following January 20, 1981.
1. Bilateral Initiatives on Behalf of Human Rights2
—Continue prompt and vigorous diplomatic initiatives with re-
gard to major human rights problems in communist countries. Coun-
tries requiring such action are: the USSR, Czechoslovakia, the German
Democratic Republic, Poland, Romania, the People’s Republic of
China, Cuba, Vietnam, Kampuchea, Ethiopia, Mozambique and others.
—Continue prompt and vigorous diplomatic initiatives with re-
gard to major human rights problems in non-communist countries.
Countries requiring such action are: South Africa, Liberia, South Korea
(particularly to save the life and obtain the freedom of Kim Dae Jung),3
the Philippines, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Guatemala, El Salvador, Ni-
caragua, Iraq, Syria, the Israel-occupied territories and others.
Failure to take action with regard to these countries will under-
mine the leadership role of the United States in the human rights area,
and in many cases impact adversely on our national interest and secu-
rity objectives.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 16, TL Transition Folder
’80. Confidential. Drafted by Roberta Cohen. Derian did not initial the memorandum.
Jennone Walker attached a handwritten note to the memorandum, which reads: “General
review of h.r. policy including: 1) implementation current econ & security legislation?
2) change legislation? 3) pending international treaties? 4) [unclear] pending countries or
other problems 5) role in or with international agencies, orgs. 6) Bureaucratic proce-
dures.” (Ibid.)
2 Walker inserted a handwritten point above the first one, which reads: “Key
human rights problems in specific countries on which decisions & action may be neces-
sary in early months of Administration.” She also bracketed all of the points of section 1.
3 Walker circled the phrase “obtain the freedom” and wrote a question mark in the
left-hand margin.
