893.5045/118: Telegram
[Document 528]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 9, 1925—7 p.m.
[Received July 9—6:48 p.m.]
267. My telegram No. 264, July 6, noon.
1. Meeting of the Heads of Legation yesterday further to discuss the effect of
British interposition in action proposed by the Heads of Legation respecting
the Municipal Council. In this connection I understand the British
Ambassador has communicated to you the desire of his Government. Senior
minister informed colleagues that the senior consul had telegraphed that the
conclusions of the Heads of Legation had been transmitted to the Municipal
Council.
2. French Minister evinced considerable animus toward the British
Government characterizing its action as a most regrettable interference with
decisions of Heads of Legation and urged that, in view of the British action
described in the telegram above mentioned and elaborated in further
instructions to the British Chargé d’Affaires here, settlement of the Shanghai
incident should be negotiated with the Chinese Government by the British
Government alone. Several of the colleagues expressed agreement with the
French Minister. Mr. MacMurray9 who was present at the meeting along with
me expressed opinion that the other powers concerned in the Shanghai
International Settlement could not abandon their rights and responsibilities by
agreeing to negotiation of solution of matter by British Government alone.
British Chargé d’Affaires did not seem quite to understand extreme
seriousness of the trend of discussion. He stated believed action of his
Government due to insistence of the British consul general at Shanghai
backed by British community there and strength of mercantile interest both in
China and Great Britain.
3. At this juncture I suggested a compromise which I hoped would be
satisfactory to Heads of Legation, British Government and Municipal
Council, to the effect that Municipal Council be informed that Heads of
Legation would be willing to agree that they would not communicate their
conclusions to Chinese Government or to press but would permit Municipal
Council to take as on own initiative action envisaged by their conclusions,
