106 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI — Are SLCMs in our interest? — Is START verification good enough? — Are our Defense and Space objectives correct? — How low can we reduce ground and air forces and still meet NATO objectives? — Are there alternatives to a global, verifiable ban on chemical weapons? Although the nominal purpose of the NSC meeting is to review specific questions posed in the discussion paper, I recommend that you use this opportunity for an exceptionally frank discussion of where we are going in the START and Defense and Space negotiations. There will be additional NSC meetings on our specific negotiating positions in START and Defense and Space, as well as meetings on conventional and chemical arms control (at which the last two questions can be considered). (1) Reductions and Stability. Our goal in START should be stability and reduced risk of war, not reductions, per se, but our shift in emphasis from “reductions” to “stability” needs to be handled in a way that recognizes the political risks of appearing to abandon “deep reductions.” The discussion paper concludes that present START reductions do not imperil military sufficiency, although deeper reductions might. (2) Air Breathing Systems. Our current START position encourages a shift to air breathing systems and accepts looser constraints in START on such systems. It does not constrain air defenses. The principal issue is whether, even though the U.S. has no air defense, the future of the B–­l as a penetrating bomber may be in doubt, and the B–2 may prove to be unaffordable, we still want to encourage a long-­term Soviet shift to air breathing systems. The alternative of proposing stricter limits on bombs and ALCMs, however, could reduce significantly the number of weapons the U.S. could deploy under START and leave us open to charges that START is “undercutting deterrence”. An additional consideration with respect to air breathing systems is the fact that we have chosen to preserve our bomber deployment flexibility and to exclude our non-­nuclear forces from START at the expense of verifiability. Despite extensive work to find verifiable limitations on air breathing systems, none of the limitations we have proposed in START (other than the basic count of bombers) is verifiable with confidence. (3) Verification. Verification affects every limit in START and will prove to be the most controversial issue in the ratification debate. The discussion paper is useful background on our difficulty in monitoring Soviet compliance with specific provisions, including numbers of: mobile ICBMs, warheads on ballistic missiles, and cruise missiles on
