3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
403
basis of good intentions in wording the unilateral statement, but it
seemed that these good intentions had boomeranged against the Soviet
side, or at the very least had produced nothing at all. If that was so, the
Soviet side would simply have to revert to its original language. The
same thing applied to the question of the flight profile, the question the
Secretary had raised in Moscow toward the end of their discussion.
Furthermore, they had deleted the words to which the Secretary had
taken such great dislike—“by way of information.”
The Secretary said he would start with the assumption that the lan-
guage of the unilateral statement was intended to be helpful in terms of
resolving the Backfire issue. However, when we tried to understand
the meaning of that language, we were at a loss. When the Secretary
had been asked what it meant, he had not been able to explain it. To us
it seemed to say that no structural changes would be introduced and no
wing tanks added to enable the aircraft to take on more fuel than it
could take on now. The second thing seemed to be that there would be
no intent to refuel the aircraft more than once. He was not sure of that,
but that is what the statement seemed to be saying. However, he did
not know whether it also covered such things as not holding training
exercises involving refueling and not creating a tanker force to support
this aircraft. He was trying to understand what was included in the
statement.
Gromyko replied that training exercises and maneuvers would
have to remain at the discretion of the Soviet side. As for refueling, it
was entirely possible that the Soviet side may want to refuel it five or
six times for purposes other than intercontinental missions. The Secre-
tary had mentioned two things—wing tanks and structural changes.
But these were not the only things, they had only been cited as ex-
amples and did not exhaust all possibilities. Gromyko said that this air-
craft’s being in the air would not disturb the sleep of the Secretary or
any other American.
Gromyko now proposed that this question not be discussed any
further. He could not make any further concessions on this issue be-
cause it was impossible to do so. This was a medium range weapons
system and it was not strategic. Otherwise the Soviet side would be
compelled to table an official proposal to consider certain types of U.S.
aircraft, including Phantoms, in order to ensure that equivalent aircraft
be discussed on a par basis. The Secretary could judge for himself—
would this ease the situation? That should be explained to the U.S.
Congress and to others talking about the Backfire. Would it be to their
liking if the Soviet Union officially raised this question at the next
meeting and threw even more questions at the U.S. side about refueling
exercises, deployment, etc.? As for the Phantom, there were good
