1955  111
August 11 draft proposal. I concluded I was prepared immediately agree 
with him on this draft and announce it today.
Following 10 minute recess requested by Wang, he stated he had 
made preliminary comparison my draft with his August 11 draft. He 
noted my draft did not include a few points in his.
1. Quoting first paragraph his August 11 draft, Wang declared we 
should not object provisions this paragraph. At last meeting he had 
stated that under condition that agreement reached on question return 
civilians both sides Chinese Government would be in position inform 
me of results investigation cases of Americans on which investiga­
tion completed. In my draft no mention made of nationals involved 
in civil or criminal cases. International law recognizes right of sover­
eign state exercise jurisdiction over civil or criminal cases in its terri­
tory. To demand a state refrain from exercising jurisdiction is obviously 
infringement on its sovereignty. In past used to be such things as extra­
territoriality in China but such unreasonable things now gone forever. 
Wang said I had repeatedly indicated my aim was to secure return all 
Americans in China who desired return. As he had repeatedly pointed 
out all those not involved in civil or criminal cases able to leave any­
time. Even with respect to Americans involved in unfinished cases, 
Chinese Government would review cases and grant lenient treatment 
making allowance for nature of crime and conduct of individual in 
accordance Chinese legal process. Such persons could leave promptly 
on completion their cases. He was sure I could appreciate sincerity of 
this offer. However if my intention was that American nationals now 
or in future should be permitted leave prior to settlement their cases he 
must point out frankly this impossible. There might also be few cases of 
Chinese in US involved in civil or criminal cases though he didn’t know 
of any. Could be seen situation two sides quite different. US maintained 
liaison station Hong Kong to gather information on American citizens 
in China. He had also given me information on all ­American nationals 
in China. However his government had no liaison station close to US 
and he had been ­unable obtain list Chinese nationals from me. Hence 
he not in position know whether any Chinese nationals involved in 
civil or criminal cases. He did not believe I had intended propose Chi­
nese nationals involved in civil or criminal cases should never come 
under jurisdiction American law and should be permitted leave prior 
settlement their cases. Hence he held that reference in draft to nationals 
involved in civil or criminal cases was reasonable and applied equally 
both sides.
2. Reference was made in draft to cases American nationals previ­
ously detained in China. He must point out as general principle Chi­
nese Government did not detain American nationals in China. So there 
was nothing in common with the situation in US where orders issued to
