568
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
color the world in shades of black and white, and we can no longer
reduce challenges to a single phenomenon, be it Hitlerism or Stalin-
ism. However, I suspect that part of the problem is also to be located
on a less philosophical plane, with some of it related to tone and
orchestration.
For example, I think a genuine problem has been created by the
press’s fascination, exploitation and magnification of the so-called
Vance-Brzezinski rivalry. To be sure, some differences do exist and you
are not only aware of them, but, as you have often said, you do want
divergent viewpoints presented to you. At the same time, the fact is
that on most matters Cy and I are in basic agreement, and there has
been no underhanded maneuvering to have one’s point of view
prevail.
As one looks back on previous administrations, one can note sim-
ilar divergences, and in the case of FDR they were certainly much
wider philosophically and more intense. The real difference is that FDR
was seen as orchestrating and deliberately exploiting such differences
whereas the press is now creating the impression that you are buffeted
by them. You know and we know that this is not so, but it is the percep-
tion that is damaging.
Accordingly, it would be very useful if you took some deliberate
steps to demonstrate that you are exploiting the differences while pur-
suing a steady course. Schram in a recent story asserted that this is ex-
actly what you are doing and it was the first positive expression of that
view.5
One way to achieve that objective would be to use Cy soon and
visibly in relationship to China, and to use me in some fashion in rela-
tionship to the Soviet Union. For example, you told Deng that the
United States and China should have regular consultations. When the
crisis in Indochina is over, it would be useful for Cy and some of his top
assistants to go to Peking at your direction to engage in high-level dis-
cussions. Similarly, it might be useful, and domestically even appealing,
to have me spend a couple of days in Moscow in consultations with the
5 Presumable reference to Martin Schram, “Birth of a Notion,” The Washington Post,
January 24, 1979, pp. A–1, A–8. Schram referenced a January 2 meeting at the White
House, during which the President, Mondale, and several White House aides discussed
the upcoming State of the Union address. The meeting, Schram noted, generated a
broader philosophical discussion about possible themes for the Carter administration. He
continued: “New Foundation. As the Carter advisers came to see it, the theme stands for
a new approach to today’s problems. A new way of taking a long-range look at what is
wrong and a new way of solving things on a long-range basis—heavy on concept but
spare on promises.” (Ibid., p. A–1)
