Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 305 could work out a compromise formulation that could be blessed at your level. — SLCMs: this is obviously a Soviet agenda item and I don’t think there is much you should or could do on the issue next month. That said, Soviet thinking on SLCMs is clearly in flux and we should hear them out. Beyond that, one step we could take in September would be to agree to engage on SLCM verification. At the Washington summit in 1987 we not only agreed to SLCM limits but to seek an effective verification regime. However, for the last two years, we have resisted being drawn into any systematic dialogue on verification. This is not only an untenable position over the long run, but we might be able to get something from the Soviets by simply agreeing to talk about monitoring SLCMs. You should know, however, that OSD and the Chiefs will strongly resist doing anything on SLCMs. 7. In a nutshell, then, there are plenty of START issues that could be profitably addressed during your September meeting. The corollary is that if they are not covered in Washington, it will be difficult, if not impossible, to move them forward in Geneva. 8. This brings me to the ‘‘second-­track” of a strategy for moving START—­the Geneva negotiations themselves. Although I am lucky to lead a talented and experienced negotiating team, there is passive mindset here that relfects the fact that in recent years, the real action in the talks occurred at the ministerials rather than Geneva. It also reflects the close watch that the Washington bureaucracy keeps on Geneva, to ensure that nothing happens there that hasn’t been vetted and approved in detail beforehand. But much more work on second and third-­tier issues needs to be done in Geneva. Putting it bluntly, I think many of us have been lulled by reports that a START treaty is 80 to 90 percent completed and only four or five major issues remain. This is simply not the case. If progress in Geneva continues at the current rate, I am afraid there will be no possibility of a completed agreement in the first term of a Bush Administration. In my view, this is alarming because down the road the perception that we had dropped the ball on the most important arms control accord every would entail real political costs. 9. Thus, in addition to well-­prepared ministerials, there are some steps we should take to breath new life into the Geneva exercise: (A) Use the interagency process to simplify the START text. The current reviews under way in Washington on such topics as non-­deployed missiles and perimeter-­portal monitoring should be designed to make our position less complicated. I’m worried that we are currently headed in the opposite direction. (B) Give the delegation more authority. We have a strong interagency team in Geneva that works far more effectively than the interagency process in Washington. We sould rely on it more. (C) Rather than micromanaging Geneva, force the interagency process
