1240  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
stockholders, however, will buy where the oil is cheapest. Mr. Mann 
suggested that we should admit the temporary advantages to 
Venezuela, but also point out that there will be disadvantages, partic-
ularly in the long run, since some Venezuelan oil is high cost and will 
be gradually displaced. Mr. Petersen stated that his company has been 
in Venezuela for 30 years and has spent 125 million without finding 
light oil with the exception of a single recent strike at great depth. The 
new tax law, he said, may make exploration costs in less desirable 
areas in Venezuela prohibitive.
This is the sort of experience we should point out to the Venezuelans, 
Mr. Mann said. He commented that President-­elect Betancourt is not 
anxious to increase production, but on the contrary, feels that too 
many concessions have already been let. Mr. T. L. Lenzen (Standard 
of California) suggested that U.S. Ambassadors to other oil countries 
be informed. Mr. Mann commented that there seems to be close con-
tact between the Venezuelans and the Arabs. Mr. R. C. Sauer (Sohio 
Petroleum) suggested that we ought to talk about other things; the 
issue of the contract price and the world price, for example. A depreci-
ation allowance would also be desirable.
Mr. Eugene Rolman (Standard of New Jersey) said that the indus-
try ought to get the door open for talks. There are many knowledge-
able Venezuelans, particularly in the Bureau of Mines, he said, and it 
is to these people that we ought to make our points. The Venezuelans 
made this decision on political, not economic grounds, he said. Mr. 
Mann pointed out that we can talk to the Government along technical 
lines; what the decision means for the long and short run. The indus-
try can help the Department of State in that the Department cannot 
know how it will affect companies without cooperation. He cautioned 
against over stating the case. Mr. Holman indicated that many other 
industries are largely dependent on the oil industry. Mr. Peterson said 
that he believed that a drop in tax revenue would be taken more easily 
if we begin now to educate people to the real effect of economic laws. 
The most dangerous thing to do is to give the impression of retaliation 
by design, he said. The meeting closed with several companies prom-
ising to send in their estimates of the effect of the tax decree within a 
short time.
