936
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
that did not deter the invasion. We were equally explicit about the
high risk if the Soviets increased their naval activities in Cam Ranh
Bay. They did not heed that warning, but we have yet to respond. We
have a credibility problem with the Soviets which must be taken into
account in communicating our judgments to the Soviets about the
stakes in Iran. (TS/S)
In the end, agreement was reached to propose to the President the
text of a non-paper (attached at Tab A) which included the following
sentence as an acceptable compromise: “Any military attempt to gain
control of the Persian Gulf, including specifically any Soviet military
action in Iran, could lead to a direct military confrontation with the
United States.” It was agreed to submit the non-paper for Gromyko
to the President for his review (Tab A).4 (TS/)
Intelligence Briefing for the Allies
Turner and General Jones will work out a final version of the
intelligence briefing text which was tabled at the meeting this morning.
It will be circulated next week for their comment and reaction. Unless
there are strong reservations, the final version will be used by General
Jones for briefing the NATO allies. (TS/S)
[1 paragraph (7½ lines) not declassified]
Thus, the intelligence indicates that the Soviet threat is less imminent
but more ambitious than we originally recognized. (TS/S)
Possible Defense Actions
The JCS recommendations of actions to consider doing now were
reviewed (attached at Tab B). It was agreed that most of them are
already in progress and need no SCC attention. Discussion centered
mainly on whether to brief Congressional leaders now (in addition
to members of the intelligence committees who already have some
awareness [less than 1 line not declassified]), and how to approach the
question of a Defense supplemental budget request, both in size and
the time for its submission. Brown and Muskie expressed concern that
a supplemental budget request could escalate the situation with the
Soviets and create political excitement within the United States. (TS/S)
[heading and 6 paragraphs (15 lines) not declassified] (TS/S)
4 Muskie met with Gromyko in New York on September 25 and read aloud the
non-paper, which Gromyko described as piling “word upon word.” No copy of the non-
paper was found. The memorandum of conversation is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–
1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 302.
