First Responses
23
attack on the Iranian military as a punitive gesture would make much
more difficult actions that we might want to take in the event the
country came apart.
The President said we had not adequately assessed the possibilities
of an embargo on Iran assets and economic steps that we could take.
They were very vulnerable on this score. If we had to move, we should
move on a broad front including economics. To the extent possible we
should avoid the loss of life. Economic options were potentially much
better than bombing.
Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the United States could get away with
only economic steps if American citizens are killed. After a long pause
the President said that he doubted it. We would probably have to take
some punitive action but he wanted to do something which would
avoid heavy costs and lengthy problems of trying to extricate ourselves.
Stan Turner interjected that we really ought to try to isolate Iran
and blockade it.
The President agreed and said that we should insist that our Euro-
pean allies cooperate with us on an air blockade as well as naval
blockade. They might not agree but we should go to the mat on this one.
Jody Powell noted that our blockade as leverage is alright but if it
is designed as a punitive action where would we end it.
Dr. Brzezinski said we may need both. Even if they kill the hostages
we will still need leverage to prevent further action against U.S. citizens
remaining in Iran.
Hamilton Jordan wondered if the American citizens were truly
identifiable.
Secretary Brown wondered whether we should look at the pipeline
which carries Iran’s refined product from the refinery to the market
place.
The Vice President noted that the weather is getting cold and this
might be a real vulnerability.
Secretary Brown said it would be interesting in several ways since
it would conceivably make them rely on us for refined products.
Hamilton Jordan wondered how much lead time it would take to
conduct an air strike of that sort.
The President wondered how long it would take if we wanted
simply to bomb refineries.
General Jones noted that the Carrier Midway is about five days away.
Another alternative would be to bring in B–52s from Guam which
could be done in about 48 hours or 72 hours at the most. They could
not land at Diego Garcia. We had intentionally kept the runway at
Diego Garcia too narrow for the use of B–52s, however, refueling air-
