90 Foreign Relations, 1977вҖ“1980, Volume IV the 3% per year growth in real defense spending agreed to at the May NATO Defense Ministerial meeting. All agreed that strategy for NATO must continue to rely on a combination of strategic nuclear, theater nuclear, and conventional forces for deterrence, and that we wanted first to emphasize conventional force improvements. After current efforts at improved conventional capability have succeeded or failed, we may want to turn to theater nuclear policy, especially the potentially critical role of the land-Вӯbased cruise missile. The group agreed that a distinction between declaratory strategy and actual capability was necessary; for example, we cannotвҖ”Вӯfor political reasonsвҖ”Вӯannounce a strategy that includes any loss of West German territory. 2. Operations outside of Europe during a NATO/Pact War. There was general agreement that taking initiatives against the Soviet Union, especially Soviet territory, could have important consequences in a war: they might provide trading material, hurt the SovietsвҖҷ ability to prosecute war in Europe, or divert Soviet forces. Secretary Brown, however, did not see any opportunities that would worry the Soviets enough to help in the context of a war in Europe. Mr. Aaron suggested that it may be more important to defend our access to the Persian Gulf than to take initiatives. 3. Crisis Management and Local Wars. The participants generally agreed that forces procured for this purpose should be added to those required for a NATO/Warsaw Pact war. The Middle East, the Persian Gulf and Korea would be the most important areas. Forces acquired for these purposes would be ample to handle contingencies that might occur elsewhere. Dr. Brzezinski suggested the creation of a highly responsive, global strike force; the Second Division might become available for this purpose after its withdrawal from Korea is complete. 4. East Asia. All agreed that, beyond the ground force withdrawals from Korea, the US should make no further changes in its military posture in the Far East for the time being. Some thought that a few small steps towards increasing our presenceвҖ”Вӯsuch as filling out the fighter wing in Korea or undertaking some exercises with ground force unitsвҖ”Вӯ might help assure Far Eastern nations that we intend to remain a Far Eastern power. 5. Forces and Costs. There was concern, expressed particularly by Mr. Aaron and Mr. Jayne, that the large range of forces estimated for the alternative integrated military strategies (AIMS) made it difficult to understand the cost constraint on the choice of strategy. Secretary Brown agreed to do further work on that aspect.
