378 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement much room for reduction exists in construction, ARPA, maintenance and operation, installations, and proficiency flying. There was then considerable discussion on the nuclear powered aircraft (ANP) involving $200 million, including the AEC portion of $130 million. The budget proposed the elimination of ANP, but Mr. McElroy argued for the validity of the program from the psycho­ logical point of view. The President questioned the nuclear-­powered aircraft, asking if it were not slow. Mr. Quarles responded that it was up to mach 1 and that it could penetrate to enemy defenses and launch missiles. Mr. Quarles felt that it had real military use but agreed that it was premature to “barge” into the systems application at this time. The President then questioned why the development of ANP was not given to NASA and to AEC. Mr. Quarles suggested that he get Drs. Killian and Glennan and Mr. McCone and bring the results of further study to the President. The President approved this suggestion but said he still thinks it should be out of Defense. A discussion then followed, based on an example used by Mr. Stans, of the DYNA-SOAR. Since this program represents a space experiment, there is considerable question as to whether the program should be pursued with the Department of Defense or with NASA. The discussion of switching the program to NASA was not conclu­ sive. However, the whole question of basic research was touched on to include the matter of reconnaissance satellites. In this connection, the President observed that he felt that satellites should be orbiting and working before Defense takes them over. Mr. McElroy defended the reconnaissance satellite but the President returned to his point, saying whenever we have the satellite we want, let us then give a defense application to it. As a result of his studies of the practices of the Department of Defense, Mr. Stans concluded that as the President’s budget officer, he could not recommend approval of the budget as presented by the Department. His recommendation was to instruct the Defense Department to utilize the figure of $40.0 billion as a ceiling in a fresh attempt to make up a new FY 1960 budget. The President did not directly respond to Mr. Stans’ proposal. III. The discussion then turned to basic philosophy. The President made a pointed effort to emphasize that Defense is the key to a bal­ anced budget. He pointed out that if the Department of Defense desires to spend the kind of money requested in this proposal, they should realize that increased taxes are necessary in order to make it possible if the budget is to be balanced. He stated that he will, of course, listen when the Department of Defense says to him that national security
