Options Identified 275 of a total trade embargo which would involve extended debate and possible failure in the UNSC.10 (S) In order to maintain the public appearance of momentum, it will be necessary to publicize in some form the types of actions which our allies have agreed to undertake. Some will not object; others will wish to keep their advice entirely private. The SCC recommended that State contact the countries involved and determine what they would be willing to announce publicly. Depending on their reaction, we will probably want to do a careful backgrounder to get out the whole story. This can be linked to intelligence information on the decline of shipping into the Persian Gulf, to increase the appearance of effective disruption of trade. We would expect to do the backgrounder by Wednesday.11 (S) 2. Presidential Views. Dr. Brzezinski briefed the SCC on the President’s comments on the notes of Friday’s meeting.12 The President approved the proposed strategy on the White Paper (that the information be collected and papers prepared, but not to publish a formal document) but asked that the internal documentation be complete for selective use. Approval was granted for leaking information about certain banks’ circumvention of restrictions on Iranian assets. At this point, however, there appeared to be no flagrant cases to be exploited. (S) 3. Trials. The President noted that it is important that we do nothing which would lend legitimacy to any trials of the hostages by Iran. The question of the lawyers preparing legal support for the hostages will be raised at the meeting tomorrow. (C) 4. French. The Iranian case against U.S. branch banks in France has been refiled. The SCC agreed that Giscard should be reminded of his assurance to Vance that this case would be tied up in the courts and not be subject to an early court decision. (S) Political-Military Issues: [Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.] 10 Carter underlined the phrase “except for humanitarian items” and wrote in the left margin: “define narrowly.” He approved this item with a checkmark. 11 In the left margin beside this paragraph, Carter wrote: “My guess: better for them after move in UN on sanctions.” Wednesday was December 19. Carter approved this item with a checkmark. 12 See Document 97.
