960
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
304.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, May 19, 1978
SUBJECT
A Strategy For the Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) Into the Eighties
As you requested, we have developed a proposed strategy for the
MDBs into the 1980s. To facilitate planning, I am seeking your approval of
an overall strategy for all the MDBs and a preliminary U.S. position for up-
coming replenishments in the largest banks—the International Develop-
ment Association (IDA), the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD), and the Inter-American Development Bank
(IDB). Your decisions on the Asian Development Fund (ADF) and the
African Development Fund (AFDF) have already been made,2 and suc-
cessfully negotiated internationally. My recommendations are agreed by
all agencies, with one exception as noted.
IDA
The principal multilateral component of your program to increase
U.S. concessional aid should be a major expansion of IDA, in which the
U.S. would provide around $1.4 billion annually during FY 81–83. Such
an expansion is essential to approach your overall aid target of $10 billion by
FY 82.
At this level, IDA would be able to almost double its programs aimed
at the poorest people in the poorest countries with almost 50% of lending
related directly to food production. It will be able to exercise maximum lev-
erage for appropriate policies in recipient countries. Our participation at
this level would induce other donors to maximize their contributions. It
would make a major contribution to the overall U.S. posture in the
North-South dialogue.3
1 Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat,
1978 Files, 56–83–69. No classification marking. Sent to Blumenthal for his signature
under cover of a May 18 memorandum from Bergsten, who noted that Carter had re-
quested the memorandum “for the mid-year budget review, to lay out our overall
strategy for the MDBs as part of total U.S. foreign assistance strategy for 1979 and be-
yond.” Bergsten also noted that Treasury officials had “worked out the memo in some
detail with NSC (Henry Owen) and OMB, and believe they will support our proposal.”
(Ibid.)
2 See Document 302.
3 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
