Chapter 4, February–April 1990  547
has come to think about the future and to try to delineate the main 
parameters of the next, qualitatively different phase of disarmament.
I have to say that we remain committed to radical balanced mea-
sures aimed at a gradual elimination of weapons of mass destruction, 
above all nuclear weapons. Achieving this noble goal, set forth in our 
program of January 15, 1986,3 would give the most solid guarantee of 
security and tranquility for all people on Earth.
I think, however, that you will agree that our immediate and top-­
priority task is still the early completion of the treaty on 50 percent stra-
tegic offensive arms reductions and its official signing, in keeping with 
our agreement at Malta, before the end of the year.
In light of this common understanding, I welcome your proposal 
that we initial the treaty at our forthcoming meeting in Washington, 
having in mind that all the main issues would be resolved by that time.
I am encouraged by the efforts of our delegations and the more 
rapid pace of work on the treaty, although I still think that the nego-
tiating process should be speeded up substantially. In this regard the 
Soviet side attaches key importance to the April round of talks between 
our foreign ministers.
Let me now turn to some additional ideas that you outlined in 
your letter of March 21, 1990.
I have studied it carefully, and I find that the suggestions and pro-
posals contained in it merit thorough consideration in our dialogue.
Regarding your proposal on banning MIRVed mobile ICBMs, 
I would like first of all to say that, in principle, I welcome your read-
iness to adopt radical, large-­scale decisions in the field of strategic 
arms reduction. Also, I can only agree that it is always better not to 
deploy some weapons systems rather than first to deploy and then 
eliminate them. Thorough analysis of the draft START Treaty shows, 
however, that it would be difficult to implement your proposal within 
its framework now.
First of all, our countries have already reached fundamental agree-
ment that ICBM mobility is a factor that serves to strengthen strategic 
stability. Both of us proceeded on that basis while preparing the START 
Treaty in its present form. In the process of negotiations the two sides 
have arrived at a carefully-­weighed balance of mutual concessions and 
compromises; changing any part of that balance would entail the risk 
of reopening many of the problems already solved.
Nevertheless, we could consider a substantial reduction of our 
deployment program of SS–24 mobile missiles, limiting their number 
3 Reference is to Gorbachev’s proposal to eliminate all nuclear weapons by the year 
2000.
