International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
581
It is hard to see how an economic setback of this magnitude could
occur without political repercussions. Resentment and recrimination
would drive the US, Europe, and Japan apart. Antagonism between the
West and the Third World would sharpen. The Soviet Union would be
tempted to exploit resulting disarray, and East/West relations might
worsen as a result. (C)
France. The French probably see some of the more immediate MTN
implications described above. That is why they want an MTN agree-
ment. But they also want to be sure that this agreement does not cause
them too much domestic political pain, and they threaten to veto the
negotiations in bargaining to this end.3 (C)
We don’t know how much this threat is a bluff, because we don’t
know how clearly they see the wider consequences of failure. To make
sure that they do, we need to make evident, without threat or pressure,
our view as to the heavy costs that they would have to bear if they were
to cause the negotiations to fail. (C)
To this end, if you approve, I will send the attached letter (which
has been cleared by State, STR, and Treasury) to French Trade Minister
Deniau.4 For us to remain silent in the face of the threatening message
that the French have sent would, I believe, be taken as a sign of
weakness—thus compounding the risk that the MTN will fail, more by
French miscalculation than deliberate intent. Since the French message
comes from Giscard, the answer should explicity reflect your views.
But since the message was delivered by Deniau, we should not escalate
this exchange above the Ministerial level.5 (C)
3 In the margin beneath this paragraph, Carter wrote: “It still seems to me that other
nations who are more heavily dependent on exports would be hurt worse than U.S.—but
we appear to be the supplicant. J.”
4 Not attached.
5 Carter checked the option to approve sending the letter and initialed “J.” Tele-
gram 37790 to Paris, February 13, transmitted Owen’s letter for delivery to Deniau. In the
letter, which is dated February 9, Owen related Carter’s views on the economic and polit-
ical implications of a failure of the MTN and his desire for a quick conclusion of the
U.S.–EC MTN negotiations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D790069–0310)
