88
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
5% in 1976 and will be 4.5% this year. It differs from country to country.
The US and Japan are likely to lead; Germany will not attain the im-
pressive figures of last year, but we will have 4½% to 5% growth this
year. We will watch our growth to ensure that we have a healthy
economy. If not, we will do something; not by printing money, how-
ever. We do this, quite frankly, because we want to survive, but we also
do it because of our international responsibilities.
As a social democracy, my first aim is to reduce unemployment.
The question is how do we do it. We do this not by neglecting price sta-
bility since inflation is the underlying uncertainty. We cannot create
necessary capital until there is confidence that we will not have a new
round of inflation leading to a new clampdown by governments which
will make resources idle. A go-stop policy is disastrous.
But we recognize that in the meantime, without necessary private
expenditure, governments must fill in the gaps. There must therefore
be additional public capital expenditures. I just launched a 16 billion
DM program in addition to the money that the local, state and federal
governments are already spending. This is the biggest in our history.
But we cannot fix unemployment in a short period of time.
We also have to live with large OPEC surpluses. The structural up-
heaval in balance of payments is also likely to continue for a while. En-
ergy policy is one important tool in this remedy. For this reason, I wel-
come President Carter’s initiatives to reduce dependence. And there
must also be a structural network of balance of payments cooperation.
Germany has up-valued the DM by 18% since the beginning of 1976;
imagine what that means for our exports—18% in less than 18 months.
We do this because we think it is our responsibility to help others. But
this has an impact since we export 29% of our GNP. We will stick to our
flexible currency regime because it helps others to let this happen.
There have, however, been some examples of competitive devaluation;
for example, Sweden. I am not talking about you, Jim. (Callaghan: I can
do without mine.)
I want to stress that we cannot cure the illness without curing the
cause of the illness. We must deal with inflation, the problems of the in-
ternational monetary system, uneven exchange rates, and unequal dis-
tributions of incomes. We need a stable consensus among us and a
stable social consensus within our countries. Most of our efforts must
be autonomous national tasks, but we also need psychological help
from other parties.
The results of the Summit need not stress all of the measures that
have been decided—but they should give the impression to the world
that we are not going to fight each other by means of economic warfare,
and that instead we will have complementary economic policies.
