454
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(Temporary Disconnection.)
President Sadat: We are ready to treat them according to the United
Nations Charter like any other people in the world—like you, like the
United States. But they want preferable positions. We don’t agree to
this principle. These are small points, but believe me, it is very hard. At
the same time I will be ready. I shall be telling all of them. As I have
agreed with you, even the normal relations part before the Israeli with-
drawal, I have done all I can, Mr. President. They are already greedy.
They won’t buy everything?
President Carter: Mr. President, they feel the same way about you
and I think both of you are wrong. I think both sides need more peace.
President Sadat: That is my oil. They think that it is theirs.
President Carter: They want to have a chance to buy it, not take it,
Mr. President.
President Sadat: We are ready, Mr. President. We are ready to sell
them. And in the future the difficulty with them is that they need
nothing for the future. Well, I don’t agree to this at all. You know, Mr.
President, I have seen other schemes in [missing text] and so and so.
Well, they don’t give me any opportunity to do this. Opportunity for
agreement. No Egyptian will agree to this. Imposing their conditions
on us. I am ready for full recognition, normal relations, good neighbor-
hood, a joint committee between us and them to put the whole thing to-
gether. I am sure in six months everything will be judged. [missing text]
agree to put in the treaty such things like they ask for, because this im-
poses conditions.
President Carter: I understand. When you go over the document
with Ambassador Eilts . . . it’s one that I think is a sound document and
fair and please go as far as you can, even though there are some parts in
it that you may not like to accept, because there are parts in it that the
Israelis do not like and I am trying to get them to accept it too—both of
you in the spirit of compromise.
President Sadat: I shall do, Mr. Carter, as I have always done with
you. I shall work very close and I shall tell you on every point why I
don’t like.
President Carter: I understand. Make those differences as few as
possible, Mr. President.
President Sadat: [missing text]
President Carter: Good luck to you.
President Sadat: [missing text]
President Carter: Thank you, sir.
President Sadat: Good-bye.
