Honduras 813 objectives in Honduras, and the role of the MSP and other programs in achieving them. The basic objectives of U.S. policy in Honduras have not changed since the submission of the ICA Master Program Book in August 1958.5 At that time they were stated in the following terms: 1) Promote political stability and develop democratic and representative institutions; 2) Promote the sound development and expansion of the Honduran economy, with emphasis to the extent possible on private enterprise; 3) Eliminate and prevent Communist penetration and influence; 4) Strengthen inter-American relationships with a view to improving the security system of the Western Hemisphere. All agencies of the U.S. Government which are represented in Honduras are working toward the realization of one or more of these objectives, each in the manner dictated by its own authority and capacities. The U.S. Embassy, as the principal instrument of U.S. policy in Honduras, works through normal diplomatic channels and its activities are necessarily limited to indirect influence except where U.S. interests are immediately concerned. The Ambassador coordinates the program of the various U.S. agencies from a policy standpoint, but, normally, does not interfere with their specific operations. The Country Team principle has been observed for some time in Honduras; representatives of the ICA (USOM), Army Mission, and the USIS attend the regular weekly Embassy staff meetings, as well as specific conferences called to establish Country Team policy, or a unified approach to a particular problem. The Country Team this year includes one member having the dual capacity of D/USOM and Counselor of Embassy for Economic Affairs6, thus insuring a more closely coordinated policy Advisory group. The U.S. Army and Air Force Missions in Honduras, through the Military Assistance Program, are working especially toward the achievement of the Objective (4), referring to the improvement of the hemisphere security system. These Missions are relatively small. Their continuation in Honduras depends principally on regional factors and Department of Defense determination as to their necessity. The Embassy has recently received a formal request from the Honduran Government 5 In desp. 37 from Tegucigalpa, August 1, 1958, Ambassador Newbegin informed C. Douglas Dillon, the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, that the United States Operations Mission in Honduras was transmitting the Master Program Book to him via ICA channels. No copy of the Master Program Book has been found in Department of State files. 6 Carson O. Crocker.
