course of the 17th and 18th meetings of the Commission, on December 9 and 16, 1925. Section 5. That in view of the provisions of the third and last sentence of paragraph D, page 45 of the award, the Commission respectfully recommends that the Arbitrator communicate to the Commission by cable his determination as to the time and manner in which, and the record upon which, the instant appeals of His Excellency the Chilean member shall be submitted to the Arbitrator. Section 6. That the Commission respectfully recommends that the Arbitrator communicate to the Commission by cable his ruling as to the effect of the instant appeals upon the past, current, and future proceedings of the Commission and its agencies, with special reference to the question whether or not, pending disposition of the instant appeals, the parties are bound to cooperate with the Commission in carrying out its decision with respect to certain matters or all matters. The foregoing resolution was adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica Arbitration, on the 16th day of December 1925. Sections 1 to 5, both inclusive, were adopted by unanimous vote of the three members of the Commission. Section 6 was adopted upon the affirmative vote of the President and the Peruvian member, the Chilean member abstaining from voting and formulating the following reservation: “Section 6 of the resolution could be interpreted in the sense that the members of the Commission are to cooperate in carrying out each and every decision adopted by the Commission: but as the Commission has adopted, and may adopt in the future, resolutions affecting, or which may affect and even undermine, the laws and jurisdiction of Chile which prevail in these territories in accordance with the Treaty of Ancon and recognized by the Arbitral Award, I am compelled to abstain from voting on this section 6 and I make formal reservation of the rights of Chile. “I wish to state at the same time, that in every matter outside these referred to, and particularly in the enactment of the registration and election regulations, the Commission can count on the cooperation of the Chilean member”. [Here follow the texts of the documents referred to in section 2 of the resolution.]
