March 27–December 31, 1979
833
2. Please deliver2 the following letter from the Secretary to Prince
Saud at the earliest opportunity:
3. Begin text:
HRH Prince Saud bin Faisal al-Saud, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Your Royal Highness:
I want to share with you my concern that the outcome of the Is-
lamic Conference3 could affect Egypt’s international position in a way
that would have negative consequences for each of our countries. The
United States believes that Saudi Arabia and its moderate Gulf
neighbors understand that the survival of a moderate government in
Egypt is important for the geo-political interests of Saudi Arabia and its
neighbors and that the current Arab campaign to punish Egypt is
turning toward extremes which can only undermine the security of the
region and the position of the moderates in it.
Expulsion of Egypt from Islamic or international groupings which
are not exclusively Arab can only work against broader long-term in-
terests of countries like Saudi Arabia, and we hope that Saudi Arabia
will lead in resisting such efforts.
I bring this matter to your attention because of the critical nature of
the present period for all of us and because of the leading role Saudi
Arabia can play in support of Egypt’s rightful place in the Islamic Con-
ference. A positive approach by Saudi Arabia on this matter would
clearly benefit us all, while Egypt’s expulsion would further damage
interests which each of us considers important.
Sincerely, Cyrus Vance. End text.
3. FYI: Under Secretary Newsom will be making same points to
Crown Prince Fahd.4 End FYI.
Vance
2 The letter and a translation were sent to Saud on April 30. (Telegram 3390 from
Jidda, April 30; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790196–1244)
3 In the aftermath of the Baghdad Summit, the meeting of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference Foreign Ministers, scheduled to be held in Fez, Morocco, beginning
May 8, was expected to consider Egypt’s future place in the group. On May 9, despite ef-
forts led by Libya and Iraq to expel Egypt completely, the Organization voted to suspend
Egypt’s membership, rendering it ineligible for all Organization activities as well as aid
money from the group. (“Islamic Conference Suspends Egyptians,” The New York Times,
May 10, 1979, p. A7)
4 Newsom met with Fahd in Marbella, Spain, on April 30, to discuss the state of
U.S.-Saudi relations. At the meeting, Fahd stated that Sadat “did not consult with the
Saudis before his first trip to Jerusalem and that, because Sadat achieved so little, Saudi
Arabia had difficulty in supporting Sadat or the peace process.” Newsom responded by
urging Saudi support for Sadat “to the extent Baghdad makes possible” and “active
Saudi opposition to the expulsion of Egypt from international bodies.” (Telegram 110491
to Jidda, May 2; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables
File, State Department Out, Box 116, 5/1–9/79) A full memorandum of conversation for
this meeting is in the Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-
fairs, NEA Front Office Subject File 1978–1984, Lot 85D251, Box 3, 1979 Memcons—UN
Secretariat (P).
