662 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV they have to spend more because they get less out of it. In fact, the Soviets are probably a lot less efficient in the defense sector than we used to think. But this measure does not reveal it. Rather, this measure is largely the result of military outputs. Soviet defense costs are estimated by CIA on the basis of observed physical activity, e.g., missiles, ships, bunkers, etc. Occasional clandestine reports of real Soviet defense budget figures confirm that our totals are about right. (S) A more significant deficiency of Andy’s analysis might be called “the problem of relative starting points.” If the Soviets were far enough behind the US in real military strength when, around 1968, they began to invest more than we in defense, then all their effort may amount to no more than closing large gaps. This merely reminds us that we cannot divorce gross investment and spending trends from real force balances, trends in those balances, and missions. To a large extent the Soviets have been closing gaps. They have also been investing in areas where we choose not to compete and may, in fact, be forcing them to waste investment, e.g., in air defense. And they must invest against the China threat. (U) Yet it is hard to accept that a Soviet investment effort larger than ours for more than a decade will yield no more than gross military equality, given the starting point. In the late 1960s, the Soviets had functional strategic parity with the US by their own testimony. They enjoyed preponderance in theater forces in Europe. And they had largely completed the quantitative expansion of their forces opposite China, a power balance in which the US also has an interest. They suffered deficiencies in all these areas. Naval forces were a major area in which they lagged. Here differences between US and Soviet naval missions and doctrine are important. In terms of missions, the US needs naval superiority; the USSR does not. (U) We should keep in mind that Soviet spending levels in the 1970s result from steady growth since the late 1950s, not any change of Soviet policy. It is we who changed our behavior, reducing real defense outlays since the late 1960s after a period of growth. One cannot easily escape the conclusion that, sooner or later, a superior effort by a competent performer will yield a superior position. (U) If this overall message is approximately correct, it has far-­reaching implications: 1. The increases in defense spending we now talk about are likely to be insufficient. In no case can we turn things around quickly. Substantial increases in defense spending as a percentage of GNP over a sustained period may be necessary to alter the prognosis in five years or so. 2. Increasing the efficiency with which we select and buy defense assets is a necessary, but insufficient, condition for redressing the balance. There must be more resources. But at the same time we probably
