March 1952–February 1953
407
143.
National Intelligence Estimate1
NIE–75
Washington, November 13, 1952.
PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAN THROUGH 1953
The Problem
To estimate probable future developments in Iran through 1953.
Conclusions
1. The Iranian situation contains so many elements of instability
that it is impossible to estimate with confidence for more than a short
period. On the basis of present indications, however, it appears prob-
able that a National Front government will remain in power through
1953, despite growing unrest. The government has the capability to
take effective repressive action to check mob violence and Tudeh agita-
tion and will probably continue to act against specific challenges of this
sort as they arise. The government is likely to retain the backing of the
Shah and control over the security forces. Although the danger of se-
rious Tudeh infiltration of the National Front and the government bu-
reaucracy continues, we believe that Tudeh will not be able to gain con-
trol of the government by this means during 1953. Neither the groups
opposing the National Front nor the Tudeh Party are likely to develop
the strength to overthrow the National Front by constitutional means
or by force in 1953.
2. Even in the absence of substantial oil revenues and of foreign
economic aid, Iran can probably export enough to pay for essential im-
ports through 1953, unless there is a serious crop failure or an unfavor-
able export market. The government probably will be able to obtain
funds for its operation. Some inflation will occur. Capital development
will be curtailed, and urban living standards will fall. However, we do
not believe that economic factors, in themselves, will result in the over-
throw of the National Front in 1953.
3. If present trends in Iran continue unchecked beyond the end of
1953, rising internal tensions and continued deterioration of the
economy and of the budgetary position of the government might lead
to a breakdown of government authority and open the way for at least
a gradual assumption of control by Tudeh.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79R01012A, Box 25, Folder 3,
(NIE–75) Probable Developments in Iran. Secret. The following member organizations of
the Intelligence Advisory Committee participated with the Central Intelligence Agency
in the preparation of this estimate: the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. All members of the Intelli-
gence Advisory Committee concurred in this estimate on November 6.
