Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
707
Option 1. A five percent reduction during this year recognizing the
importance of achieving and even exceeding the target for the year.
Option 2. An eight percent reduction this year to ensure the credi-
bility of our policy of restraint.
Option 3. At least a five percent reduction this year with the addi-
tional commitment to at least a ten percent reduction by the end of two
years to establish a downward trend over a longer period and facilitate
planning.
3. Ceiling Management
There was agreement on the procedures to be used in managing
the ceiling. The sale of aircraft to the Middle East is likely to account for
a large portion of the ceiling dollars available for new sales commit-
ments this year. The attached listing2 presents other major requests—
excluding the Middle East package—and will be forwarded to the Pres-
ident for his approval as the FY 1978 plan, as part of a flexible predic-
tive approach to managing the ceiling. There will be a monthly review
of the plan to measure progress against the ceiling, incorporate new
information and recommend additional cases. The normal clearance
process during which arms control, human rights, and economic im-
pacts are assessed before forwarding the request for the President’s ap-
proval will be preserved. For large cases or when there is disagreement
on a particular case, it may be necessary to convene the PRC before the
case goes to the President.
4. Congressional and Press Strategy
There was broad agreement that a substantial education program
must be carried out with the Congress and the press. State will prepare
a plan by next Tuesday3 which will identify the members of Congress
whom we must contact and develop a strategy for the Press. State will
also contact the Chairmen of the HIRC and the SFRC in an effort to
head off requests for Administration working papers which might con-
tain lists of possible sales, citing the problems of the list becoming
public and of falsely generating expectations.
2 Not attached.
3 January 31.
