September 18–December 16, 1978
515
strong case could be made for withdrawing our tentative acceptance of
exchanging ambassadors within such a short period. When they re-
neged on the sub-phases, they upset the quid pro quo equation.
I realize that the process of negotiations entails a series of accom-
modations by both parties. But the outcome should present a reason-
able balance between the rights and obligations of both of them. You
and your able aides have devoted your time and energy so generously
to help the two sides strike this equilibrium. But I feel that the Israelis
insisted adamantly to have it their way. They invoke the Camp David
“Framework” when it suits their purpose and ignore it when it requires
them to honor certain commitments which they do not like. They insist
on specificity when it comes to their benefit and ambiguity as to any of
their obligations.
They do not seem to appreciate our flexibility and willingness to be
responsive. It might be revealing to review the situation since we went
to Camp David last September. If we examine the “Framework of a
Comprehensive Settlement of the Problem of the Middle East”45 which
I submitted to you and Premier Begin on the opening of conference and
compare it with the document we signed, we will find that we went a
long way to make both ends meet.
We responded positively to their need to feel secure and we re-
flected this in the security arrangements we agreed to. Reciprocity was
applied in a liberal rather than a literal sense. In addition to that, I ac-
cepted to start the process of normalization, including diplomatic, eco-
nomic and cultural relations after the completion of the interim with-
drawal. Legally speaking, we had every right to defer that until the
completion of the final withdrawal. We accepted your concept of
solving the Palestinian problem including Arab Jerusalem in stages
while leaving certain points to be settled in future negotiations.
The Israelis did not commit themselves to adhere to the treaty on
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Nor did they accept the com-
pulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice with respect to
disputes which emanate from the application or the interpretation of
the parties’ contractual arrangements. Nevertheless, I decided to pro-
ceed in the hope that these shortcomings will be remedied in the future
with the progressive development of peace, as I have believed and still
believe that the real peace process starts only after the signing. Despite
the risks involved, I took the decision to go ahead. I did this mainly for
you and on account of my full faith that you are committed with us to
work for a comprehensive peace which safeguards the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people.
45 See footnote 8, Document 28.
