1046 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement him that there was an increase from zero to 19 per cent on “income from service, interest and rent obtained by companies not established in Peru.” Mr. Linville informed him this phase of the bill had been inserted by Congress, reportedly without the knowledge or suggestion and approval of the Ministry of Treasury. I said we felt these two taxes had added to the unfavorable climate for investment and that he himself had in his letter of acceptance to President Prado stated the need for foreign capital. At one point early in the conversation when I mentioned Gallo Porras’ letter to the President, he thought I meant a letter which evidently he has written to Vice President Nixon.8 He said he told the Vice President that he shouldn’t go to San Marcos—it was a mistake, etc., etc.—that he and the Vice President upon reaching the Hotel Bolivar “there were only cheers; he shouldn’t have gone to Son Marcos.” Since Mr. Linville and I had not called on him to get into a discussion on the Nixon visit, I gave him no reply but turned him back to his acceptance letter to President Prado.9 With reference to the economic troubles, I told Gallo Porras there was no need for Peru to import experts to advise them on their needs because he had right, on the same floor with him two financial experts from the International Bank. I stated both Mr. Havlik and Mr. Chaufournier were friends of Peru, and their viewpoint was professional, had nothing to do with their respective governments and therefore their advice could be relied upon implicitly. I said the Embassy had faith in them. Mr. Linville stated Mr. Havlik and Mr. Chaufournier would know precisely what procedures were required in applying for loans. Mr. Linville added that Mr. Larrabure of the Central Bank and Mr. Romulo Ferrero could also be relied upon for good advice. 8 The referenced letter was not further identified. 9 In despatch 981 from Lima, June 16, the Embassy reported on Prime Minister Gallo Porras’ letter of June 9 to President Prado. (723.11/6–l658)
