North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 775 moment, appear to be less compelling, except in the Caribbean area. Our interests in Asia come not so much from its natural resource potential as from its trade, finance and strategic importance. There are, in addition, divisions resulting from disparate growth performance and natural resources endowments. A dozen or so developing countries, including much of South America, Mexico, Korea, Hong Kong, Saudi Arabia and Iran have experienced remarkable economic growth in the post-war period, surpassing the weaker industrialized countries of Europe. Each of these nations has significant economic interests to defend that are far more important than any benefits they expect to receive from the general LDC call for more concessional aid, preferential treatment and commodity agreements. The very poor countries of Asia and Africa would gain from more aid but, lacking substantial amounts of raw materials, very little from commodity agreements. A number of commodity exporting countries could gain from commodity agreements, but have little real interest in more aid (which would go to poorer nations). US Interests The US has a fundamental interest in securing the support for or, failing that, acquiescence in an open multilateral economic system, and orderly change within that system. Further, we have an interest in avoidance and containment of regional disputes and in maximizing logistic support capabilities of our forces. Finally, we have a major interest in constructing new global system in such areas as nuclear proliferation, conventional arms sales, the controlling of terrorism, the use of “global commons” like the oceans, population control and global food production. Stringent challenges by the poorer countries to the economic system’s equity and legitimacy could undermine the world economy, global political stability and the potential to cope successfully with the new “global order” issue you have written so eloquently about for the last five years. We are not at present experiencing the same tensions as we did in 1974—with growing radical tactics of the developing countries, a tight alliance between the OPEC cartel and the developing countries. In fact, the developing countries appear, for the time being, to be convinced that they may after all have a place in US foreign policy. Kissinger’s UN and UNCTAD speeches3 made some progress in re-establishing a rea- 3 For the text of Kissinger’s speech to the Seventh Special Session of the UN General Assembly, which he was unable to deliver but Moynihan read in his stead on September 1, 1975, see the Department of State Bulletin, September 22, 1975, pp. 425–441. The text of Kissinger’s address at UNCTAD IV in Nairobi on May 6, 1976, is in the Department of State Bulletin, May 31, 1976, pp. 657–672.
