September 18–December 16, 1978
313
tians do not want language that seems to make the treaty specifically
directed against the Palestinians. However, steady progress has been
made in narrowing the difference on this paragraph, and we think that
with a little bit more work, agreement can be reached.
2. The UN Role. The problem here is that the parties cannot, by
mere agreement between themselves, commit a UN Force or observer
presence which of course must also be authorized by the Security
Council. Dayan feels that the treaty text which is based on the Camp
David language is inadequate. In this morning’s session he cast around,
in a thinking-out-loud manner, for the possibility of some kind of U.S.
assurances in the event that the UN Force were withdrawn against the
two parties’ consent. We are trying to come up with a range of options
that might meet Dayan’s concern on this point.
3. Rights of Navigation. We now have agreed language on Israeli use
of the Suez Canal, but a difference remains on the question of the Strait
of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba. Israel wants, in accordance with the
language at Camp David, to have the treaty state that the parties con-
sider these waterways to be international waterways “open to all na-
tions for unimpeded and non-suspendable freedom of navigation.”
The Egyptians are resisting this language because they do not want to
frame their commitment in terms of a general principle which could
weaken their position to bar Soviet or other vessels from unimpeded
passage in these waterways. The Israelis exhibit no sign of give on this
point however. They take the position that because it was in the Camp
David Framework it cannot be weakened.
4. Arms Limitation. The Israelis originally proposed an article on
arms limitation but now request that it be withdrawn. The Egyptians
do not seem to feel strongly about it one way or the other; they are
checking with Cairo about dropping this provision.
5.
Priority
of
Obligations.
The
Israelis
want
sweeping,
all-
encompassing language to the effect that this treaty supersedes any
other Egyptian obligation. This causes the Egyptians severe problems
because of their numerous defense pacts with other Arab states. There
has been much discussion about this item; both sides fully understand
the other’s problem; and they are beginning to try to formulate lan-
guage that may in the end be mutually accommodating. The latest Is-
raeli suggestion came from Dayan this morning: he wonders whether
Egypt might not supplement the somewhat vaguer language it prefers
in the treaty text with a letter to the U.S. stating that if Syria (for ex-
ample) attacks Israel, Egypt would not honor its defense pact under-
taking to come to its assistance.
6. Oil. The Israelis want to begin discussions about this as soon as
possible; the Egyptians have not made up their minds about it. We see
this as something the two sides will have to come to some under-
