El Salvador  623
next following, you may also wish inform Osorio of plan to approach 
key Army officers.
If in your opinion split among officer corps is serious, we sug-
gest an approach should also be made promptly to key officers in 
both Osorio and Lemus camps. These officers would be informed that 
while we have no desire to intervene in political affairs of Salvador and 
in particular no desire to take sides as between military groups, we 
believe that unity of armed forces in face of present Communist threat 
is both urgent and essential. Colonel Alberto Escamilla or Major Ruben 
Rosales or both may be best persons to approach in Osorio camp. 
General Molina or General Cordova or both might be best persons to 
approach in Lemus group. However, our information regarding mili-
tary is fragmentary and we leave to Embassy’s and Mil Attaches discre-
tion which officers should be approached and most appropriate person 
in Embassy family to make approach. Cable Niact results these con-
versations with any additional recommendations Embassy may have. 
Department suspending recognition until receipt your report.
Ambassador Kalijarvi concurs.
Herter
ES–30.	
Telegram from the Chargé in El Salvador (Downs) to the 
Department of State1

San Salvador, November 3, 1960, 7 p.m.
258. Department pass Army for ACSI; CINCARIB; CG USARCARIB; 
Department of Air Force for AFCIN. Re Department telegram 169.2
At “Kye” Quinonez’s house and in company Colonel Matthews 
spent one hour this morning with Osorio, and hour with junta mem-
ber Major Rosales alone, two hours with Rosales and Colonel Escamilla 
together. Quinonez party to all discussions.
Made presentation as suggested reference telegram and Osorio 
commenced with review of situation leading to coup which general in 
nature and lacking in specifics. Lemus hated by everyone, army dis-
united and decaying, several coup plots in making, executive without 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.00/11–360. Secret; Niact. This tele-
gram was sent in two sections.
2 See Document ES–29.
