Arms Control and Disarmament 1255 sheet for background purposes. It was considered by others of the group that the statement would raise questions which would not be seemly for the President to attempt to answer. However, Mr. Washburn did feel that it would be advisable for the President to have some back­ ground questions and answers, and in the event you consider it useful, I am attaching a copy of a memorandum sent to me yesterday by USIA, which lists possible questions and answers from a USIA perspective. As a footnote to this aspect of the matter, when Admiral Foster talked with Admiral Strauss, he strongly urged the latter to get in touch with Press Secretary Hagerty and to have him agree that the President would refer questioners to the competent agencies concerned. Mr. Washburn left before the meeting was over because of another meeting he was obliged to attend and, on leaving, indicated his dis­ satisfaction with the draft statement as it stood with no percentages indicated for fallout and with the decision that there be no attached question and answer sheet for the President. Earlier I had the occasion to tell him privately and in general terms of what you had given me as the substance of what had been discussed at the special White House meeting yesterday. He indicated that he thought USIA, with its world­ wide information responsibilities, might be brought into the chain of developments if it was intended to take substantive policy actions on any crash basis. Mr. Washburn told me on the phone what he had said to you on meeting you after leaving the meeting and your request to him, with which he is complying. Roy M. Melbourne Acting Executive Officer cc: Mr. Staats Mr. Damon 303. Record of Telephone Conversation Between Lodge and John Foster Dulles1 L said he sees the Pres is scheduled to make an announcement tomorrow re having observers for the Hardtack Operation. Of course the Sec knows more than L does but from where he sits he thinks we 1 Source: Public relations considerations to nuclear testing. No classification mark­ ing. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations.
