Chapter 2, January–June 1989 49 1600 delivery vehicles (ballistic missiles and bombers). Can affect concentration of forces by constraining number of platforms on which warheads can be distributed. bomber weapon counting rule that treats bombers without ALCMs as one unit against the 6000 limit regardless of how many non-ALCM nuclear weapons (gravity bombs, short-­range missiles) they actually carry. Creates big incentive for “penetrating” bombers (B–1, B–2) which may carry more than 16 such weapons. missile warhead counting rules that limit existing missile types to agreed numbers of warheads even if some had previously been tested with more. Avoids counting our D–5 SLBM with more warheads than it will carry, but credits some Soviet missiles with fewer than they are probably capable of carrying. broad outlines of verification regime, including permanent portal monitoring of selected production facilities, baseline and short-­notice inspections of declared facilities, observation of elimination procedures, and data exchanges. Key Areas of U.S.-Soviet Disagreement — Mobile ICBMs. We proposed a ban due to difficulty of verifying a limit (but also because support for a U.S. mobile program seemed questionable). Soviets have already deployed two mobile ICBMs (one-­warhead SS–25, 10-­warhead rail-­mobile SS–24) and reject a ban. Without committing to permit mobiles, we’ve worked with Soviets on possible verification measures. — Sea-­launched cruise missiles (SLCMs). Soviets proposed limits of 400 nuclear and 600 conventional SLCMs. We’ve rejected limits on conventional, agreed to explore limits on nuclear, but argued we haven’t found effective verification measures that would not harm ship security, operations, or our “neither confirm nor deny” policy for shipboard nuclear deployments. Instead of binding numerical limits, we’ve called for periodic declarations of nuclear SLCM deployment plans. This issue will be difficult to resolve. — Air-­launched cruise missiles (ALCMs). While agreeing to exempt conventional ALCMs, Soviets propose that ALCM-­carrying bombers be counted with maximum number of nuclear ALCMs for which they’re equipped (e.g., 20 for B–52s). Because that would severely limit number of ALCM bombers we could deploy under 6000 ceiling (and because U.S. bombers usually carry fewer than equipped number), we proposed that each bomber be credited with an agreed number (10 for U.S.) regardless of number actually deployed, arguing this simplified monitoring. — ICBM warhead sublimit. Soviets have said they’d accept our proposal for 3300 limit on ICBM warheads only if it were also applied to
