342
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Cooperative US/USSR program may provide international PNE
benefits not otherwise attainable.
Disadvantages:
—Arrangement might be criticized as a cooperative US/USSR
weapon development program (condominium).
—Requires extreme care in the disclosure of design information to
avoid enhancing existing Soviet weapon design capabilities.
—May not be negotiable with Soviets because of high degree of
intrusiveness.
D. Negotiating Strategy
As outlined above, it would appear to be clearly in our interest to
exert maximum pressure to convince the Soviets that PNEs should be
banned under a CTB. If this proves unacceptable to the Soviets, an al-
ternative would be to include in the CTB agreement a provision for
consideration of a PNE accommodation at a later time. This was the
final resolution of the Soviet desire for PNEs above 150 kilotons during
the PNET negotiations.
If this approach proved unsuccessful, we might attempt to nego-
tiate a PNE accommodation that would be restricted to the Pechora-
Kama Canal project. This might be negotiable, would limit the scope of
the Soviet PNE effort, and upon completion could lead to a complete
test ban. There would be important disadvantages, however, in that
since only the Soviets would benefit, other nations could criticize it as
discriminatory.
More importantly, the project would involve only excavation ex-
plosions and we have repeatedly stated that major PNE excavation
projects would violate the LTBT. This would preclude treating the
LTBT problem as we did in the PNET by including a provision for strict
LTBT compliance and not differentiating between contained and exca-
vation PNEs. Finally, the project is so large, and would take so long
(perhaps 10 years), that this option would not significantly reduce
weapons-related benefits compared to a general PNE accommodation.
Under either the restricted Pechora-Kama or an unrestricted PNE
accommodation, their negotiability would obviously depend on the de-
gree of intrusiveness of the accommodation arrangement we selected.
None of the four such arrangements outlined above has been examined
in detail, and all should receive further careful review before pro-
ceeding with negotiation of any PNE accommodation.
