1466 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. Herter said that he considered the U.S. objective was not to eliminate testing per se as this was not very important one way or the other. It was instead to test the bona fides of the Soviets in following through on the recommendations of the Geneva experts and thus to test their willingness to subject themselves to inspection, which is the sine qua non for disarmament. There was, of course, much public sentiment on the basis of possible health hazards but this factor is not basic from the U.S. point of view. Dr. Killian added that there was of course a public opinion factor to be taken into account. Mr. Gray asked if agreement could have been reached in Geneva by the experts without a Soviet political decision to reach agreement. If such a decision were taken by the Soviets in August he wondered why their present attitude toward agreement had changed. It was generally agreed that the Geneva experts’ report was based upon a political decision by the Soviet Government that it desired to reach this agreement. Mr. Farley suggested that one possibility that might account for a change in Soviet position was that our August 22 statement of willing­ ness to proceed to political negotiation took the Soviets by surprise. They may have hoped by reaching agreement at the expert level to increase pressure upon the U.S. position rather than move toward real agreement. Another factor that might be responsible for a change in their attitude could be that the Soviets came to realize in the course of the Geneva discussions that they still had much to learn about nuclear weapons and their effects. This might account for their resuming tests promptly after the Geneva talks. Mr. Herter raised first for discussion the threshold question. He said he understood the Secretary’s position to be that the U.S. would take no stand at the beginning of the Geneva talks on the threshold question but that if the Soviets came to see the disadvantages to them of the extensive inspection required for a full cessation of tests, the alter­ native of a threshold might be introduced. Mr. McCone said that he agreed with the Secretary that we let this evolve and begin by discussing the geometric rate at which ­on-­site inspection increases as the threshold is lowered. He understood, for example, that in the case where a hundred inspections would be required for a 5 kt threshold, 1800 would be required at 1 kt level. Mr. Quarles said he agreed that we should leave the threshold ques­ tion to be handled in this way. He thought: 1) that we should leave no ambiguity as to what the capabilities and threshold of any agreed sys­ tem would be; 2) that we should agree to discontinue all tests above the threshold; and 3) that we might unilaterally renounce, subject to certain
