January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1163 Therefore, this would affect the Palestinian position, since they fear that Hussein wants a united kingdom. The President asked if that included part of the West Bank. President Sadat said yes. The President said that Hussein wants others to do the negotiating. Mr. el-Baz said that Hussein would not be blamed for anything; he believes it will fall into his lap, sooner or later. He would take the credit, but not the blame. Ambassador Linowitz said that the Palestinians should join the process. They have no alternative for a better life; and they will get more at the table than absent from it. First, he can see them holding off, expecting a magic formula or a better turn of events after May 26. We should discourage the notion that they would get a better deal later. Second, if they stay away, someone else will speak for them. Israel will say that no matter what Egypt says, when the Palestinians get in they will press for more. Therefore, Israel will hold back: why give anything now, they will say, if they will be pressed for more later. The Palestinians can get the best deal now. Mr. el-Baz questioned whether the fact of sitting down at the table were an important element. Is it an inducement? Egyptian contacts say this is not so, that it is not a big advance. The first liability is in the Palestinians’ talking with the Israelis without equilibrium, since Israel is in control. Therefore, there is no equilibrium. This could work if the Israelis had said that they would withdraw completely. Without that— either a commitment that Israel would withdraw completely or under some other shield for their fears—i.e. of Israeli de facto control—then the outcome to the negotiations would either be the status quo or occupation. Without a commitment to withdraw there should be the shield of the U.S. position, to show that the Palestinians are not left to the mercy of the Israelis at the table. Ambassador Linowitz said the Palestinians should welcome the Continuing Committee. Mr. el-Baz said that they need to know the joint Egyptian-American concept of foreign affairs, with limited exceptions. First, they want a U.S. commitment to self-determination. Ambassador Linowitz said he had told Crown Prince Fahd that the Palestinians have three courses open to them: to stay as they are now; to resort to force; or to pursue the path of the autonomy negotiations. What else is there? Mr. el-Baz said that they see two other approaches. Ambassador Linowitz asked what they were. Mr. el-Baz said that could combine a UN resolution and some form of international conference, with people like Kreisky and others. The
