Chapter 2, January–June 1989  235
NSC staff believe that this sublimit is a relatively minor constraint 
on Soviet forces compared to the 1540/4900 warhead limits and 50% 
throwweight reduction already agreed. In view of the Soviet opposition 
in principle to limits that affect ICBMs only, the ICBM warhead sublimit 
is not worth the likely negotiating cost. Further, it will be more difficult 
to fall off our position later in the negotiations. We should not remove 
the sublimit unilaterally, but now is the time to authorize the negotiator 
to pursue a trade—­perhaps in the context of new initiatives—­and make 
his recommendations back to Washington.
NSC Staff Recommendation
That you approve Option 1.4
2. Limits on Heavy ICBMs. The Soviets have thus far agreed to cut 
their SS-18 heavy ICBM force by one-­half. At issue is whether to seek 
further reductions or restrictions on this particular system, or whether 
to allow flight-­testing and modification of this missile in return for 
equal rights by the U.S.
Discussion
Any flight-­testing of heavy ICBMs would complicate our ability 
to monitor a ban on modernization, and would remove the “withering 
away” aspect of our current position that satisfies the Jackson amend-
ment “equality” requirement. Although Option 4 may satisfy the letter 
of the requirement, it could pose a ratification issue because, in practi-
cal terms, we will never deploy a heavy ICBM.
The JCS believe that we should not press further limits on heavies 
(Option 4) because they do not want modernization constraints to be 
applied to U.S. non-­heavy missiles as a negotiating price.
In addition to their positions on the options, State, Ambassador 
Rowny and ACDA favor authorizing the negotiator to quietly pursue 
the possibility of additional reductions with the Soviets.
Option 1.  Seek the negotiated elimination of all SS-18s. (favored by 
OSD and Ambassador Rowny, although Ambassador 
Rowny would not pay a high negotiating price for this)
Option 2.  Retain current position, rescind contingency guidance. This 
would ban heavy ICBM flight testing and ultimately lead 
to a “withering away “ of the Soviet heavy ICBM force. 
(favored by the DCI; acceptable to OSD and Ambassador 
Rowny as a fallback)
4 Scowcroft initialed his approval.
