International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 321 The implementation of the trigger price system for steel imports by the Treasury Department this month is expected to have an adverse impact on the domestic bolt, nut, and large screw industry. It is estimated that 25 percent of the steel used by the fastener industry is imported and that the trigger price system could increase import prices by about 20 percent. Depending on the assumptions used, this could raise total costs of production of bolts, nuts, and large screws by 10–16 percent for firms relying solely on imported steel. The Federal Preparedness Agency (FPA) has just completed a staff study of fastener requirements during a national emergency.3 The scope of the study is broader than the products covered by the escape clause case and the results are preliminary. It concludes that under certain conditions, notably restricted access to foreign supplies, the U.S. would face serious shortages of fasteners in a wartime emergency. These findings have become publicly available and a number of Congressmen have already written to you stressing national security aspects of the case. We have been contacted by about 50 Congressmen and 12 Senators, almost all of whom have expressed support for the industry’s case. The Congressional delegations from Ohio, Michigan, Illinois, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Indiana, and Missouri account for most of these contacts. Recommendations The Trade Policy Staff Committee (TPSC), acting on behalf of the Cabinet level Trade Policy Committee (TPC), recommends without any agency dissent that you direct the Secretary of the Treasury to undertake an expedited national security investigation on iron or steel bolts, nuts, and large screws under section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. Such an investigation would define our national security interests in this industry and could lead to appropriate actions by the U.S. Government (including trade actions) to protect those interests. I recommend that you approve this TPSC recommendation.4 The Trade Policy Staff Committee split on the question of granting import relief in this case. Labor, Commerce, Interior, and STR recommend that you grant import relief in the form of a tariff rate quota. State, Treasury and Defense recommend that you deny relief on the grounds of national economic interest. Agriculture has not taken a position on this case. 3 Not found. 4 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to the recommendation.
