1316 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement larger payload capacity, improved accuracy of delivery and/or reliance on larger quantities. It is in the light of the above considerations that I find myself in general agreement with the belief of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that in its overall long range effects a test cessation will operate to the distinct dis­ advantage of the United States. If such a test cessation is a positive and integral part of more comprehensive measures which deal with the sta­ bilization and reduction of nuclear weapons stockpiles, the prevention of surprise attack and the regulation of armaments and armed forces, the military disadvantage of test cessation becomes acceptable in the light of these major objectives. In any case, the United States should not become a party to a test cessation agreement which would prohibit the conduct of tests of yields, in environments and under conditions which the agreed and implemented control system would be unable to monitor satisfactorily as to detection, identification and responsibility. Donald A. Quarles Enclosure: Memo for SecDef frm JCS, 13 Mar 58, w/Appendix 308. Record of Telephone Conversation Between Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles1 April 7, 1958, 8:30 a.m. The Sec. said he was sending to the President a clean draft of a message to Khrushchev. The Sec. said that after he wrote the Pres. on Sat. we sent a draft to London. Macmillan looked it over and came back with some minor suggestions which are incorporated in the draft the Sec. was sending over. They discussed whether the Sec. would come to the WH this morning and Sec. said he could come over at 10 on his way to the Pentagon. The Sec. mentioned Jim Hagerty’s idea about the possibility of a somewhat different approach to Khrushchev and try to put him behind the propaganda eight ball by saying he suddenly talks one-­third of our initial proposal where he said both of us do this and it would be 1 Source: Message to Khrushchev; cessation of testing. No classification marking. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations.
