808
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Jones: Pakistan’s military deficiencies are so glaring that only a
large input of Saudi funds could provide them with a military capability
to withstand Soviet pressures.
Komer: We have never really explored the option of going to India
to ask them to provide assurances that they will not attack Pakistan.
This would enable the Pakistanis to move any of their forces from the
border with India to the Afghanistan side.
Muskie: What kind of leverage do we have with India?
Komer: The Indians are very nervous about our military assistance
to Pakistan. We could point out to them that the level of our assistance
to Pakistan will to a considerable extent depend on how much the
Pakistanis need. That in turn could be affected by Indian behavior. The
Indians giving assurances to us might not do much for the Pakistanis.
Assurances to third parties such as the Saudis and others might be
more credible.
Thornton: I am dubious about this sort of an approach; it has never
been helpful before when we tried it.
Brzezinski: In any case it doesn’t get to the gut issue—how do we
warn the Soviets and reassure the Pakistanis? Precisely at the time of
an election we might be forced into doing more than we expect. There-
fore there may be some utility in showing now that we are concerned
and thereby heading off the danger.
Christopher: Shouldn’t we ask the Pakistanis what they want?
Brzezinski: No, we would probably get the wrong answer. We want
to convey our own level of concern. Congressional consultations would
be useful; preliminary discussion is better than waiting and having to
respond quickly to a rapidly evolving crisis.
Aaron: We have up until now tried to keep ourselves in the back-
ground of this effort. The discussion today doesn’t seem to reflect that
fact. We are trying to keep the Muslims in front. The Soviets have not
been able to make us the issue and we don’t want them to. We are
talking today too much about US involvement.
Muskie: Perhaps, but this group should discuss these issues in order
to keep precisely that from happening.
Brzezinski: David Aaron may be correct in the present context but
this would not be true in face of a Soviet threat of the kind discussed
in the cable from Ambassador Hummel which triggered this meeting.5
5 A possible reference to telegram 6618 from Islamabad, July 7, in which the Embassy
reported on a meeting between Peck and MFA Director General Khan. The discussion
centered on the acute food shortages faced by the Afghan insurgents, and the possibility
of Soviet forces escalating their military campaign against the rebels. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800325–0321)
