262  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
These votes are consistent with my conclusion that (1) because of infla-
tion there is an overriding concern in the House about the size of the 
budget deficit, and therefore a reluctance to add to the overall budget; 
(2) there is greater support than ever in recent years for shifting more 
expenditures within the budget total toward Defense.
I note also that Joe Kraft in his column yesterday3 said that 
although he has long supported detente, he now is deeply concerned 
about Soviet military and political gains. Such a change of position is 
consistent with the Congressional indications. Both suggest to me that 
while public sentiment will still support your decisions about the level 
of the Defense budget over a substantial range around our level, there 
is now much less leeway on the down side of that level than there was 
a year ago.
A group of Republican Senators, after an Easton, Maryland con-
ference, has issued a lengthy “Declaration” critical of Administration 
national security and foreign policy.4 They announced that all thirty-­
eight of the Senate Republicans support it, though several have not yet 
signed it. This looks to me like an opening gun of a major campaign. I 
have said to Zbig that (whether we use it now or pieces of it later) he, 
Cy, and I need to put together for our use and yours a response to the 
major points raised.
I also see a confluence of questioning and some loss of confidence 
among our allies which compounds and feeds back into the domestic 
concern about these issues.
I report these attitudes rather than analyzing their causes or sug-
gesting detailed solutions at this point. We have had successes—­the 
Panama Canal Treaties, the B–1 decision, the beginning of programs 
to revitalize NATO—­and are likely to have more. I believe that most 
of our foreign policy and defense decisions, taken singly, have been 
correct and that all have been justifiable. Taken together, however, they 
have been distorted by some into signals of a weakening in our strength 
and resolve.
Part of the problem is, as we have all noted before, that the pub-
lic and the Congress do not have a clear picture what we consider the 
relative proportions of the competitive and cooperative aspects of our 
relations with the Soviet Union, or of precisely where we propose to 
cooperate and where to compete. We should, and I will, place more 
emphasis on the new things we are doing in the defense area, to counter 
the charges that we merely kill programs. I urge that we try to present 
3 Joseph Kraft, “Russia’s Winning Streak,” Washington Post, May 4, 1978, p. A27.
4 The resolution alleged that Democrats had supported “unilateral U.S. disarma-
ment in the face of mounting Soviet military aggressiveness.” (George F. Will, “Republi-
can ‘Sunniness,’” Washington Post, May 4, 1978, p. A27)
