National Security Policy 941 have asked the Secretary of Defense to summarize the recommendations which he has submitted to the President in this study. (PRESENTATION BY THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE) The general considerations of this paper state the desirability of an efficient and effective civil air cargo fleet, outline the conditions which have limited the development of such a fleet, and spell out the condi­ tions which would stimulate the development of such a fleet. Briefly, we do not have an efficient and effective civil air cargo fleet today for several reasons. In the commercial field, long preoccupation with the more profitable passenger business and with constant passenger air­ craft modernization has resulted in a lack of emphasis on the develop­ ment of the cargo business and of uncompromised all-­cargo aircraft. In the last several years the Department of Defense has had a higher priority requirement for the development of convertible (troop-­cargo) aircraft than for the development of all-­cargo aircraft. Finally, the U.S. Government maintains a substantial military cargo airlift capability and has not fully utilized in peacetime available civil cargo airlift. The first split occurs in paragraph 1. The majority would say that it is in the national security interest of the U.S. to have available an effi­ cient and effective civil air cargo fleet, and that such a fleet could also serve as an instrument of other national policies. Treasury and Budget prefer to say simply that such a fleet would be in the interest of the U.S. I understand that there has been some negotiation on this language between General Quesada and Budget end Treasury. CALL ON GENERAL QUESADA (others?) The next split occurs in paragraph 10–­b, at the top of page 6. The majority believe that a combination of four things would stimulate development of a modern air cargo fleet. These four things are the pro­ gressive transfer of MATS business, appropriate reductions in average rates, the enactment of legislation offering U.S. guarantee loans for the purchase of new all-­cargo aircraft, and a continued rapid growth of commercial demands for air cargo service. Treasury and Budget pro­ pose that the purchase loan guarantee legislation be deleted from the list. It should be noted that this draft policy paper does not recommend a decision to the President on this legislation, which will be coordinated through the usual Budget Bureau process. Normally a question of this kind would not be discussed by the NSC, but the legislation is part of General Quesada’s recommended plan for expanding civil cargo air lift. The question, Mr. President, is therefore whether you want to dis­ cuss the legislation at this time.
