490
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Government Forces
Bani-Sadr has said on several occasions that he would not use force
to attain the release of the hostages. In his new role as commander-in-
chief of the military the president has theoretical authority over a large
number of forces in Tehran, however, that could be used against the
militants. None are entirely loyal to Bani-Sadr and none are trained in
the tactics necessary to storm the Embassy compound against deter-
mined resistance and free the hostages unharmed. [portion marking not
declassified]
—Military units in Tehran consist of an under-strength infantry
division, two armored brigades, a special forces brigade and one artil-
lery group. At full strength this would amount to about 25,000 men
but the actual strength is probably about half that figure. None of
these units is garrisoned in the immediate vicinity of the US Embassy,
although some military transport units and depots are located in the
area. An armored brigade equipped with over 100 tanks is approxi-
mately eight kilometers from the Embassy. [portion marking not
declassified]
—Revolutionary Guard forces in Tehran number approximately
5,000 personnel, divided into units of some 200 men. About 4,000 are
garrisoned at the Sultanatabad barracks in the northwest part of the
city and 1,000 are located near the Majles building in the bazaar. The
degree of loyalty of the Guards to Bani-Sadr probably varies from
unit to unit. Some sources have reported that there are Revolutionary
Guardsmen inside the Embassy compound cooperating with the mili-
tants. [portion marking not declassified]
—Police and gendarmerie units in Tehran have been extensively
purged since the revolution. There are apparently only headquarters
personnel from the gendarmerie in the city. Police are patrolling the
streets but reportedly their morale and effectiveness is low. Few police-
men would probably be willing to take the risk of participating in an
attack on the militants. [portion marking not declassified]
We believe Bani-Sadr would resort to using these forces only in
extremis—perhaps after an order from Khomeini had failed to effect
the release of the hostages. [portion marking not declassified]
Bani-Sadr’s most attractive option in this case would be to try to
infiltrate loyal forces into the compound gradually in order to avoid
a direct confrontation with the militants. Some press reports from Arab
sources in Tehran have indicated that the government may already
have begun this process, but we doubt that it has had much success
to date. [portion marking not declassified]
We would expect the militants to resist forcibly a sudden govern-
ment attempt to seize the Embassy in the absence of an order from
Khomeini. At least some of the militants are probably sincerely pre-
pared to be martyrs for the revolution. If Bani-Sadr decided to pursue
a more gradual approach of cordoning off the compound, starving out
the militants and gradually infiltrating their ranks, his ability to effect
