Chapter 2, January–June 1989  239
Discussion
In establishing this position, the United States recognized that it 
provided no assurance against supposed conventional cruise missiles 
being illegally equipped with nuclear warheads. Some believe this 
is a serious problem, since it provides the Soviets with an option for 
deploying nuclear ALCMs disguised as “conventional” cruise missiles 
(which we could not reliably verify not to be nuclear-­armed) on a wide 
variety of aircraft, thus increasing the threat to the United States. Others 
believe that the primary consideration is protecting U.S. programs, not 
constraining Soviet ones.
JCS favor studying the issue because it is not clear that NTM alone 
will be sufficient to distinguish between conventional and nuclear 
ALCMs.
The DCI strongly supports altering our position and eliminating 
the monitoring task of trying to distinguish between nuclear-­armed 
and conventional ALCMs. The Intelligence Community has very lit-
tle confidence in its ability to determine if a bomber tested with any 
long-­range ALCM was not in fact capable of carrying nuclear-­armed 
ALCMs.
Option 1.  Reconsider our basic position on ALCM distinguishabil-
ity and agree to treat all ALCMS, both nuclear-­armed and 
conventional, over a specified range (1500 kilometers) as 
nuclear armed. (favored by the DCI)
Option 2.  Reaffirm our existing approach to ALCM distinguishability, 
accepting the drawbacks as the necessary price for avoid-
ing constraints on conventional cruise missiles, (favored by 
State, OSD and Ambassador Rowny)
Option 3.  Reconsider our existing approach. Undertake a study of 
­alternatives. Inform the Soviets that we have the ALCM 
­distinguishability issue under review. (favored by ACDA 
and JCS)
NSC staff is doubtful that any measures can be found that will give 
us a meaningful distinction between a nuclear and conventional ALCM 
capability in Soviet heavy bombers. Details in our current position (e.g., 
geographic separation of nuclear and conventional ALCMs) are use-
ful confidence building measures, and continued study might identify 
additional such measures. But the central problem will remain. The 
U.S. will have to protect its conventional ALCM options with either a 
range threshold (see previous issue), a distinguishability rule, or accept 
constraints on these conventional capabilities in order to reduce veri-
fication and breakout problems. We should continue to flesh out our
