38  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
alignments of power. The Sino-Soviet split has seriously weakened the 
Soviet alliance system. In part as a result of this, Soviet leadership of 
the worldwide communist movement is no longer unchallenged. For 
the United States, China remains in one sense a potential opponent, 
but in another sense parallel interests have made it almost a de facto 
ally. China’s low capabilities, however, limit its role in either respect. 
The broader diffusion of power is reflected in the ability of other coun-
tries or groups of countries to act independently on the world scene. In 
most cases, such as in the Group of 77, these blocs may raise significant 
questions of economic policy, but thus far they have lacked the coher-
ence and the resources directly to challenge American security inter-
ests. The growing western dependence on imported oil, particularly 
from the Middle East, has, however, increased the vulnerability of the 
U.S. and its principal allies to potential adversaries, such as OAPEC, 
which on one occasion demonstrated that they did have the coherence 
and the resources to impose significant costs on the U.S. and its allies. 
In addition, recurring secondary threats, such as terrorism, have arisen. 
Nonetheless, the central but not exclusive focus for this reconsideration 
of strategy, as for its predecessors, must be U.S. relations with the Soviet 
Union.
Significant changes have taken place in those relations in the past 
decade. On the one hand, a relaxation in the tension which character-
ized that relationship in the 1950s and 1960s has made it possible to dis-
cuss and, in some cases, reach understandings with the Soviet Union 
on matters of mutual concern, among which the SALT agreements are 
clearly of central importance. On the other hand, the past eight years 
have also seen the steady growth of Soviet military power. Since the 
mid-1960s the USSR has moved from a position of marked inferiority 
in nuclear capabilities to one of rough equivalence with the United 
States. Depending on the outcome of SALT negotiations and American 
decisions on strategy and procurement, the Soviets have the poten-
tial to increase and improve their nuclear forces to the point where 
they could exceed the quantity, quality, and net destructive power of 
American forces. Whether or not such a measure of superiority could 
be exploited usefully in war or in diplomatic confrontation is debat-
able; equally uncertain—­and more significant—­is whether the Sovi-
ets, our allies, other nations, and ourselves will believe that it could 
be so exploited. In recent years, the Soviet Union has also strength-
ened, modernized, and enhanced the readiness of its forces in Eastern 
Europe. At the same time, it dramatically increased its deployments in 
the Far East and, in effect, prepared for its own “2-­war” contingency. 
The Soviet navy has matured from a weak coastal defense force into 
a modern global maritime power, increasingly capable of threatening
