Hungary
449
5. Helsinki. After expressing satisfaction that agreement had been
reached on the agenda for the Belgrade meeting, President Losonczi
stated that it was essential to think of the Helsinki Accords as a whole;
that it was a mistake to concentrate interest on only isolated parts of
the agreement. Proper evaluation of its implementation required a
broad-gauge approach. I replied that the U.S. was committed to the
effective implementation of all three Baskets, but that this did not
mean that, depending on circumstances, different signatories to the
accord would not feel compelled to emphasize different aspects of
what was a rather lengthy document. I pointed out that we were
pleased with the performance of the Hungarian Government in imple-
menting the Helsinki Accord as was evidenced by the comments made
in the Executive Branch’s report to the CSCE Commission. The continu-
ing dialogue between the top officers of the Hungarian Government
and our Embassy during the past year was productive and contributed
to and reflected the improved relations to which President Losonczi
had referred.
6. The two issues.
A. MFN. In reply to a rather impassioned plea for the granting of
MFN, I followed the line taken by State 182700.3 We shared a common
desire to increase our bilateral trade; we recognized Hungarian efforts
in this area; and we were looking forward to the opening of the National
Bank’s representation office in New York, and to the Hungarian Eco-
nomic Days planned later this year. When mentioning our satisfaction
that we had begun useful discussions about our trade agreement, I
reminded the President of the important role Congress plays in this
area as well as other areas of international interest. I also referred to
the recent visit of Mr. Nyerges to Washington and the discussions
which were now scheduled to take place in Geneva in September.
B. The Crown of St. Stephen. There was a powerful but dignified
plea for its return. The President left no doubt about how strong were
the Hungarian feelings that the time had come for the Crown to come
home. In reply I said that Hungary’s concerns on this were well known
and understood in Washington. That was all I could say at this time.4
7. Comment. I was received with what seemed to be genuine
warmth. Serious talk was interspersed with light banter. The President
was clearly pleased over the recent improvement of American-Hungar-
3 Telegram 182700 to Budapest, August 3. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770278–0728)
4 In telegram 182833 to Budapest, August 4, the Department informed Kaiser that
the President had not taken action on Vance’s July 28 memorandum suggesting a scenario
for returning the Crown, and instructed him to remain noncommittal on the subject.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840070–0723)
