520
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
students should make their documents available to the Commission,
that “the meeting with the hostages involved in compiling the dossier
on the crimes committed by the Shah and the United States can take
place for the purpose of their interrogation,” and that if the Commission
announced its views in Tehran about the Shah’s crimes and U.S. inter-
ference in Iran’s affairs, “then a meeting with the hostages can take
place.” Within hours the students withdrew their offer to transfer the
hostages. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, Country File, Box 31, Iran 3/80) The text of Khomeini’s statement
is in FBIS 31, March 10. (Ibid.) See also Sick, All Fall Down, pages
316–317.
Given the turn of events, Carter met on March 10 with senior-level
advisers and congressional leadership. As related by historian Richard
Cottam to Ghotbzadeh, the administration’s mood was “pessimistic”
but determined to pursue negotiations and keep the Commission of
Inquiry in being. Ghotbzadeh agreed to keep Iranian statements from
complicating efforts to keep the Commission operating. (Memorandum
of conversation, March 11; Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff,
Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 35, Iran, Ghotbzadeh, Cottam) The
meeting with congressional leadership is recorded in a handwritten
memorandum of conversation, March 10. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 99, Meeting File,
3/10/80 President’s Meeting with Congressional Leadership)
In his memoir, Carter wrote that the “deranged” Khomeini had
overridden the government and aborted resolution of the crisis. Carter
found Khomeini’s demands to be “obviously unacceptable.” Quoting
from the March 10 entry in his personal diary, Carter wrote:
“It [events] shows that the UN commission must return. And it
also shows that there is no government in Iran other than the fanatics.
. . . We’ll hold off breaking diplomatic relationships. We’ll impose
economic sanctions as soon as the commission is clear of Iran. We’ll
investigate the possibility of confiscating Iranian assets in addition to
just impounding them. We should not attack Bani-Sadr and Ghotbsa-
deh, because they have indeed been the ones who have tried hardest
to get the hostages out.
“. . . Vance called during lunch to say that the UN commission
had been asked by Bani-Sadr to stay over until tomorrow night to meet
with the Revolutionary Council to receive a proposal for a simultaneous
statement on American and Shah abuse and an announcement that the
hostages could all be visited by the commission. I told Cy, ’Absolutely
not!’ This was unacceptable to me. There’s no way to trust the Iranian
government officials, because they can’t speak with any authority.”
(Carter, Keeping Faith, pages 498–499)
The Commission of Inquiry left Iran on March 11, 1980.
