International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
691
protectionist pressures in the United States. Any such reaction might
set off a chain process that could endanger the MTN results of which
we are both so rightly proud.” (Carter Library, Plains File, President’s
Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 1, European Communities, Commis-
sion of the, 7/78–3/80)
On March 21, the U.S. Steel Corporation filed anti-dumping com-
plaints against steel producers in Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and West Germany. In re-
sponse, the Department of Commerce suspended the trigger price
mechanism, while suggesting that it could be reinstated “in the event
that the petitions are withdrawn or otherwise satisfactorily resolved.”
(Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Protective Pricing in Steel Suspended,” The
New York Times, March 22, 1980, page 1) In Brussels, Davignon con-
veyed to the U.S. Mission to the EC, the EC “Commission’s disappoint-
ment and bitterness over the recent turn of events on the steel issue,”
asserting “that the filing by [U.S.] Steel and the suspension of the
trigger price created a completely new situation which the EC would
have to assess carefully before developing a new policy. Davignon was
especially critical of what he regarded as a cop-out by the administra-
tion which would effectively leave the US industry to regulate the
market.” (Telegram 5178 from USEC Brussels, March 21; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, International Eco-
nomics, Subject File, Box 6, Steel: 2–3/80) On March 27, the EC Com-
mission released a statement expressing disappointment in the
suspension of the trigger price mechanism, asserting that “a means of
fighting protectionist tendencies in the U.S. has, for the time being, dis-
appeared.” While disavowing “rumors concerning possible retaliatory
measures” and the possibility of a trade war, the EC also denied “that it
might propose a modus vivendi such as ‘orderly marketing arrange-
ments’ or self restraint on steel exports.” (Telegram 5527 from USEC
Brussels, March 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800155–0663)
Over the next several months, as the investigation into the anti-
dumping complaints progressed, U.S. officials engaged in informal
talks with representatives of U.S. Steel in an effort to resolve the issue.
In July, Davignon traveled to Washington to discuss the situation with
U.S. officials, “urging that the Government and the steel companies
find some way of settling the cases—presumably in a way that does not
hurt the European steel producers too much.” Davignon cautioned that
there was a “growing possibility of a ‘Trade War’” and expressed con-
cern “that ‘we will let the situation get out of our control.’” (Memo-
randum from Council of Economic Advisers member George Eads to
Schultze, August 5; Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Eco-
nomic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 80, Steel [3])
