Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
673
Cy with the same recommendation. They all believe that the risks of
continued incarceration or of military escalation are far greater than a
surprise rescue operation. They are convinced that true surprise is
possible and that penetration of the Embassy is a realistic prospect. (TS)
I find this argument persuasive. There may never be a better
moment to undertake such an operation than the next few weeks. The
security at the Embassy must have settled into a routine by now, and
the Iranians are almost contemptuous in their certainty that rescue is
not a feasible option. Even the U.S. press has totally accepted our
explanations that such an operation is impossible. The Iranian military
is in nearly total disarray and preoccupied with the Iraqi threat. The
chance of maintaining true surprise is good, and with true surprise,
our chances of a successful operation grow. (TS)
We have no risk-free options. Even the risks of inaction are consid-
erable. No other option offers as many potential benefits or gives us
as many opportunities to keep the timing and control in our own
hands. We could even build in a little protection for any hostages who
might not be freed by “arresting” some of the militants and bringing
them back under kidnapping and even murder charges. (TS)
In my view, a carefully planned and boldly executed rescue opera-
tion represents the only realistic prospect that the hostages—any of
them—will be freed in the foreseeable future. Our policy of restraint
has won us well-deserved understanding throughout the world, but
it has run out. This is the painful conclusion we must now face. (TS)
I understand that your preference is not to undertake a rescue
except as a reaction to the killing of our hostages. But that is really
tantamount to dismissing the rescue option altogether. Please consider
the following: the lead time on any rescue operation is a minimum of
eight days. If a hostage is killed, there will be an immediate outcry for
retaliation; there will be mass hysteria; there will also be a heightened
state of alert in Tehran and perhaps even additional killings. I very
much doubt that we could afford to wait for days to undertake a rescue
operation, and could be thus forced to retaliate, which would then
further reduce the element of surprise which is so crucial to a successful
rescue. (TS)
Post-Rescue
It is essential that we be ready to react to any post-rescue conse-
quences. These would include threats to the lives of any hostages left
behind, or to any prisoners taken in the operation, or to any Americans
available in Tehran. In addition, we have to consider the need to react
to any large-scale failure that could occur, and which could maximize
the foregoing complications. Accordingly, in addition to the rescue
operation, we should be prepared to initiate almost immediately large-
