152
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Attachment
Briefing Memorandum From the Coordinator for Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to Secretary of
State Vance2
Washington, June 1, 1977
Status Report on U.S. Policy on Human Rights: Actions Being Taken
Since May 3 the following actions have been taken in accordance
with the memorandum from the Deputy Secretary.3
1. Communication of Policy to All Posts
A. The Atlanta Law Day speech was dispatched to all posts. Am-
bassadors and Embassy personnel informed the highest level of host
governments of the speech and of U.S. human rights policy and re-
ported on the reaction.
B. A cable has been sent to the posts directing the Ambassador to
take personal responsibility for human rights reporting and for as-
suring Embassy personnel awareness of our human rights policy de-
velopments and of recent legislative and international legal develop-
ments in the human rights field.4
C. The results of the policy review memorandum process now un-
derway will be communicated to the posts at an appropriate time.
2. Action with Respect to Individual Countries
A. All regional assistant secretaries have been requested to submit
draft reports on human rights conditions and appropriate recommen-
dations for achieving human rights improvements.5 Each region is cur-
rently preparing three draft reports for submission by June 15 with the
remainder due on July 1. Bureaus will both prepare draft reports for
comment by individual posts and in other instances permit posts to
prepare the initial report for review and comment by the bureaus.
2 No classification marking. Drafted by Schneider. Sent through Christopher.
Schneider initialed for Derian. Derian sent an updated version of the memorandum,
dated July 19, through Christopher to Vance. (Department of State, Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1976–1977 Human Rights Subject Files and Country
Files, Lot 80D177, SHUM—Policies)
3 See footnote 1, Document 48.
4 See Document 51.
5 See footnotes 3 and 4, Document 49, and Document 52.
