898  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
make even clearer to the Arabs our commitment to Israel’s security).14 
Such assurances (and aid) may also be indispensable to successful com-
pletion of the Camp David process, in terms of autonomy and territory. 
They would in turn enable us to meet the insistent demand of Saudi 
Arabia (and Egypt) for “equal treatment” with Israel. DoD sees a reso-
lution of this issue as indispensable to the kind of security relationship 
without which we simply cannot execute a viable PG/IO strategy.15
The energy squeeze poses another serious obstacle to closer rela-
tionships with key PG oil producers. Their price increase and produc-
tion policies create economic difficulties which in turn impede our 
defense efforts, thus adversely affecting the very East/West military 
balance which in the last analysis protects their security too. Since con-
tinuation of such policies could make major defense budget increases 
impossible, DoD believes it vital for us to attempt to develop a policy 
which explicitly trades our security umbrella for their granting sure 
access at reasonable prices to PG oil.
Issue #4—What Far East strategic posture will best relieve Soviet pres-
sure on Europe and the PG/IO, while limiting risks of simultaneous global 
war? If we must give strategic priority to Europe and now the PG/
IO, we face again the old WW II problem of what to do about our 
Pacific flank. Though neither China, Japan, nor for that matter the US 
can pose a major offensive threat to the USSR, Moscow exhibits live 
concern over its own FE flank and is steadily strengthening its forces 
there. Fortunately Japan’s rapid economic development and the grow-
ing parallelism of US/PRC strategic interests (China’s concern over the 
Soviet threat is even greater than our own), offer a strategic option for 
(1) enhancing Soviet concern over a two-­front threat; yet (2) forestall-
ing the need for major US defense increases directed specifically at this 
third theater.
Given our acute need to limit Soviet capabilities against NATO 
and the PG/IO, and our inability to deal with all three fronts simul-
taneously, DoD believes that the clearest way to accomplish goals (1) 
and (2) above is to insist on greater Japanese rearmament and provide 
China certain carefully calculated defensive weaponry.16 Something of 
this sort is probably necessary to improve China’s defensibility in any 
case. Absent this approach we would almost certainly need to carry 
out a massive US force buildup in the Western Pacific. We also urge 
that Japan should be pressed to finance more of the US/Japanese 
defense capability and (indirectly through trade) some of the PRC arms 
14 Brzezinski underlined “to Israel” in this sentence.
15 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this sentence. He also 
drew two short lines in the right margin bracketing this and the previous sentence.
16 Brzezinski underlined “insist on greater Japanese rearmament” and “certain care-
fully calculated defensive weaponry” in this sentence.
