Preface IX in Congress without a major arms control breakthrough. This led to Bush’s March 20, 1990, proposal to Gorbachev to consider eliminating mobile MIRVed missiles in START and eliminate all land-based MIRVs in follow-on START II negotiations. The following year, in the aftermath of the January 1991 Persian Gulf War and the simultaneous steep decline of the Soviet economy, President Bush instructed his national security team to sprint toward a START I agreement in advance of an anticipated summer summit in Moscow. The negotiations were successfully concluded on July 29, 1991, in time for Bush and Gorbachev to sign the treaty in Moscow on July 31. The U.S. Senate ratified the treaty on October 1, 1992, and it entered into force on December 5, 1994. Acknowledgments The Office of the Historian wishes to thank the interagency declassification personnel who conducted the review of this volume, including those at the Department of State, Office of Information Programs and Services (IPS), the FRUS Coordination Team at the Central Intelligence Agency, the OSD, Records and Declassification Division (RDD) at the Department of Defense, and the Directorate of Records, Access and Information Security Management at the National Security Council. The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the George H.W. Presidential Library, especially Simon Staats; and the National Security Council, especially Tom Lutte. The History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency was accommodating in arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelligence Agency; Sandy Meagher was helpful in providing access to Department of Defense materials. The editor also thanks the staff at the National Archives and Records Administration facility in College Park, Maryland, for their valuable assistance. The editor wishes to extend special thanks to Ed Ifft at the Department of State. James Graham Wilson collected and selected documentation and edited the volume under the supervision of Kathleen Rasmussen, then-Chief of the Global Issues and General Division. The volume was reviewed by Kathleen Rasmussen and then-Historian of the Department of State Stephen Randolph. Chris Tudda coordinated the declassification review under the supervision of the Carl Ashley, Team Lead of the Declassification Coordination Team. Matthew R.G. Regan did the copy and technical editing under the supervision of Mandy A. Chalou, Team Lead of the Editing and Publishing Team. Both the declassification review and the technical editing were conducted under the supervision of John C. Powers, Director of the Declassification Coordination, Publishing, and Digital Initiatives Division. James Graham Wilson Historian
