Panama 909 from President de la Guardia4 objecting to certain features of the new merit system and wage scale procedure put into effect by Canal Zone authorities in February. Our Chargé reports that the Foreign Minister privately stated that the contents of the Aide Memoire appeared to offer little or no satisfaction to the Panamanian Government and the Chargé believes that objections were raised on procedural grounds solely in order to forestall criticism of the Government when the contents of the Aide Memoire are eventually made public. I believe that the transmittal of your reply, dated April, 1959, to President de la Guardia5 and the subsequent delivery of the Aide Memoire were entirely correct and appropriate. However, rather than permit this incident to be further distorted out of proportion, I believe it advisable and would suggest that you approve the enclosed letter stating that the United States Government’s study of the points raised by the Panamanian Government’s memorandum has been completed and is being delivered in the form of an aide memoire through the usual diplomatic channels. If you approve this suggestion, I will instruct our Chargé, on presentation of the letter, orally to inform the Panamanian Foreign Minister that, although the Department regards the delivery of the Aide Memoire on July [illegible in the original] to have been correct diplomatic procedure, you are pleased to send another letter to President de la Guardia on this subject. It is recommended that this letter, if approved, be released only on the initiative of the Panamanian Government. Douglas Dillon Acting Secretary [Enclosure] Suggested Letter to the President of Panama6 Dear Mr. President: I stated in my letter of April sixth, 1959 that I would direct a study to be made by competent experts in my Government of the points raised in the Memorandum accompanying your letter of March seventh, 1959. The results of this study are contained in an Aide Memoire which is being delivered through the usual diplomatic channels. 4 For further information concerning the contents of President de la Guardia’s letter of March 7, see Rubottom’s memorandum of April 1 to the Acting Secretary of State, Document PA-11. 5 See Document PM–12. 6 Drafted by Leggett on July 10.
