462 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII estimated 250 VTA sorties from 25/27 December. During this airlift, at least two airborne regiments were introduced. 4. (S) Casualties: There has been no accurate information on Soviet or Afghan casualties incurred during the coup. One report cited as many as 250 Soviet casualties incident to the takeover but this is unsubstantiated. Similarly, there are various reports of conflict between Soviet units and dissident Afghan army troops and insurgents—all of these suffer from imprecise casualty figures. All that can be responsibly stated is that Soviet casualty levels are expected now to be low, resulting primarily from terrorist attacks and various hit-and-run attacks by the rebels. These figures should increase as the Soviet units become more actively engaged in combat operations. [name not declassified] Assistant Director for JCS Support (Acting) 161. Intelligence Cable1 [cable number not declassified] January 11, 1980, 0736Z Subj: [1 line not declassified] Afghanistan: Status of the Afghan Army. (U) 1. (S [codeword not declassified]) The internal collapse of the Afghan Army is gathering momentum.2 An engagement on 9 January is the first confirmed Soviet operation against the rebels. 2. (S [codeword not declassified]) The Army’s desertion problem has become particularly acute in the northeast. Officers and men of the 31st Regiment of the Nahrin-based 20th Division deserted last week following an accidental bombing of their position. Virtually all 20th Division forces in Takhar Province have deserted. Additionally, troops 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Box 4, Afghanistan: 1/11/80 (0000–1599). Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]; Sensitive; Priority. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room. 2 An intelligence memorandum prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, January 9, noted: “rebel forces appear to be making substantial gains in a large number of regions” and “the Afghan military is attempting to assert itself more but to date seems barely capable of holding on to areas that have been under its control.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, SITREPs)
