National Security Policy  251
3. SURVIVAL OF POPULATION FOLLOWING A MASSIVE NUCLEAR 
EXCHANGE
(NSC Action No. 1882; NSC 5807/1; Memo for NSC from ­Executive 
Secretary, same subject, dated June 27, 1958)
After a short briefing, General Cutler called on Mr. Rogers 
­Cannell, of the Stanford Research Institute, to summarize the contents 
of the written report by the Stanford Research Institute. (A copy of the 
SRI report is filed in the minutes of the meeting.) After Mr. Cannell 
had set forth the general conclusion that both survival and recovery 
were possible if the nation possessed fallout shelter in 1965, ­General 
Cutler noted that the qualified optimism of the report rested on two 
assumptions: First, that the Soviets would make a single nuclear 
attack only on the United States, with no repeats; and second, that 
90% of the ­American people who were not killed by blast and thermal 
effects would make effective use of the fallout shelter provided.
The President inquired as to the ways and means of decontamina­
tion, to which question Mr. Cannell provided an answer.
The President then inquired whether it was fair to conclude from 
the Stanford study that if we do undertake to create a fallout shel­
ter system in the United States, every American should do his best 
to provide the shelter with emergency food rations and emergency 
fuel storage. The President thought that every industrial plant should 
have underground fuel storage and each American household ought 
to store up food for use in a shelter in the event of an emergency. 
Mr. Cannell agreed with the President, and pointed out that it would 
be extremely difficult for the average American to know how much 
food or fuel to store, inasmuch as he would not know whether he 
would have to stay in his shelter for as little as three days or as much 
as thirteen weeks. As a result, many people would simply give no 
thought to the problem.
Governor Hoegh commented that the FCDA had advocated that 
every individual stockpile in his own home a supply of food and 
other necessities designed to last for two weeks. The requirements 
thereafter should be taken care of by the public authorities of the 
community.
Secretary Anderson asked how, with so many people in shelter, 
anyone would know when to come out. Governor Hoegh and General 
Cutler attempted to answer Secretary Anderson’s question.
The National Security Council:
Noted and discussed the report on the subject (including its 
assumptions) prepared, pursuant to paragraph I–­b–(3) of NSC 5807/1 
(“Measures to Carry Out the Concept of Shelter”), by the Stanford 
Research Institute and transmitted by the reference memorandum of
