188 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement to maintain much greater forces, without resorting to a controlled soci­ ety or becoming a garrison state. (4) He thought there should be provided to the National Security Council more definitive information as to the exact size of the deterrent forces which the U.S. requires in this calendar year and will require over the next two or three calendar years. As you will see from the Record of Action, we have included in NSC 5810/1 the exact language for pars. 13 and 14 of the existing basic policy (NSC 5707/8) without change. You will note in the approved Record of Action that the President revised the June 2 date for receiving from the Department of Defense (perhaps in the form of a limited-distribution-supplement) recommen­ dations for any revision of the military strategy outlined in NSC 5810/1, after Defense shall have given further consideration in the light of the Council discussion at the May 1 Meeting. The President has authorized an extension of this date to June 16, because he wants these important matters brought up for further discussion and final approval, while the significant issues raised are still fresh in our minds, without there being requested any further postponement. Accordingly, he has approved a Council Meeting on June 26 to hear the Defense recommendation. This schedule will permit advance circulation of the Defense recommendation due June 16 (on such lim­ ited basis as may be deemed necessary) to Council Members, in plenty of time to be fully prepared for the Council Meeting on June 26. It would obviously be very desirable to receive the joint study on limited war capabilities pursuant to NSC Action No. 1881 on or before June 16, so that its consideration could be coordinated with the above Defense recommendations. Sincerely yours, Robert Cutler Special Assistant to the President cc: The Deputy Secretary of Defense The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs The Special Assistant to JCS for National Security Council Affairs Lay Asst. Sec. of Def (Sprague)
