National Security Policy 301 our best staff officers. General Twining said that the Joint Staff is taking in some of the best officers from each service. The President added that he hoped the G–2 and G–3 activities in each service would be mini­ mized. He again said he was delighted with what was being done. Mr. McElroy next referred to a request the President had made for thorough investigation of three instances reflecting faulty discipline. All three have been investigated. Regarding the violation of interna­ tional boundaries by a B–47 over the Caspian Sea, it is clear that the commander of the plane was not at fault. Any fault that existed was that of his superiors, and this is mitigated by the fact that the location of the border is not certain or agreed. The President said he understood there was an agreement between Russia and Iran, and I confirmed that this was correct. Regarding the disclosure of location of storage sites for atomic weapons, Mr. McElroy said this occurred through a request for funds for military construction at AFSWP sites. There was a degree of carelessness, and Defense is undertaking to correct this. With regard to the balloons, decisions were taken by at least one officer and one civil­ ian which were in error and in excess of authority; appropriate action will be taken. The President said that there is an evident usurpation of authority, and it is this he wishes to have corrected. Mr. McElroy asked if the President wished to know the specific action taken, and the President said he did not—he regarded that as Mr. McElroy’s respon­ sibility so long as the tendency he spoke of was corrected. He thought that we have too long been taking errors for granted. Mr. McElroy said this action has already had a tightening effect throughout the establish­ ment. The President then said, with regard to the balloons, that much of the mistake had been made through people going ahead and devel­ oping and procuring the balloons, then telling him on short notice that the money would be wasted if some use could not be made of them. Finally, Mr. McElroy raised the question of whether he should appoint an assistant secretary for legislative liaison, or retain the Assistant Secretary for Medical Affairs at least until Dr. Berry fin­ ishes his tour. The President said that the assistant secretaryship for legislative liaison had been strongly proposed by the man who has more experience probably than any other in this whole field— General Persons. The President said he thought he saw the value of it, but would leave the matter to Mr. McElroy and asked him to talk to General Persons about it. A.J. Goodpaster Brigadier General, USA
