754 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement of the United States and of the Free World that this progress be accom­ panied by the spread of individual freedoms and the growth of demo­ cratic institutions and practices.” I believe that this is consistent with the discussion last week on military takeovers. Par 31 [p. 24] involves revisions the most significant of which is the addition of subparagraph e. (read subparagraph e) Par 32 [p. 25] represents a somewhat more qualified U.S. attitude toward the use of the UN. [At the beginning of the second sentence, what is now “make effective use” was “make maximum effective use”. In the second sentence, at the bottom of page 25, the parenthetical lan­ guage has been inserted as a qualification. Finally, the last sentence, a new one, reflects the new voting patterns caused by the entry of many new nations.] Par 33 [p. 26] has been revised to reflect the improved economic situation in Western Europe. While still strongly supporting European integration, U.S. financial assistance to that end is drastically curtailed. [The FY 1960 Budget called for $3.5 million for the three continuing programs mentioned in the footnote.] Par 35 [p. 27] is old 30, considerably revised. Old 30 said that independence of neutral less developed nations from Sino-­Soviet con­ trol serves U.S. interests; the new language says that such independ­ ence “meets the minimum U.S. objective”. There is new language which says to avoid insofar as possible courses of action which appear to reflect more consideration by the United States for neutrals than for friendly nations. Further, there is new language which calls for providing incentives where feasible for the eventual incorporation of less developed nations in effective regional collective defense sys­ tems, for encouraging a maximum identification of interests and atti­ tudes between these neutral nations and the U.S. and its allies, and for promoting practical forms of cooperation in non-­military fields. A minority of the consultants advocated a still harder line toward neu­ tralist nations. To here June 2.5 Par 36 [p. 28], a new paragraph which would apply world-­wide a policy contained in the current Latin America paper (NSC 5902/1), deals with maintaining contact with selected non-­Communist oppo­ sition elements. I believe that we should add “through appropriate channels”. 5 The Council reached this point in its discussion of Basic Policy (Through Para. 35). Discussion on remaining sections of the Basic Policy and Briefing Note will be contained in the subsequent Memorandum. [Footnote is in the original.]
