664
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
rent expenses; crops are good, the general level of economic activity is
fairly normal, and such inflation as has developed shows no signs of
soon getting out of control. Finally, it is uncertain whether any serious
challenge to his leadership will soon emerge. The Shah’s past unwill-
ingness to give strong backing to an effort to oust Mossadeq is likely to
be reinforced by the current absence of a Majlis which might give legal
sanction to such a move, and it remains unclear whether Mossadeq’s
other opponents are capable of banding together and following
through with a unified and vigorous effort to overthrow him by force
unless they get the Shah’s cooperation. Although Tudeh’s capabilities
are manifestly increasing, we believe that it is not yet prepared to make
a direct bid for power itself and—except to take advantage of a sudden
crisis—will not turn against Mossadeq until it has further exploited its
current tacit alliance with him.
5. Despite these favorable factors, Mossadeq will still face consid-
erable difficulty in maintaining his present position. So long as the
present unsettled situation continues, he will be constantly exposed to
the danger that an effective movement to unseat him may in fact
emerge, even though a successful plot against him would almost cer-
tainly require the cooperation of the security forces. Even if such a plot
does not emerge, Mossadeq will remain subject to opposition harass-
ment and will be under continuing pressure to exert himself in order to
keep his opponents off balance, maintain his prestige, and reaffirm his
command of the situation. This pressure is likely to increase if Mos-
sadeq fails to secure some kind of mandate for remaining in office after
his plenary powers expire in January 1954.
6. In Mossadeq’s efforts to stay in power, it is extremely unlikely
that he will be able to undercut his opposition through a successful at-
tack on the problems underlying the present political crisis in Iran—the
uncertainties and financial difficulties arising from the virtual shut-
down of the oil industry following nationalization and the unrest aris-
ing from the government’s failure to satisfy popular aspirations for eco-
nomic and social betterment. Mossadeq’s half-hearted efforts at land
reform in 1952 appear to have brought more trouble than credit to the
regime. An expansion of the economic development program, now vir-
tually restricted to projects financed by Point Four, is impossible
without additional funds. And with respect to the financial problem it-
self, the outlook is extremely gloomy:
a. A settlement with the British providing for resumption of large-
scale Iranian oil operations remains extremely unlikely. The British
have no present need for Iranian oil and appear resolved to hold out for
what they consider a fair basis for determining compensation. Mos-
sadeq will almost certainly continue to reject these terms. Even if the
British were induced to offer settlement terms more favorable to Iran
