1956  865
a reply and did not say our reply would cover implementation. Our 
March 6 statement did very properly, I believe, include implementation 
and their statement of March 11 was a reply thereto. I therefore do not 
believe that any exchange based upon technicalities of our understand­
ing with regard to public statements can be very useful or fruitful but 
we should rather keep to the substance.
If he pursues his tactics of the last meeting of simply not meeting 
my arguments and chanting his refrain on accepting either their two 
drafts, the situation may get fairly sticky. If their purpose is to bring 
about a break they will, of course, try to maneuver me into a position 
where it would appear the initiative had come from me. However, I will 
be alert for all such situations and do my best to avoid them. I think that 
my best line will continue to be a willingness and desire to continue to 
strive for an agreement with them and a willingness to listen to any 
alternative formulations they may have with respect to the substance 
of our January 12 draft.
I will also make the point contained in your 1754 with regard to 
Father Houle. Although this point has never seemed very impressive to 
me as the usual pattern in the past has been “trial and sentencing” just 
prior to release. My position has always been that I am not interested in 
their legal mumbo-­jumbo but only the fact of the release of the Americans.
I am enclosing an original and two copies of our draft of a White 
Paper summarizing the talks. This, of course, contains blanks that 
require filling in as time passes. However it embodies my thoughts 
on how this whole complicated and in many ways esoteric subject 
can most clearly be presented in White Paper form. Dave Osborn has 
done the writing and deserves whatever credit the paper may merit. 
I have approved it and, therefore, deserve the full share of whatever 
blame may be attached to it for errors. In any event, I hope that the 
Department may find it acceptable as a basis from which the final 
product can be produced.
Kindest regards to all.
Sincerely yours,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
P.S. In looking over the postscript to my letter No. 24 I note that 
there is a typographical error in the first sentence of the last paragraph 
which completely reverses the meaning. It should have read “wilder 
charges” rather than “milder charges”.
Is there any conceivable factual basis for this continued repeti­
tion in Chinese students’ letters to “applying for permission to INS” to 
return? In the absence of word to the contrary I am assuming I am still 
on absolutely solid ground in saying they do not apply to anybody for
