X Preface by the Nixon and Ford administrations, specifically the policy of differentiation between Eastern European countries, which it codified on September 13, 1977 under PD/NSC–21. It did, however, modify that policy substantially, by including human rights as an aspect to the differentiation policies. This allowed for a warming of relations with countries that exhibited internally liberal policies, even if its foreign policy continued to be viewed in Washington as subservient to Soviet interests. The Carter administration also continued the previous administration’s policies toward modernization of broadcasting capabilities of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) into Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. While a decision on modernization had been taken in 1976, and reapproved at the beginning of Carter’s administration, implementation of the decision faced bureaucratic hurdles. Pressure from the Federal Republic of Germany to consider relocating RFE/RL from Munich added to the complexity. As the relationship with the Soviet Union deteriorated following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the administration redoubled its efforts to modernize the Radios, increase their efficiency, and expand their audience, especially in Muslim regions of the Soviet Union and the Persian Gulf. As PD/NSC–21 made clear, relations between the United States and Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and the Germany Democratic Republic remained limited. Relations with Czechoslovakia were governed by the ongoing negotiations over the return of the Czechoslovak share of Nazi Germany gold, which the Allies had set aside to return to Prague, but which was held back until negotiations were finalized over compensation for nationalized property. While the administration was willing to settle the negotiations quickly on parity with previous settlements, congressional insistence on full dollar restitution prevented a full agreement from being reached. Congressional threats to pass legislation forcing the administration to vest the gold, sell it and reimburse U.S. citizens from the proceeds before returning the remainder to Czechoslovakia placed a great deal of pressure on the Czechoslovak Government. Eventually, Prague agreed to pay full dollar restitution and interest to the parties. The greatest beneficiary of the administration’s reassessment of the policy of differentiation was Hungary. PD/NSC–21 included Hungary alongside Romania and Poland in the group of Eastern European nations to which the United States offered preferential treatment. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance pushed strongly for an administration decision on the return of the Crown of St. Stephen, the Hungarian Royal Crown, to Budapest. Despite Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski’s initial opposition to the idea, Vance succeeded in obtaining the President’s agreement to begin
