X
Preface
by the Nixon and Ford administrations, specifically the policy of differ-
entiation between Eastern European countries, which it codified on
September 13, 1977 under PD/NSC–21. It did, however, modify that
policy substantially, by including human rights as an aspect to the dif-
ferentiation policies. This allowed for a warming of relations with
countries that exhibited internally liberal policies, even if its foreign
policy continued to be viewed in Washington as subservient to Soviet
interests.
The Carter administration also continued the previous administra-
tion’s policies toward modernization of broadcasting capabilities of
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) into Eastern Europe and
the Soviet Union. While a decision on modernization had been taken in
1976, and reapproved at the beginning of Carter’s administration, im-
plementation of the decision faced bureaucratic hurdles. Pressure from
the Federal Republic of Germany to consider relocating RFE/RL from
Munich added to the complexity. As the relationship with the Soviet
Union deteriorated following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the
administration redoubled its efforts to modernize the Radios, increase
their efficiency, and expand their audience, especially in Muslim re-
gions of the Soviet Union and the Persian Gulf.
As PD/NSC–21 made clear, relations between the United States
and Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and the Germany Democratic Republic
remained limited. Relations with Czechoslovakia were governed by
the ongoing negotiations over the return of the Czechoslovak share of
Nazi Germany gold, which the Allies had set aside to return to Prague,
but which was held back until negotiations were finalized over com-
pensation for nationalized property. While the administration was
willing to settle the negotiations quickly on parity with previous settle-
ments, congressional insistence on full dollar restitution prevented a
full agreement from being reached. Congressional threats to pass legis-
lation forcing the administration to vest the gold, sell it and reimburse
U.S. citizens from the proceeds before returning the remainder to
Czechoslovakia placed a great deal of pressure on the Czechoslovak
Government. Eventually, Prague agreed to pay full dollar restitution
and interest to the parties.
The greatest beneficiary of the administration’s reassessment of
the policy of differentiation was Hungary. PD/NSC–21 included Hun-
gary alongside Romania and Poland in the group of Eastern European
nations to which the United States offered preferential treatment. Sec-
retary of State Cyrus Vance pushed strongly for an administration deci-
sion on the return of the Crown of St. Stephen, the Hungarian Royal
Crown, to Budapest. Despite Assistant to the President for National Se-
curity Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski’s initial opposition to the idea,
Vance succeeded in obtaining the President’s agreement to begin
