and naval services; also surgical and medical officials and employees on duty at the army and navy hospitals. 18. Civilian (or other) officials, artificers and employees on duty at the arsenals, public docks, public factories and repair shops engaged in constructing, providing, maintaining or storing arms or ammunition or both for the army and navy, or ships for use by the army, the navy, the lighthouse service, the customs, the internal revenue, the quarantine or other similar services. 19. Civilian (or other) navigating and executive officers on public ships, other than those engaged in a purely commercial service. 20. Mayors and other executive officials of the cities and municipal corporations of either nation or of any other political subdivisions of the Chilean or Peruvian Governments. 21. Legislators and aldermen. 22. Officials, superintendents and teachers in the public schools. 23. Officials, superintendents and inspectors of the public markets. 24. Secretaries, stenographers, clerks, assistants, and employees of every nature and find who cooperate or collaborate or assist in the work entrusted to the officials, superintendents, or others mentioned above. 25. Officials and employees whose duty falls within the scope of the present paragraph or includes some of the duties of the army, navy, carbineers, secret or other police, the secret service or the gendarmerie, even though such duty falls also within the scope of paragraph (B) of this article. (B) The several registration and election boards will treat the following government officials or civil employees (provided they do not discharge, in part, the duties of the government officials or civil employees mentioned in the preceding paragraph) as not included within the scope of the phrase quoted at the beginning of the present article, to wit: 1. Officials and employees of the Arica La Paz Railway. 2. Officials and employees of enterprises of a private nature, despite their receiving subsidies from the public treasury. 3. Secretaries, stenographers, clerks, assistants, and employees of every nature and kind, who cooperate or collaborate or assist in the work
