Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I of achieving the human dignity to which long-suffering people of this region are entitled. “There is simply no workable alternative to the course that your nation and my nation are now following together. The conclusion of a treaty between Israel and Egypt will enable your government to mobilize its resources not for war, but for the provision of a better life for every Egyptian. “I know how deeply President Sadat is committed to that quest. And I believe its achievement will ultimately be his greatest legacy to the people he serves so well. “My government, for its part, the full power and influence of the United States of America, is ready to share that burden of that commitment with you. These gains which we envision will not come quickly or easily, but they will come. “The conclusion of the peace treaty that we are discussing will strengthen cooperation between Egypt and the United States in other ways. I fully share and will support President Sadat’s belief that stability must be maintained in this part of the world, even while constructive change is actively encouraged. He and I recognize that the security of this vital region is being challenged. I applaud his determination to meet that challenge, and my government will stand with him. “Our policy is that each nation should have the ability to defend itself, so that it does not have to depend on external alliances for its own security. The United States does not seek a special position for itself. “If we are successful in our efforts to conclude a comprehensive peace, it will be presented obviously, each element of it, to this body for ratification. “It is in the nature of negotiation that no treaty can be ideal or perfect from either the Egyptian or Israeli point of view. The question we’ve faced all along, however, is not whether the treaty we negotiate will meet all the immediate desires of each of the two parties, but whether it will protect the vital interests of both and further the cause for peace for all the states and all the peoples of this region. That is the basic purpose and the most difficult question which we are resolved to answer. “Such a treaty, such an agreement, is within our grasp. Let us seize this opportunity while we have it.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pages 413–414) The complete text of the address is ibid., pages 412–414. Following a luncheon at Mena House in Giza, Carter and Sadat met and subsequently made a statement to the press about Carter’s visit. For the text of the statement, see ibid., page 415. After touring the pyramids at Giza, the Presidential party departed for Tel Aviv. For the
