January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1297
start. The President has shown that the process of evolution can work.
We will persist in trying to bring the parties in, to get a new perception.
Israel is concerned with security; the Palestinians are concerned with
self-determination. Fundamental rights must be kept separate; it can’t
be done in a grand effort; only dealing with the nitty gritty can work.
The powers and responsibilities of the Self-Governing Authority are
largely resolved—though the tough ones are left. We need to work out
answers to five issues, or the talks will fail. If they do, will a fresh start
be possible?
The Prime Minister answered yes. The talks don’t have to fail. He
doesn’t say they are finished. But one should allow a parallel course,
for the Palestinians to articulate their demands outside a formula
which closes the road to the future. The Israeli occupiers must relax
their repressive policies for this. Without it, who can articulate a rea-
sonable platform? If an alternative road is open—if the idea of self-
determination is allowed—then the Israelis will get used to it.
King Hussein said he knows the President was disappointed on
Camp David about the lack of participation. He (the President) knows
that Jordan was out of the picture until the Camp David results were
announced. Jordan sent its questions11 to help in dealing with the other
Arabs. If Jordan had gotten in, without knowing the end results, then
the very danger Israel sees of a radical state would not be more real on
the West Bank; but a similar threat would emerge on the East Bank—as
a wedge threatening the entire area. Instead, Jordan kept in touch. The
promises in the past were not fulfilled. Jordan knows the President’s
sincerity and his desire to see a solution. Jordan managed to keep the
Arabs together, but there are almost two camps. There are other
problems on Jordan: Afghanistan, etc. Regarding the PLO, Jordan has
bridges. With Iraq, Jordan has dramatically improved relations. Re-
garding Saudi Arabia and the Gulf, Jordan talks with all of them now. It
hopes to play a constructive role; it wants peace and stability. The Jor-
danians will go back and talk to the PLO. They have covered it time and
again: Jordan wants something to help move forward beyond this
point. The Egypt-Israel treaty is something that has been achieved. But
the Palestinian problem is still there—in Jerusalem, Gaza, and the West
Bank. Soon, there will be the next Arab summit in Jordan.
The President asked when.
King Hussein said: November. Soon, on the economic level of the
Arab world, they will need to talk to the oil producers, regarding the
future, and to see if there is a way of changing them. He sees they have
not charted a course, but an erratic one. The next phase is the summit:
11 See Document 64.
