1244
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. Under Secretary Osama El-Baz called me to the Foreign Ministry
Friday at 1630 local to hand me the text of the following letter from
President Sadat to President Carter. El-Baz said this was intended to
supplement the oral message conveyed last night in reftel.
3. Begin text:
May 16, 1980
Dear Jimmy:
I was very pleased to talk to you on the phone3 and have another
stimulating conversation with you. As you well know, I highly value
the bonds of friendship and solidarity that bind us together and con-
sider them among the main pillars of our policy. It is my deep convic-
tion that coordinating our stands and agreeing on a common strategy
should remain as an overriding factor in shaping our moves and ac-
tions. I view this as an important contribution to world peace and sta-
bility in the Middle East.
It is in this spirit that I am writing to you this letter to share with
you some thoughts on how best to deal with the present situation. You
will certainly recall that I told you, in our telephone conversation, that I
was quite willing to agree to the resumption of the autonomy talks de-
spite the discouraging signs which emerged from the Hertzliya Round.
In that session, the Israeli Government took an unyielding hard line po-
sition on such sensitive issues as the settlements and the planned ex-
pansion of Jerusalem. To be sure, we are never deterred by such posi-
tions, however unreasonable, for they can be said to be merely
negotiating positions. But the situation becomes different and those po-
sitions acquire new dimensions when they are accompanied or fol-
lowed by certain steps which are designed to consecrate them and con-
front both Egypt and the United States with a fait accompli every now
and then. Unfortunately, experience reveals that the Israeli Govern-
ment is liable to interpret our willingness to continue negotiating de-
spite its uncooperative actions and statements as a proof of our ac-
ceptance, or at least acquiescence, to its policy.
This has often resulted in encouraging the said government to take
more untenable positions rather than moderating its views, a fact
which has been recognized and regretted by many Israelis. It is for
these reasons combined that my colleagues and I found it imperative to
take a firm stand in response to a new Israeli move which could under-
mine our efforts if it goes unchecked. The move was initiated in the
Knesset to turn the annexation of Arab Jerusalem into a basic law, an
act which amounts to a constitutional amendment under the Israeli
system. Such an act would be extremely difficult to reverse. Undoubt-
3 See Document 369.
