Uruguay  1189
Means must be found to provide the type of financial and economic 
arrangements on which there could be established an internally secure 
situation.
The President asked about the existing Uruguayan situation in 
other respects. The Councilor replied that everything is fine and that 
“with Bogotá, the arrangements with the International Monetary 
Fund—that have been very helpful—­and financial assistance from the 
United States” there will be no problems. He said that his reports from 
the Uruguayan delegation to the Bogotá Conference were that the con-
ference was very successful. The President remarked that the success of 
the Bogotá Conference was most pleasing to him.
The President the said that he would like to mention a situation 
which is giving him a great deal of worry. He recognizes the need for 
economic growth in Latin America and he is convinced that private 
investment for this purpose is more useful than public investment. 
During his trip earlier this year to South America, leaders in the var-
ious countries agreed that private investment is urgently needed. The 
excesses of Castro in Cuba, however, are now establishing a situation 
which deters investors from making investments in other countries of 
Latin America. This has been brought to the President’s personal atten-
tion of late in conversations with individuals who would normally be 
making such investments.
The President said that there may be a lack of realization in Latin 
America of the extent to which Cuba now is an obstacle to private 
investment. He said that he would like to see the American govern-
ments undertake the kind of programs needed to support a greater 
flow of capital in spite of Castro. The ridiculous demand of Castro for 
$30 billion dollars is illustrative of the wrong way to go about this. He 
then invited the Councilor to make known his views on the problem.
The Councilor responded with lengthy remarks respecting Castro 
and what he termed the United States problem with Castro. He said 
that obviously much violence and misunderstanding has taken place 
and that in his opinion it has become necessary to seek means for clar-
ifying the situation. He does not think that this can be done by the 
United States or within the framework of the United Nations. Instead 
it is a problem which must be taken up by countries in Latin America 
which are less directly involved, particularly Uruguay which is a coun-
try above suspicion of domination by any foreign power. Direct or uni-
lateral action by the United States would be misunderstood and would 
cause hostility among the American Republics.
The President responded by stating that violence would appear 
to be unilateral on the part of the Castro Government, and that the 
United States has been very patient. It is difficult to understand why 
Castro behaves the way he does. Cuba’s prosperity depends on its
