Options Identified from a round of consultations so it appears to be the result of consensus—even if everyone knows that the U.S. is the real author. Secretary Vance and Ambassador McHenry intended to consult immediately following the SCC meeting to decide on the list of specific sanctions which we would demand. This list will be prepared and circulated later in the day for comments before being sent to the President as an agreed recommendation by the SCC.6 The ambassadors of the nations represented on the Security Council are being called in to State today to make a firm request for their support for our efforts in the UN. They will not be briefed on the precise details of our proposed package, however, since questions remain about the desirability and legality of interrupting communications, for example. Dr. Brzezinski cautioned the SCC that the list of sanctions should be as stringent as possible. The President did not want us to look like a bunch of puffs. (S) 3. Iranian Diplomats. State will follow up on the President’s order that the Iranian diplomats who have been ordered to leave the country should get out. (C) 4. Iranian Monetary Transfers. Secretary Miller briefed the group on a series of proposed Iranian transfers of accounts from European and Japanese banks to alternative accounts of Libyan and Algerian banks. Some of these alternative accounts would in fact be held in Japan or France. It is doubtful that the allies would be willing or, in some cases, able to interfere with this type of transaction. Nevertheless, the SCC agreed that going to the allies on this issue would underline the fact that we are monitoring Iranian activities closely and would keep them alert to their commitments. It was agreed that Secretary Miller would send a message to the appropriate finance ministers. (S) 5. Unblocking Assets. Secretary Miller circulated for SCC comments a paper outlining procedures and options available to us in unblocking Iranian assets should that prove necessary or desirable at some point in the future. (S) 6. Public Posture. State will be in contact with the various clergymen and religious groups which may be involved in visits to the hostages over Christmas. They will be briefed to insist on seeing all the hostages, to take their time and not rush through a visit, and to protest publicly in Tehran if they are prohibited from fulfilling their objectives or if the 6 Brzezinski sent the Summary of Conclusions and the operative paragraphs of the proposed UN resolution on Chapter VII sanctions to Carter on December 22. He noted that the latter “has been checked and approved by all agencies.” Carter initialed his approval and made comments on the text of the operative part of the resolution. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 18, SCC Meeting #236A
