940
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
will involve many private sector groups, including business, labor,
foundations, universities and church groups.
In reviewing the situation, we believe that an outline of initiatives
can be presented to you on or before August 15th.
Attachment
Draft Memorandum From President Carter to the Cabinet
and Other Affected Agencies4
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
U.S. International Health Policy
Approximately two billion human beings in Third World nations
face premature death due to preventable parasitic and infectious dis-
eases, malnutrition and lack of sanitary water supply. Similarly, in the
industrialized nations of the world, many crippling and debilitating
diseases continue to cut short productive and happy lives. This state of
affairs has continued in the face of unprecedented advances in medical
science and technology.
A preliminary assessment conducted at my request by Peter G.
Bourne, M.D., found that the United States government is not building
adequately on the mutual self interest of all nations to use readily avail-
able medical scientific knowledge to improve the health and well being
of people everywhere. I believe that the United States government
needs to take steps to improve its capacity to fight disease in partner-
ship with other nations.
I have asked Jack Watson to organize a Cabinet-level Task Force on
International Health. The work of the Task Force will be overseen by an
Executive Committee consisting of the following agencies: State
(Chmn.), Defense, Commerce, Treasury, HEW, AID. The White House
Office of the Special Assistant for Health Issues will also be a member.
Jack will serve as Executive Secretary of the Executive Committee and
Peter Bourne will chair a coordinating committee which will be sup-
ported by working groups. The charge of the Task Force will be to pre-
pare a report for me recommending government action to strengthen
the U.S. government’s capacity to cooperate in health with the devel-
oping and developed nations of the world.
4 No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the memorandum.
