806 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement HO–4. Memorandum of Conversation, by the officer in Charge of Honduran Affairs (Gawf)1 Washington, December 2, 1958. SUBJECT Current Political and Economic Conditions in Honduras PARTICIPANTS Ambassador John C. Dreier, Director, Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs Mr. C. Allan Stewart, Director, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs Colonel Oswaldo Lopez, Chief of the Honduran Armed Forces John L. Gawf, Honduran Desk Officer Colonel Lopez said that he was very much worried by the way things seemed to be going in Honduras. He spoke at great length about the ineptitude of the Villeda administration, as a result of its having replaced the entire personnel of the Honduran Government with inexperienced Liberal Party members, despite his pre-­election promise to form a government of national unity. He went on to describe the corruption, waste, fiscal mismanagement, softness toward Communism, and the violations of privacy which had been perpetrated upon various members of the Nationalist Party by an organization of hatchet men, which the Liberal Party had set up. He inveighed against the Liberal Party’s efforts to place the Security Police under the ministry of Gobernacion, against the efforts of the Villeda Administration to curtail the role of the military by cutting the budget and against the manner in which the Villeda Administration seemed to be running the country into bankruptcy. Colonel Lopez said that he understood that conditions had become so serious that Villeda had recognized that a cabinet reshuffle was necessary and that hence, the entire cabinet was soon to resign leaving Villeda free to eliminate those members who had been most responsible for the present difficulties. He left the impression that in this category were Roberto Martinez and Fernando Villar. At this point Mr. Stewart observed that we too had been feeling some concern about the way things seemed to be going in Honduras. However, he added that the present events seemed to be following a pattern which was not uncommonly seen in Latin America when new governments take over. He went on to say that in many cases after a year or two of stumbling and making mistakes many such governments 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 715.00/12–258. Confidential.
