614 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I In addition, the schedule proposed by the Soviet side minimizes public exposure and thus diminishes their usual penchant for public cameraderie. Above all, we are getting one message—no surprises.9 Their approach is one of extreme caution. What they appear to fear most is the picture of a young U.S. President making dramatic initiatives (a la March 1977) without careful preparation in advance to ensure their acceptability to the Soviet leadership. Tone and Style Given the character of Soviet objectives, atmosphere will be a particularly important aspect of this summit.10 Every indication is that both sides seek a positive atmosphere. We should understand, however, that the Soviets have more to gain and less to lose than you do from pumping up the atmospherics. A glowing summit gives the Soviet leadership a boost at home and abroad, because they face no public comparison between pretense and actual results. In managing the atmosphere and the substance of the summit, a number of points deserve being kept in mind: 1. There is little to be gained by philosophical discourse or ideological debate with the Soviet leaders; they are not psychologically confident enough to engage at the philosophical level as the Chinese do; in particular, trying to debate rules of conduct becomes frustrating because of the gap in perceptions;11 2. Concrete issues, however, are more easily resolved but only if they have been well prepared and the Soviets do not have to contend with surprises that have not been aired by the collective leadership;12 3. Soviet leaders are quite sensitive to their personal treatment;13 they are particularly concerned over any slights reflecting the inferiority of the USSR. This will be a particularly important issue at this summit with Brezhnev’s ill health. It is not in our interest to exploit his infirmities. 4. Meeting the “people” is of little interest to the Soviets. Their preoccupation is with those who have the power of decision. As a concession to us, they have reluctantly agreed on a joint call by the two Presidents on Austrian President Kirchschlager. 9 The President underlined the phrase “no surprises.” 10 The President underlined the words “atmosphere” and “particularly important.” 11 In this point, the President underlined “little to be gained,” “ideological debate,” and “rules of conduct.” 12 In this point, the President underlined “Concrete issues” and “well prepared.” 13 The President underlined “sensitive to their personal treatment.”
