National Security Policy 1079 to persuade their people to accept it, and some other governments would also probably acquiesce.5 5 The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, considers that paragraph 12, as writ­ ten, overemphasizes the unfavorable reaction of neutralist elements in the Free World. He believes that restrained, well timed publicity could stimulate both governmental and popu­ lar support for a US reconnaissance program and that the governments and informed peo­ ples of the Free World would draw encouragement from the knowledge that the US was able to penetrate Soviet secrecy. This would do much to offset the effects of a violent Soviet denouncement. He would, therefore, substitute the following for paragraph 12: “12. The governments of the principal countries of the Free World, as well as mili­ tary, official, and some other segments of opinion in these countries, are well aware of the requirement for effective intelligence on the USSR to maintain Free World security, and would support the US reconnaissance satellite program. Such support could be broadened and reinforced and the impact of violent Soviet denouncements and threats reduced by a restrained, well timed information program. Such a program could have some effect in con­ verting neutralist opposition to acquiescence. Many governments and peoples of the Free World would be favorably impressed and encouraged by evidence that the US could in fact penetrate Soviet secrecy; by the same token they would be discouraged and disappointed if they were given reason to believe that the US was unable to achieve such penetration. Favorable reactions in Allied countries might be enchanced by joint Allied association with the program, though not all objections would be overcome. Even in the event of violent Soviet denouncements and threats, the US program would have substantial popular accep­ tance as well as the support of most Allied governments.” [Footnote is in the original.] 259. Letter From Gates to Goodpaster1 Washington, August 10, 1960 Dear Andy: I tabled this paper with the Joint Chiefs of Staff this afternoon, and it is the subject we wish to cover with the President tomorrow morning at 10:15. In view of the fact that Admiral Burke is planning to attend to protest this proposal, I felt you at least would want to read it first, and perhaps even informally discuss it with the President prior to our arrival. I expect to review the entire subject with the President when we arrive for our meeting. Sincerely, Thomas S. Gates 1 Source: Transmits draft paper on target coordination and associated problems. Top Secret. 12 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary.
