1955 25 24. Telegram 314 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 4, 1955, 5 p.m. 314. From Johnson. Deptel 360. Fully appreciate Dept’s desire not force pace but feel it also import­ ant that we avoid giving any impression to CHICOMS or public that we are dragging feet on getting Americans out of China. Press would be quick exploit in face Chou’s statement ability readily resolve this prob­ lem and rumors started by Menon which have received wide currency that problem would be resolved at latest by end this week. In light these considerations which I have been trying keep in balance I did not con­ sider it desirable at today’s meeting to propose recess beyond Monday. By same token I am certain there would be adverse reaction among correspondents here which CHICOMS would be quick exploit if I were to make trip to Prague at this particular stage. I am convinced that CHICOMS do not seriously expect obtain point one Wang’s August 2 proposal and should not be led to belief there is any possibility success although they will continue using it to strengthen their case for point 4. I had therefore planned at today’s meeting flatly to turn it down as outside agreed scope talks. In order not give them too much encouragement on this point and carry out instructions Deptel 360 I did say while not in position reply it seemed to be outside scope our discussion. I am satisfied something in field of point four of Wang’s proposal is Chou’s minimum price for release remaining Americans. Under best circumstances I do not now feel any mass release is to be expected and fear most difficulty will be encountered over Downey and Fecteau with difficulties also over those being denied exit permits pending settle­ ment financial “claims”. I feel we are not going to get them move very far on Americans until we give them some indication on point four. On other hand I have feared that if we agreed on something along lines point four their tactic would be to attempt to claim that question of civilians now resolved at our level and “details” should be left to representing countries. Therefore tactic which I had planned prior to receipt Deptel 360 was to put forward in informal conversational style a representation proposal in strict accordance with my instructions as something I was willing recommend my government’s consideration but didn’t feel I could do so until they had come further on Americans in China. My 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–455. Secret.
