Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 1. Embassies should present to appropriate host government officials the Non-Paper in para 2, drawing orally on background information in para 3. We are seeking preliminary reactions of key Nuclear Supplier Governments to our approach to and proposed language for clarification of the restraint in export of uranium enrichment technology called for in the Nuclear Supplier Group guidelines. Host authorities should be clear that we are not seeking to establish any forms of restraint beyond those already provided for in the guidelines. At the same time, you should stress that the US, for its part, has never transferred enrichment technology under its agreements for cooperation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and does not foresee any circumstances likely to arise in the near future which would occasion a change in this policy. 2. Text of Non-Paper follows: Begin text: transfers of enrichment technology. In recent months, the US has held informal consultations with several Nuclear Supplier Group members on the question of adopting further restraints in the area of enrichment technology exports. We have found the view to be generally held that the relevant suppliers might usefully adopt additional restraint in this area. At the same time, we have concluded that a formal meeting of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and formal amendment of the Nuclear Supplier Group guidelines would not be feasible at this time. Accordingly, we are considering adopting the following principle as US policy. “In applying Article 7 of the guidelines, the Government of the US recognizes the need for special restraint in the transfer of enrichment technology and for early consultations before making any commitments in this field. As stated in Article 7, the US believes that any such transfer should be under arrangements that include supplier involvement and/or multinational participation, and believe it desirable to continue supplier consultations regarding the characteristics of such arrangements which will reinforce international safeguards. “We would appreciate governments’ comments on this approach and indications of whether governments would be prepared to adopt similar policies for future commitments.” End text. 3. Following background information may also be drawn upon in discussing above presentation with host authorities. NSG guidelines call for “restraint” in export of sensitive fuel reprocessing and uranium enrichment technologies, but do not incorporate any understandings as to the circumstances under which such exports might be appropriate. With respect to reprocessing, several key relevant suppliers have additionally undertaken, unilaterally, further voluntary restraint on exports. FRG and France, for example, have publicly indicated their intention not to enter into new arrangements for transfer of reprocessing technology. The US is strongly of the view that similar policies are also
