932
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
365.
Letter From Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representative
for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to President Carter1
Washington, February 27, 1978
Dear Mr. President:
In Europe for the IAEA Board of Governors meeting, I also talked
with Chancellor Kreisky and Foreign Ministers David Owen (UK), de
Guiringaud (France) and Simonet (Belgium), several EC Commis-
sioners and PermReps, and a number of atomic energy officials. I was
the first American allowed to inspect the French military gaseous diffu-
sion plant (Pierrelatte) and the huge civil enrichment plant under con-
struction (Tricastin).
I got the following impressions:
1. There is respect for INFCE which is a “going concern”, but
INFCE is being used as a rationale to try to defer hard decisions—like
EURATOM’s agreeing to renegotiate its supply arrangements with
the U.S. (Under the nonproliferation legislation, EURATOM must so
agree in order to avoid a U.S. embargo on nuclear exports.) I think
EURATOM will agree. But there are feelings of resentment at what is
seen as U.S. duress and a breach of international obligations by do-
mestic legislation.
2. Europeans are used to depending on the U.S. for nuclear deter-
rence but they seem determined to keep to a minimum their peaceful
nuclear energy dependence on the U.S. The British and French empha-
sized their disagreement with our policy to defer reprocessing and fast
breeder commercialization. Europeans don’t want to give us a veto
over reprocessing of U.S.-origin spent fuel because that would place
decisions as to their energy programs in our hands. Expect long, tough
negotiations over this issue, since energy dependence is a lively fear in
Europe (and Japan).
3. The non-weapons states are especially sensitive to signs of
American discrimination in its nonproliferation policy in favor of the
UK and France.
4. Kreisky is hurting politically because his government cannot
find a way to assure Austrians that reactor spent fuel can be securely
stored. I explained your foreign spent fuel storage policy and stressed
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Pastor Country File, Box 1, Argentina: 1–9/78. Confidential. At the top of the page, Brze-
zinski wrote “Mr. President, A concise and informative report from Gerry Smith. Given
your interest in the issue, it might be useful to have him call on you. Zbig.” Carter under-
lined the words “call on you,” drew an arrow pointing to them, and wrote “not now. C.”
