Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII DRA did not want. The DRA had done its best to prove that these events had been outside its control. 6. Newsom noted that the reaction in the U.S. to the Dubs assassination had been very strong and led to the congressional action which reduced somewhat our cooperation. We have tried to extend our assistance programs as long as we could under the law, and are phasing out our programs in an orderly fashion. The U.S. was always ready to discuss steps which might be taken to put our relations back on a more normal basis. We welcomed word that President Amin wanted better relations. When the time came when better relations could be discussed, we were willing to explore how the conditions laid down by Congress might be met.5 7. In reply to Shah Wali’s suggestion that “false propaganda” on this issue had unduly influenced U.S. political leaders, Newsom said it was the events surrounding the assassination that were responsible, not newspaper reports. We also felt that we had not gotten as much cooperation in the investigation as we could have expected. In defense, Shah Wali pointed to the serious doubts still remaining about the Kennedy assassination and reiterated that the DRA believed it had done its best. 8. Reminded of previous USG assistance to Afghan development projects such as the Helmand Valley,6 Shah Wali said that it was because of the previous friendly relations between our two countries that the DRA considered the present situation to be “abnormal.” He saw no hindrance or problem which could not be solved. He denied that the DRA was turning away from the prior Afghan practice of drawing on multiple aid sources and advisers in putting together cooperative projects. Shah Wali pointed to the continuation of World Bank, German and other projects, and argued that Afghanistan’s actions in some “specific cases” (read U.S.) had arisen from a feeling that individuals 5 A reference to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee amendment to the International Development Assistance Act of 1979 signed by the President on August 14. The amendment, inserted at the end of Chapter 1 of Part III of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, reads: “(A) None of the funds authorized to be appropriated under this act may be used to furnish assistance to Afghanistan nor may funds authorized to be appropriated under this act before October 1, 1979, be expended for assistance to Afghanistan until the President certifies to the Congress that (1) the Government of Afghanistan has apologized officially and assumes responsibility for the death of Ambassador Adolph Dubs; and (2) the Government of Afghanistan agrees to provide adequate protection for all personnel of the United States Government in Afghanistan. (b) The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply if the President determines that it is in the national interest of the United States because of substantially changed circumstances in Afghanistan.” 6 On U.S. assistance for Afghan development of the Helmand River Valley, see, for
