December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
601
that, after several days of intensive discussions, the Ministers might
then wish to return home to consult with their governments.
In making this suggestion, Mr. Prime Minister, I want to assure
you of my continued personal commitment to the implementation of
the Camp David Agreements, beginning with the successful conclusion
of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. I also want to assure you
that I recognize and appreciate how fully you share this commitment. I
am convinced that President Sadat also remains fully committed to a
successful conclusion of the negotiations. The differences remaining
between you touch upon matters of vital importance to the national in-
terests and security of your two nations. I do not underestimate their
importance. To resolve them will require difficult decisions. I believe,
however, that they are not insurmountable. We have travelled most of
the road already, and it would be a tragedy if we failed to complete the
journey which began with President Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem7 and the
statesmanship and vision with which you responded to that visit.
I look forward to hearing from you at your earliest convenience,
Mr. Prime Minister, and meanwhile send to you my warm personal re-
gards and continued high respect.
Sincerely yours, Jimmy Carter. End text.
4. We believe it would be desirable to announce8 that Ministerial-
level talks will resume at Camp David as soon as this has been agreed
by both sides—hopefully in the course of this week. Our intention
would be to issue a brief statement along the following lines: Quote: At
President Carter’s invitation, President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin
have agreed that negotiations between Egypt and Israel should be re-
sumed at Ministerial level. Prime Minister Khalil, Foreign Minister
Dayan and Secretary Vance will participate in these talks, which will
begin at Camp David on February 21. In agreeing to these talks, all
sides have affirmed their commitment to the Camp David Accords and
their determination that these negotiations be completed as quickly as
possible. Unquote. Please ascertain GOI reaction to an announcement
along foregoing lines.
5. I would like you and Hermann Eilts to return to participate in
these talks. You should plan to arrive in Washington by Sunday, Feb-
ruary 18, which would give us a chance for in-house discussions with
you and Hermann before talks with Khalil and Dayan begin.
Vance
7 See footnote 3, Document 4.
8 The U.S. invitation to Egypt and Israel to resume talks at the Ministerial level was
announced by Department of State Spokesman Hodding Carter III, February 7. (“U.S. In-
vites Egypt, Israel to Resume Talks in Washington,” The Washington Post, February 8,
p. A26)
