National Security Policy 691 This latter fact diverted the discussion briefly to the matter of oil quotas. The President expressed the desire that advanced informa­ tion be delivered to Diefenbaker on this subject. He pointed out that these oil quotas are not injurious to Canada. It is important that the Canadian Government know this in the light of the quid pro quo (which approaches blackmail) which they are apparently attempting to implement in this matter. Mr. Murphy confirmed that the planned oil quotas will result rather favorably for the Canadians; it will be the Venezuelans who will be hurt. Here Mr. Quarles stated that Canada’s fears are not for the present but for the future. Mr. Murphy agreed, stating that the principle of a quota is what disturbs the Canadians. They have announced that any restric­ tion on oil imports from Canada will create such surplus in their Western Provinces as to necessitate their constructing a pipeline from West to East. This the President considers highly undesirable. Accordingly, he requested Secretary Quarles to get together with Secretary Seaton to devise some scheme to insure that it does not become necessary for Canada to build a pipeline. He feels that such construction would be a waste of resources and should be avoided. He further requested Mr. Murphy to designate an official to visit Diefenbaker as a personal repre­ sentative of the President to explain the real facts of the oil import quotas. * * * * The President then brought the meeting back to the subject of Headstart II with a warning that if this exercise is leaked, it will proba­ bly have to be stopped, due primarily to the political impact in Canada and other nations. General LeMay pointed out here that the only thing new in this exercise is the regularity of dispatch of the aircraft, but the President pointed further to the magnitude and scope of this exercise. Mr. Murphy pointed out a peculiarity of the Canadian require­ ments. Whereas the clearance of these flights is normally on a service-­ to-­service basis (USAF to RCAF), the Canadians have specified that the RCAF is responsible for obtaining “ministerial clearance.” Secretary Quarles expressed considerable doubt as to the significance of this wording. He does not feel that the Canadians are going to require any exceptional clearance for this exercise. General LeMay concurred in Mr. Quarles’ view, stating that the other test had required no change from normal clearance procedures. The President remarked that the greatest danger to the entire exercise lay with the politicians—­in this case the Canadian politicians. John S.D. Eisenhower
