150 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX will all be subject to heavy Russian pressure to support the action, if not actually participate in it. There may be shading of tone, but I suspect they will be fine ones in the general chorus. 7. Nevertheless, it is important in our long term interests to proceed on the assumption of distinction between the Russians and the others. The reason, in my view, is that it is demonstrable that the whole Eastern Europe empire is in a permanent, low grade crisis in which Russian interests and those of its clients tend to diverge on many points. It is a crisis the central feature of which is economic mismanagement. It is not a crisis which is bound to drive people to the barricades, though it will, I suspect, keep them in a constant state of disaffection. The Polish trouble, even if it is liquidated, will on this view reappear at some future point in other places in other forms—just as 1956 and 1968 were unable to exorcize the demon. 8. Our approach to the Polish authorities in a post-intervention situation will be particularly important. Again, much will depend on the actual circumstances. Perhaps there will be an invitation from some Polish quarters for Warsaw Pact “fraternal assistance.” Perhaps Polish security or military forces will act to put down worker resistance by force. I suggest our basic approach should be that the Poles, specifically the Polish Party, were forced into such actions against their better judgement through massive Russian pressure and intimidation. Such a line has a basis in fact. The Party, up to this point, has shown notable readiness to try to find compromises with the new union movement. Admittedly, it has had few options, but the fact remains that is has not had recourse in the past months to massive repressive methods. We would certainly not wish to endorse in any way Polish figures sharply identified with intervention or repression, but rather put the stress on “healthy forces” in the party which have tried to devise Polish solutions for Polish problems. 9. I would not pretend that this suggested course is easy or likely to produce quick results. The easier way in fact is to lump everyone together, Russians, EE’s, Polish Party people of every stripe, in one general anathema, draw the ideological battle lines sharply and settle down to a long, cold winter in the trenches. The difficulty with this course is that experience tells us it does not last long. Usually sooner than later, counter-pressures develop. Allies will begin to get itchy about selling large diameter steel pipe. Joint projects for Siberian development will start dancing like sugar plum fairies. The Ostpolitiker will start sighing for the German nation. Our farmers will want to sell their grain again. And, on other levels, we will all gradually wend our way
