North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
1003
tone unless there are breakthroughs visible on the horizon on substan-
tive issues under negotiation in other bodies.
We plan to make a major effort to get our position on the role of the
COW across to developing countries prior to the opening of the Gen-
eral Assembly.
317.
Letter From President Carter to British Prime Minister
Callaghan1
Washington, September 25, 1978
Dear Jim:
When I thanked you for your letter of August 3 about North-South
issues, I had in mind also providing you with further comments about
the views you expressed in that letter and in the memorandum at-
tached to it.2
I agree on the need to provide greater opportunities for developing
countries to export to the industrial world, and I very much share your
view that there should be “safeguards against safeguards”. I know that
your representatives and ours will work closely together in the Multi-
lateral Trade Negotiations to help bring this about.
I made some progress this year in persuading the Congress to ap-
propriate increased funds for both bilateral and multilateral aid. I also
expect that next year the United States will create a Foundation for In-
ternational Technological Collaboration to help developing countries. I
commend your recent actions to soften the terms of past aid, and I be-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 20, United Kingdom: Prime Minister
James Callaghan, 6–9/78. No classification marking. Sent to Carter for his signature
under cover of a September 23 memorandum from Owen, who noted that State, Treas-
ury, and Fallows had all cleared the letter. (Ibid.)
2 Regarding Callaghan’s August 3 letter to Carter and its attachment and Carter’s
August 15 letter to Callaghan, see Document 312. In his September 23 memorandum to
Carter (see footnote 1 above), Owen noted that “the State Department, in coordination
with other agencies, has prepared a detailed comment on a paper that Callaghan sent you
with his letter. I believe it would be useful to let Callaghan know that this U.S. comment
is being sent to his government, to make your own views known on the key issues that it
raises, and to suggest that we act on the suggestion Schmidt made at Bonn: that a small
group of officials from Summit countries get together to lay out a long-term strategy on
North-South issues.”
