36 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII themselves will therefore be significantly influenced by Soviet perceptions of possible Indian objections. 6. In sum, in our view, the durability of the pro-Soviet regime in Kabul, particularly in the short run, will depend chiefly on indigenous factors in Afghanistan and not primarily on the ability of the Soviet Union to influence directly events on the unpredictable Afghan political scene. Toon 15. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, May 8, 1978 SUBJECT US Policy Toward Afghanistan The President has noted a report on Ambassador Eliot’s weekend conversation with Prime Minister Taraki.2 According to the report, Taraki said that the climate of bilateral relations will depend on US willingness to provide economic aid to his government. He said he will be asking for new aid from both the US and USSR. In response to the above, the President stated that we should build a good relationship with the new Government of Afghanistan, but 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1/77–3/79. Secret. 2 In telegram 3619 from Kabul, May 6, Eliot reported on his first conversation with Taraki. He characterized the meeting as friendly and expressed the U.S. desire to help Afghanistan retain its independence. Taraki emphasized that what had transpired in late April was a “revolution,” not a “coup,” and that Daoud was killed because he shot at his attackers, who otherwise would have taken him captive to be court-martialed and possibly executed. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780193– 1106) Carter may have read a condensed version of the telegram in the May 7 “Current Reports” compilation disseminated by INR. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Program Files for Soviet-Asia Relations, 1960–1978, Lot 90D320, Afghanistan, January–June 1978)
