1978 359 —What does the increasing number of Soviet rail mobile command posts and airborne command posts mean for our targeting and planning?11 —Does our target list have all the Soviet C3I bunkers in the USSR? In East Europe? —Could we launch an LNO on only Soviet theater C3I in East Europe? —Does SACEUR, in his RNO context, have the capability to destroy Warsaw Pact C3I. —How far down the command line can SAC acquire and target command posts? Front? Army Group? Army? Division? III. Interaction of U.S. and Soviet Forces and C3I This topic pushes up the force structure implications of planning and programming for a “deterrence” doctrine versus planning and programming for a “war fighting” doctrine. I am attaching at Tab E a special paper done for me by a concerned denizen in the depths of CIA.12 His thoughts are based on close examination of several years of Soviet military exercises. His most striking conclusion is the growing Soviet interest in nuclear conflicts limited in one fashion or another. Bob Rosenberg’s SAC/NORAD trip report (Tab D) summarizes Intelligence Community growing evidence of a Soviet sustained war fighting capability.13 Flexibility, use of nuclear forces in combination with other forces, and scenarios allowing for slower escalation are the hallmarks of Soviet exercise evolution. Some questions in this area are: —Where are the weak points in the Soviet approach? —What changes are we making to take into account changing Soviet capabilities and exercise practices?14 —What should be done as opposed to what is being done? —What are the implications of ASAT developments, both Soviets and U.S.? —What is the consequence of the [less than 1 line not declassified]. What can be done about it? (Bob Rosenberg suggests that you discuss 11 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence. 12 Tab E was not found attached. Above this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “Sustained limited nuclear war.” To the right of that comment, he wrote another illegible comment. 13 Tab D was not found attached. 14 Brzezinski drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this sentence.
