893.5045/91: Telegram [Document 587] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, June 16, 1925—noon. [Received 12:25 p.m.] 231. My number 228, June 15, 10 a.m. 1. Yesterday passed without disorder. Some 15,000 students and workmen paraded in orderly fashion, precautions being taken by moderate faction of students to prevent extremists from causing trouble. Demonstrators insisted in call upon Chief Executive that Government carry out following demands: (1) To sever connection with England; (2) to instruct Hsiao Yao-nan49 to send troops for the purpose of protecting the Chinese merchants in foreign concessions at Hankow; (3) to circularize all provinces by telegram to organize a national relief army. Chief aide to Tuan stated that the Government would discuss demands at Cabinet meeting on the 16th when the demonstrators were requested to send representatives to attend meeting. 2. At my suggestion senior minister authorized to call upon Chief Executive yesterday morning in order categorically to request from him guarantee of protection of life and property of foreign residents in Peking. Tuan Chi-jui gave such assurance in emphatic terms stating that he had ordered one division of Minister of War’s troops to come to Peking to assist in maintenance of law and order. These troops belonging to Feng Yu-hsiang’s forces were stationed about the city yesterday morning especially at the approaches to the Legation Quarter in support of the police. 3. General strike scheduled to take place yesterday postponed to 25th at meeting of representatives from many educational, commercial and labor organizations, the plan apparently being that on above date governmental, commercial, industrial and educational activities throughout the country will be stopped from 6 in the morning until noon; amusements of all kinds suspended, flags flown at half mast and demonstrations to take place throughout China. 4. The tension at Peking seems somewhat relieved today and I feel more at ease regarding local situation owing to steps taken by Tuan Chi-jui as
