788  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
the Chinese Communists from the obligation which they assumed 
in that Agreement expeditiously to release all detained Americans, and 
the U.S. continues to expect them to fulfill that obligation and promptly 
to release the thirteen Americans still detained in Communist Chinese 
prisons.
Chinese in the United States continue to be entirely free to return 
to mainland China and the U.S. offers no obstruction whatever to their 
departure. The Indian Embassy in the U.S. has not brought to the atten­
tion of my Government any case of a Chinese who claims he is being 
prevented from leaving, nor has Ambassador Wang here presented any 
factual evidence of obstruction.
5In spite of the Chinese Communist commitment of September 10 
last year expeditiously to release all detained Americans, thirteen 
Americans still remain in Chinese Communist prisons. The US contin­
ues to expect the Chinese Communists to fulfill that commitment and 
promptly release those unfortunate people.
I have informed Ambassador Wang that any further communica­
tions between the two sides can be transmitted through our respective 
consular offices here in Geneva.
5 This paragraph to be used and second paragraph deleted unless Wang denounces 
Agreed Announcement. [Footnote in the original.]
499.	 Telegram 1547 from Geneva1
Geneva, February 24, 1956, 4 p.m.
1547. From Johnson.
Four and one half hour meeting this morning. No progress 
whatsoever.
Renunciation took familiar lines for three and half hours with dis­
cussion becoming very diffuse Wang reiterating usual lines of foreign 
versus domestic nature dispute Taiwan area. Also tried hard to sound 
me out 1) on U.S. willingness hold FonMin meeting as “practicable and 
feasible means” mentioned in declaration and 2) on linked question 
whether any flexibility our position re status quo Taiwan. Context this 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/2–2456. Confidential; Priority; 
Limit Distribution.
