March–August 1953
485
British could be persuaded to go along, the Arab powers would fall in
line and the United States would be able to create a position of reason-
able strength in the whole Middle East area, including Iran.
The President said that Mr. Jackson was absolutely right, but, un-
happily, what he proposed would take a long time, and we are in the
midst of a crisis. “I’d pay a lot”, said the President, “for this peace be-
tween Egypt and Israel.”
Secretary Dulles added that this case was on the agenda for his
forthcoming talks with Anthony Eden.
The President then reverted to Secretary Dulles’ third course of ac-
tion, which involved giving material and financial support to Mossadegh.
That, said Secretary Dulles, would certainly give us time, but he
would like to hear now from the Joint Chiefs of Staff as to the value of
gaining time.
General Vandenberg responded by a statement that the only real
reason for gaining time was to get the Middle East Defense Organiza-
tion started. If the MEDO begins to function it might very well provide
the stability that we so desperately needed in the Middle East. General
Vandenberg, however, confirmed the President’s opinion that it would
take a very long time to get US or UN troops in position in Iran. We do,
however, have plans, he added, to send in a division of American
forces if this is the policy adopted by the President. General Vanden-
berg estimated that it would take some fourteen days to transport one
regimental combat team via Basra to a position in the defense perimeter
of mountains which might be held in Southern Iran. As for the First Ma-
rine or 82nd Airborne divisions, his estimate was 45 to 60 days, which
was probably too long. General Vandenberg did agree with the Presi-
dent that the mountain line above the Persian Gulf could be held, and
the President thought this could even be done for a time with as little as
one regimental combat team.
General Vandenberg warned, however, that there was now more
serious question as to the loyalty of the Iranian armed forces to the
Shah. The latter had had several opportunities to assure himself of the
loyalty of his armed forces, but, as in other cases, had lost his opportu-
nity. There was now a new Chief of Staff of the Army who was one of
Mossadegh’s own choice.
Secretary Humphrey expressed himself as shocked to think that
we were contemplating the loss of Iran in this fashion, and Mr. Cutler
again inquired of the Secretary of State whether it would not be pos-
sible, in the forthcoming conversations with the British, to induce them
to waive their claims and let the United States proceed to negotiate uni-
laterally with Iran. The British had lost their investment in Iran in any
case, and a unilateral course of action by the United States was about
the only thing which had not been tried.
