the company may take possession of the land necessary for the construction
of the main station” and that the Foreign Minister concurred in this
explanation.
2. As soon as we had reached an agreement in principle on these documents
the Minister for Foreign Affairs said that in consideration of his having done
this much for our interests he felt warranted in asking me for a definite
statement of our Government’s attitude in regard to the forthcoming
conference. I told him that the exchange of these documents did not in itself
place us under any obligations and that I wished to make this clear to him in
order that he might if necessary reconsider the matter before making the
exchange. I recalled that the proposed documents call upon Chinese
Government to do nothing new—in fact placed some conditions and
qualifications upon what the Chinese Government was already definitely
obligated to do; and that it was simply a matter of bringing about the
fulfillment by that Government of obligations whose nonfulfillment had led
us to doubt the willingness or ability of the Chinese Government to live up to
the further duties which it would naturally have to assume in connection with
aspirations which it is seeking to realize at the conference. I added that in this
aspect of matter the making of a new promise was a hopeful indication of
desire of the Chinese to keep faith with us, but that of course their
performance of the obligations thus newly undertaken would afford a
measure of the confidence with which we may feel warranted in dealing with
them in the conference.
[3?] He then urged that this new evidence of Chinese good will ought at least
to be a basis for our discussing and considering frankly with the Chinese
authorities the program of the conference, and he outlined in very general
terms the program in view. Upon his asking for my comment on it I stated
that it was impossible for me to form an opinion of a general program
without any details making possible judgment as to the practicability of its
various items and said that I would of course be glad to receive from the
Chinese experts detailed explanations of their proposals but that until such
details had been considered by my Government and by the delegation it
would manifestly be impossible to give more than a general assurance of our
good will and desire to be of help to China.
4. He indicated some disappointment that unwillingness to make a more
definite commitment as to our attitude on the general program or on the
particular item of “tariff autonomy.”
It is entirely possible that failing to receive from us some new consideration
for the observance of our existing rights the Chinese Government may even
