March 27–December 31, 1979
969
They concluded (and are reporting confidentially to the Committee)
that there is need for an enduring U.S. military supply relationship
with Egypt beyond anything discussed to date, probably including ad-
ditional credits in FY 81 plus FMS credits in excess of $500 million per
year. The politics of this situation are very different from the F–15 sale
to Saudi Arabia. (S)
Harold Brown is looking at possibilities of substituting materiel
from our own inventory in place of new purchases with long lead
times. However, the Egyptian problem of mass obsolescence is so great
that we cannot expect to remedy it by drawing down our own active in-
ventories. For example, Harold believes we could find about 15 F–4s
from USAF inventories to offer the Egyptians, but that is only a small
percentage of what they need. We may be able to find a number of
M–48 tanks to replace Egypt’s aging Soviet equipment. However, this
is an issue which will have to be worked out in subsequent discussions
with the Egyptians as we help them pare down their priorities to about
half of what they have identified as their “minimum” needs. (S)
Similarly, the proposal to adopt “cash flow” procedures in man-
aging Egypt’s military account recognizes that we would permit Egypt
to borrow against future credits. There is some risk associated with
such an approach, but it is the same risk we have already accepted in
dealing with large programs for Israel and Jordan. The fact is that con-
tinuation of the present “full funding” procedures will severely limit
the mileage Egypt can hope to squeeze out of available credits and will
inevitably lead to requests for significantly higher aid levels. (S)
Jim McIntyre’s suggestion4 of a joint State-Defense decision paper
is a good one. Since most of the analytical work for such a paper has al-
ready been done in preparation for the PRC meeting, I recommend that
the paper be completed for your review and decision no later than Oc-
tober 8 in order to provide ample time for necessary consultations on
the Hill and preparation of our presentation to the Egyptians in early
November. I am concerned that we not delay very long on this issue, in
view of the pressures on Sadat to show concrete results from his new
association with us—pressures that are also related to the success of the
4 Attached but not printed is a September 26 memorandum from McIntyre to
Carter. McIntyre concluded that the assistance package for Egypt should be “carefully
structured to avoid the impression of entering into a formal five-year military supply re-
lationship which is likely to be unnecessarily costly and politically and diplomatically
awkward.” Stating that “we can structure a better package,” McIntyre recommended to
Carter that he direct the Departments of State and Defense to produce a decision paper
which considered the “budgetary impact on other programs (particularly Israel), alterna-
tive ways of structuring the program, and likely congressional and foreign reaction.”
Moreover, McIntyre urged Carter to delay a decision on the package “until you can see the
full budgetary implications in November and December.”
