438 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement (home) management of U.S. companies operating in these countries with a view of attempting to secure the issuance of appropriate instructions to the local management of such companies concerning the basic labor policies of each individual company vis a vis ORIT as well as local labor organizations. In addition, occasional visits by top management to countries operating would be helpful. Recommendation No. 6 Regional Plan 20—U.S. Business Objectives About four years ago, when I was Ambassador to Honduras, I made a recommendation that Embassies should talk with U.S. business executives about the concept of partnership relationships with local businessmen and I have followed that practice for a long time. I am glad to see that this concept has now become official policy. I am not sure that all of the Ambassadors, nor indeed many of the economic officers, have had the personal business experience which I have had in operating a partnership abroad so as to be convincing on this score. For possible use in amplifying the instructions to meet this difficulty I am appending a copy of my speech to the Hispanic American Society of Stanford University (Tab E)10 and particularly recommend the entire text of the Atlantic Monthly article by Presidential Assistant Clarence Randall quoted from in the speech. Recommendation No. 7 Regional Plan 21—Attitude towards U.S. Personnel Overseas It has long been my feeling that the U.S. Government now sends too many full-­time employees abroad to do jobs which could be better contracted for through private consulting firms or educational institutions. I feel, for instance, that too much of our technical assistance program is being handled by direct U.S. Government employees who, quite humanly, tend to try to freeze themselves in their jobs. While in Honduras and previously while in China as Foreign Economic Administrator for the Orient during World War II, I developed quite a lot of usefulness from private consulting firms instead of direct government employees. If desired I could write a whole paper on this subject and will do so upon request. Parenthetically, I have been directly associated with the problems of foreign aid since April of 1940. Recommendation No. 8 Cultural—General Recommendation I understand that the expression “cultural relations” means that peoples of various nations basically understand each other in the sense 10 Ambassador Willauer gave his speech on Oct 9, 1959; not printed here.
