1304 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement in order that sound approach can be adopted re Venezuela’s need for external assistance. It would be easy dismiss Venezuela as country too rich to need external assistance for economic and social development projects. Indeed Venezuela still enjoys high level foreign exchange income and government revenues relative other Latin-American countries. Moreover, if Venezuela were able utilize these resources effectively, without waste, for sound economic and social development projects, it is possible that Venezuela would in fact not need outside assistance. But U.S. must face reality that Venezuela not likely achieve stable, well administered, democratic government for some years to come. While rich in resources, Venezuela is young and inexperienced in democracy, short of capable public administrators, lacking in technicians, and as result, weak and ineffective in implementing government’s good intentions. Venezuela’s background in dictatorship governments over the years was characterized by rapidly increasing expenditures on expanding bureaucracy and on ill-­planned projects of questionable economic usefulness. Waste and corruption were widespread. To expect Venezuela to shake off heritage of dictatorships and evils of dictatorships and to establish responsible, effective, democratic government in one or two years would be expecting too much under very favorable conditions. It is unrealistic under conditions prevailing in Venezuela today. It may not even be possible during President Betancourt’s five year term of office. Coalition government has increased difficulties achieving goals in economic and social spheres but considered by President Betancourt essential for achieving political stability and maintaining democracy in Venezuela. Withdrawal URD from existing coalition, which now appears imminent, will increase Betancourt’s political problems and opposition parties. Ineffectiveness coalition government and effect unstable political situation on Venezuelan economy have been adverse and serious. They have undermined confidence, both business and public, which in turn has resulted in the withdrawal deposits from banks and flight of capital. President Betancourt faced up to this problem this week. On advice of his closest economic advisers, and apparently also, IMF, he proposed to devalue the bolivar. This engendered such overwhelming and unanimous opposition, not only among industry, commerce, banking and labor, but also from COPEI and URD, coalition partners with Betancourt’s AD Party, that he was forced instead to adopt exchange controls. Country has not yet recovered from shock and confusion. Budget for current fiscal year is out of balance by over 600 million
