September 18–December 16, 1978
299
Bank/Gaza, whatever their political sympathies. The President asked
why it could not be any Palestinians who were qualified to participate
even if they did not live in these areas. Dayan said this would create a
problem. In response to the President’s comment that Hussein could
choose any Palestinians living in Jordan, Dayan thought this would be
no problem; Hussein would not choose PLO Palestinians. He saw no
problem with the President’s meeting Palestinians from Jordan but was
not so sure about Egypt. In response to the President’s comment that he
assumed there were thousands of PLO members in the West Bank and
Gaza, Dayan said he was concerned primarily about a small group of
leaders of the PLO. The best thing would be to let Israel look at the list
of Palestinians involved.
The President said he would not want to show Israel the list. If he
went to Cairo, he would ask Hussein to bring a group of Palestinians to
meet with him.
Dayan said he saw no problem with this. Hussein might bring Pal-
estinians Israel had expelled but Israel could live with this. Israel’s con-
cern is about those Palestinians it must work with; they must be elected
representatives. Dayan concluded this discussion by saying it would be
a wrong move to focus now on West Bank/Gaza issues instead of con-
centrating over the next few weeks on the Israeli-Egyptian treaty. It
would only antagonize the Arabs. Let us work within the framework
agreement, Dayan said. The Palestinians will join when they see that
the train is moving.
Secretary Vance said we need to move fast but urged Dayan not to
close his mind to discussing West Bank/Gaza issues; this may be neces-
sary in order to expedite the treaty negotiations. (Dayan and Weizman
did not respond to this point.)
The President then raised the question of claims. Sadat had said in
his and Begin’s presence that he would have a claim for the oil that Is-
rael had extracted. The President said his own inclination was to try to
get both sides not to make any claims against the other. Negotiations
over claims could be a festering sore. If we could get Sadat to agree not
to press claims, the President hoped Israel would also agree.
Dayan said Israel has questions to raise about the oil fields. Israel’s
interest was in being able to purchase Gulf of Suez and Sinai oil; this
could be left to the oil companies, which were American on both sides,
perhaps with Israeli and Egyptian representatives participating. Dayan
said he agreed the best solution would be to have no claims.
In conclusion, the President said we would prefer the same ar-
rangements for briefing the press as had been adopted at Camp David.
Dayan and Weizman both agreed. Dayan noted, however, that this
would be harder to enforce in Washington than at Camp David, but if
there were any leaks, they would not come from him.
