536 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI by one week. So, in other words, instead of meeting from June 18–22 we could meet from June 11–15. Regardless of which week you would come, we would hope that President Gorbachev would arrive on either Tuesday, June 12th or Tuesday, June 19th. Then we could have meetings that day and then the next day, perhaps in the evening a State dinner and that would be on either June 13th or June 20th. President Bush would then like it if President Gorbachev could come up to his home in Maine at Kennebunkport, that would be on either June 15th or June 22nd. That would leave time for meetings with Congress or others on June 14th or June 21st. Then you would be able to leave from Pease AFB on either June 16th or the 23rd. I know that President Reagan would like President Gorbachev to visit in California and President Bush has no objection, provided that time does not detract from the program I have just outlined. In other words, President Bush would hope that any visit to California would not come at the expense of President Gorbachev’s time in either Washington or Kennebunkport. I know this is short notice and you will need time to confer with President Gorbachev on timing and on the scenario I have outlined for the visit to President Bush’s home. Shevardnadze: Thank you. We did consider the dates that Ambassador Matlock gave us very carefully. The problem with the original date is that it is not convenient because of the first Party Congress of the Russian Federal Republic. We’ve never had such a Congress before in the past. This republic only has had regional organizations, not a Congress. This is an important event for Gorbachev. And the other time was in fact too close to the Union Party Congress. Given that, I would hope that you would be willing to consider the following option and that is June 4th to June 8th. That is the first week in June, early June, and we would like you to consider it. After that slot we really have no other slots available. We do not want the Summit to come after the big Party Congress, and I am afraid that might be the only alternative. If the June 4th date is convenient—­and I am sure the program is agreeable to us though I would have to speak with President Gorbachev—­but in principle we are prepared, I know, to accept whatever you and the President want to suggest in terms of the organization of the visit here. We are not considering a visit to California. We have heard from President Reagan that he would like to come to visit the Soviet Union some time in the spring. At any rate, please consider our suggestion given the complexity of our situation and the big events that we are planning. This is really the only time that works for President Gorbachev. This is the time we are proposing. Baker: I will talk to President Bush. Presently, we have a state visit during those dates and that is also the time of the spring ministerial meeting of the NATO Council. But we will see if we can’t rearrange the
