1955 255 choices: to turn it down; or expressedly, or impliedly, agree to it under certain conditions. The question is what conditions we would estab­ lish. Of course the best tactic is to try to prevent it coming to a head any time in the near future, but to do this I will need substance with which to work. If we have a clearly defined goal under “no force”, we could, of course, probably work this vein for a considerable period, but our success in this would be considerably dependent on whether the Communists saw, or thought they saw, a pot of gold of the higher level meeting at the other end. The only other vein I see that I could work is the embargo, and that is entirely dependent on decisions taken back there. It is my understanding that there was some discussion of this subject and, as I urged the Secretary before I left, I think it of the highest importance, if any shift in our position is going to take place, that the decision be most closely held and given to me to trade with here. I forgot to mention in my last letter that Wang had invited the four of us to the gala opening of the Peking Opera here. He was very correct in calling to see whether I would be willing to accept the invi­ tation, to which I replied that, although I would be glad to see the opera, I could not accept his invitation to the opening and invitational night where he and other officials would be present and there would be inevitable publicity. He immediately accepted my position and sent us tickets for the following night with the promise that there would be no publicity over my presence. We went and he faithfully kept his agreement. Incidentally it is an excellent show and magnificent pro­ paganda in Europe for them just because there is no overt propaganda whatever in it. I am returning the courtesy by sending him tickets for the New York Philharmonic Orchestra concert here next week. I wanted you and a few others concerned to know that I was doing this and doing it every deliberately, with the thought this type of thing will help me carry out our objectives in the difficult days ahead. I am going to have little or nothing in the way of substance to give them, but feel that by maintaining a reasonably easy personal relationship to which he has been responsive, I can do much to avoid or postpone a break when the going gets tough. I hope all of it will also keep them guessing a little without committing us to anything. With reference my remarks on the telephone that Washington sto­ ries were saying we had finished item one, even USIA went way out on the limb on this. With our help the USIA man wrote a very careful story which some bright boy in Washington saw fit to rewrite. I recom­ mend you take a look at the September 12 radio bulletin which carries a September 11 story under a Geneva date line which says almost all the wrong things and is far different from the story the USIA man filed
