388
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
affairs are Slavicists who tend to ignore the GDR. It would be well, he
said, to encourage exchanges that would foster American expertise in
East German affairs. Larrabee agreed, and said it should be possible
to upgrade our activities in this area within the limits of PD–21. Milton
(ICA) added, however, that our presentations and exchanges programs
had grown satisfactorily without a cultural agreement. Since such an
agreement could later be used to limit our activities in the GDR, ICA
would prefer to avoid signing one, unless it were demonstrated that
we had reached the limits of growth in the absence of an agreement.
All agreed.
10. Responding to Goodby’s request for a discussion of GDR activi-
ties in Africa, Larrabee suggested that, while the GDR has interests of
its own in Africa, in the military-security sphere the GDR often appears
to be acting as a Soviet surrogate and that the way to moderate its
activities there is through the Soviet Union. Goodby said that the GDR
was in Africa not only as a Soviet surrogate and that its military activi-
ties, restricted so far to advisors, have not been great. The ORPA/EE
rep agreed that the surrogate role had been overplayed and reported
that only small numbers of GDR military personnel have been detected
in Africa. The ORPA/EE rep added that the GDR, which had long
pursued its own interests in Africa, is also trying to develop the conti-
nent as a market. Farlow (INR) said that what was significant was not
that the East Germans had been in Africa for a long time but that their
[interests] correlated with and reinforced Soviet interests. A division
of labor with the Soviets was evident, with GDR military aid down
and economic aid up in 1978. Suggesting possible GDR support for
terrorists, he said that we should monitor East German activities
throughout the Third World, urging moderation when necessary. All
agreed that this “monitor/moderate” formula was preferable to a neu-
tral dialogue that could be interpreted as acceptance or even approval
of an East German presence in Africa or elsewhere in the Third World.
Vance
