121.5760h/1
[Document 172]
The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to
the Secretary of State
BELGRADE, July 2, 1925.
[Received July 22.]
No. 2733
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt on May 7th last of your Instruction No.
563, File No. [121.5760h/–], dated April 21st last,60 informing me that Mr. James F.
O’Neill, had been attached to this Legation, as well as to certain other Missions, as
Customs Attaché and that Messrs. George R. Coxe, John P. Griebel and Lucien Picard
had also similarly been attached, the first two as Assistant Customs Attachés and the
last as Customs Clerk. According to your directions, I immediately addressed an
official communication to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, advising him of these
appointments and conveying to him the information regarding them which is contained
in your Instruction. I also took advantage of a conversation soon thereafter with the
Foreign Minister, Dr. Nintchitch, to draw his attention to my communication and to
explain to him the duties of these Attachés. Dr. Nintchitch informed me that the matter
would have his full attention.
Having had no reply to my communication, I availed of a recent conversation with Dr.
Nintchitch again to invite his attention to this subject and he replied that he had not
failed to give his consideration to my communication but that he had heard that a
number of Governments had signified objection to the recognition of representatives of
the American Customs as Customs Attachés and that accordingly his Government had
decided to await until at least one or more of these Governments had decided to
recognize these Attachés before finally deciding whether or not to recognize them
itself. He then asked me for certain further explanations regarding their duties which I
was able to furnish him from the information in your Instruction and in your Circular
Instruction of April 2nd 1925. I then stated that I hoped that the reason for their desired
recognition was clear to him and also the benefits which these Attachés would render to
commercial exchanges between the United States and Yugoslavia. Dr. Nintchitch
replied that these reasons were clear to him but that in view of the objections which he
had heard had been raised by other Governments, he considered that his Government
should not be the first to give recognition.
