340 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI ities; and (d) on-site seismic monitoring. Opportunities for detection of a collateral clandestine test or weapons effects experiments would depend on the details of the on-site observation and monitoring that was permitted, the relative yields of the PNE and the clandestine weapons test, and national technical means. Four alternative, supplementary procedures are considered below: (1) Registration and Measurement of Explosive Characteristics This procedure consists of (a) registration of the characteristics of a limited set of explosives; (b) firing of the explosives by observers; (c) on-site electronic monitoring; and (d) collection of post-shot radiochemical samples. For this system of constraints, the parties would have to make available to each other the electronic signatures and radiochemical samples from the explosives they propose to use. Advantages: —May be easier to negotiate than other options considered; it permits host to use his own explosives. —Least complicated of options. —May be made multilateral. Disadvantages: —Stockpile reliability testing could be accomplished by preregistering stockpile weapon signatures. —Radiochemical and electronic signatures may not suffice to identify adequately the character of the registered explosive. —Radiochemical samples could be difficult and costly to obtain from deep contained explosions. —Unforeseen circumstances may require new PNE explosive designs which could not be accommodated. (2) Warehousing This procedure involves international warehousing, whereby a stockpile of PNE devices provided by the US and Soviets adequate for several years of PNE applications would be established under international surveillance and used as needed for PNE applications. Advantages: —Reduces opportunities for checking weapon stockpile reliability. —May be as negotiable as option (1). —May be made multilateral. Disadvantages: —Requires large initial stockpile with attendant security problems and cost. —Poses problems related to how the explosives in the stockpile could be maintained and how to replenish the stockpile without per-
