1418 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement entrance of American correspondents into his country many of whom had previously been in receipt of invitations from the authorities of his country, as an undisguised attempt to interfere in his internal affairs. If it is the decision of his authorities to reverse their previous position and exclude American correspondents, that was of course a matter of his own Government’s choice. As far as I was aware neither he nor his Government had ever previously raised the question of reciprocity nor has any journalist from his country ever applied for entry into the US. If any journalist from his country desired to enter the US he is entirely free to make application at any Foreign Service Post for a visa and it would be considered on its merits just the same as any other visa appli­ cation. I was not in a position to enter into any agreement or under­ standing with him any more than I was with any Government, that a full and equal number of correspondents be admitted to US or that any particular individual would be granted admittance to US. Neither did we make any such demand from his side. It was entirely up to his own Government’s dicision as to whether he wished to admit any individ­ ual or any number of individuals. 9. Wang replied it is consistent belief of his side that exchange of vis­ its is an important step toward gradually improving relations between two countries. The simple reason is that such mutual exchange of visits corresponds with the interests of both peoples and countries. Through such exchanges mutual understanding and trust can be expected to increase. It was in this spirit that his Premier made his statement at Bandung conference of 1955 that traditional friendship existed between Chinese and American peoples, and his Government has consistently worked in direction of improved relations between China and America. This attitude of his Government could be testified to by all proposals made during our talks of past two years. However, they found that inso­ far as matter was concerned, there are two entirely different attitudes and practices. In handling matters within realm of relations between our two countries, his Government has always acted in accordance with created international practice while he has always acted in contrary sense. In handling matters of Sino-American relations his Government has always worked to remove obstacles to intercourse and exchanges whereas US is consistently engaging in obstacles. 10. Wang continued, in their handling of Sino-American relation­ ship they have always observed principle of equality and reciprocity, that is, the principle of mutual benefit whereas the US has always ­violated such a principle. He will just cite an instance. As I was probably aware, sometime during the Chinese Opera Company’s tour of Europe, it had received an invitation to stage performances in the US. His authorities, in observance of principle of reciprocity immediately followed by an invitation to an American company to give performances in China. As a
