528 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement electric power are dependent upon petroleum. The capabilities of the Dominican military establishment would, of course, also be greatly reduced by an effective embargo. With respect to trucks and spare parts, approximately one-­half of Dominican imports of trucks in 1959 came from the United States and the rest from Europe, while the United States percentage of the supply of spare parts was probably higher. A complete embargo on such shipments from OAS member states would doubtlessly have an effect on Dominican internal transport, although that country would presumably continue to increase its purchases from European sources. While the United States is prepared to extend the embargo in the manner suggested, it is, of course, for the Special Committee to decide whether this should be done, having in mind the remarks of some of the delegations at the San José Meeting concerning injury to the Dominican people. In the event a recommendation to that effect is made by this Committee, my Government would be prepared to support such a finding by the Council. While my Government understands that any such finding on the part of the Council would be recommendatory rather than obligatory in nature with respect to the individual member states, it would undertake in good faith to implement it, with the understanding that the other member states would do likewise. This should, of course, include measures by the other states to prevent transshipment to the Dominican Republic through their respective territories of these articles originating in any member state, in order to insure to the extent possible the effectiveness of these sanctions. It is important in my Government’s view to preserve the collective nature of any further decisions and actions taken by member states in this regard, following upon the action already jointly taken by them at the Sixth Meeting of Foreign Ministers. The United States is continuing its study of the feasibility of applying the suspension in trade to other commodities and expects to present its further views when these studies are completed.
