Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 343 intention not to conduct from land or sea any flight of less than fifteen minutes in duration, from time of launch to time of impact, of any SLBM of a type that has demonstrated a range of more than 500 km. Burt continued that such declarations would help to restrict the ability to certify, through testing, future STOF SLBMs. At the same time, it would not affect development programs of missile systems other than STOF SLBMs; it would not significantly affect the testing practices used by the two sides for existing SLBMs; it would not affect the reliability of existing U.S. or Soviet SLBMs; and it would not restrict the operational capabilities or practices of existing SLBMs. The U.S. side recognized that seeking to preclude the acquisition of a STOF capability through such a testing constraint is subject to circumvention. In view of this potential circumvention problem, the best approach was to record these declarations in a manner that would politically constrain both sides, but would not be legally binding. He then handed over a text of the U.S. STOF declaration.4 Nazarkin asked how, where, and when the U.S. side visualized making the STOF declarations. Burt responded that, if the two sides could reach agreement this week, the Ministers could make parallel declarations. If not, discussions would be continued in Geneva and a decision could later be taken about where and when. Nazarkin said that originally the Soviet side wanted to focus on depressed trajectories. It came to the conclusion that it would be preferable to adopt a broader approach, one even broader than the U.S. approach. Specifically, it was important to focus on warning time. The surprise element of attack could result from STOF, but could also result from stealth characteristics. In addition to banning tests of depressed trajectory SLBMs, it would be necessary to ban arms that have the ability to reach their targets secretly, such as SLCMs, ALCMs, and heavy bombers with stealth characteristics; to ban flights of heavy bombers and navigation of aircraft carriers in zones from which it would be possible to reach the continental territory of the other side by means of air-­ to-­surface missiles and carrier-­based aircraft; and to ban the navigation of surface vessels and submarines carrying long-­range cruise missiles in zones from which it would be possible to reach the continental territory of the other side. Burt said the U.S. had tried to address a specific concern in a practical way, whereas the Soviet side seemed to be raising a variety of other issues that only complicated the matter and moved us away from a 4 Not found.
