570
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Panel Discussions: The GATT panels found the DISC to be an export
subsidy and a violation of present obligations. The panels also found
against the European tax practices. In the latter cases, however, the
panels may have gone further than was necessary and wrote opinions
directly calling into question a keystone of European tax systems (the
“principle of territoriality”, i.e., European tax systems do not purport to
tax income generated abroad).
Congress and DISC: Meanwhile Congress in the tax legislation of
1977–78, expressly declined to repeal DISC, despite Administration
recommendations.
Problem: In the light of these developments, how does one nego-
tiate a code on subsidies and countervailing duties, especially one
which prohibits export subsidies and asks developing countries to ac-
cept an obligation to eliminate their export subsidies? Keep in mind
that the DISC has been found to be a violation of the present rules. Keep
in mind also that Congress is not about to repeal the DISC under the
present circumstances. Predictably, our trading partners made the re-
peal of DISC a pre-condition for the negotiation of a code on subsidies
and countervailing duties.
Tactical Solution: A year ago, we told our negotiating counterparts
that we would repeal DISC when they agreed to adopt the panel re-
ports on the European tax practices in toto, (something we knew they
could not agree to) thereby creating a deadlock on the issue. A year
passed, during which we negotiated a subsidies code containing,
among other things, a flat ban on export subsidies on industrial
products. Export subsidies are identified in the code both by means of a
general definition, and by an “illustrative list”. Two months ago, we
told our negotiating counterparts, ‘Wouldn’t it be a pity if our work of
the past year were to be lost because of our inability to resolve this
DISC/direct tax practice issue? What we need is some language in the
illustrative list saying, in effect, signatories are concerned about the re-
lation between direct tax practices and trade and agree that there
should be a post-MTN conference on direct tax practices with a view to
supplementing this illustrative list.’ This has resulted in two alternative
formulations in the attachment.3 Both versions: (1) freeze the present
situation and put the DISC issue in abeyance; (2) set the stage for an in-
ternational tax conference that Conable and others have sought for so
long, and (3) sets the precedent of amending and supplementing the
subsidies code.
DISC Lobby: The DISC lobby is angry because:
3 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “Annex A—Illustrative List
of Export Subsidies.”
