598  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Capabilities for Major Land Campaigns
179. Soviet ground forces are capable of conducting large-­scale 
operations on several fronts into peripheral areas, separately or con­
currently. These operations could be supported by the large available 
air forces, but the high priority assigned to air defense would limit the 
availability of fighter aircraft for such support operations in the initial 
phase of a general war. Surface naval vessels, naval aircraft and subma­
rines would be available for operations in Bloc coastal areas in support 
of ground campaigns. The logistic environment is an important lim­
itation on these capabilities, and the capacities of military transporta­
tion systems have been considered in the following estimates of Soviet 
offensive capabilities against selected land areas. These estimates do 
not take into account the effects of an initial nuclear exchange, of direct 
Western opposition to advancing Soviet forces, or of Western interdic­
tion of essential logistic lines. Moreover, these are not estimates of the 
numbers of divisions the USSR would consider it tactically feasible or 
necessary to employ in the areas discussed.
180. Against Western Europe and Scandinavia. Without prior build-­up, 
Soviet forces in East Germany and Poland could initiate an offensive 
campaign into Western Europe with 22 line divisions, half tank and 
half motorized, supported by about 1,400 tactical aircraft. To augment 
the strength of the initial attacks, a maximum simultaneous airlift of 
two lightly-­equipped airborne divisions of 7,500 men each could be 
mounted by Aviation of Airborne Troops based in Western USSR. If 
approximately one-­half of the civil transport aircraft normally in the 
area also participated in the airlift, the equivalent of an additional 2–3 
divisions could be lifted in a one-­day operation. However, we doubt 
that the Soviets would risk loss of strategic surprise by assembling such 
a large number of civil aircraft prior to an initial attack. In addition to 
airborne reinforcements, a maximum of four divisions could be lifted in 
merchant ships across the Baltic Sea. Air reinforcement could be drawn 
from the nearly 2,000 aircraft of Tactical Aviation units in Western 
USSR, and ground reinforcements from the 56 divisions in Western 
USSR could be brought up rapidly. Lines of communication through 
the northern satellites are estimated to be capable of supporting a theo­
retical logistic maximum of about 160 divisions.
181. Soviet campaigns to seize Norway and Sweden could be 
launched from northwestern USSR through Finland and from west cen­
tral Europe through Denmark. Forces immediately available in north­
western USSR consist of nine line divisions and about 2,600 tactical and 
naval aircraft. Operations against Norway would be limited logistically 
in the north to four divisions over Finnish land routes plus one water-­
borne division, and in the south to a maximum of five divisions water-­
lifted from Denmark. If Sweden were also attacked, as many as six
