814 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 Attachment Washington, October 27, 1953. SUBJECT Effects of Proposed Increase of Military Aid to Iran 1. It is the view of this Division that United States military assistance to Iran on a scale designed to build the Iranian Armed Forces into an effective defense force would have decisive influence in consolidating Iran’s position on the side of the free nations. The Zahedi Government appears fairly well entrenched at this time, but already it is beginning to be faced with problems similar to those which undermined the Razmara regime three years ago and which led to the advent to power of Mossadeq and the extreme nationalists and to the concomitant upsurge of Tudeh influence. 2. We believe that an expanded military aid program would be likely to have the following effects: a. Immediately and on a long-term basis increase the prestige and influence of the Shah, who we consider to be the most effective instrument for maintaining and strengthening Iran’s orientation toward the West. The principal source of the Shah’s power is the Army. We believe, therefore, that any strengthening of the Army will directly contribute to the strengthening of Iran’s Western orientation. b. Immediately strengthen the prestige of the Zahedi Government, thus allowing it more opportunity to concentrate on basic social reforms and economic programs. Present leaders in the government are now prepared to commit themselves to a pro-Western alignment and to undertake a positive program of social reform and economic development. However, because of the seriousness of the problems confronting them and of their lack of experience, they are having great difficulty in formulating and initiating a positive course of action. It is our view that a military aid program would act as a catalyst and induce a program of development in Iran far transcending the military sphere. c. Have a profound psychological effect on the nation as a whole by demonstrating United States confidence in Iran’s ability to play an active role, similar to that of Turkey, in military defense against Soviet imperialism. It would so bolster the morale of the people, the government and the army that under its impact Iran might well develop into an asset, rather than remain a liability, in the cold war. 3. The manner in which a military assistance program is negotiated with Iran will have a very important effect on its value to the United States. We are convinced that for the United States to obtain full benefit
