326 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 2. The potential consequences of major Soviet/Cuban success in Ethiopia;3 3. Our failure to exploit politically our relatively favored position in the U.S.-Soviet-Chinese triangle.4 The cumulative effect of these trends could be very serious internationally and then domestically. By the fall we could be under attack for having presided over a grave deterioration in the U.S. global position. In that setting, SALT will not have a chance, and our ability to deal with other issues will be severely reduced. The linchpin of our policy towards the Soviet Union has been a strong Western Europe, closely tied to the United States; moreover, in recent years we have subtly and cautiously exploited Soviet fears of China to encourage Soviet restraint. Given present trends, our first asset—Western Europe—may be partially undermined from within. At the same time, we have failed almost entirely to take advantage of the opportunity inherent in the Sino-Soviet hostility, while concentrating heavily on enlarging the scope of U.S.-Soviet negotiations. Political trends in Western Europe are ominous. The Italians have in effect cut a deal with the Communist party that will bring them into the Parliamentary coalition. The French left coalition of the Socialist and Communist is the favorite to win the March elections.5 German politics are increasingly manifesting neutralism and anti-U.S. symptoms, while Schmidt’s economic policy is not helpful to the West’s overall political and economic strength.6 Our initiative for NATO force improvements—though desirable—increasingly looks like we are using military measures to prop up a politically weakening alliance. In sum, by the end of March we could see major Communist advances in Europe, and then an important backlash at home with the Administration being criticized for doing too little too late. At the same time, demonstrable Soviet success in the African Horn is likely to have a very direct psychological and political impact on Egypt, Sudan, Saudi Arabia and Iran.7 It will simply demonstrate to all concerned that the Soviet Union has the will and the capacity to assert itself. This will encourage Libya and Algeria to act more aggressively; it will also make more likely increased Cuban involvement in the Rhode- 3 The President wrote “agree” in the right-hand margin next to this point. 4 The President wrote “Later—(post-Panama)” in the right-hand margin next to this point. 5 The President underlined the word “favorite” and placed a question mark in the right-hand margin next to this sentence. 6 The President underlined the phrase “anti-U.S.” and wrote “True” in the right-hand margin next to this sentence. 7 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote: “Iran, SA, Egypt should stand firm re crossing of Somali border.”
