Guatemala 655 the belief that the PR is the only effective representative of the ideals of the Revolution of 1944. 16. In the midst of growing public concern regarding the conservative composition of Ydígoras’ government, the PR is vigorously championing the still widely popular social and economic program of the Revolution of 1944. It is rapidly gaining new adherents and is likely to become the focus of opposition to the Ydígoras regime. The party is still a heterogeneous agglomeration, however. It needs time to organize and consolidate its strength. Fearing suppression by Ydígoras, its leaders, many of whom were prominent in the Arévalo administration, are pursuing a policy of moderation in order not to provoke him while they prepare for the 1959 congressional election. The PR publicly repudiates association with communism, but has not yet acted effectively to check Communist infiltration of the party’s lower echelons. 17. The clandestine Communist Party (PGT) probably has no more than 400 members and 2,000 sympathizers, but since the assassination of Castillo it has been working to reestablish its influence at the grass roots. Although many Guatemalans are now more aware of the Communist danger than previously, there is still widespread apathy with regard to communism. While there has been some reaction against excesses practiced in the name of anti-­communism, there has been no marked increase in sympathy for Communists. The PGT’s present capabilities are limited. Its most prominent leaders are still in exile. There are no known Communists or sympathizers among the leaders of legal political parties or in influential positions in the administration or the armed forces. The party’s efforts will be directed primarily toward further infiltration of the PR and toward regaining its former control of organized labor. The Communists are not likely to achieve control of the PR within the period of this estimate, but may gain control of some of that party’s more extreme elements, particularly if many more of the pro-Arbenz exiles are permitted to return to Guatemala. They have a better prospect in the field of organized labor, because of their experienced labor leaders and organizers, and because of latent rank-­and-­file support in unions which they formerly led, but are not likely to regain their former control of the labor movement. 18. The PR will offer stiff competition to the Communists in the labor field. The party is now making a determined bid to win over key unions such as those of the railroad workers and United Fruit Company employees. In this situation, the labor policy followed by Ydígoras will have an important bearing on the future strength and character of the leftist opposition and consequently on the stability of his regime. He will be confronted by wage demands, particularly from unorganized workers, who have so far gained little from the increase in economic activity. Ydígoras cannot meet the demands of the unorganized
