March–August 1953
693
He maintained American officials either in Washington or in Tehran
had directly or indirectly deliberately leaked information to pro-British
Iranian press re this exchange and against his will US had insisted on
publishing notes. He said he had actually never consented to their pub-
lication and was astonished receive letter from Embassy expressing ap-
preciation his willingness that exchange be published. When he saw US
Government was determined to publish, he had finally insisted pre-
vious messages exchanged last January between him and President-
elect be also published. I told him it had been my understanding leak
had occurred in his office and in view distorted public version of Presi-
dent’s letter unfavorable to US, US Government had thereupon insisted
exchange be published. He denied heatedly Iranians had been guilty of
leaks. No Iranian except himself and Saleh, US Embassy Iranian as-
sistant and interpretor, had been aware of existence these letters. He
had kept them among his own private papers, not in office files. I inti-
mated I not sure his private papers were kept in manner which would
prevent clever agents having access to them. I also pointed out there
were certain modern hearing devices which might result in knowledge
this kind falling into possession of agents parties hostile both to Iran
and US. He continued insist certain Americans had deliberately leaked
in order that public knowledge of contents of President’s letter might
weaken his government. I told him that I knew that exchange had been
handled in US and Tehran in most discreet manner by trusted officials
and I sure no US leak.
6. Mosadeq then outlined events which led to dissolution Majlis.
His narrative in general in line with information already furnished De-
partment by Embassy. He maintained however that 30 members Majlis
had been bought outright by British. Only 40 votes had not been
bought. Ten of these 40 votes could easily have been purchased for
100,000 tomans and when he learned that negotiations were in progress
to complete such purchasing operation he decided that British pur-
chased Majlis was unworthy of Iranian people and should be elimi-
nated. He asked me if I had any comments to make regarding his disso-
lution Majlis.
7. I reminded him he inviting me comment on Iran internal affairs.
I realized it not usual for comments of this kind to be offered by foreign
diplomat. Nevertheless he would recall that during some of our past
conversations I had overcome my scruples in this respect. I said only
comment which I wished to offer at this point was that it seemed to me
unfortunate for Iran and no compliment Iranian people that gov-
ernment of Iran apparently could not be based on a Parliament. Iran
was in most dangerous international position and I thought it would be
more secure if all organs provided for in Iranian constitution could be
functioning with at least certain degree of harmony.
