322 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX that diversion of resources to nuclear engineering will eventually adversely affect the Czechoslovak consumer. [classification not declassified] These events suggest that the leadership in Prague has adopted a more assertive tone in its economic dealings with Moscow. They also underscore the problems the leadership will face in attempting to maintain a standard of living high enough to preserve the passive mood of the population. Nonetheless, the recent developments appear to pose no immediate threat to Husak. Although it will be increasingly difficult for the regime to continue to meet the rising expectations of consumers—a point underscored by recent steep increases in the price of gasoline and certain other goods—living standards are unlikely to worsen so abruptly as to provoke a sharp change in popular attitudes, so long as other factors influencing public opinion remain constant. Moreover, any sign of increased popular discontent would strengthen Prague’s argument for economic concessions from Moscow. Husak could also take advantage of Czechoslovakia’s high credit rating to alleviate the situation through hard currency loans, a course he has so far avoided.2 [classification not declassified] Moscow is unlikely to halt its support of Husak in the near future. Two days after Strougal’s outspoken address at the CEMA meeting, a Soviet delegation visiting Prague praised Husak as “the acknowledged and esteemed leader of the Czechoslovak Communists.” Even if Brezhnev were succeeded by a leadership ideologically more akin to the Czechoslovak hardliners, the new Soviet rulers would hardly wish to compound the uncertainties of their own transition by summarily ousting the leader of one of their most stable East European allies. The succession period in Moscow should tend to strengthen Husak’s tenure, at least in the near term. [classification not declassified] On the other hand, divisions within the Czechoslovak leadership are likely to sharpen further if, as seems probable, the moderates are behind the new firmness toward Moscow. To forestall conservative criticism and minimize tensions with the Soviet leadership, Prague’s moderates are likely to continue espousing Soviet positions on noneconomic matters. This tendency could retard the improvement of relations with the West. [classification not declassified] Contenders for the Succession Husak’s eventual successor will almost surely come from the current leadership. Factors influencing the selection will include to various 2 Czechoslovakia has the lowest ratio of debt service to merchandise exports to non-Communist countries of any of the East European countries. In 1978, Czechoslovakia’s debt service ratio was an estimated 20 percent, compared with 77 percent for Poland, roughly 40 percent for East Germany, and about 30 percent for Hungary. [Footnote is in the original.]
