Chinese Delegation was not in position to discuss the question at that time
and Count de Martel also requested a postponement Further discussion took
place with reference to the subject, or subjects, which would be first
considered by the Committee and after finally agreeing that Articles I, II, III
and IV (relating to Tariff Autonomy and Likin) of the American [British]
proposal would be discussed, Dr. Wang stated that the Chinese Delegation
wished to reiterate the position which it had taken on the question of the
abolition of likin, to wit, that China voluntarily, but resolutely, declared her
firm purpose to abolish likin and considered it to be an internal measure, for
which reason a solemn declaration on the part of the Chinese Government
to abolish likin would be sufficient. Colonel Peel remarked that he did not
see why the discussion of Tariff Autonomy and Likin as related subjects
should prejudice those questions and that he could not understand why such
discussion should prevent them from also discussing the question of the
2½% surtax. Mr. Strawn referred to Article II of the Washington Treaty95
and read: “Immediate steps shall be taken through a special conference to
prepare the way for the speedy abolition of likin and for the fulfillment of
other conditions laid down in Article VIII” (Treaty of 1902.96 ) Mr. Strawn
remarked that he conceived it to be a part of the duty of the American
Delegation to collaborate with the Chinese Delegation to find a way which
would be satisfactory to all Powers, especially to China, for the abolition of
likin, a duty which he did not assume that the Chinese Delegation, on its
sole responsibility, would undertake to do without assistance from the other
Powers. Dr. Wang said that he thought that the position of the Chinese
Delegation differed from that of the American Delegation, and Mr. Strawn
inquired of Dr. Wang whether he considered that the Chinese proposal
complied with Article II of the Washington Treaty and whether it was the
position of the Chinese Government that none of the other Powers would
have anything to say in the Conference concerning the manner in which
China should abolish likin and that China would not want any assistance
from the other Powers. The only response of Dr. Wang was that the Chinese
Delegation had presented to the Committee the measures whereby likin
could be abolished. Mr. Strawn said that his understanding was that the
purpose of the Conference was to discuss whether the Delegations were in
accord with China’s proposal and whether it was sound and effective. He
said that some doubt might arise in the minds of the Delegates whether
China would be able to abolish likin in the manner proposed by the Chinese
