1978 449 Harold’s memo does not explicitly mention an argument for the Triad frequently made, i.e., that ICBMs protect the bombers by making it very difficult for the Soviets to attack both. Does modernization of ICBMs provide any such benefit to bomber survivability or does retention of some Minuteman in silos provide this benefit? The issue of hedging against both evolving and unforeseen Soviet threats raises an interesting question. Is the margin of advantage of a Triad over a Dyad in hedging against unforeseen threats that meaningful if the ICBM modernization schemes required to maintain a Triad must be maintained against evolutionary expansions of threats we can already see? The argument that abandoning the ICBM field to the Soviets could have a disastrous effect on perceptions needs more development. Are we being run unilaterally out of an otherwise attractive force posture, or are we simply the first to recognize and respond to a problem of technological obsolescence that the Soviets will eventually have to face? Finally, there are several larger issues that this discussion of Triads versus Dyads does not come to grips with. Specifically, as we enter the relatively dangerous early 80’s, we should have a clear view of what we need in terms of specific strategic capabilities, that may be realized in a variety of different forms, and how the Soviets may try to respond to our modernization efforts. We should ask which force mix poses the greatest problem over the course of a protracted competition to the Soviet force planner concentrating on damage-­limiting objectives: —Augmented sea and air mobile forces with no ICBMs? —Augmented sea and air mobile forces with some silo-­based ICBMs? —Augmented sea and air mobile forces with improved and rebased ICBMs? A better understanding of these larger issues may strongly influence our answers to the current key question—­are the strategic capabilities we add or retain by modernizing and rebasing ICBMs really unique and necessary?
