374 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II however, where the post itself prefers not to pass over the report, the Department can provide a copy to the host government’s Embassy here in Washington, although there is risk that the host government may not receive the report before it is made public. There may also be isolated cases where the post believes that no advance copy of the report should be furnished to the host government. 4. Action requested: Each Embassy is requested to provide a copy of the final approved text to the host government of that country’s human rights report. Posts which believe that the report on their host country should be handed over in Washington rather than abroad, or not at all, should so inform the Department immediately. 5. Embassies in countries on which no reports have been prepared need take no action. Vance 107. Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 24, 1978 SUBJECT Human Rights Foundation and Other Human Rights Issues Since our meeting with the Vice President on the Human Rights Foundation2 I have discussed the idea with Bill Korey, John Richardson,3 Leo Cherne, Bob DeVecchi (International Rescue Committee), Theron Van Scotter (American Council of Voluntary Agencies for Foreign Service), Leonard Marks and, as you know, with Huntington, 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues— Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: Policy Initiatives: 1/77–10/78. Confidential. Sent for action. Inderfurth initialed the memorandum. An unknown hand wrote “fwd 1/24 1pm” at the top of the page. 2 No record of the meeting with Mondale has been found. For his comments on a Human Rights Foundation, see Document 97. 3 According to the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s January 9 evening report, Tuchman met with Richardson that day: “Also had a long and very useful meeting with John Richardson of Freedom House focusing on the Human Rights Foundation which he thinks is not only a good idea, but terribly badly needed.” Brzezinski wrote in the margin next to the paragraph: “Good. Talk also to SPH [Samuel Huntington].” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 1–3/78)
