372
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
104.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, October 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Israeli Position on Oil Negotiations
PARTICIPANTS
David Korn, Director, NEA/IAI
David E. Zweifel, NEA/EGY
John Craig, NEA/RA
Hanon Bar-On, Israeli Minister
Joseph Vardi, Director General, Ministry of Energy and Infrastructure
Elisha Ruih, V.P., Operations, Israeli National Oil Co., Ltd.
Ely Rubenstein, Secretary to Foreign Minister Dayan
Naftali Lavie, Press Spokesman, Israeli Foreign Ministry
Eitan Raff, Economic Counselor, Israeli Embassy
We called on members of the Israeli delegation at the Madison
Hotel to learn about the Israeli position on the oil issue and what may
have transpired during the course of October 23 Israeli-Egyptian dis-
cussions2 on this item.
Bar-On recapitulated the Egyptian position as having been as fol-
lows. There should be early Israeli withdrawal from the area, a transfer
of operating fields in good order, and cessation of exploration activity
upon signature of the agreement. Any subsequent cooperation with the
GOE (e.g. concessions in free areas) would be on the basis of interna-
tional bidding practices.
The same would apply to Israeli purchase of Egyptian petroleum
at competitive prices. The Egyptians did recognize that, by reason of
proximity, Israel would have a competitive advantage as a logical
market for Egyptian crude.
He then summed up the GOI position as follows. There is no ques-
tion about Egyptian sovereignty in the area. The Israelis are prepared
to lay aside previous legal argumentation during the current negotia-
tions. During the Egyptian-Israeli meeting on October 23, claims were
not discussed. Basic premises underlying the Israeli position are that
any economic cooperation is positive and “peace building” should be
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-
fairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 6, Memcons 1 of 2. Confidential; Exdis.
Drafted by David E. Zweifel (NEA/EGY) on October 25. Copies were sent to Atherton,
Sterner, Draper, David Small (L/NEA), Donald F. Hart (EB), Korn, Lewis, Eilts, and
Zweifel.
2 No other record of these discussions has been found.
