Bulgaria 281 strong number two and a potential successor. The younger men in the leadership seem able, relatively flexible, often well qualified technically (especially the economists), and of course quite loyal to Zhivkov. There may be some personnel changes at the April Party Congress, but I would be surprised to see any major change in policy or direction. I think Zhivkov has shaped a system he can control—and can control the country with—until he dies or is incapacitated. So far I see no thought given to a succession. 7. Third, how well will the economy function in the next five years? 8. Not badly, as far as overall growth is concerned, and probably better comparatively than most of the countries of Eastern Europe. This is a guess by a non-economist, but the leaders have several things going for them: (a) Starting from such a low base in 1944, the Communist regime has been able to keep standards of living gradually rising to the general (repeat general) satisfaction. This should continue, although there are pockets of dissatisfaction. (b) Bulgarians are by and large an accepting people, not rebellious, and in their Balkan way they manage to get by all right even if supplies are limited and quality is low: they grumble, but they carry on. (c) The planners are using their heads. The Bulgarian new economic mechanism, somewhat like its Hungarian namesake, has aspects of rationality which may take some of the edge off the “Soviet model” insofar as Bulgaria is concerned. (d) Agriculture seems to be working tolerably well, although distribution is lousy. (e) There is enough corruption around—hard currency stores, winking at illegal currency exchanges, bribes, semi-accepted ways of beating the system—that almost everyone is coopted into the system by being engaged in beating it. (f) By toning down their desires for all-round industrialization, and accepting specialization within CEMA, the Bulgarians strike me as showing signs (in contrast to, say, Romania) of living within their means. Now all of the above could go sour, and I am not saying there will not be difficulties. In fact the rising price of oil, and the need for the USSR to continue to favor Bulgaria in providing raw materials, is a fruitful field for disappointment and possible friction with Russia. But in contrast to Czechoslovakia and Poland, where any growth rate at all seems to be a pretty big deal nowadays, the Bulgarians—a small country, only very recently industrialized—has some hope of meeting its goals without undue strain. 9. Fourth, how secure is the Party’s position? Are there any alternative centers of power? 10. With Moscow’s continued support, and ruling out unexpected disaster such as a real economic failure, I believe Party control is quite firm. I do not believe the Communist regime has very deep roots into the populace, however; many if not most Bulgarians accept their rulers precisely to the extent that they have a personal stake in the system. It
