140  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The Acting Director of the U.S. Information Agency, Mr. Abbott 
Washburn, spoke in support of undertaking the construction of at 
least a few prototype shelters because, he warned, without such shel­
ters it would be impossible to launch an effective program of public 
education. General Cutler thought well of this suggestion, and asked 
Governor Hoegh certain questions about this matter.
Mr. Patterson said that he, on the other hand, was disturbed about 
the program for public education if this were to be undertaken prior 
to the completion and evaluation of the recommended research pro­
grams. He felt that the Government must be in a position to answer 
clearly the public’s questions. Governor Hoegh said that he believed 
that we were already in a position to answer the public’s questions, as 
a result of the knowledge and information which had been acquired 
by FCDA and AEC.
Mr. Patterson then expressed himself as being in favor of a match­
ing program for building shelter in public buildings, rather than a pro­
gram in which all the costs of shelter construction were borne by the 
Federal Government. In reply to this argument, Governor Hoegh again 
stressed the value of the example set by the Federal Government.
The President said that this was one of the hardest problems in the 
world on which to make a wise decision. General Cutler therefore sug­
gested leaving the matter where it was. He would undertake to write 
a Record of Action which he would discuss with the President so that 
the President could make a decision after thinking the matter over at 
greater length.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted and discussed the report on the subject (NSC 5807) pre­
pared by the Interdepartmental Committee established for the purpose 
by NSC Action No. 1842–­e; in the light of (1) the comments and rec­
ommendations of the NSC Planning Board on NSC 5807, transmitted 
by the reference memorandum of March 24, 1958, and (2) the views 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on NSC 5807 (transmitted by the reference 
memorandum of March 26, 1958) and on the above-­mentioned Plan­
ning Board comments and recommendations (as summarized orally at 
the meeting).
b. Agreed that the following measures should be undertaken to carry 
out the concept of fallout shelter for protection of the civil population 
against radiation hazard, in accordance with NSC Action No. 1842–­d:
(1) A research and development program along the lines of:
(a) The recommendations in paragraph 1–­a of NSC 5807; and
(b) The recommendations by the NSC Planning Board in para­
graph 1, page 1, and subparagraphs 2–­a and –­b, page 3, of the enclosure 
to the reference memorandum of March 24, 1958.
(2) A limited program of prototype construction of relatively 
small-­capacity fallout shelters, differing in design and type (includ­
ing multiple-­use) and adapted to differing conditions such as climate;
