Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  395
59.	
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and 
Disarmament Agency (Lehman) to Secretary of State Baker1
Washington, November 29, 1989
SUBJECT
Malta and Arms Control
The President has reinforced his view that Malta2 is not meant to 
be an arms control summit and has sought to control the agenda and 
keep down expectations. He has said he is taking no specific proposals 
and is seeking no agreements. At the same time, he correctly acknowl-
edges that he wishes to discuss a range of issues including arms control 
and will be prepared to do so. To help in that process I offer the attached 
paper in which I have attempted briefly to place arms control in the 
context of current changes and then to offer some specific suggestions. 
I would appreciate your making this paper available to the President 
as he prepares.
The paper makes the following points:
Progress in human rights may ultimately do more for real arms 
control than anything we do in the arms negotiations, but our arms 
control efforts also are designed to improve the prospects for change 
in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. We should do nothing to slow 
that process, but violent Soviet repression could derail arms control.
The START Talks need a public boost, which is warranted after 
the Wyoming meeting. We should make clear we are entering the "end 
game” for completion of a START Treaty by the end of 1990 or early 1991. 
Details of the treaty and verification now determine the time needed to 
complete START, not the so-­called big issues. Nevertheless, we should 
highlight the importance of reaching agreement on some key issues such 
as ALCM counting, range and definitions, mobile ICBMs, and the like.
We should avoid any agreement to a “time certain” solution of the 
SLCM and Defense and Space problems. This would only reinforce the 
very linkage that the Soviet Union has signalled it may be prepared to 
reduce or stop. It could also delay START while we work what is really 
a Soviet agenda, and it could undermine START ratification. Most of the 
preferred US approaches to these two issues can be completed quickly 
and require no agreement now.
1 Source: Department of State, STARS, Document Number 198927847-0. Secret. 
Copied to Scowcroft. A stamped notation at the top of the memorandum reads: “Treat 
as Original.”
2 Reference is to the December 2–3 meeting in Malta between Bush and Gorbachev 
following the collapse of the Berlin Wall on November 9.
