288 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX forego further action on the others, until we see more clearly what evolves out of the Charter 77 confrontation. We should let the GOC know that as a matter of principle we cannot remain indifferent to appeals of any citizenry asking for international support in a struggle for elementary human rights. If the situation for the dissidents greatly worsens here, I believe that we should seriously consider indefinitely postponing the Spacil visit or even withdrawing the invitation. 5. In addition, the Embassy proposes: A. Port security—that we delay indefinitely informing GOC of reduction in notification time. B. Civil aviation—that we continue to support PanAm’s wishes as we reach agreement on conditions for extending the Bilateral Air Transport Agreement which formally expired December 31, 1976. Current unwritten “gentlemen’s agreement” for interim extension must eventually be replaced by formal extension. We recommend that this be done, in spite of Charter 77 issue, in order to protect PanAm’s landing rights and its commercial investment here. C. Textiles—that we be in no hurry to replace our bilateral agreement with a consultative mechanism, even though we originally proposed this change. However, given the technical nature of the change, we should not delay action on this step unduly. D. Scientific/cultural exchanges: We have about one month to watch development of Charter 77 issue before decision is required on whether to go ahead with negotiating the exchanges implementation program and to sign agreement and program. Human rights issues are highly relevant to this agreement, so we suggest Department continue to prepare for implementation negotiations as originally scheduled, i.e. possibly some time in March, but be prepared to postpone them at last minute, if political considerations require. E. Claims/gold: Here again we suggest Department proceed with groundwork for renegotiation, as proposed in ref B, but not become locked into any time framework. Congressional consultations should stress that in reaching USG substantive negotiating position we are not committing ourselves to timing. In considering when to propose opening renegotiation, we will want to consider not only issue of human rights of Czechoslovaks, but also the rights of the U.S. claimants and the possibility that in current situation GOC may be more amenable to accepting tougher settlement terms than previously. 6. At the same time, we must take into our calculations that the GOC may retaliate for a “go-slow-approach on our part by slowing or temporarily halting its processing of divided family cases. 7. The Department may also want to consider making the human rights issue in Czechoslovakia an item for discussion in the NATO
