1980  933
of Europe. The President added that they are also reluctant even in 
Europe. (S)
Brown said that we should avoid a shift in strategy in a new Presi-
dential Directive but that we could codify what we are doing, things we 
have been doing since 1977. They are fairly clear and straight-­forward. 
First, we have been trying to improve the defense posture in Europe. 
Second, we have given a higher priority to the Persian Gulf region. 
Third, we have begun a close relationship with China in an effort to 
lessen the requirement for U.S. contingency forces earmarked for that 
region. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski explained to the President that at the SCC meeting 
on Security Framework yesterday a draft PD had been circulated, one 
more narrowly focused on the Persian Gulf region.6 It sets forth the 
President’s commitment in the State of the Union Address7 and elabo-
rates on a strategy for meeting that commitment. In light of the discus-
sion today we could broaden it to deal with strategic challenges of the 
1980s. (S)
The President said there were two other points not addressed in 
Brown’s paper which he was concerned about and should be addressed 
in any directive. The first was about our relationship with the Peoples 
Republic of China as the next administration might deal with it. We 
have pursued it on an economic, political, and cultural basis. The new 
administration might even reverse much of that. We need to emphasize 
to Governor Reagan what is at stake. But to move another step and to 
sell military equipment, this we cannot resolve even among ourselves. 
Brown interjected that we have gone further in that direction than the 
President suggests. We have not discouraged the French and the British 
from direct military sales to the Chinese. The President said that indeed 
we had transferred some computers and dual-­use technology which 
we would not give the Soviet Union. (S)
The second point, the President continued, is to put emphasis on 
arms control. A point not mentioned in Brown’s paper. He went on to 
say that he has come to doubt that the8 MX missile will ever be devel-
oped9 although it should be. Too many obstacles—­environmentalists’ 
concerns, design problems—­are being voiced by the critics. We may 
even become inferior in strategic forces to the Soviet Union as a result. 
The President said he would like to leave office encouraging the next 
6 For the summary of conclusions of the December 16 SCC meeting on the Per-
sian Gulf Security Framework, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East 
Region; Arabian Peninsula, Document 97. PD/NSC–63 “Persian Gulf Security Frame-
work,” January 15, 1981, is ibid, Document 98.
7 See footnote 3, Document 214.
8 Carter inserted the word “mobile” before “MX missile.”
9 Carter crossed out the word “developed” and replaced it with “deployed.”
