Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII within Afghanistan), as well as of the provision of some food, medicine, and tactical radio equipment (for field combat use) to various guerrilla groups. The arms being furnished currently are Soviet-made rifles, submachine guns, machine guns, ammunition, mines, and anti-tank launchers and rockets. These items, at first drawn from CIA reserve stocks, but now bought by CIA on the international arms market, move in USAF C–141 aircraft [less than 1 line not declassified] to Saudi Arabia, and then by Saudi C–130s to Pakistan. No American personnel in Pakistan are in any way involved in the logistics machinery or in training Afghans, though a few Egyptian Specialists may be present. The training function is performed by Pakistani personnel, who, if necessary, have received special training from Americans in Saudi Arabia. The CIA Station Chief in Islamabad works out all of the operational details with Pakistani intelligence and President Zia. The most critical gap in Afghan rebel armament has been the absence of means to shoot down Soviet helicopters and aircraft. Egypt has now donated 15 Soviet-made SA–7 shoulder-held anti-aircraft rocket launchers, with a small supply of missiles. CIA is purchasing additional such weapons on the international market, through devious cut-outs, from a Bulgarian source. As of one week ago, Pakistan had not yet taken the final decision on whether to transfer the SA–7s, because Zia recognizes that this would be a major escalation of outside support to the insurgents, which could trigger a sharp Soviet reaction. However, CIA believes that Zia will bite this bullet too. Pakistani cooperation in the program has been exemplary—and completely divorced from the troubles that bedevil the US-Pakistani political relationship. However, this collaboration was put into jeopardy in mid-January [mid-February] by reports on the program, attributed to White House officials, which appeared in the Washington Post and New York Times. Zia was outraged and has made it perfectly clear that Pakistan will stop all participation if there are any further leaks.3 Background. Interagency consideration of covert action in support of Afghan elements in opposition to the Marxist Taraki regime first took place in the Special Coordination Committee for Intelligence (SCC–I)
