Afghanistan 233 84. Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 [cable number not declassified] Washington, December 13, 1979 COUNTRY Afghanistan/USSR SUBJECT Appraisal of Situation in Afghanistan (12 December 1979) SOURCE This is a field appraisal. It presents the views of this Agency’s senior officer on the scene. It is an interpretation based on previously reported information. Prepared primarily for internal Agency use, it is disseminated in the belief that it may be useful to others in their own assessment of the situation. 1. We believe the current buildup of Soviet forces reflects a continuing deterioration in the situation for the Afghan military and Government. The Afghan military has suffered a series of reverses in the last several weeks. Additionally, the government’s successful October offensive in Paktia has largely now been negated by recent events there. Badakhshan is in a precarious position. The situation elsewhere between Kabul and the northeast border is deteriorating. The rebels are again active in Paktia and Qandahar areas. Nightly, both Herat and Qandahar cities are the scenes of rebel activity and assassinations and the fighting is creeping closer to Kabul. Additionally, the DRA is no longer able to meet its manpower requirements and continues to experience desertions from its forces. We would assume that, given the above, there is a note of desperation at the People’s House and a general fear among the Khalqis and their Soviet supporters that the DRA military position could quickly crumble, leaving Kabul exposed to a successful insurgent attack and/or a general breakdown in the law-and-order situation. 2. Another possibility and only partially connected to the above is that the Soviets are getting ready to remove Amin. 3. It seems evident that the Soviets are committed to supporting the revolution here. Our sources tell us that they will forward whatever supplies are needed to do this. Increasingly, we are receiving rumors that the Soviets are directly engaged in combat operations. On 11 December, a third-country diplomat told us that he has a senior Khalqi 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Thornton, Country File, Box 91, Afghanistan: 5/78–12/79. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
