Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I tinue this dialogue, ever seeking to expand its depth and compass, yet fully consistent with Western interests. At the same time, the President and his Administration are vitally aware of the continuing growth in Soviet military power and the uncertainties that lie ahead with inevitable changes in Soviet leadership in the years to come. The growth of Soviet military power makes us keenly aware of the need for the NATO alliance to modernize and improve its defenses—not for the sake of military power itself but, rather, for a more fundamental reason. This reason is stated in the North Atlantic Treaty: that we are determined to safeguard the freedom, the common heritage, and the civilization of our peoples, founded on the principles of democracy, individual liberty, justice, and the rule of law. As President Carter said in his inaugural address about our own country: We are a strong nation, and we will maintain strength so sufficient that it need not be proven in combat—a quiet strength based not merely on the size of an arsenal but on the nobility of ideas. The Atlantic alliance has successfully withstood repeated testing for more than a quarter century. And as President Carter begins his Administration, we mark another milestone in U.S.-European relations— the 30th anniversary of the Marshall plan. Today, as we look back on how much we have done together, it is fitting to recall what Secretary of State Marshall said at Harvard in June 1947: Our policy is directed not against any country or doctrine but against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos. Its purpose should be the revival of a working economy in the world so as to permit the emergence of political and social conditions in which free institutions can exist.4 And this concern with basic values still motivates us today. Mr. Secretary General, members of the Council, 30 years ago the United States entered into a firm commitment to enduring involvement on this continent—as vital to both the United States and Europe and as reflecting shared political and human values. President Carter has asked me personally to convey to you that the American commitment remains firm and undiminished. In support of our close ties with our NATO allies—our commitment to allied defense—President Carter is determined to maintain fully effective defense forces in Europe. As you are well aware, we are determined to reduce waste and inefficiency in the U.S. defense budget. But he has asked me to inform you that his new budget and
