798  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
46. Wang said situation confronting us one in which U.S. force 
already being used in Taiwan area. I had said that in making such dec­
laration it did not prejudice their views or require their side abandon 
its views. However, by continued insistence my side on self-­defense 
clause, was it not our intent to require them abandon their position 
with regard dispute in Taiwan area?
47. I asked Wang to let me immediately answer his last question. 
To let me say again what I had said over and over again, that it not our 
intent require him abandon his position regarding merits our disputes 
there.
48. I asked Wang let me turn question around and ask if it not his 
intent in requiring abandonment this clause to obtain acknowledgment 
from U.S. that it does not have right individual collective self-­defense 
in Taiwan area, and thereby to accept in this declaration his one-­sided 
contentions with regard our dispute there, which involve very points 
at issue between us.
49. I said only other point I wanted make was that he had said this 
declaration should indicate desire of two sides for peaceful settlement. 
My contention from beginning had been and still continued to be that if 
that desire honest and unequivocal it must go beyond that and say that 
we determined settle disputes only (repeat only) by peaceful means. It 
should not be possible for either of us by giving one interpretation or 
another to situation with respect those disputes in fact to resort to force 
to settle them.
50. I said I thoroughly agreed that this declaration was not the 
final result. It in itself settled nothing, except that we determined our 
disputes should not lead to war, and in that atmosphere to seek their 
peaceful settlement. From very beginning I had characterized declara­
tion as preliminary to discussion our disputes.
51. I said as I had said at last meeting and again this morning, once 
declaration issued, it was intent U.S. to carry it out in full and in good 
faith. We said in declaration that we determined we will settle disputes 
between us through peaceful means. We said that two of us should con­
tinue our talks to seek feasible and practical means for realization that 
desire. Wang could be certain that U.S. would carry this out to full. He 
could also be certain when U.S. said in declaration it would not resort 
to threat use force in Taiwan area or elsewhere, it meant exactly what it 
said and that we would not by some twisted interpretation of situation 
attempt to get around it.
52. Wang said if there is willingness to make such declaration and 
to indicate that neither side would be required abandon its position 
then they failed see why U.S. would not withdraw its demand with 
respect self-­defense clause.
