United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 81 to continue expansion in production. However, adequate financial reserves are available to meet Colombian external needs. Costa Rica. Despite weak coffee prices, managed to maintain adequate reserve position because of large coffee crop. Government has conservative financial policies. In 1960 lower export income likely to require continued caution, if payments equilibrium is to be obtained. Cuba. Deterioration in 1959 was general with between 5 and 10 percent decline in national income and foreign payments deficit of over $50 million. For 1960, outlook is unfavorable as Government increases controls over economy and resultant uncertainties. National income is expected to stagnate and by next August—September an external payments crisis may shape up. Dominican Republic. 1960 was the poorest economic year since the end of the war on top of which Government faced heavy defense burdens. If GCDR follow IMF stabilization program some improvement may be expected since outlook for export crops is better. Heavy foreign debt limits flexibility of Government and public works expenditures cannot be too sharply curtailed. Ecuador. Overall improvement noticeable in economy in 1959 with production, exports, and foreign reserves up. Important in 1960 for GOE to resist pressures from businessmen for expansionary monetary policies which would threaten steady expansion of economy over past decade. El Salvador. During 1959 large increases in production compensated for coffee price weakness. The economy is stable and well managed and no problems on that score envisaged for 1960. Guatemala. Continued lax monetary policies and budgetary deficits with declining experts, led to a $15 million payments deficit in 1959 and a fall in dollar reserves from $74 million in 1956 to $30 million in 1959. The GOG has already imposed import restrictions and limited bank credit so that in 1960 the payments deficit is expected to be reduced to $5 million. Continued effort, however, will be needed to achieve this objective. Haiti. 1959 was one of the most disastrous years in the economic history of Haiti. A coffee crop of 50 percent of normal and government overspending in face of low tax revenues, led to an intensified stabilization program backed by $6 million of U.S. special grant aid. For 1960 a great improvement is expected, with a record high coffee crop and Haiti should actually accumulate dollar reserves and have a 5% increase in national income. Honduras. Economic stagnation, marked by declining banana production, was a basic problem in 1959. An IMF program was worked out which has achieved budgetary balance and stopped the decline
