502  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The Soviets appear willing to tolerate certain differences among the 
Satellites and to tailor their policy to meet varying Satellite require­
ments. They apparently still believe that if some concessions to auton­
omy are gradually and judiciously meted out, the Satellite peoples will 
eventually become reconciled to a close relationship with the USSR.
173. Czechoslovakia, economically the most successful and politi­
cally the most stable of the Satellites, appears to be Moscow’s favorite, 
and may be intended to serve as a model for the others. Czech party 
leaders have been relatively successful in utilizing the threat of Soviet 
intervention as a means of suppressing popular ferment, while at the 
same time pointing to economic and political improvements since the 
death of Stalin. The arguments appear to have persuaded the population 
not to jeopardize its relatively favorable status by precipitate action.
174. Hungary presents the Soviet Union with numerous practi­
cal problems. To accomplish its primary goal of restoring Hungary as 
quickly as possible to orthodox Satellite status, Moscow has encour­
aged the Soviet installed regime to combine severe political repression 
with limited economic bribery. There appear to be no suitable alterna­
tives to this tactic. Both repression and bribery, however, are probably 
scheduled to diminish with time and accomplishment.
175. Soviet policy toward East Germany seems motivated primar­
ily by the same considerations which underlie the USSR’s rigid opposi­
tion to German reunification (see para. 231, Chapter VI). Aware of the 
unpopularity of the Communist regime in the GDR, the USSR is fearful 
that any relaxation of tight controls would stimulate the growth of pres­
sures for reunification and promote increasing unrest or even a popular 
revolt in this highly sensitive area, Therefore, little liberalization has 
been attempted and Moscow has re-­endorsed Ulbricht’s repressive pol­
icies. The USSR probably feels that it has no alternative but to support 
the doctrinaire, Stalinist East German regime.
176. The reluctant Soviet acceptance of the “new” Poland now 
appears to be a long-­range adjustment rather than a temporary accom­
modation. Tenseness in Soviet-Polish relations has abated since 1956, 
in large part because the Gomulka regime has restrained anti-Soviet 
and anti-Communist popular sentiments and has removed the imme­
diate threat to the party’s position. Concurrently, direct Soviet press 
attacks on Polish liberals have ceased and the strength of the pro-Soviet 
(Natolin) faction in the Polish party has diminished. The Soviet lead­
ers retain a large arsenal of political, economic, and military weapons 
with which to exert pressure on the Gomulka regime or ultimately to 
destroy it, although they cannot be certain that pressures will always 
prove effective or that their use would not, in fact, boomerang.
