1956  639
are American bases in Far East. Thus it apparent that it intention of US 
side to require PRC side to recognize status quo of American occupation 
Taiwan as well as coastal islands controlled by Chiang ­Kai-­shek clique. 
This position of US side can never be tolerated by PRC side.
12. Wang said all these events cannot but alarm PRC side and cre­
ate doubts among Chinese as to whether US side is genuinely sincere in 
stated desire settle disputes between two countries.
13. Wang said, in view of fact that US is creating tension and in 
view of attitude of US side in deliberately stalling talks, all of which not 
in conformity with purpose and aims these talks, therefore PRC side 
demands that these meetings be public so that issues may be judged by 
world opinion. Also PRC side is obliged give account to Chinese people 
of proceedings these talks. That was PRC side’s opinion on question we 
had just discussed.
14. I said in reply that first I didn’t believe they’d had sufficient 
time fully consider my suggested changes and that I hoped they would 
do so. I thought probably first question between us, often discussed 
here, is question of whether we considered statement applied to ­Taiwan 
area. My suggestion from beginning on October 8 was that we make 
this specifically clear.
15. I said my understanding of their position had always been 
that they would consider such statement as applicable to Taiwan area. 
However, they had objected to form in which it was previously made 
on grounds this would prejudice their position on Taiwan area.
16. I said that I had stated in as many ways as I possibly could that 
our intention was not to get them to say anything that would prejudice 
pursuit of their policies by peaceful means, that this was made clear in 
our October eight statement and our November 10 draft, but that they 
had objected to form in which it was set forth in that draft.
17. I said we were both agreed that most serious problem facing 
our two sides was precisely in Taiwan area, and that question therefore 
appeared to me to be not whether any agreement applied to Taiwan 
area but whether it clearly stated this.
18. I said that they had talked previously, and at great length this 
morning, of sincerity. I said my government had over and over pro­
posed and I again proposed this morning that both sides sincerity be 
demonstrated by specifically relating our agreement to Taiwan area. 
This would assure world which as he had rightly said had longed for 
peace, that neither side had any concealed reservations in this regard.
19. I said I had over and over pointed out problem wasn’t one of 
form of words which either side variously interprets, but lay in reach­
ing genuine agreement which could be put into words. To do other­
wise certainly could not contribute to peace. I was reluctant to place
