3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 372 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI state of our bilateral relations. That, too, was important and therefore Gromyko had provided appropriate explanations. The Soviet Union had no designs on Africa at all. The President could rest assured that the Soviets did not want to lay their hands on Africa,32 the Soviet Union had a large enough territory of its own with much to do there. He would draw the conclusion that it was necessary for our two countries to consult with each other more frequently,33 and to explain our respective views of the situation to each other. That should be done in person rather than just by written communications. The President said he would respond briefly. U.S. assessment of the same situation was quite different from the assessment Gromyko had provided. We looked at the Horn of Africa with a great deal of concern. From our perspective, the Somalis had invaded Ogaden using Soviet weapons. We understood that the Ethiopian response there had been directed by a Soviet general. While the Soviet Union had not sent troops to the area, the Cubans had sent more than 15,000 men. We recognized that the Soviet Union and the United States had persuaded the Ethiopians not to cross the Somali border once the Somalis had been pushed out of Ogaden. However, Soviet generals and Cuban officers remained,34 perhaps directing combat35 against Eritrea. The Cubans had said that they were not involved directly, that they had no troops in combat status in Eritrea. We certainly hoped that was the case. In Angola the Cuban presence had recently36 increased to 20,000 troops plus service personnel.37 The Katangans, to whom Gromyko had referred as refugees, had certainly been trained and supported by the Cubans in Angola and perhaps by some East Germans. In Zaire a major military force had appeared, well supplied with Soviet weapons. It had destroyed Kolwezi with major loss of life. The President had no doubt that the Soviet Union could have prevented that if it had used its38 influence with the Angolans, the Cubans and the East Germans, all of whom39 depended upon the Soviet Union to a great extent. The President had not claimed that the Cubans had troops in Zaire, but he did 32 Bartholomew added “or doing anything there even if invited” after “hands on Africa.” 33 Bartholomew added “(‘at different levels’ interjected in English)” after “more frequently.” 34 Bartholomew added “planning and” after “remained.” 35 Bartholomew put brackets around “combat” and wrote “a campaign” in the margin above it. 36 Bartholomew put brackets around “recently” and wrote “substantially” in the margin above it. 37 Bartholomew added “in the last 12 months.” after “service personnel.” 38 Bartholomew added “full” after “its.” 39 Bartholomew added “heavily” after “all of whom.”
