1978 299 —Your mid-­term review of the Defense budget in late August/ early September. —The Defense review of MX and MAP in October. —The Defense budget decision in December/January, and —The Secretary’s Posture Statement in February 1979. The August/September budget review emerges as particularly important. Harold suggests that it provides an opportunity for you to announce some general lines of policy that would start creating a more positive atmosphere on defense issues. He also feels it would be extremely helpful if you could indicate at least privately to him the direction you are inclined to take on the key MX/MAP/bomber issues. This would enable him to better control the Defense bureaucracy and project a more orderly and systematic image to enhance confidence in our decision-­making process. It also might be desirable to be more open about the decisions that we make along the way so as to pre-­empt the inevitable leaks. Harold recognizes that this procedure might conflict with OMB’s prerogatives but emphasized that the more guidance he can get the better, even if actual formal decisions are not taken until later. We agreed that I should draw up a draft “scenario” for coordinating Defense actions in support of SALT which I will clear with Harold for presentation to you prior to your August/September budget review session. 2. Alert Defense Budget Status On the basis of the Consolidated Guidance (CG), the military services submitted draft five-­year programs in their Program Objective Memoranda (POMs). In the spirit of ZBB, the CG called for three programs—­basic, decremented and enhanced. The CG basic program implies Defense TOA of roughly $138.4B for FY 80; the decremented and enhanced levels were set at ± 5% around that level. The POMs reflect a good deal of “goldwatching” by the Services, especially the Air Force. “Goldwatching” is the label given the long-­ standing Service device of protecting or beefing up their budgets by structuring them in such a way that programs of special importance for the civilian authorities require net additions to the budget. Thus, in the current POMs, many programs have been placed only in enhanced program or are not in any program at all. Examples are M–X/Trident II, ALCM, Cruise Missile Carrier, strategic mobility programs, and GLCM. As a consequence, most of the OSD staff alternatives appear to add to the basic level of the budget. This poses Harold with a difficult problem. Your tentative budget target for Defense is $135.4B (0.6% real growth). Thus Harold will
