1002 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI their ambitious downloading proposal. They have been pressing hard for just such a new types definition, most recently by arguing that changes in the throw-­weight of missile should qualify it as a new type. As a complement to our downloading position, we have been insisting that a missile be substantially different before it could be considered to be a new type. We have offered the Soviets a cosmetic fix that takes account of missile throw-­weight, but leaves the substance of our position unchanged. Our concern is that the Soviets will try to convert a cosmetic adjustment into a real change. Assuming that we continue to insist on something like our current position on downloading, we will resist any such Soviet efforts. A related, and seemingly technical, issue concerns how to measure and verify the dimensions of stages and missiles. Since these dimensional measurements are precisely the criteria that distinguish existing from new types of ballistic missiles, we will need to insist that they are defined and measured in appropriate ways. Ban on Data Denial. In an effort to expedite completion of START, the Soviets have been pressing to defer many of the hard decisions on data denial until after the treaty has been signed. Our Geneva delegation believes there is some merit in this Soviet approach if we are to complete a treaty in February. The issues related to the ban on data denial are difficult and controversial. Indeed, they have divided the USG for months, if not years. Nevertheless, the ban on data denial has considerable political visibility and is at the heart of our approach to START verification. We need to get as much of the regime agreed as possible before START is signed. Against the backdrop of the stalled CW agreement and the CFE Treaty, we need to be especially careful about signing a START treaty that leaves hard issues unresolved. Accordingly, we are telling the Geneva delegation that Washington will not support “telemetry triage,” but will work as hard as possible to reach agreement on all of the facets of the data denial ban. If and when we get to a point at which everything else in START has been agreed, we can review the bidding and decide which loose ends, if any, on data denial we are prepared to try to tie up after treaty signature. Rich Davis and Art Kuehne concur.
