74
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the day after he raised the idea, Khlestov recoiled into vagueness and
clearly was not going to get drawn willingly into saying anything more
about it in this round. Indeed, his approach at that time suggested
strongly that, if further discussion of the matter were pursued in this
round, he would have to make remarks prejudicial to the notion of
dealing with “enablement.” Preservation and cautious cultivation of
this potential negotiating asset should be a significant aspect of the U.S.
approach to the next round.)
9. The Soviet side raised a mixed collection of topics which they
will probably drag along for some time for tactical reasons. One was
the point noted in para 2, above, about the need to account, somehow,
for the contingency of “unlawful” operations through space objects. In
response to questions from the U.S. side they chose to say that their
concerns of this sort were directed toward possible future capabilities
of third countries rather than future behavior of the U.S. or USSR. A
second was the inconclusive state of international understanding on
the boundary between air space and outer space, and a third was the le-
gitimacy of direct TV broadcasts from satellites. The U.S. side ex-
pressed the view that these talks are not an appropriate forum for dis-
cussing such matters, and noted that opinions do differ on them. A
fourth was the general assertion that a state has the sovereign right to
take whatever “self defense” actions it deems appropriate against a
space object which intrudes into its air space. (The Soviets might view
this simply as a confortable point to talk about and keep alive in the dis-
cussions for some future use, or it might reflect an extravagant assess-
ment of potentialities lurking in space shuttle capabilities, or it might be
a retailing of air defense institutional doctrine from Soviet internal dis-
cussions. Legalities of sovereignty over air space notwithstanding, not
only is it unnecessary but it could be dangerous for the U.S. to agree in
general with the Soviet claim that a state has an unfettered right to de-
fend against a space object entering its air space because any defense
system with significant capabilities against objects of near-satellite
speeds would have substantial ABM potential, and the Soviets ought
not be allowed to erect such a system and claim it to be an “air defense”
system, free of limitations in the ABM Treaty or any prospective ASAT
agreement.)
10. The Soviet side said that in their view it would be a hostile act
to change the orbit of the other side’s satellite even though the satellite
might not be damaged in the process. The U.S. side expressed the view
that changing the orbit of the other side’s satellite, except by agreement
between the two sides, should be prohibited. (The U.S. could not go be-
yond a non-use undertaking on this kind of operation without preju-
dicing the space shuttle program.)
11. In connection with mention of interference, the Soviet side
made vague remarks which might foreshadow their arguing in
