416 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 301. Telegram 910 from Geneva1 Geneva, October 20, 1955, 1 p.m. 910. From Johnson. 1. Two hour twenty minute meeting this morning, somewhat over hour of which devoted to implementation. 2. I made prepared statement along lines para one Deptel 914 and including info on O’Neill’s inability perform functions contained Deptel 933. 3. During considerable give and take in which he said nothing new, I strongly stressed to Wang increasing seriousness present situa­ tion, increasingly unfavorable effect it would have on other aspects these talks, referred to increasingly hard tone American press and read por­ tion of letter I had received from mother of Father Houle. Theme was Americans believe announcement meant what it said and as time passes with no results in this our first common public act, he must expect strong reaction. Conviction 19 being held for political purposes strengthened by continued reference PRC public statements on “improvement of rela­ tions” as factor in timing release. Believe I was successful in some degree impressing on him seriousness with which we view situation. 4. I then made prepared statement on renunciation of force along lines paras 2 and 3 Deptel 914. Wang replied with short prepared state­ ment to effect our proposal was abuse non-­recourse to force principle in international relations to prevent their exercise of sovereign rights in Taiwan, Taiwan was domestic problem, discussion inadmissible in scope these talks and mere statement principle cannot resolve tension in Taiwan area. Deeds, that is US withdrawal from Taiwan, required. Repeated theme “circumstances permitting Chinese Government will­ ing to strive for liberation Taiwan by peaceful means”. In give and take he regularly spoke of “American invasion and armed occupation of Taiwan”. Rejected any parallel between Taiwan situation and other divided countries. PRC “will never recognize status quo”. 5. I ignored challenge our policy and kept coming back to theme first and fundamental step was non-­recourse to force declaration to which his reiterated reply was withdrawal US forces in implementa­ tion US acceptance of principle non-­recourse to force or threat of force. 6. Next meeting Thursday October 27. 7. I am departing for Prague Saturday returning Geneva Tuesday. Goze 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–2055. Confidential; Niact; Limited Distribution.
