264  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Communist attack on Quemoy and Matsu, (3) Chinese Communist 
attack on Taiwan, and (4) North Vietnam attack on South Vietnam and 
Laos. It is based on the hypothetical situations which are developed 
in Appendices A–D of the State-Defense study and which are summa­
rized at the outset of Sections III–VI of this estimate.
CONCLUSIONS
1. We believe that if the US used nuclear weapons in meeting Bloc 
local aggression in the Far East, there would be a grave risk that the 
Communists would retaliate in kind. Indeed any Far East Communist 
state, taking into account the possibility of such US action, would be 
unlikely to launch a local aggression without having received assur­
ances of Soviet support.
2. We estimate that, though the USSR will be determined to avoid 
courses of action gravely risking general war throughout the period 
concerned, it probably calculates that its growing military capabilities 
likewise increasingly deter the US from taking such risks. Therefore, 
the Soviets would probably estimate that local Communist use of 
nuclear weapons in direct and localized response to their use by the US 
would not necessarily lead to expansion of hostilities into general war, 
and they would under certain circumstances be prepared to use such 
weapons.
3. If the Communists retaliated with nuclear weapons, they would 
attempt to do so in such a manner as to limit the risks of general war. 
The USSR itself would probably prefer to avoid open involvement, 
and would probably provide the necessary weapons to Communist 
China or North Korea, though retaining Soviet control. Moreover, the 
Communists would probably confine their use of nuclear weapons 
within limits comparable to those observed by the US.
4. The likelihood of Communist retaliation with nuclear weap­
ons would be greatest if the US mounted nuclear attacks deep into 
Communist China, creating a situation to which Moscow and Peiping 
would almost certainly feel compelled to respond by attacks on US bases 
and nuclear capable forces in the Far East. If, in the case of Communist 
aggression against South Korea or Taiwan the US nuclear response were 
limited to Korea or the Straits area, the Communists would probably 
respond in kind in the same area. In the case of local aggression against 
Quemoy and Matsu or South Vietnam, the Communist response would 
be less certain. If US nuclear attacks were confined to the immediate 
Quemoy and Matsu areas or Vietnam and Laos, the Communists might 
attempt to win without using nuclear weapons or seek to break off the 
action. However, even if the US nuclear response were limited to the 
immediate area of Korea, Taiwan, Quemoy and Matsu, or Vietnam and
