International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
459
crease in the U.S. deficit on manufactured goods. We have not tried to
impose restrictions on your goods. In fact, U.S. proposals in the MTN
moved farther, earlier than your offers. On some of our agricultural
items foreign markets are closed to us. I don’t say this to criticize, but to
be clear. There is little criticism of the U.S. for excessive imports of
manufactured goods, but there is criticism of our excessive use of oil
imports.
We would like to be kept informed and ask you to assess our views
during discussions among yourselves. We favor more stable European
currency and avoidance of temporary aberrations in the value of the
dollar.
Callaghan: This has been a useful discussion. Fukuda made some
interesting points. We agree that traders dislike currency fluctuations.
Although this helps the City because lots of money is made writing
insurance—especially when the Pound rose from $1.35 to $1.95. The
U.K. would like a scheme to lessen fluctuations. But we have had a
bitter experience in trying to beat the market. It helps if you have a lot
of reserves. Some fluctuations occurred in the past because we did not
have adequate reserves.
Jenkins and Giscard put forward strong points of view. And
Helmut believes this will contribute to higher rates of growth.
However, I do not believe the analogy with the U.S. is quite per-
fect. It is true in the U.S. that San Francisco is not concerned about fluc-
tuations. But there has been a drift of industry in the U.S. from the
Northeast to the South. The U.S. imports 9 percent of its GDP. In the
U.K. the figure is over 30 percent. The U.K.’s share of trade is 39 percent
in the EC and 62 percent outside of the EC. Thus, the EC scheme will
not affect 62 percent of our total trade. We will try to work out these
factors. Lots of work needs to be done if we are to find a satisfactory
scheme. Such a scheme should not operate against the dollar.
I would like to reemphasize Fukuda’s point. These techniques may
be useful, but they will not deal with the fundamentals. We need
success in equalizing inflation and reducing disparities in the balance
of payments. This will mean more stable exchange rates in the long
term.
All of us in the EC want to keep the U.S. fully aware of events here.
It is right to emphasize that all developments have to be done with the
full knowledge of the U.S. and in consultations with them. I hope for a
satisfactory and constructive conclusion.
Carter: We wish you well.
Schmidt: I would like to respond to the American President. It is a
good course for the USG to bring about more export mindedness
amongst its people. In agricultural trade all of us are sinners—both the
