Chapter 6, June–December 1990  889
163.	 Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Security 
Assistance, Science, and Technology (Bartholomew) to 
Secretary of State Baker1
Washington, October 4, 1990
SUBJECT
Your October 6 meeting with Shevardnadze on START
The purpose of the meeting is to get a response to the points you 
made on Wednesday,2 and you basically have what you need in your 
package for Wednesday’s meeting.3 The following are a few addi-
tional points4 that respond to comments made by Shevardnadze and 
Nazarkin:
Non-­circumvention Nazarkin told Burt Thursday5 that they saw 
nothing new in the US statement on non-­circumvention, and the solu-
tion was for them to make a unilateral statement.
(If Shev says the solution is for them to make a unilateral statement 
that if the US/UK program goes beyond SLBMs, they can withdraw 
from START:)
 We have done a lot for you on non-­circumvention—­the ban on 
undertakings which would conflict, ban on transfer except for existing 
patterns of cooperation, the Hurd letter, the ban on overseas basing and 
the statement I gave you on Wednesday.
 We have worked hard to put together the package I gave you on 
Wednesday.
 What we cannot do is predict the future. The objective of our 
cooperation is to help maintain and modernize the independent UK 
nuclear deterrent, which as the Hurd letter makes clear, will continue 
to remain a minimum one. But we cannot say now what might be nec-
essary in the future to maintain and keep modern the UK force.
 Urge you to look hard at what I gave you on Wednesday. That 
should meet your political problems. It would be better to have an 
agreement rather than to leave this to unilateral statements.
1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross 
Files, New York October 5, 1990. Secret. Timbie affixed a note on the memorandum: “DR: 
For tomorrow’s meeting. J.T.” (Ibid.) No memorandum of conversation for Baker and 
Shevardnadze’s October 6 meeting was found.
2 October 3.
3 See Document 161. Ross underlined “you basically have what you need in your 
package for Wednesday’s meeting.”
4 Ross underlined “additional points.”
5 October 4. No memorandum of conversation was found.
