1168
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
world’s exportable oil. U.S. positions are well known, vis-a`-vis the So-
viet Union. We are taking strong steps to induce Soviet withdrawal. We
do not see them getting out soon, if ever. Its forces are not going down,
but up. Several units have been increased during the past week. The So-
viets are killing thousands of Afghans a month, destroying entire vil-
lages, and directly and brutally violating the rights of the brave people
of Afghanistan. The Soviet Union underestimates the Afghans’ bravery
and commitment to fight. It underestimates the revulsion in the world
at the invasion; and it underestimates the condemnation of the Arab
world.
We have a specific interest in the peace process—in addition to our
friends Sadat and Prime Minister Begin. We have a direct interest in its
success. Sadat is for it. He (the President) will add his own voice: we
should carry out the Camp David Accords meticulously, at the earliest
possible time. He is concerned about the Europeans—the Austrians,
French, Germans, and to an extent the British—over their tendency to
turn away from their historic support of Israel, and to accept increasing
relations with the PLO and the militant groups. But to avoid this trend,
we must carry out the Camp David Accords: including refugees, the
Palestinian problem in all its aspects, and also the security of Israel. The
Camp David Accords are complex, and difficult issues remain. Prime
Minister Begin said that some minor issues have been solved. The
major ones are left for intense negotiations. The American public is
deeply committed to the peace process. If there is a failure to succeed,
the American people will condemn all of us who are involved: him (the
President), and also Israeli and Egyptian leaders, for sure, if we do not
carry out all of the Camp David Accords.
We have a serious problem with the hostage crisis, and this is his
(the President’s) constant preoccupation. He gets advice, varying be-
tween taking strong action and exercising patience. He accepts the need
for patience. He has called on the Allies to exert more pressure on Iran.
After stronger economic efforts later, then we will need to decide on
military moves. This option is open under international law. He will
take it if he needs to.
We have a mutual interest in the security and peace of Israel; and
also in the peace and security of Egypt. This is a three-way partnership:
all are valuable. Sadat has shown both determination and patience.
There is a difference of interpretation concerning the Camp David Ac-
cords. If there had been no flexibility in the language, then we would
not have got agreement at Camp David. The Accords went far in spe-
cifics. We need to honor both the letter and the spirit of the Camp
David Accords, and recognize the need for accommodation in re-
solving differences. What we get will be the measure of our success.
There is some concern here that Sadat and Egypt are isolated in the
