International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
133
—Negotiations regarding the IMF expansion are going forward.
—We are now trying to get ECOSOC to convene a diplomatic con-
ference this fall to conclude an agreement banning illicit payments in
1978.5 In the pre-Summit ECOSOC working group, some of our Euro-
pean partners—especially the Germans—were lukewarm. We will
need their support, and you may want to mention this to Schmidt. At the
recent OECD meeting French opposition was evident.
—The international agreement on guidelines for export credits was
renewed for another six months, and we will use this period to try to
strengthen and extend these guidelines.
—A ministerial meeting of the International Energy Agency will be
held this fall,6 at which the US will seek (i) concrete commitments to
hold total oil import demand by member countries to not more than 26
million barrels per day by 1985; (ii) agreement on means of eliminating
wasteful use of energy, greater coal utilization, expansion of nuclear
power and appropriate controls, and increased research energy and de-
velopment; (iii) agreement to review annually these group objectives
and the contribution of each country toward achieving them. (State and
ERDA are presently working with an IEA committee to develop spe-
cific joint projects in the areas of coal refining and solar and wind en-
ergy, and it is expected that these projects will be ready for approval at
the fall Ministerial meeting.)
—You are familiar with the situation on the nuclear study.
—The North-South Summit items are moving forward, and you
might want to mention to Schmidt your hope that the key industrial na-
tions will continue to concert closely in this field. The World Bank gen-
eral capital increase negotiations will probably begin in September. The
substantial increase in US aid hinges on the inside and outside reviews of
US aid now underway. The World Development Program to examine
what is being done and needs to be done to spur development is now
being launched by the World Bank staff. Work within the USG on the
common fund proposal is being completed. The study of export price sta-
bilization will probably be launched by the International Development
5 On the afternoon of May 8, during the Summit’s final session, Carter said in refer-
ence to the Joint Declaration: “I think we need something on irregular practices in trade to
avoid bribery. I would like to have your support.” Giscard replied: “I have had problems
with the questions of Swiss secrecy on foreign assets. This is also an irregular practice. Is
this referred to?” Carter responded: “I was referring to an international effort now taking
place in the US [UN].” Schmidt commented: “I think we should have this here. I have a lot
of headaches with banks in the Caribbean and Lipinstein [Lichtenstein?].” (Minutes of the
London Economic Summit, May 8; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Mate-
rial, Special Projects, Henry Owen, Box 27, Summit: London: 5/77)
6 The IEA Ministerial Council met in Paris October 5–6; see Foreign Relations,
1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980, Document 129.
