272  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
team prepared to undertake serious and constructive negotiations. 
Ambassador Henry Cooper and I will serve as the chief negotiators 
of the defense and space and START negotiating groups, respectively. 
Mr. Linton Brooks will serve as my NST Deputy Head of Delegation, 
Mr. James Medas as the deputy START negotiator and Mr. William 
Courtney as the Deputy Defense and Space Negotiator.
II
The United States views arms control as a key component of its 
security policy which can reduce the risk of war; promote greater sta-
bility and predictability between the sides; and constrain, reduce, or 
eliminate specific established and emerging threats. The U.S. approach 
to achieving these goals will focus on practical, sustainable steps that 
are designed to build confidence and increase stability and security for 
both sides. The United States will avoid sweeping proposals designed 
more for their public relations impact than for their practicality. Not 
only have such proposals not led to progress in the past, but they 
undermine the mutual confidence necessary for progress.
The United States will measure the value of strategic arms control 
agreements on the basis of six fundamental principles that provide a 
sound foundation for concluding agreements that will reduce the risk 
of nuclear war and enhance strategic stability:
— Stability, which lessens and eliminates incentives, even in a 
crisis, to launch a nuclear strike or to use military power to achieve 
national objectives. In as much as reductions should be carefully struc-
tured to enhance stability, arms control should promote an evolution 
of forces that will lead toward a more stable and less threatening U.S.-
Soviet strategic relationship;
— Equality, which requires that agreements must assure equal 
rights and impose equal limits on the parties;
— Predictability, which enhances stability by providing for more 
transparency in the size, nature, and evolution of each other’s forces;
— Verification, so that both sides know with confidence that agree-
ments are being complied with;
— Compliance, which ensures the continuing value of arms con-
trol obligations and the entire arms control process; and
— Allied security, which precludes a separation of U.S. security 
interests from those of our allies and precludes bilateral agreements 
that could compromise the security of our allies.
III
Mr. Ambassador, in the months since the President’s inauguration, 
the administration has conducted a comprehensive review of American 
security and arms control policies based in part on the principles that
