September 4, 1926, 11 a.m.
September 6, 1926, 3 p.m.
September 11, 1926, 3 p.m.
In his opening speech, the President recalled the events which had preceded
and made necessary the convocation of the Conference, and reminded his
colleagues that it was exclusively a Conference of the representatives of the
signatories of the Court Statute and that it did not sit in any other capacity.
He underlined the importance which the adhesion of the United States to
the Court Statute would have for the subsequent development of this
institution and was of the opinion that its task should consist, above all, in
satisfying the desires of the Government of the United States. The
Conference should, he believed, take care that this adhesion should take
place in conformity with the constitution of the League of Nations. He then
proposed that the discussion should bear in the first place on the substance
of the question and secondly on the form. The Conference then proceeded
to a first reading of the reservations formulated by the United States Senate
with regard to its adhesion to the Court, As reported in the first of my
telegrams above mentioned, the Conference was unanimously of the
opinion that there was no substantial objection to the first, second and third
reservations.
With regard to the fourth reservation, Sir John Foster (Canada) stated that
he believed that the second part of this reservation (requiring American
consent for amending the Statute of the Court) seemed to contain an
inhibition against future amendments which might be judged essential to
the well working of the Court by a majority. He believed, in view of these
possibilities, that it was necessary to know what was intended by this
American reservation. He stated further that as the reservation now stands,
if it ever became patent to the 55 members of the League that changes were
necessary, they might be prohibited from bringing about such changes
through the lack of consent of the United States.
The Serbian representative expressed the opinion that if the United States
was asking the right to take part in deliberations, her demand was very
justifiable, but if she were asking power of veto, it was an altogether
