1979 705 them. George Seignious said that cooperative verification arrangements are clearly needed for this system, and we will have to tell the Soviets what we will be doing to insure verification. Admiral Turner added that we would have to carefully time our challenges against any similar Soviet missile basing system if we expect to meet our exact verification requirements, and we will have to watch for phony excuses for not meeting our challenges. (C) The President said: “I may have a different concept of how this is done, but I thought the idea was to open all the shelters in a given area within say 24 hours notice for a period of perhaps 48 hours. If we are prepared to do this kind of thing, then we can demand the same of them.” He then asked DOD, “can you open all the shelters in a valley in such a simultaneous manner?” Harold Brown answered that this should clearly be possible with enough cranes. Admiral Turner said that CIA estimated that the proposed system would allow opening all the shelters in a valley within a day. David Aaron noted that Stan appeared to be arguing for a quick challenge to avoid the possibility of slipping missiles out of the cluster of shelters to be examined and into others. (C) Frank Press asked why Soviets would see an advantage in placing extra small missiles within this kind of basing system if they were to build one? Admiral Turner responded that missiles need supporting infrastructure which could be found there. The President then asked Admiral Turner the key question: “Do you want to change anything in DOD’s design?” Admiral Turner responded no—­he just wants to arrange proper challenge procedures. Dr. Brzezinski then asked why the Soviets would spend the equivalent of $40 billion to build a system of this kind, which so obviously takes great care to minimize the potential for cheating, if their purpose were to cheat? (C). The President then turned to the question of the ability of the system to expand to counter larger Soviet threats. He noted that if we made no effort to build a survivable replacement for Minuteman, we would be worse off than if we ended up in a race to keep M–X survivable against an expanded Soviet threat. He noted that the question would seem to be: Is there an alternative basing scheme that is better from the point of view of our ability to stay ahead of expanded Soviet threats? (U) George Seignious noted the danger inherent in thinking of this basing system as “sponge” for Soviet warheads. He also said that we should not exaggerate the survivability of the system. Finally, he argued that a Trident II missile should be pursued as a hedge against the possibility that the M–X program would not work out as currently conceived. (C) The President said “I think the Soviets have thought they could win the strategic arms race. In my view, M–X, plus other improvements we are making will convince them otherwise—­will make them
