844
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
8. Governor Harriman said that President Carter has consistently
and recently made it clear that neither he nor the United States Govern-
ment wants to intervene in the internal affairs of the Soviet Union.
But, with regard to the Shcharanskiy case, there is no way that the
administration can change its present position. The Soviets need to
make some gesture.
9. President Tito returned again to his reference to the Belgrade.
CSCE, saying that the administration’s initial approach to human rights
was “unfortunate.” Washington failed to recognize that the Belgrade
CSCE was to address issues of European security; those security issues
should have been the focus, rather than the overwhelming emphasis
on human rights. Tito said there is no question that human rights are
important, but there should be some “balance.”
10. What is needed now, Tito said, is to find some way to “freeze
the controversy” so that the US and the USSR can devote themselves
to basic issues. Perhaps the administration, while continuing to main-
tain the importance of human rights, could emphasize the need to
resolve basic differences between the two countries that affect the possi-
bilities for peace.
11. China. Governor Harriman recalled that President Tito had
once told him that the Chinese had called him a “revisionist bandit,”
but relations now have greatly changed. He asked for the President’s
view of China. Tito said he had some impressions from his recent visit
to Peking, and would know more following Hua Kuo-feng’s visit to
Yugoslavia in August. He indicated that as far as he was concerned
there is no question that the new Chinese leadership is actively search-
ing for ways to open itself to the world; they know they cannot develop
without contact with the outside; they are a poor country and greatly
in need of technological and industrial development and vast improve-
ment in their agricultural situation. They are interested in Western
technology to make up for their backwardness; additionally, they are
intent upon creating a modern army since they recognize that numbers
are no longer the “essential factor.” “The Chinese want—and they
are absolutely right—maximum security. And they want to know the
world better.”
12. Tito said that during his visit to Peking he had reproached the
Chinese leadership with regard to their policy in Africa. He said that
the PRC was so intensely anti-Soviet that it was prepared to support
whatever African regime found itself threatened by the USSR or allies
of the USSR. This is, said Tito, “unprincipled.” But at the same time
he recognized that it was inevitable, since Peking views the USSR as
its “first and main enemy.”
13. President Tito said that he would hold extensive talks with
Hua Kuo-feng when the latter is in Belgrade. The Chinese have indi-
