966 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Ambassador Lawrence Eagleburger Steve Larrabee, NSC Staff Member Victor Jackovich (Interpreter) Yugoslav President Cvijetin Mijatovic Lazar Kolisevski Veselin Djuranovic Josip Vrhovec Sinan Hasani Ambassador Budimir Loncar Mirko Zaric President Mijatovic opened the meeting by welcoming President Carter to Yugoslavia. He thanked him for his message and expressed his appreciation for the high-level delegation which the United States had sent to President Tito’s funeral. The Yugoslav leadership, he said, particularly appreciated the condolences that had been expressed through the President’s mother. The Presidency of Yugoslavia was also grateful for the messages of support for the non-aligned movement transmitted by the Vice President at the funeral. (C) President Mijatovic reiterated Yugoslavia’s constant commitment to non-alignment and stressed that support for this position in the world was very strong. President Carter’s visit, he said, came at the right time and underscored the deepening of U.S.-Yugoslav bilateral relations. He then suggested that President Carter begin the substantive portion of the conversation, noting that he was eager to hear the President’s assessment of international trends, particularly in areas of the world where these trends could be improved. He also looked forward to hearing the President’s assessment of his discussions in Venice2 and of U.S.-Soviet relations and U.S.-Chinese relations. In return, the Yugoslavs would inform the President of issues that concerned them, particularly detente as well as the situation in the Middle East, Iran and Afghanistan. The Yugoslav leaders also looked forward to discussing the situation in the non-aligned movement, especially their own perspective on the situation. Lastly, they looked forward to a discussion of bilateral relations, which President Mijatovic noted were “good.” (C) President Carter began by noting that he had come in the spirit of peace, friendship and support for the independence and integrity of Yugoslavia. The welcome at the airport, the outpouring of enthusiasm along the way to the Palace and the beauty of the Palace itself were impressive. But even more impressive had been the tomb of President Tito. This was perhaps the most appropriate memorial to a great leader 2 President Carter traveled to Venice to take part in the G–7 Economic Summit June 21–24.
