548 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement needed Dr. Velasco’s advice concerning such a program. Dr. Velasco said that the poor class in Ecuador was suffering from a deplorable economic situation, unemployment and little government initiative to alleviate this situation. He said that he had to do something to calm his people, because his people were restless. He continued by saying that the United States had the technicians, and that these technicians could help him in fomenting a low cost housing project. He mentioned the township of Babahoyo which was in a very great need for a low cost housing project, and said that such a project for Babahoyo would calm the people of that community. The Ambassador said that through the Embassy in Quito the U.S. Government has been thinking about presenting a low cost housing program to Dr. Velasco, and that we needed Dr. Velasco’s advice and Dr. Velasco’s support for such a program. Dr. Velasco replied he needed such a program, and asked that the presentation and the help for such a program be urgent. The Ambassador mentioned to Dr. Velasco that the United States and Ecuador had common interests in the United Nations in combating totalitarianism; that the Russians were making efforts to penetrate Latin America and sabotage our solidarity; and that we prayed that the collaboration he gave us before in combating this menace, would continue during his forthcoming administration. Dr. Velasco replied that he understood, and said that he would not cease to awaken the Latin American conscience to this peril; that in so doing he would be giving the United States great help. He continued by saying that we could not allow the Russians to overrun our institutions; that the United States has been the equilibrium between the democracies and the Russian menace; that the democracies must be ­strengthened because it was our obligation to humanity. The Ambassador brought up the Cuban situation; the political unrest which Cuba was exporting to many Latin American countries, and told Dr. Velasco that he would like to exchange ideas regarding this problem with someone in Dr. Velasco’s government. The Ambassador asked if he could leave with Dr. Velasco a memorandum which he had on this subject,2 and Dr. Velasco was pleased to accept it. The Ambassador said that the memorandum could be amplified with the view of coordinating ideas concerning the Cuban ­menace in Latin America. Dr. Velasco said that soon he would inform the Ambassador about the person he would designate to collaborate with the Ambassador on this matter. 2 The memorandum under reference was not further identified.
