Chapter 5, May–June 1990 771 options don’t do the job. I will restrain myself from temptation on linkage, let’s settle something. What’s the matter with 1000. You can tell Gen. Omelitchev that satisfies your program. 1000 doesn’t squeeze you, we are not trying to squeeze you. Omelitchev: It is a relief to know you know our program so well. Bartholomew: We are open about our programs, and you are becoming every day more open about yours. Karpov: When we gave you 1200 from 1600, this was precisely rationalized on the basis of our program. Bartholomew: General, think what you can say, the 1000 level includes your longer range plans and ours. In the longer term 1000 doesn’t squeeze you, and both of us have agreed that, as an interim step at least, it is good to have a sublimit. Karpov: I have proposed a solution to you. We are prepared to have a sublimit. Let’s deal with verification. I have suggested various options and failed to hear a positive analysis. Burt: The American side has done a lot of thinking about road-­ mobile verification. In the last two months in Geneva, no single subject has had more attention. We have looked hard at the various variables connected with road-­mobile verification. We will address this further in Geneva. Karpov: We already have clarity on Backfire. There will be a politically binding statement, we can agree to that. We can say no intercontinental capability, including by refueling. We can have the number 400, but naval aircraft are not included. Naval aircraft must be considered with other naval arms, we are not prepared to change. Bartholomew: This reminds me of the saying what the right hand gives, the left takes away. Karpov: Everything I am giving with both hands. Bartholomew: This means we have no agreement, because of a hole big enough to drive a truck though. This is not a solution. This loophole is big enough not just for a truck, but a Sukhoi, a Mikoyan, a TU–22M. Karpov: As a matter of principle, naval arms is ripe for negotiation. We should sit down and get to work. I will report a freeze, including on naval, could be considered. I will report that. Burt: I didn’t understand what you just said. Would that be a freeze on all naval Backfire? Karpov: Since we are not talking about a limit, we can consider a freeze. I propose to support this if you are prepared to consider it. Bartholomew: This could achieve the same effect as a 400 number. You could say you won’t exceed 250 non-­naval Backfire, with a freeze on naval Backfire.
