National Security Policy  877
B. HIGHLY MOBILE AND SUITABLY DEPLOYED READY FORCES 
WITH THE CAPACITY TO RESPOND SELECTIVELY AND FLEXI­
BLY TO LOCAL AGGRESSION USING ALL WEAPONS (INCLUD­
ING NUCLEAR WEAPONS) AS REQUIRED, AND TO CARRY OUT 
GENERAL WAR TASKS.
1. Over-­all Capabilities.
a. U.S. Army forces are capable of reacting selectively and flexibly 
and with appropriate means to situations ranging from local aggres­
sion to general war. Integration of organic nuclear delivery systems in 
the reorganized infantry, armored and airborne divisions has increased 
the operational capability of the Army to engage in nuclear warfare. 
The dual capability of individual weapons systems has been improved 
by a new high explosive warhead for HONEST JOHN rocket, which 
is now available in limited quantities, and will be further improved 
by activation of LACROSSE missile battalions scheduled for FY 1960. 
Introduction of DAVY CROCKETT [text not declassified] atomic weapon 
planned for FY 1961 will further enhance nuclear capabilities of Army 
forces. Exploitation of the helicopter, together with introduction of self-­
contained, readily transportable combat units provides an increased 
degree of flexibility and mobility. The Army considers that principal 
limitations on effectiveness of Army forces are: insufficient manpower 
and funds; lack of modernization of non-­nuclear weapons and equip­
ment; an insufficiency of combat support and logistic support; lack of 
forward depots, and insufficiency of adequate high speed troop lift.
b. Naval. Highly mobile and strategically deployed ready naval 
forces have the capability and flexibility to respond selectively and 
with the degree of force necessary to meet local aggression and to carry 
out general war tasks. U.S. naval forces have increased their nuclear 
and non-­nuclear capability which adds materially to the effectiveness 
of the ready forces. The Navy has continued integration of guided mis­
siles weapons systems into fleet operations. BULLPUP air-­to-­surface 
missile, a close air support guided missile, is now in the combat inven­
tory of Atlantic and Pacific Fleets in limited quantities. Atlantic Fleet 
has a limited capability in surface-­to-­air missiles for fleet air defense 
with 3 TERRIER equipped ships and the USS GALVESTON now con­
ducting evaluation of TALOS shipboard system. All attack carriers are 
equipped with SIDEWINDER and some with SPARROW III air-­to-­air 
missile squadrons for air defense operations. Included in naval forces 
are Fleet Marine Force ground and air units with capability to employ 
nuclear and non-­nuclear weapons, either surface or air launched. The 
vertical assault technique developed by Navy and Marine Corps no 
longer ties an initial assault to the shore line but permits landing of 
troops quickly and selectively to points up to 50 miles inland.
Capability to conduct vertical assault operations was increased 
materially by conversion of 2 CVS’s to LPH’s, bringing to 3 the number
