614 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Cuba and has been increasingly evident in student and labor publications and meetings. Castroism has its adherents. Osorio coming to power against this background could not help but be responsive in some measure to its pressures, some of which would be bound to react unfavorably against the United States. Therefore, as long as the present situation does not deteriorate, we continue to hope that constitutional government can be preserved here and believe that Lemus still has it within his power to save it. To that end I recommend that we provide Lemus with short-­term aid by immediate implementation on a crash basis of the program set forth in Embassy despatches 21 of July 26, 1960 2 and 62 of September 7, 1960,3 and also by immediate implementation of the program discussed in correspondence between Mr. Charles E. Higdon of ARA and the Embassy including the letter of Mr. Downs to Mr. Higdon dated August 26, 1960. We should also press forward with long-term economic and social assistance and with the Central American Bank. Lemus needs to make new advances with economic and social programs, if he survives. If he does not survive, we need to consolidate our position with a successor government through such programs as are not designed to support any particular administration but to improve the country as a whole. In either case the United States should provide assistance of a longer-­term nature in the economic and social fields. We shall submit separate recommendations accordingly. Kalijarvi 2 See Document ES–17. 3 Under conver of despatch 62, Ambassador Kalijarvi transmitted an ICA survey team report of August 24, which recommended the addition of an investigation advisor to the two-­man staff of the ICA Public Safety Program in El Salvador. (716.5-MSP/9–760) A Public Safety Advisor, John C. Hazelett, was added to the ICA Public Safety Program staff on December 31, 1961. [text not declassified] ES–24. Airgram From the Embassy in El Salvador to the Department of State1 September 30, 1960 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 4 pages not declassified.
