1122  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
240.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, July 27, 1991, 1057Z
8344. Subject: START: Irregular Sitrep #6, July 27, 1991
1. Secret—Entire Text.
2. My personal Sitrep as of 1100 Geneva time July 27.
3. Distinguishability appears settled, subject to getting the text 
right. They agree to (a) canisters, launchers, launchers with canisters 
and converted launchers all “distinguishable” as defined by the treaty; 
(b) additional exhibitions to demonstrate distinguishability and to 
demonstrate that missiles could not be interchanged between launch 
canisters; and (c) segregated basing by restricted area, with a 60 day 
exception when the type of missile was being changed. In addition, the 
provisions on declaring the type of missile at the portal and reading the 
unique identifier are already agreed treaty language.
4. Agreement on these new side by side exhibitions may not be 
quite as good as it may sound. There are a series of criteria for when the 
new exhibitions get conducted. I think that we have the hammer and 
they must be conducted if we want them, but until we get language 
agreed, it’s a little fuzzy. We don’t have treaty language, and a lot can 
go wrong in drafting.
5. On the other hand, even if we dropped these new side by side 
exhibitions completely, we’ve met Washington minimum guidance. As 
a result, I think this one is behind us.
6. A while ago we made a change in the new types definition with no 
formal review. I understand it caught some in Washington by surprise 
and want to be sure all are aware of the revised wording. Language now 
compares ICBMs only to ICBMs and SLBMs only to SLBMs. I frankly 
had always assumed that was our position, but in fact the old U.S. lan-
guage required new ICBMs to be different from all existing ICBMs and 
from all existing SLBMs. The language was changed in the last month 
or so. As a result, if, for example, the Trident II were deployed ashore it 
could be considered a new type of ICBM if it differed from all existing 
ICBMs, even if it were identical to the sea-based version.
7. I think this is nothing to worry about. I’ve been through two 
attempts to design a common missile (land and sea-based) and both 
times we decided it wasn’t feasible even at the design phase. The idea 
that the Soviets could simply rebase isn’t worth worrying about.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D910718–0089. Secret; Niact Immediate; Exdis.
