Human Rights 513 Restricting Human Rights Evaluation of Ex-Im, CCC, and OPIC Programs to the Minimum Required by Law The S/P memo admits that the “minimum” approach would mean carte blanche for CCC credits—presumably nothing would prevent them from going to Cambodia or Uganda under this theory. It also would as a general rule exclude Ex-Im loans from human rights considerations. An Ex-Im loan could be denied only if violations of rights of the person were involved and only where the particular export could be used in such violations.6 Even if a denial was viewed as a positive step to convince another regime to restore freedom of expression, that judgment would not be allowed to affect our recommendation to Ex-Im. In addition, other governments, the U.S. Congress and the American public view decisions to extend Ex-Im, OPIC and CCC loans to another country as a reflection of our relationship with that nation’s government. To argue that we should do the minimum required by law ignores the fundamental political nature of these programs. The Argentine deputy foreign minister did not argue that the Allis Chalmers’ loan was vital economically. Rather, he said the GOA wanted the Ex-Im loan as an expression of U.S. political support.7 Starting up Ex-Im loans, OPIC and expanding CCC credits to Chile, or voting for bhn loans in the IFI’s would also communicate a signal of U.S. political support. Adopting a Policy Against Taking Human Rights into Account on IFI Loans, once Violations of the Person Have Ended Where an assessment of all factors in a given country convinces us that restricting a U.S. Government program is an appropriate and effective element of a strategy to promote respect for civil and political liberties, we should not be barred from that action. Even more important, where we believe that such action, (e.g. voting for an IFI loan to the Government of Chile) will undercut the policy objective of seeing democracy restored in that country, we should not be prevented by a broad policy guideline, from opposing that loan. 6 An unknown hand placed a horizontal line and wrote “not so” in the left-hand margin next to the portion of this paragraph that begins with the word “export” and ends with the word “denial.” 7 Reference is to the Department of State’s veto on human rights grounds of an Allis Chalmers Ex-Im-financed loan to Argentina to enable the Government of Argentina to purchase turbines for a hydroelectric project. In telegram 161509 to Buenos Aires, June 24, the Department reported that Deputy Foreign Minister Allara met with Newsom and Schneider in Washington on June 23. With regard to the veto, “Allara mentioned Eximbank cases involving Boeing and Allis Chalmers, commenting that Argentina can finance its needs but that Eximbank policy has ‘profound political significance.’ ” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780263–0255)
