1016 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Health Organization. Following your meeting with Dr. Mahler,11 we have agreed to hold meetings twice a year between top officials of WHO and key representatives of the U.S. Government. Similarly we expect to rely heavily on the continuing close relationship with the National Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences. Much of the cost of this initiative would be subsumed under the decisions you have already made to increase the foreign aid budget generally. For instance the commitment to make a commitment of $10 million to WHO’s Tropical Disease Research Program. Consistent with your instructions on the development assistance decision memo we will seek to involve public figures including those from the entertainment industry in building public support for this initiative. We would do this as part of the overall strategy now being developed with the NSC to build public support for foreign aid in general. Focussing public attention on an issue such as health, I believe, humanizes our foreign policy and makes it personally understandable in a way that amorphous impersonal issues like SALT and the Panama Canal are not. However, I think there is a spill over benefit to these harder issues in that good will in general is generated for your foreign policy. If you approve, in general, of the above recommendations I suggest a meeting in the next couple of weeks as you proposed previously.12 The meeting should include Califano, Vance, Sam Brown, Harold Brown, Blumenthal, Gilligan and Henry Owen. The meeting should consider the implementation of the recommendations included here. I would like then to develop a public statement for you laying out this strategy either in the form of a message to the Congress, as a separate speech, or as part of a larger statement on global human needs. 11 See footnote 4, Document 292. 12 According to a February 17 memorandum from Bourne and McIntyre to Vance, the President had “approved the broad concept” of an international health program. The full text of this memorandum is printed as Document 309.
