794
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
referred to the subphasing as discussed at Blair House. That means four
or six months, depending on which set of talks is referred to. A message
to Begin will probably be needed. (S)
2. Memorandum of Agreement on Oil. The Israelis have submitted a
counterdraft3 which would include a price subsidy formula and an op-
tion to extend the guarantee almost indefinitely. (C)
3. Memorandum of Agreement on Assurances. Senator Church has
said that anything more than what we have in our draft would virtually
constitute a treaty and would require Senate approval. The Israelis are
asking for significant changes. (C)
4. Unilateral Steps Letter. Begin wants to discuss this with the Presi-
dent. His initial reaction suggests that we will have problems.4 (C)
3 The text of the Israeli counter-draft has not been found. On March 18, the United
States amended the draft text of the oil supply agreement from the originally proposed
fifteen year guarantee. Under the new formulation, the agreement would become effec-
tive for a five-year period “commencing blank months following the entry into force of
the treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel, and shall be extended for an additional pe-
riod commencing at the end of that five-year period and ending ten years later, at which
time the arrangement will terminate.” (Telegram Tosec 30001/67721 to Tel Aviv, March
19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–2617)
4 On March 20, Lewis presented Begin with a draft version of the letter for Khalil on
unilateral actions Israel would take guaranteeing freedoms for the Palestinians of the
West Bank and Gaza. In response, Begin stated that he would take up the matter with
Carter in Washington and that “he wished at this time only to remind us that during his
discussion with President Carter on this issue, the President had asked only about the
prevailing repeat prevailing situation on the West Bank and Gaza regarding freedom of
movement, freedom of political activity, etc. Begin stressed that it is the particulars of the
prevailing situation—which will continue to obtain in the future—which should be con-
veyed on his behalf by President Carter to Sadat.” (Telegram 931 from Jerusalem, March
20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850011–1318) For the final ver-
sion of the letter from Carter to Khalil, signed March 26, see Document 238.
