Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Sections 1 and 2 above indicate, there is a great deal that the HRF can do, that cannot be done by small groups working alone. Secondly, the Vice President raised the important question of whether “the government would take blame for ineffectiveness or inaction” by the HRF. While there is no way to rule this out, I believe that our experience with the Inter-American Foundation (IAF), which has pursued a bold policy in a very sensitive region, indicates that this risk is not too large. The IAF sponsors unconventional development projects that are potentially quite controversial in the host country. Nevertheless, while a few U.S. ambassadors have complained from time to time about problems caused by the activities of the IAF, the overall record has been that of an independent entity functioning without embarrassment to the U.S. government. Jim McIntyre has emphasized the need to avoid problems of duplication and policy coordination with the State Department. But the HRF would not be involved in the process of formulating U.S. government policy, so that it could not complicate that process. Most, if not all, of the proposed functions are best accomplished by an organization with some independence from the U.S. government. In the case of refugee programs, the HRF would be concerned specifically with victims of human rights repression, complementing but not duplicating current State Department activities. Moreover, assistance to refugees would be only a relatively modest part of the HRF’s overall program. I can conclude only that the advantages of the HRF proposal substantially outweigh the risks. 5. Implementation If you approve this proposal, I would recommend that we begin consultations with Zablocki, Fraser and Fascell, and on the Senate side with Sparkman, Kennedy and Case. If these prove successful, the consultations can be expanded to include the members of the Vice President’s human rights group. Once the details have been worked out, the proposal can be announced as a Presidential initiative with the appropriate Congressional support. Recommendation: That you approve this proposal, and initiation of Congressional consultations to be carried out by NSC in close consultation with Frank Moore.6 6 There is no indication as to whether the President approved or disapproved the recommendation; however, his handwritten notation on the first page of the memorandum instructed Brzezinski to hold the memorandum (see footnote 1 above). Brzezinski resubmitted the Human Rights Foundation proposal at the same time he transmitted the final draft of PD–30 for the President’s signature; see footnote 1, Document 119.
