398
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Sections 1 and 2 above indicate, there is a great deal that the HRF can
do, that cannot be done by small groups working alone.
Secondly, the Vice President raised the important question of
whether “the government would take blame for ineffectiveness or inac-
tion” by the HRF. While there is no way to rule this out, I believe that
our experience with the Inter-American Foundation (IAF), which has
pursued a bold policy in a very sensitive region, indicates that this risk
is not too large. The IAF sponsors unconventional development
projects that are potentially quite controversial in the host country.
Nevertheless, while a few U.S. ambassadors have complained from
time to time about problems caused by the activities of the IAF, the
overall record has been that of an independent entity functioning
without embarrassment to the U.S. government.
Jim McIntyre has emphasized the need to avoid problems of dupli-
cation and policy coordination with the State Department. But the HRF
would not be involved in the process of formulating U.S. government
policy, so that it could not complicate that process. Most, if not all, of
the proposed functions are best accomplished by an organization with
some independence from the U.S. government. In the case of refugee
programs, the HRF would be concerned specifically with victims of
human rights repression, complementing but not duplicating current
State Department activities. Moreover, assistance to refugees would be
only a relatively modest part of the HRF’s overall program.
I can conclude only that the advantages of the HRF proposal sub-
stantially outweigh the risks.
5. Implementation
If you approve this proposal, I would recommend that we begin
consultations with Zablocki, Fraser and Fascell, and on the Senate side
with Sparkman, Kennedy and Case. If these prove successful, the con-
sultations can be expanded to include the members of the Vice Presi-
dent’s human rights group. Once the details have been worked out, the
proposal can be announced as a Presidential initiative with the appro-
priate Congressional support.
Recommendation:
That you approve this proposal, and initiation of Congressional
consultations to be carried out by NSC in close consultation with Frank
Moore.6
6 There is no indication as to whether the President approved or disapproved the
recommendation; however, his handwritten notation on the first page of the memo-
randum instructed Brzezinski to hold the memorandum (see footnote 1 above). Brze-
zinski resubmitted the Human Rights Foundation proposal at the same time he trans-
mitted the final draft of PD–30 for the President’s signature; see footnote 1, Document
119.
