162
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—The French remain the most hostile; their goal is “organized lib-
eralization”. They are following the old pattern of linking trade negoti-
ations to every conceivable issue (Concorde, the VAT case, “dollar de-
valuation”). However, the Patronat6 has backed off its opposition to the
whole exercise.
One possibly disruptive issue has crept into the picture. You will
recall that the Tokyo Declaration promised “special and differential”
trade for the LDCs.7 The British and particularly the French have in
mind a new kind of “differential treatment”: differentially discrimina-
tory against all “low wage countries”. At today’s meeting, Cooper sug-
gested that we seek partial reciprocity from the LDCs via their cutting
tariffs half as much as the DCs.
Strauss mentioned two operational issues:
—He would like you to meet with the TPC for an hour or two, to
discuss the Kennedy Round experience,8 as a guide for this round; I
gather he has discussed that with you personally.
—He wants designation of an official from each agency as his reg-
ular contact on MTN issues; I assume that I should fill that role.
Recommendations:
(1) That you agree to meet with the TPC to discuss the Kennedy
Round experience, in the next week or two.9
(2) That I be the designated Treasury contact for MTN issues.10
6 Reference is to the Conseil national du patronat franc¸ais (National Council of
French Employers), known as the Patronat.
7 For the text of the Tokyo Declaration, issued at the end of the September 1973
GATT Ministerial meeting, see the Department of State Bulletin, October 8, 1973,
pp. 450–452.
8 Blumenthal served as the Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
from 1963 until 1967, as well as the head of the U.S. delegation to the Kennedy Round of
GATT negotiations.
9 Blumenthal initialed his approval of this recommendation on July 22.
10 Blumenthal initialed his approval of this recommendation on July 22 and wrote,
“if OK with Solomon.”
