January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1161
government would be withdrawn, with great consequences. The SGA
makes this possible. Second, the Palestinians, as of right, would be at
the table, at the Continuing Committee where they can vote on issues
they must negotiate. This should be of great significance to the Pales-
tinians in terms of unresolved issues like water, economic relations,
and maybe land. If the SGA gets set up, there would be the withdrawal
of the military government. This can be viewed by Israel as some de-
parture. If so, they (?) should be ready for it.
Minister Butros Ghali said that unless the SGA has the minimum
authority needed, the Palestinians will not come in. Therefore, we
should try to show them they will be given a maximum number of
powers. If they do not see flexibility, he knows they will not take part,
and there would be no Palestinian participation.
The President said we will work for maximum authority. What
steps will induce representatives of the West Bank and Gaza, plus Hus-
sein, to join the negotiations?
Minister Butros Ghali said that they (the Egyptians) had sent a note
on confidence-building measures.
The President said that was before; what process can be done now
to induce their involvement—without involving Begin or the Israelis in
the effort?
Minister Butros Ghali said that that was a big qualification.
The President said he knows. He guesses that Begin does not want
them to join.
Mr. el-Baz said that the Palestinians want a settlements freeze and a
U.S. commitment to what is at the end of the tunnel, nearing self-
determination, and the liquidation of Israeli occupation. First, it should
be cut down; later it should be liquidated. There must be some real
movement on the ground, or a U.S. presence or forces in the area.
The President asked what the last idea meant.
Mr. el-Baz said that Hikmat el-Mazri said that maybe the U.S. could
substitute for Israel in the transition period.
The President said he sees.
Mr. el-Baz said that this would be difficult. If we emphasize
confidence-building measures, and if we do not get Begin to agree on a
settlements freeze or an attractive definition of powers and responsibil-
ities for the SGA, he would like something like the President’s speech16
of last night (at the White House dinner). If this were repeated, it would
be useful. The Palestinians attach importance to the U.S. position; they
16 The text of Carter’s speech, delivered in the White House State Dining Room at
8:07 p.m. on April 8, is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 617–620.
