March 1952–February 1953
423
the National Front to maintain control of the situation indefinitely is
uncertain. The political upheaval which brought the nationalists to
power has heightened popular desire for promised economic and so-
cial betterment and has increased social unrest. At the same time, na-
tionalist failure to restore the oil industry to operation has led to
near-exhaustion of the government’s financial reserves and to deficit fi-
nancing to meet current expenses, and is likely to produce a progres-
sive deterioration of the economy at large.
3. It is now estimated that communist forces will probably not gain
control of the Iranian Government during 1953.2 Nevertheless, the Ira-
nian situation contains very great elements of instability. Any US
policy regarding Iran must accordingly take into account the danger
that the communists might be enabled to gain the ascendency as a re-
sult of such possible developments as a struggle for power within the
National Front, more effective communist infiltration of the gov-
ernment than now appears probable, government failure to maintain
the security forces and to take effective action against communist ac-
tivity, or a major crop failure. It is clear that the United Kingdom no
longer possesses the capability unilaterally to assure stability in the
area. If present trends continue unchecked, Iran could be effectively
lost to the free world in advance of an actual communist takeover of the
Iranian Government. Failure to arrest present trends in Iran involves a
serious risk to the national security of the United States.
4. For the reasons outlined above, the major United States policy
objective with respect to Iran is to prevent the country from coming
under communist control. The United States should, therefore, be pre-
pared to pursue the policies which would be most effective in accom-
plishing this objective. In the light of the present situation the United
States should adopt and pursue the following policies:
a. Continue to assist in every practicable way to effect an early and
equitable liquidation of the oil controversy.
b. Be prepared to take the necessary measures to help Iran to start
up her oil industry and to secure markets for her oil so that Iran may
benefit from substantial oil revenues.
c. Be prepared to provide prompt United States budgetary aid to
Iran if, pending restoration of her oil industry and oil markets, such aid
is necessary to halt a serious deterioration of the financial and political
situation in Iran.
In carrying out a, b, and c above, the United States should:
(1) Maintain full consultation with the United Kingdom.
2 See NIE–75, “Probable Developments in Iran Through 1953,” published No-
vember 13, 1952. [Footnote is in the original. NIE–75 is Document 143.]
