3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
576
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
199.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Vienna, June 15, 1979, 6–6:20 p.m.
Carter-Brezhnev Meeting with President Kirchschlaeger
and Chancellor Kreisky
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Ambassador Wolf
Hamilton Jordan
Interpreters: Krimer and Obst
U.S.S.R.
President Brezhnev
U.S.S.R. Ambassador to Vienna
Two interpreters
Austria
President Kirchschlaeger
Chancellor Kreisky
Two interpreters
After some initial banter and welcoming remarks by President
Kirchschlaeger, President Brezhnev asked if Kirchschlaeger could not
make a speech so he could reply with a speech of his own, pulling out
some prepared written remarks.
Kirchschlaeger replied that Austria was just a small country, there-
fore his speech would be very short, but he would be happy to accom-
modate Mr. Brezhnev. He hoped that Vienna would furnish a climate
conducive to successful completion of the talks. Austria very much
wished this visit to be a good one. Traditionally Austria had tried to
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 19,
U.S.S.R.—Vienna Summit: (10/78–6/79). Secret. Drafted by U.S. interpreter Harry Obst.
The meeting took place in the Office of the Austrian President at the Hofburg. Brezhnev
and Carter met in Vienna from June 15 to 18. Carter described meeting Brezhnev in his
memoirs: “I met President Leonid Brezhnev for the first time at the palace of Austrian
President Rudolf Kirchschlaeger, where we were to pay a formal call on him and Chan-
cellor Bruno Kreisky. I had carefully studied the latest intelligence reports about
Brezhnev and his supposedly failing health, and had also heard from the French and
German leaders that on his recent visits to their countries he had been frail and not
always alert. Eager to see him, I hoped that he would be vigorous and able to conduct the
long discussions that lay ahead.
“There was no need for me to worry. By arrangement, I arrived a few minutes
ahead of Brezhnev. We greeted each other before an enormous contingent from the news
media. He walked toward me slowly and carefully, but at a steady pace. Brezhnev
seemed a little hesitant about approaching me, but I moved forward immediately and
greeted him warmly.” (Keeping Faith, pp. 243–244)
