International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1107
technicians trained to work with villagers in their native language to re-
solve problems at the village level.
AID and the Peace Corps have agreed to consult and collaborate as
closely as possible in future programs so as to combine creatively the
technical resources, expertise and funds of AID and the rural commu-
nity based practical experience of the Peace Corps.
The U.S. Government in its bilateral programs will focus on rural
and peri-urban water supply and sanitation where it perceives the
greatest need. In the U.S. view, the proper strategy is to seek to improve
the availability and quality of water in conjunction with primary care
and efforts to increase food supplies in order to improve both health
and the general quality of life.
Accomplishment of that goal requires not only supplying funds,
material and technicians to build water supply and sanitation systems.
Equally important is the training of village workers and the develop-
ment of community participation in the planning and management of
projects so that there subsequently may be adequate monitoring and
maintenance of facilities. Without such training and maintenance, ex-
penditures on facilities may be wasted. Training in health and hygiene
is another essential component if water supply development is to ben-
efit fully the community concerned.
Also essential in the U.S. view, is that water supply and sanitation
projects, whether small or large scale, should be planned carefully
within the context of overall water management including supplying of
water for agriculture and industrial use.
The U.S. plans to increase significantly its contributions to multi-
lateral agencies and bilateral programs in support of the UN Decade for
Water Supply and Sanitation. The magnitude and trend of existing bi-
lateral programs reflect the strong support of the U.S. for the objectives
of the Decade.
Currently, the U.S. is carrying out a broad based assistance pro-
gram in water related development. Expenditures by AID for invest-
ments in water projects will increase substantially in the course of the
decade. In addition to actual water supply and processing programs,
the U.S. supports related programs such as water-disaster assistance;
environmental health training; land conservation and natural resources
management; and development of new energy technologies, including
remote sensing applications. All these activities have water compo-
nents and, thus, are relevant to U.S. involvement in the Decade for
Drinking Water and Sanitation.
In its future assistance efforts, the U.S. will seek opportunities to
promote Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries. This
policy will include the use of third country consultant firms to imple-
ment projects, support for training programs located in developing
