Romania
579
193.
Intelligence Information Cable1
DB–315/04475–78
Washington, March 31, 1978
COUNTRY
Romania
SUBJECT
Appraisal of Situation: Goals and Problems of Ceausescu’s Romania on the Eve
of his Fourth Visit to the United States (DOI: March 1978)
SOURCE
[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
INTRODUCTION:
1. This is an assessment of Romania’s political situation on the eve
of President Ceausescu’s visit to the United States. It focuses primarily
on internal political factors within the economic and social framework
of the country and also discusses foreign policy and military considera-
tions. Trying to assess those problems with which the regime will have
to deal over the next five years, this paper is necessarily weighted
toward the negative side rather than toward the regime’s past accom-
plishments. For example, instead of discussing the considerable
improvements in living standards, the paper focuses on the mounting
pressures from rising expectations. Similarly, there are important seg-
ments at all levels who believe in the system and have no desire to
change it. This paper, however, while acknowledging this group’s
existence, concentrates on the factors which have the potential to force
the regime off its current course in the next few years.
2. The denouement of the leadership situations in Yugoslavia and
the Soviet Union may affect Romania in decisive ways but is not dis-
cussed here as our knowledge of these situations is conjectural.
Summary and Conclusions:
3. President Ceausescu runs a highly centralized power system
with its main objectives being to maintain as high a degree of independ-
ence from the Soviet Union as is possible and reach a competitive level
of industrialization as fast as possible. It is symbolized by a personality
cult so intense that a Soviet diplomat in Bucharest recently said that
his country had witnessed nothing quite like it even under Stalin. At
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
Lot 92D412, Box 2, Romania—Ceausescu Visit. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
Carlucci forwarded the cable to Brzezinski on April 13. (Ibid.)
