Peru  1077
problems. You may inform Beltran USG views his objectives with sym-
pathy and desires to cooperate with him in his efforts restore financial 
stability, improve climate for private investment, and create condi-
tions favorable to national economic growth. Beltran, of course, should 
understand that basic stabilization effort will have to be made by GOP 
itself within limits of current balance of payments availabilities includ-
ing existing EximBank credit. As for loans for development assistance 
they will, of course, have to be considered on case by case basis.
“EximBank probably prepared amend loan agreement permit 
Treasury drawing soles provided Exim satisfies itself not inconsistent 
with stabilization program Peru is developing with IMF. Bank would, 
however, like have explanation rationale of this operation since using 
counterpart only different in form from any other recourse to Reserve 
Bank and since apparently necessary in any event obtain approval 
Peruvian Congress for changing loan agreement. We dubious about 
any attempt make the/use of counter-­part appear to be method of 
avoiding inflationary impact direct borrowing from Bank.
We note Beltran expects one billion sol budgetary deficit to mid-
1960. Would appreciate your explanation gap this magnitude, which 
equal that anticipated 1959, in view anticipated additional tax revenues 
and economies.”5
5 By telegram 193 from Lima, August 29, the Embassy sent requested budget data to 
the Department of State. (823.00/8–2959)
PE–27.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the 
Department of State1

Lima, August 11, 1959, 7 p.m.
132.
Secretary, Prime Minister Beltran, Rubottom and I had long mutu-
ally satisfactory talk at Talara this morning. Beltran described his 
program along lines outlined in Embassy telegram 892 and Embassy 
despatch 60. He stated he hoped shortly to submit concrete requests for 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.11-HE/8–1159. Official Use Only. 
Repeated to Santiago for information.
2 Regarding telegram 89 from Lima, August 3, see Document PE–26, footnote 4.
