882  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
In connection with the Department’s recent guidances, including the 
guidance for tomorrow’s meeting, you can be sure that unless clearly 
and specifically instructed I am never going to bring about a break 
and will do my maximum to avoid giving him any basis for claiming 
I have caused a break. Perhaps my telegrams have at times indicated 
a greater degree of frustration and exasperation than I have intended 
and possibly given rise to a little concern I might sometime go too far 
in a meeting, but you can be sure that I will do my best not to do so. 
I full well realize that this is a situation which completely transcends 
in importance any personal feelings I may have and I will not give 
way to them. I do appreciate the kind and generous words in para­
graph 3 of the Department’s 1804. I assure you that they give me a big 
lift. I assume the Department approves of my tactics at a few of the 
recent meetings of not attempting to drag out the meeting in the face 
of Wang’s unwillingness to enter into any real discussion but close it 
off after I have made my points.
Thanks very much for the new Defense material on prisoners. 
I do not clearly understand whether it is supposed to include all of 
whatever “accounting” the Communists rendered at Panmunjom 
in February of this year. I have not yet found any specific mention 
of this “accounting” under any of the individual names in the new 
book and the only information I have received on this was Deptel 
1695. That telegram indicated that of the 2,720 missing UNC person­
nel 1,084 were carried on the list as “no data available.” I am curi­
ous as to what information was given as regard to the others and 
whether it covered any Americans. I am also interested in informa­
tion on how to reconcile this new list with the previous list. From a 
cursory examination of the new list it indicates that it now contains 
a total of 438 names (243 Army, 5 Navy, 3 Marine and 187 Air Force) 
which represents a reduction of 67 (55 Army, 10 Marine, 4 Air Force, 
plus 2 additional Navy) over the August 1, 1955 list. This comes out 
to a total of 505 whereas the August 1 list was 450. Perhaps a further 
detailed study which I hope to make will explain this, but I would 
appreciate any readily available information on how these figures are 
to be reconciled. I am immediately sending back by surface pouch 
rather than burdening Stanley’s baggage with them the briefing book 
for ­Hammarskjold and the previous roster from Defense of missing 
American personnel which I presume you mean by “prisoner book.” 
I am not clear as to what else you mean by the latter and if this is not 
correct, please let me know.
I will be looking forward to the arrival of Holdridge.
To break the monotony, Pat and Jennifer are coming down here 
Thursday and we plan to drive up to Paris on Friday to spend the Easter
