September 18–December 16, 1978
405
—Even suggestions of suspension of aid already committed to Is-
rael would invite charges of violation of U.S. commitments at the
highest levels not to use aid as a form of pressure and would trigger
outrage both here and among Israel’s supporters in the U.S.
—This package of pressures may be required at a later, much
tougher point in the negotiating process over the West Bank and Gaza;
if employed now, its effect will be weakened then.
B. Without triggering a uniformly defensive reaction in Israel, this
strategy would carry the clear message that both U.S.-Israeli relations
and the hard-won gains in the peace process are bound to suffer acutely
if the Begin government does not accept the necessity to suspend settle-
ment activity at least until the first phase of West Bank-Gaza negotia-
tions are completed, and that restraint can bring positive benefits. Ele-
ments of this strategy could include some of the following:
—Delivery of stern face-to-face message by the President to Begin
during the latter’s upcoming visit to the U.S., with a forthright public
acknowledgement, if necessary, of their deep disagreement
—Regular and frequent expressions of hope by high level U.S. offi-
cials that GOI will not take provocative actions concerning settlements
in occupied territories
—Explicit statements or calculated leak to press that U.S. will-
ingness to help GOI with costs of relocating infrastructure and materiel
from Sinai to Negev is directly linked to freeze on settlement activity
—Continuing delay of overall Matmon C discussions, while con-
tinuing approvals of essential military deliveries and authorization to
purchase a few selected priority new items.
—Mustering support of key Congressional figures and influential
private supporters of Israel for administration’s position on settlements
issue. This can be brought to bear when Begin is in the U.S. and during
the already planned visits of several important senators and congress-
men to Israel over the next few weeks
—Hint willingness to reconsider financial assistance for relocation
of Sinai settlers if Israel demonstrates prudence and restraint in the set-
tlement field
Pro
—Without reneging on our standing commitments to Israel’s secu-
rity requirements or undermining the negotiations with Egypt, force-
fully brings home the real cost of Israeli obduracy on the settlements
issue in terms of U.S.-Israel relations.
—Over time could assist moderate elements in Israel, including
members of the coalition, to isolate Begin on this issue, rather than
leaping to his defense. This type of approach seemed to produce such
an effect in the period following the breakdown of the Jerusalem talks
