of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7] Feb. (71) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Basis of Mr. Chamberlain’s views found to be his inference from general political situation in France and conversation with French Premier. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] Feb. (74) From the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.) Mr. Chamberlain’s reply to a question in the House of Commons regarding the conference that the matter has been mentioned informally in conversations with the U. S. Ambassador and is under consideration. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] Feb. (34) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) United Press cablegram reporting consent of England, Japan, and Italy to conference, and consent of France awaited by President Coolidge. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] Feb. (94) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Resume of what has occurred in regard to discussion of disarmament conference; assurance for French Government that no formal negotiations have taken place, as might have been inferred from press reports, and that if the United States takes any initiative in the matter, all the other Governments, including France, will be notified. 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 11] Feb. (19) To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Summary of situation concerning possible calling of conference, and U. S. position; regret that press reports have made it appear that some special negotiation was going on with Great Britain. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12] Mar. 18 (51) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) London press despatch reporting President Coolidge’s alleged decision, following failure of Geneva Protocol, to proceed with the conference even if some powers refuse to take part. Japanese impression that U. S.-British conversations were significant. (Footnote: British Government’s announcement, March 12, of its inability to accept Geneva Protocol.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13] Mar. 19 (31) To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Secretary’s explanation to Japanese Ambassador in Washington that the subject of a disarmament conference was introduced by Mr. Chamberlain, that conversations were informal, and that if the President decided to call a conference [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]
