Comprehensive Test Ban
507
The President asked if we had a real low threshold for a short pe-
riod, he emphasized that he meant very short, of perhaps six months,
what would the lab directors want to test? Harold Agnew responded
that if other needs had been met they would want to use their quota to
test stockpiled warheads for reliability purposes. The President asked
how they would view three years, maybe with a small quota. Roger
Batzel replied that a duration of three years would be much easier than
five years in maintaining laboratory capabilities. Harold Brown noted
we had gotten through 2½ years during the moratorium. Roger Batzel
agreed but said it was starting to hurt and that more than three years
would be particularly tough.
Frank Press commented that offering opportunities to work in laser
fusion and other related areas could be helpful in retaining scientists.
Harold Agnew agreed but argued that the best people would switch into
other areas on a permanent basis. In time we would lose our good
people and have little confidence in our stockpile, but he guessed that
presumably this was consistent with our long range objective.
David Aaron said in his view it wouldn’t help to have a short period
of testing unless a problem had been identified which needed to be cor-
rected. Harold Agnew agreed and pointed out that what was really
needed was a 3–5 KT threshold to cover any problems that would arise
and that this would be a major step forward in restraining testing.
The President asked what the effect of a CTB would be on SALT.
Harold Brown responded that SALT constraints were not applicable to
warheads. Roger Batzel commented there was a relationship in that the
CTB would constrain our ability to provide warheads for new missile
systems.
Harold Brown said that if we don’t test for three years and that, in
that time, deterioration had not occurred, then the same problems
would be experienced after three years as now. The President said we
could build all new warheads at that time for critical systems. He asked
if SALT II permitted new missiles what would be the effect of a CTB?
Harold Brown said there would be little effect, since if we were going to
resume testing after 3–5 years we would just design new warheads and
test them at that time.
John Marcum pointed out that it was his understanding that prior
to the threshold test ban we had fully tested new warheads which were
intended to meet the future needs of the M–X, TRIDENT II and cruise
missile systems. Harold Agnew agreed that this was the case and said we
had a family of tested warheads for use and planned to use these in de-
veloping new systems, since we would be unable to develop new stra-
tegic warheads even at 3–5 KT. The President commented then the 5 KT
threshold would not really help in this regard. Harold Brown said prob-
ably not although new tactical warheads might be developed. Roger
