3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
668
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Gromyko had said in his speech. He understood Gromyko’s sensitiv-
ities and hoped Gromyko understood ours.
The Secretary said he would not repeat the ground they had cov-
ered earlier. We have sought to find a practical solution for this issue,
which takes account of both Soviet sensitivities and ours. Unfortu-
nately, the position Gromyko had taken does not lead to a satisfactory
resolution of the problem. Without a reasonable measure of coopera-
tion from the Soviet side, it is not possible for us to work out a resolu-
tion of the problem that would prevent a serious deterioration in our
relations, as he had indicated the other day. We had suggested action
which the Soviet Union might take to make it clear that this is not a
combat unit. We had indicated that the Soviet Union could present
these actions in any way it wishes, and we would not, for our part, rep-
resent them as the result of any agreement or as anything other than a
voluntary action on the part of the Soviet Union. Such actions would
make it possible for us to declare that our concerns had been allayed,
and to press ahead vigorously with other matters, including the ratifi-
cation of SALT.
As the Secretary had indicated the other day, Cuba, as Gromyko so
well knew, is a highly sensitive issue with our people. We have sought
to avoid confrontation with the Soviet Union on this issue, but several
times now, in less than two decades, the discovery of Soviet military ac-
tivities on the island has created the confrontations we have sought to
avoid. We accept the reaffirmation of the 1962 understanding and note
Gromyko’s statement that this unit has not changed appreciably since
1962. We accept the fact that it has no capacity at the present time to
move beyond Cuba. The possibility remains, however, that its organi-
zation might form the basis for expansion or that the Soviets might pro-
vide the airlift or sealift for its movement to other parts of the
hemisphere.
To come to the nub of the question, it is evident that Soviet/
American relations are poised at a fork in the road. If we are able to
work out a mutually satisfactory resolution of the present problem, it
will, in the Secretary’s judgment, make it more possible to do a number
of things, to complete the ratification of SALT, which we both desire, to
press for early action in MFN and to work for a broad improvement in
our relations on many significant fronts. If, however, we are not able to
work out a mutually satisfactory solution to the problem, he was con-
cerned that all the work he and Gromyko have done to try to stabilize
the strategic military competition and to bring about a more sensible, a
more stable and a more productive relationship between our two coun-
tries will be jeopardized. The President will have to consider what ac-
tions would have to be taken under the circumstances. The Secretary
was concerned that, if this is the direction in which we will be moving,
