564
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
criticism on those nations which were helping Iran avoid the full effects
of a blockade. (TS)
Mr. Fried said that, in many respects, this is the best possible time
for a possible cutoff of Iranian oil. Iranian exports are down to only
1.5 mbd, world stocks are high, there is slack in the market, and demand
is historically low at this time of year. Because of these factors, Kuwait
and some other nations are planning to cut back production. Neverthe-
less, we are not likely to get out of it without a market reaction, and
specifically a price increase. The market is very nervous, and the reac-
tion to an Iranian cutoff would be to compete for remaining supplies
in order to protect stocks as a hedge against future contingencies. He
anticipated a possible price increase of $5–10 per barrel, i.e., a 15–30%
increase, which would represent an increase in the inflation rate of
.75–1.5%. Admittedly, these were only rough estimates. It could be half
that much. Since there is a good chance of a price increase late in the
year, it might simply make that happen sooner than anticipated. The
Saudis would certainly not increase their production. If they should
decide to reduce production as a gesture against blockade of an Islamic
state, that could be quite serious. More dangerous would be the reaction
of Kuwait, Libya and perhaps others who might go ahead with planned
cuts or even cut deliberately as a form of counter-embargo. Most of
the effects would fall on Japan which relies on Iran for 10% or more
of its total consumption. They would be entitled to trigger the IEA
sharing mechanism. The actual amount of oil involved would be very
small, but the IEA reaction would probably be internal acrimony. The
Japanese would scramble to secure alternate supplies, again tending
to drive up the price. (S)
Mr. Claytor said it would create hell in the Islamic world. Mr.
Newsom said that, if the action was taken suddenly and without
advance indication, it would have an adverse effect on the moderates
in Iran. It would create a strong public reaction and inspire a new
round of anti-Americanism which the hardliners would use to their
advantage. However, if this could be relayed in secret in advance to
the moderates, it might give them leverage to use in the in-fighting. If
handled very carefully, a case could be made that this would improve
the chances of getting the hostages out. We would have to be prepared
to follow through, however. (S)
Mr. Aaron wondered what the effects would be if the threat had
to be carried out. Mr. Newsom said that there would be a very strong
reaction in Iran which, in the worst case, could lead the militants to
start killing hostages. There would be massive demonstrations and a
hellish month or so for us to get through. In the end, however, it could
go either way. It could succeed, although it was a high risk. Admiral
Turner said it was his judgment that the militants would be very
