National Security Policy  781
the Planning Board had spent some further time on this paragraph on 
July 14. I said I felt we were pretty well narrowing the issues down to 
two questions which I showed him on the attached sheet.
I said that it seemed to me now clear that at the Planning Board 
level the State Department view was that we do not now have an ade­
quate conventional limited war capability and that the State Department 
effort would be to enlarge our present capabilities. I said that one way 
to “smoke out” this issue would be insert the words “continue to” in 
the fifth line if the redraft of paragraph 12 a, marked “NSC”, attached.
I then pointed out to him that the Defense Department felt that the 
only criteria that should govern the use of nuclear weapons were mili­
tary criteria and that the Defense Department would want 12 a to read: 
“Planning should contemplate situations short of general war where 
the use of nuclear weapons manifestly not be militarily necessary nor 
militarily appropriate to the accomplishment of national objectives . . .”
The President said that he felt that this definition was too narrow 
and agreed that the insertion of the word, “deemed” before “appropri­
ate” in the eighth line would more nearly meet his views.
I also pointed out to the President that the JCS had objected to the 
phrase, “organized units” and had proposed a substitution therefor of 
the phrase “designated commanders.” I suggested to the President that 
this probably was not quite what he had in mind and offered the lan­
guage “combatant forces” which he thought well of.
The President expressed his displeasure at not being able to find 
language which was clear and decisive and would communicate to 
everyone concerned his clear intention. I pointed out to him that it 
would be unlikely that he would wish to change this language next 
year and that a new administration would likely not rush in with major 
changes in basic policy at the beginning and that therefore we were 
writing language for the next two or three years, or possibly more. 
Therefore, it was necessary that the language be clear and definitive 
and understood and accepted by all.
Attached are redrafts of the paragraph reflecting JCS, Defense and 
other views.
2. I then said to the President that I had read and considered 
Mr. C. D. Jackson’s letter and that I thought well of his suggestion. 
I also indicated I felt that he should be present. The President agreed and 
said he had already written Mr. Jackson a letter agreeing to the meeting, 
adding a couple of names to the list and saying that the timing would 
depend only upon whether it was important to have Mr. Herter present.
3. I referred to the conservation I had had with the President on July 
13 relative to the Defense Department concern about State Department 
position papers for the Geneva Conference. I said that I had had a long 
talk with Mr. Murphy and he had also talked with Mr. McElroy and I felt
