246 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 2. Summary and action requested. There is disturbing evidence pointing to the release of lethal biological agent as the cause of numerous deaths in Sverdlovsk, USSR, in April–May 1979. The intelligence community’s present conclusions and report have been sent to you septel.2 Ambassador Watson is instructed to raise this matter with deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko as soon as possible. Ambassador Flowerree should inform Ambassador Israelyan of the de´marche promptly after it is made in Moscow.3 End summary. 3. We are deeply concerned about the the incident in Sverdlovsk in April 1979 and its implications. We wish to make a serious effort to discuss this issue bilaterally in accordance with Article V of the Biological Weapons (BW) Convention. Speed is essential in view of the end of the BW Convention Review Conference on March 21, and our desire to give the Soviets as much time as possible to give USA considered response. It is in both our interests to have at least a preliminary response before the end of the Review Conference, since we will have to state at the conference that we have raised a compliance issue. 4. Ambassador Watson should personally make the following points as soon as possible to Korniyenko or, should he be unavailable, to another official on the First Deputy Minister or Deputy Minister level. Points should be provided in the form of a Non-Paper as well. A.—The United States and the Soviet Union have a continuing interest in sustaining our mutual efforts to control the arms race. B.—I have been instructed to raise a matter which potentially has extremely serious implications for the future of arms control negotiations between our countries and more specific bearing on the Biological Weapons Convention. C.—Although no public announcement was made by Soviet authorities, for some time we have been aware of reports of an extraordinary outbreak of disease which was apparently pulmonary anthrax, which caused numerous deaths in Sverdlovsk in April 1979, and which resulted in the establishment of a quarantine. D.—We have now received further information which indicates that this extraordinary outbreak appears to have been caused by the release of a quantity of anthrax agent exceeding that justified for prophy- 2 See footnote 1, Document 111. 3 On March 17, the Mission in Geneva reported that when informed of the de´marche, “Israelyan’s only reaction was to bemoan the fact that this development would further complicate the already difficult task of agreeing to a final declaration for the BW Review Conference. He also said that he had not been informed by Moscow of the US de´marche.” (Telegram 4292 from the Mission in Geneva, March 17; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870149–0757)
