Chapter 2, January–June 1989 143 association with our assurance on testing of space-­based components capable of substituting for ABM interceptor missiles. As a means of identifying testing activities in space that would be permitted during the non-­withdrawal period, the Soviets proposed in April 1987 that the sides negotiate a “list” of criteria for devices to be banned from launch into space, using as a starting point their proposed “list” of performance parameters. Under the Soviet concept, everything below the specifications or thresholds for devices banned from being tested or stationed in space would be allowed for testing or stationing in space. In October, 1987, the Soviets clarified the “list” proposal: devices below the list thresholds could be put into space for any purpose, whether ABM-­related or not. Production and ground-­based test range activities involving devices not on the list and those with critical parameters above the thresholds would be permitted. The Soviets also proposed at this time, that, alternatively, the sides could agree to “observe the ABM Treaty as signed and ratified in 1972.” (S) Since the Washington Summit, the Soviets have alluded to the “list” proposal only in the context of discussing “data sensors” and have emphasized the WSJS language, without defining what that language means. We do not know whether or not the Soviets have abandoned the broader scope of the “list” proposal. (S) The U.S. responded that the “list” proposal was too complex, inherently unverifiable, and imposed restrictions on SDI beyond those of the ABM Treaty agreed to in 1972, and in many cases the values proposed were in effect more restrictive than even the narrow interpretation. (S) Soviet negotiating tactics (including a refusal to work a joint draft treaty text) are consistent with what appears to be their strategy in the Defense & Space talks: to defer issues and serious discussion in the hope that a change in U.S. administration or Congressional pressure might cause the U.S. to pull back from its SDI program, and failing that to defer the issue until a START Treaty is closer at hand, when greater pressure may be brought to bear on the U.S. (S) SDI Testing Requirements. The President decided on the basis of NSR-12 that the goals of the SDI program will remain unchanged, and that the program presented to Congress will focus on evaluating the potential of the most rapidly advancing technologies such as Brilliant Pebbles. In light of this guidance, a proposed test program for evaluation of the Brilliant Pebbles concept is being developed and reviewed for compliance with the ABM Treaty. This program consists of 12 flight tests to be completed by mid-FY92. While the compliance certification process has not yet been completed for these tests, we expect to conduct them consistent with the “restrictive” interpretation of the ABM Treaty. This test program would also be compatible with the U.S. unilateral
