232 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX there. The SCC-approved plan was to investigate renting or leasing time on existing transmitters—with the issue of building new ones left open. The aim was to get added impact immediately, not to spend months/ years building new transmitters before broadcasting was actually expanded. If transmitters are to be built, it is obvious that there are closer locations to the target area to build them—[2 lines not declassified]. A transmitter building scheme should be separately reviewed and approved by the SCC and the President, not dealt with in an informal letter from Walter Roberts to you. (S) In some circles concerned with the radios (Barthelemy, Lisann, some people in congressional staffs) a great deal of opposition to building transmitters in Egypt has developed and there is a minor storm brewing on this issue. Jan Nowak has picked up a good deal on it. It is typical of the kind of acrimonious argumentation which develops around all radio issues and which the BIB Staff exacerbates instead of trying to resolve. (C) You recall OMB’s stubborn refusal last winter to make funds available to RFE/RL for program expansion so that the radios could be ready with expanded programming as soon as more transmitter time was secured. Your efforts to get OMB to release funds did not succeed. No money has ever been allocated. The BIB Staff has colluded with OMB and congressional staffers to frustrate the large scale effort mounted by Jan Nowak and others (including the radios themselves) to circumvent OMB and the BIB by getting concerned Congressmen to include additional funds in this year’s appropriations for the radios. All these efforts have failed. OMB and the BIB have entangled themselves in an impossible bureaucratic circle: no money for programming until transmitters are available; no transmitters because leaks alarm the Egyptians; no serious effort to develop possibilities in other countries; no transmitter building program because that costs too much money; no expanded broadcasting. The KGB could not have devised a better scheme to keep us from achieving Presidentially approved action plans! (C) Meanwhile energy has been diverted by the sordid smear campaign the BIB Staff launched against Leo Cherne, Paul Seabury, you and me—which goes on and on, as you can see from the Pravda piece of July 28, 1980 (Tab B).4 The White House announcement of intention to reappoint Gronouski in the midst of this has made a travesty of our whole effort. Domestic politicking takes priority over serious foreign policy purpose. The BIB Staff, under Gronouski, works to undermine our efforts to make the radios more effective. Both Gronouski and the 4 Not attached.
