March–August 1953
615
agreement to such a settlement might tend to weaken mutual trust be-
tween free nations engaged in friendly economic intercourse. Further-
more, many of my countrymen who have kept themselves informed re-
garding developments in this unfortunate dispute believe that, in view
of the emotions which have been aroused both in Iran and the United
Kingdom, efforts to determine by direct negotiation the amount of
compensation due are more likely to increase friction than to promote
understanding. They continue to adhere to the opinion that the most
practicable and the fairest means of settling the question of compensa-
tion would be for that question to be referred to some neutral interna-
tional body which could consider on the basis of merit all claims and
counter-claims.
I fully understand that the Government of Iran must determine for
itself which foreign and domestic policies are likely to be most advanta-
geous to Iran and to the Iranian people. In what I have written, I am not
trying to advise the Iranian Government on its best interests. I am
merely trying to explain why, in the circumstances, the Government of
the United States is not presently in a position to extend more aid to
Iran or to purchase Iranian oil.
In case Iran should so desire, the United States Government hopes
to be able to continue to extend technical assistance and military aid on
a basis comparable to that given during the past year.
I note the concern reflected in your letter at the present dangerous
situation in Iran and sincerely hope that before it is too late, the Govern-
ment of Iran will take such steps as are in its power to prevent a further
deterioration of that situation.
Please accept, Mr. Prime Minister, the renewed assurances of my
highest consideration.”
Foregoing should be delivered to Prime Minister soonest with oral
explanation telegraphic transmission used in view fact Ambassador
Henderson not returning Iran immediately.
Unless released by Prime Minister existence and substance this
message should be held secret.
Dulles
