286 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement the Chinese Government interprets and understands as such the Sep­ tember 11 notification of the United States Government to the Indian Government. It must be pointed out that our side has taken into account of the difficult position in the diplomatic relations in which the United States Government finds, and has acceded to your proposed text on the entrusting of third powers in its present form in the Agreed Announce­ ment. However, on the concrete content with regard to the Chinese Government’s entrusting the Indian Government and the United States Government’s entrusting the United Kingdom Government both sides cannot have any other interpretation. After the publication of our Agreed Announcement the Amer­ ican press including the United States Information Service invari­ ably made distorted interpretation at variance with the actual fact of the text of the Agreed Announcement regarding the entrusting of the third powers, alleging that the Chinese Government would entrust the United Kingdom Government on the one hand and the United States Government would entrust the Indian Government on the other. The United States Government ought not to agree to such a distorted interpretation. We desire to know if the United States Government has formally entrusted the United Kingdom Government and will appreciate a confirmation in a reply letter to this effect if it has already done so, so that I will be able to report promptly to my Government. Then my Government will inform the United Kingdom Government of its agreement to the latter’s being entrusted by the United States Government. (Signed) Wang Ping-­nan 217. Telegram 6 from Geneva to Hong Kong1 Geneva, September 22, 1955, noon 6. Would appreciate any immediately available information whether nine jailed Americans released from Communist China were informed by prison officials of these negotiations or terms of agreed announcement before their release. Wang has alleged remaining 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.95A251/9–2255. Confidential; ­Priority. Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 760.
