Guatemala 675 importance of extending DLF loan assistance to Guatemala at this time suggests the advisability of sympathetic consideration of an alternative to this present application. As currently cast, the housing loan application of Guatemala does not appear to me to merit DLF Board approval. It looks to the extension of a $12 million 30 year loan to enable the Central Bank of Guatemala to purchase first mortgages now held or scheduled to be field by private banking institutions. No evidence is presented that this action per se would stimulate further savings or investments within Guatemala in the housing field. While it would presumably make possible the financing of 3000 additional houses, this volume would appear only marginal in relation to the total volume of housing foreseen by the Government of Guatemala as likely to stem from governmental and privately sponsored housing activities in the next 5 years. It would not, therefore, appear likely significantly to contribute to Guatemala’s economic development. At the same time, it would saddle the Government with a substantial dollar repayment obligation and might establish an unfortunate precedent complicating DLF efforts to fend off voluminous loan requests for housing construction in other countries in Latin America and elsewhere. For these or those reasons, despite the high priority attached to this loan application by the Government of Guatemala primarily on political grounds, we would not favor favorable action on this present request. On the other hand, we would strongly recommend sympathetic consideration by the DLF Board of a loan to Guatemala of a sum approximating $2 million which might serve as a catalytic medium to foster greater housing construction and the accumulation of savings to flow into this field on a continuing expanding basis. Such a loan, matched in equal amount by the Government of Guatemala, might be used to create a mortgage credit institution. Such an institution would have features akin to the combined functions of the Federal Housing Administration and the Federal Home Loan Bank in the U.S.: the guarantee of mortgages on insurance principles and the provision of a credit pool upon which building and loan associations and insurance companies and savings banks might draw as occasion warranted to prime private housing financing. To the capital of such an institution these private lending agencies might also be called upon to contribute in an amount equal to the DLF-Government of Guatemala subscription. The primary purpose would be two-­fold: the creation of a more orderly, secure market for mortgage money and of institutions to attract savings to such a market. The precise pattern for such an institutional arrangement and related details require more discussions and study both here and in Guatemala. These have already been initiated. Experts of ICA’s Housing Division, the FHA, HHFC and FHLB hurriedly convened last Friday referred to the favorable experience with such institutions in the U.S. and Puerto Rico and are prepared to shape up a detailed program for DLF
