96 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII greatly endanger the Ambassador’s life. Boles then outlined the American strategy of waiting in such cases. Boles then told the police that we had our medical staff ready for all emergencies and were prepared to move the Ambassador to the dispensary, if necessary. Boles was then assured that the police would provide an escort. 12. At about 1115 a.m. Mr. James E. Taylor, Political Officer, and Embassy employee, Jalal Talibee, arrived at the Ministry of Interior. They asked to see police commandant Sayed Daoud Taroon and were asked to wait in Taroon’s outer office by his secretary, for a few minutes. Earlier in the morning, Taroon has met Admin Officer Bernie Woertz and a local and had said that an American officer was welcome to sit in Taroon’s office and act as a contact point for the USG. What Woertz and his local picked up by way of info was transmitted by sitrep no. 5. 13. At 1120, Afghan police were observed moving ladders against the outside of the hotel in such a way that the kidnappers could see the action. Troops with what appeared to be commando badges also arrived at that time. By this time, the entire hotel and neighboring streets and buildings were filled with police and other security forces. At 1125, RSO Boles notified the Embassy that it appeared that a police action against room 117 may be pending immediately. At the Embassy’s request, American officers at the hotel once again asked the Afghan police for patience, advising that time is usually on the side of the authorities. The Americans then saw several commandos enter the hotel lobby, cock their weapons, and rush upstairs. 14. At 1128, the Embassy told American officers at the hotel that DCM Amstutz was trying to get in touch with police commandant Taroon. This information was passed to the Afghan police at the hotel and they were asked not to do anything drastic until these negotiations took place. 15. At 1130 Bakhturin told American officers that the men in the room demanded the return of the man whom the police had caught in the lobby. He said that this request had been conveyed to Hafizullah Amin. The terrorists said that after their comrade had been returned to them, they would be willing to talk further with the police. An Afghan police official told us that security forces had talked to Ambassador Dubs, but did not know what his condition was. He reportedly confirmed in English that he was all right. They also reported that a policeman across the street had viewed him through a window and he appeared to be all right. Bakhturin indicated that he thought it would be at least an hour before anything could be done. 16. Also around 1130, Bakhturin asked Flatin what languages the Ambassador knew besides English. He was told the Ambassador’s best foreign language was Russian. Bakhturin did not appear satisfied with this, and asked what other languages he knew. When told German, Bakhturin asked if Flatin knew German, and was told yes.
