1978  403
will work properly, since these plans are not realistically exercised [2 
lines not declassified]
—We also find that only the President, Vice President, and Sec-
retary of Defense are briefed on nuclear weapons control and release 
procedures. Other successors are not familiar with SIOP or SRF proce-
dures or options; however, military advisors will be available to assist 
an NCA successor.
(TS) On Information Availability
—The information “needs” of a national decision maker could 
range across the following competence or ability levels for decision-­
making and force management:
—Level I—“Blind.” Has minimum knowledge of status of U.S. 
forces, inferred from launch orders given and known weapons systems 
characteristics. Capable of launching preplanned SRF options.
—Level II—“Informed.” Has access to a reasonable amount of 
information about U.S. status but does not have comparable informa-
tion on enemies or neutrals. This allows the NCA to reprogram forces 
against preplanned options to make up for force drawdowns.
—Level III—“Intelligent.” Has access to status of enemy, neutral 
and U.S. forces, and an assessment of the results of the SIOP laydown. 
Can do effective force reprogramming and retargeting against the pre-
planned options (including all withholds)—­that is, a limited ad hoc 
employment capability, for response to enemy attempts at coercion or 
“peripheral pillage.”
—Level IV—“Ideal.” Knows the status of enemy, friendly and 
neutral forces; the extent of damage to the enemy (both economic 
and military); the rate and status of U.S. and enemy recovery efforts; 
international political situation; extent of damage to the U.S.; and has 
sufficient information and control of assets that he can sustain near-­
real-­time battle management, including reprogramming, retargeting, 
and reconstitution.
—NSDM 242 requires that the SRF be available for use for pro-
tection and coercion during and after a major nuclear exchange. This 
implies a need for both SRF flexibility and responsiveness to rapidly 
changing real-­world situations, and also an “Intelligent” decision-­
maker. Hence, the study used Level III information requirements and 
command abilities as the standard against which needs and abilities 
were assessed.
—Information Availability—U.S. Status
—Assuming that they survive, the ABNCPs will be able to moni-
tor and update the status of most of the surviving military communi-
cations/intelligence/reconnaissance assets, as well as monitoring the
