 
You will further note that the Treasury will request the Congress to repeal the
provisions of the Act of January 13, 1925, which, for practical purposes, have been
nullified by the refusal of foreign governments to accord diplomatic status to “Customs
Attachés”.
The Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, remains in effect, and it is
expected that the cooperation described therein, between Diplomatic Missions and
representatives of the Customs Service will continue. You are directed to give all
proper assistance to these officials, bearing in mind that their obligation to carry out the
provisions of the Tariff Act of 1922 is in no way impaired by the refusal of any foreign
government to accord to them diplomatic status. You will take every appropriate
occasion to explain to the appropriate foreign officials the duties of the Customs
officials, as described in the Tariff Act, and the Department’s Instruction of April 2,
1925, and to remove any misunderstandings that may exist.
In reply to a request of the Treasury Department that instructions be issued to American
Diplomatic Missions directing them to obtain for “Customs Attachés” laissez passer,
etc., as well as to endeavor to arrange exemption from police registration requirements
and income taxation, the Department said: “The Department deems it inadvisable to
issue specific instructions to its Diplomatic Missions directing them to request ‘laissez
passer’, etc., for your officials, since these special customs facilities are given by
foreign governments only as special courtesies. The Department prefers to leave this
matter to the discretion of the Diplomatic Missions concerned. It is suggested that each
of your representatives take up this question with the American Diplomatic Mission
with which he is in closest touch.
“The question of the liability of your representatives to police registration regulations
and to income taxation abroad is dependent upon the domestic laws of individual
countries. The Department, and American Diplomatic Missions, will continue to make
every effort to obtain for your representatives such exemption as may properly be
requested in specific cases as they arise.”
This instruction is for your information only. The status of “Customs Attachés”, from
the point of view of American law, has not been changed. In those countries where they
have been recognized as members of the Diplomatic Mission, they will continue to be
so regarded pending a modification of the Act of January 13, 1925.
I am [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW
