3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
408
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
reaching a new accord. But, as he had said, the Soviet Union was still
determined to continue the negotiations and apply further efforts.
Displaying some emotion, Gromyko said he had been asking him-
self what interests the Chinese might be pursuing with regard to these
negotiations and what sort of advice they could give the United States
in this connection. He had come to the conclusion that the Chinese
could only advise the U.S. as follows: “To the devil with this new agree-
ment on the limitation of strategic offensive arms.”
Gromyko said that quite frequently he had heard from the Secre-
tary and from other representatives of the Administration that many
representatives in the Congress of the United States and many people
in the United States opposed conclusion of the SALT II agreement. Was
this really so surprising when the U.S. Government had not taken any
substantive steps to defend the new agreement and to speak out in its
favor? He and the Soviet leadership were struck by the timidity dis-
played by the U.S. Administration in SALT matters. Everyone in his
country knew that these negotiations were of prime importance. Virtu-
ally every statement at the Special Session of the U.N. General As-
sembly had referred to the enormous importance of this matter and he
was personally convinced that it was indeed enormously important.
But, he would ask, what about the U.S. Administration? Why does it
not speak out in a bold voice, and clearly state that this agreement is in
the interests of both our countries and in the interests of world peace?
That was a very valid question, one that he as Foreign Minister had
been asked by many people. Indeed, no such firm voice had been heard
in defense of the agreement in the United States. When he was asked
this question he could only shrug his shoulders in bewilderment. He
was genuinely astounded by the absence of a firm stand in defense of
the agreement on the part of the U.S. Administration. Voices were
heard in the Congress of the United States to the effect that it was a
risky thing to conclude an agreement with the Soviet Union, because
the Soviet Union might violate the agreement. But, he would point out,
people on his side could say the same thing about the United States. A
firm reply should be provided. It should be said that the agreement
being worked out would be based on the ability of each side to verify
compliance with complete reliability. Under those conditions it surely
must be made known to the public at large that violation of the agree-
ment was ruled out by all the verification arrangements contained
therein and by our extensive experience of implementing the SALT I
agreements. That experience had surely been most positive. Whenever
misunderstandings had arisen, they had been promptly resolved by
appropriate discussions and explanations between the two sides.
Gromyko repeated that no firm voice had been raised on the part
of the U.S. Government. For the sake of truth it should be said that the
