370  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
perform any functions envisaged for him under Agreed Announce­
ment; register our profound dissatisfaction and concern; state that there 
has been no announcement of release any Americans in last four weeks 
although QUOTE expeditious UNQUOTE release pledged; and end 
with observation that we shall continually scrutinize record of Chinese 
Communist performance or non-­performance most closely.
3. After making this brief statement and without insisting on fur­
ther discussion, you may then proceed with renunciation of force item. 
Presentation of statement approved. Material for your use in later dis­
cussions now being prepared.
4. It is not essential to fix a rigid order of all agenda items under Point 
Two at next meeting although this may serve as subject for discussion.
5. We have requested Foreign Office to instruct O’Neill to put your 
three unanswered questions to Chinese Communist Foreign Office 
through formal approach. Text of our memorandum to British being 
sent you separately.
6. Meetings only three or four days apart are too frequent. FYI Other 
demands on Secretary and senior officers Department are so heavy 
that Geneva developments cannot be appraised and new instructions 
approved at such short intervals. In future endeavor arrange minimum 
one week interval.
Dulles
270.	 Letter 11 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 11
Geneva, October 6, 1955
Dear Walter:
I have received both your letters No. 16 and No. 17 and found them 
very interesting and helpful. I know the time these take from your hec­
tic day, but want you to know that from my standpoint it is well worth 
while.
I was sorry to miss writing you last week, but just could not make 
it and felt I had thoroughly covered the situation in my telegrams. At 
the last minute I decided to drive to Prague in the new Oldsmobile I 
had delivered to me here. Left at 5 a.m. and got to Prague at 9 p.m. 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
