Chapter 2, January–June 1989  225
START
You should consider a shift in emphasis in START from seeking 
reductions for their own sake (the “deep reductions” theme) to the 
goal of reducing the risk of war and enhancing stability. Such a shift 
would have implications for your arms control policies in three related 
areas and for our specific negotiating proposals in START. These three 
areas are (a) verification, (b) mobile ICBMs, and (c) other changes in 
our START position (notably airbreathers) and new START initiatives.
Verification. Our approach to verification involves two kinds of 
tradeoffs. First, measures that increase our confidence that the Soviets 
are not cheating typically are expensive and intrusive. The costs of ver-
ification are likely to come out of the defense budget and—­in an era 
of very tight fiscal constraints—­at the expense of important conven-
tional and nuclear capabilities. Intrusive inspection cuts both ways: the 
Soviets would have the same rights that we do and could collect valu-
able intelligence about sensitive facilities and highly classified activities 
that are entirely unrelated to START.
Recognizing that verification never can be perfect, you will be asked to 
make decisions about how to strike the best balance among the competing con-
siderations of verification confidence, costs, and intrusiveness in several areas.
One of our approaches to deter the Soviets from producing more 
missiles than they are allowed under START is to fence some of their 
missile factories and then count the number of missiles leaving through 
the gate. This is called “perimeter and portal monitoring” or PPM. 
PPM is expensive in money and manpower. The greater the number of 
facilities at which we establish PPM, the greater the deterrent to Soviet 
cheating but the higher the costs to us. We could propose to monitor 
fewer Soviet facilities using PPM, or we could rely on less comprehen-
sive procedures, but with less deterrence of Soviet cheating.
Another approach to deterring Soviet cheating is a right to inspect 
“suspect sites.” If verification were our only concern, we would 
want  extensive inspection rights. But we also need to protect from 
Soviet inspectors (and their intelligence agents posing as inspectors) 
facilities ranging from CIA headquarters to the plant where the B–2 
“Stealth” bomber is being produced. The more exclusions we insist on 
for ourselves, the more we must grant the Soviets and the less our con-
fidence that they are not cheating.
The second kind of verification tradeoff concerns the competition 
between our interest in deterring and detecting Soviet cheating on the 
one hand, and preserving our own military capabilities and flexibility 
on the other. Probably the clearest example of this dilemma is presented 
by the problem of mobile missiles which are, at once, both more sur-
vivable and less verifiable. The issue of mobile missiles is discussed in
