Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Begin had an almost pro forma meeting with Habib,5 stressing the need to a halt to attacks on Israel; the Israelis apparently accepted that the Habib effort is not a back-door approach to the PLO; they are skeptical but open-minded; Weizman will suspend the preemptive strategy for now, but will keep options open if attacks resume; and Israel will get Haddad out of the UNIFIL area if the PLO and Leftists leave it; —France is trying to get a statement out of the PLO prior to the Arab summit, on Lebanese territorial integrity, the temporary nature of the PLO presence, extension of Lebanese authority, support for the cease-fire, and praise of the UNIFIL role. The sweetener (provided the statement came before the Arab summit) would be an Arafat visit to Phil is thus “reasonably optimistic” about the chances for moving forward. Formal written statements and all-party conferences are out. A modus vivendi might be possible, and he sees a “surprising degree of Arab confidence that Arafat would cooperate.” Given what is happening, there is no need for us to take a more prominent role. (S/S) Where Next? Habib sees the near-term as important in seeing what the Lebanese can and will do to follow up—in thinking things through, developing details of an initiative, and securing Palestinian approval of next steps. The Arab summit could be crucial. (S/S) Phil has asked for approval of a number of steps (pages 7–8). These are essentially non-controversial, except: —should we talk to the Saudis, Kuwaitis, Moroccans, and Sudanese about supporting some effort through ambassadors, or send Habib out (the former minimizes risks of being seen as trying to interfere in the Arab summit; the latter has more chance of getting somewhere); and —should we tell the Israelis about French thinking (yes: to keep from being accused of holding back; no: that we might be asked to turn-off an Arafat visit). (S/S) 5 Habib met with Begin on October 28 to discuss “cooling” the situation in South Lebanon and moving the ceasefire toward a permanent peace. Assessing their meeting, Lewis stated that the Israelis were “basically satisfied with current status quo in South Lebanon. At same time, they recognize that situation there does not provide best foundation for securing Israel’s northern front. Overall impression left is that Israel has no quarrel with long-term objectives of: perpetuating the ceasefire; eventual departure of unauthorized forces from area of a strengthened UNIFIL, and effort to enhance authority of GOL. As for practical next steps in Lebanon, Israelis are deeply skeptical, but apparently willing to let others give it a try so long as certain fundamental factors are kept in forefront of effort.” (Telegram 23165 from Tel Aviv, October 29; National Archives, RG
