996
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Begin had an almost pro forma meeting with Habib,5 stressing the
need to a halt to attacks on Israel; the Israelis apparently accepted that
the Habib effort is not a back-door approach to the PLO; they are skep-
tical but open-minded; Weizman will suspend the preemptive strategy
for now, but will keep options open if attacks resume; and Israel will
get Haddad out of the UNIFIL area if the PLO and Leftists leave it;
—France is trying to get a statement out of the PLO prior to the
Arab summit, on Lebanese territorial integrity, the temporary nature of
the PLO presence, extension of Lebanese authority, support for the
cease-fire, and praise of the UNIFIL role. The sweetener (provided the
statement came before the Arab summit) would be an Arafat visit to
Paris. (S/S)
Phil is thus “reasonably optimistic” about the chances for moving
forward. Formal written statements and all-party conferences are out.
A modus vivendi might be possible, and he sees a “surprising degree of
Arab confidence that Arafat would cooperate.” Given what is hap-
pening, there is no need for us to take a more prominent role. (S/S)
Where Next? Habib sees the near-term as important in seeing what
the Lebanese can and will do to follow up—in thinking things through,
developing details of an initiative, and securing Palestinian approval of
next steps. The Arab summit could be crucial. (S/S)
Phil has asked for approval of a number of steps (pages 7–8). These
are essentially non-controversial, except:
—should we talk to the Saudis, Kuwaitis, Moroccans, and Suda-
nese about supporting some effort through ambassadors, or send
Habib out (the former minimizes risks of being seen as trying to inter-
fere in the Arab summit; the latter has more chance of getting some-
where); and
—should we tell the Israelis about French thinking (yes: to keep
from being accused of holding back; no: that we might be asked to
turn-off an Arafat visit). (S/S)
5 Habib met with Begin on October 28 to discuss “cooling” the situation in South
Lebanon and moving the ceasefire toward a permanent peace. Assessing their meeting,
Lewis stated that the Israelis were “basically satisfied with current status quo in South
Lebanon. At same time, they recognize that situation there does not provide best founda-
tion for securing Israel’s northern front. Overall impression left is that Israel has no
quarrel with long-term objectives of: perpetuating the ceasefire; eventual departure of
unauthorized forces from area of a strengthened UNIFIL, and effort to enhance authority
of GOL. As for practical next steps in Lebanon, Israelis are deeply skeptical, but appar-
ently willing to let others give it a try so long as certain fundamental factors are kept in
forefront of effort.” (Telegram 23165 from Tel Aviv, October 29; National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790495–0901)
