Human Rights 503 pared to present our case in defense of our refusal to support the imposition of economic sanctions, our commitment to peaceful change and our assistance to and encouragement of investment efforts in majority ruled countries in Southern Africa. At the same time we should be prepared to rehearse and expect full credit for the positive accomplishments which have occurred in Southern Africa, in Namibia, chiefly through the efforts of U.S. and other Western governments. B. Israeli-Occupied Territories We must stress the need for an overall settlement, which is the only way finally to solve this problem. In the meantime, we should highlight our support for the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the Occupied Territories,8 and the encouraging progress being made by the ICRC in dealing with the treatment of prisoners problem. C. Chile Discussion of the human rights situation in Chile will center upon the report of the Human Rights Commission’s ad hoc working group, which has finally been able to visit Chile. As a co-sponsor of the resolution on human rights in Chile at the last General Assembly,9 the United States should be prepared to engage in consultations on a resolution at the 33rd General Assembly which will be responsive to such developments as may be reported by the ad hoc working group. D. Democratic Kampuchea The focus of attention in the United Nations with respect to the human rights situation in Democratic Kampuchea will be the 1979 session of the Commission on Human rights, which responded to the United Kingdom initiative at its 1978 session by deciding to discuss the question at its 1979 session. We understand that the UK Government desires that nothing be done at the UNGA to shift the focus from the Commission on Human Rights. The United States delegation should be prepared to make appropriate references to our concern over the situation in Democratic Kampuchea, both in the speech to be delivered during the general debate as well as in the statement we may make on the human rights record presented by the report of ECOSOC. The U.S. delegation should also consult further with the UK and other WEO members of the Human Rights Commission, both to encourage them to maintain their active interest in this matter and to explore the possi- 8 See footnote 3, Document 125. 9 Reference is to A/RES/32/118, Protection of Human Rights in Chile, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 16, 1977.
