Venezuela 1247 VE–20. Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela, February 14, 19591

Caracas, February 14, 1959. SUBJECT President Betancourt of Venezuela PARTICIPANTS President Betancourt; Mrs. Betancourt Governor Dewey, Head of United States Delegation to Inauguration of President Betancourt Ambassador Sparks ARA—Mr. Rubottom Ambassador Falcón Briceño Governor Dewey, Ambassador Sparks, and called on President Betancourt by appointment at 8 a.m., February 14. We waited 5 or 10 minutes on the porch of the residence, along with Venezuelan Ambassador to the United States, Sr. Marcos Falcón Briceño, and then were greeted by the President and Mrs. Betancourt, who escorted the group2 into the dining room for breakfast. The President wasted no time in getting down to business. Addressing himself to me in Spanish, he said that Venezuela intended to raise in the OAS the question of expelling the dictatorship countries. He declared that communism profited by the continuation of the dictatorships and that their fall would deal the communists a mortal blow. He began to refer by name to Trujillo, with noticeable feeling, and aimed most of his thrusts directly at him. I stated our policy of supporting the basic principles of the OAS, including non intervention, and my conviction that this was fully compatible with the encouragement and growth of democracy. I questioned whether a majority of countries in America would support his position of expelling members which had not yet arrived at democratic systems. I reminded him of the risk, in tolerating any kind of intervention, that “bad” governments would feel justified in intervening just as much as “good” governments. Governor Dewey, who followed the discussion 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.11/2–1659. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Rubottom on February 16. 2 President-­elect Betancourt was inaugurated on February 13, 1959. The U.S. delegation to attend the inauguration included the following: former N.Y. Governor Thomas E. Dewey; Rubottom; John M. Budinger, Vice President of the Rankers Trust Company; Harry Darby, Chairman of the Board of Darby Corp. and former U.S. Senator from Kansas; General Lyman L. Lemnitzer, Vice Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; and Serafino Romualdi, AFL–CIO Representative for Latin America (who replaced AFL–CIO President George Meany, who was ill).
