838  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
NI–2.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge 
of Nicaraguan Affair (Taylor)1

Washington, February 21, 1958.
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua
Dr. Alfonso Ortega-Urbina, Counselor of Embassy of Nicaragua
ARA - Assistant Secretary Rubottom
MID - Mr. Taylor
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa called to discuss President Somoza’s 
fear of an invasion against his Government from Nicaraguan exiles 
residing in Honduras and Costa Rica. The Ambassador said that he 
had had a recent conversation with President Somoza in which Somoza 
asked him to discuss this matter with the Department. He said the revo-
lutionary Nicaraguan exile leaders were Pedro Vivas and Gomez Flores 
in Honduras, and General Cuadro Pasos in Costa Rica.
The Ambassador said that in Honduras, according to Nicaraguan 
intelligence reports, Nicaraguan exiles were organizing near the bor-
der for an attack. He said that although Honduran President Villeda 
Morales had given assurances to President Somoza that he would not 
permit the exiles to launch such an attack, it was feared that Villeda 
was not completely informed of the present activities of the Nicaraguan 
exiles. He indicated that although President Somoza had confidence 
in the good intentions of Villeda, there was doubt in his mind as to 
whether such key figures in his government as Oscar Flores, Villa 
Bermudas, and Alvarado Puerto were of the same mind. Sevilla-Sacasa 
stressed that Pedro Vivas was the brother-­in-­law of Alvarado Puerto, 
the new Honduran Foreign Minister, and that because of this rela-
tionship it was feared any attempt of Vivas to organize the exiles for 
an attack in Nicaragua would not be effectively discouraged by the 
Foreign Minister.
Sevilla-Sacasa stated his Government felt sure that in Costa Rica, 
when Echandi assumed the Presidency, he would not permit the 
exiles to remain in the country such as Figueres has done. He said the 
Nicaraguan exiles were aware of this and that fear of not being per­
mitted to remain  in Costa Rica would force them to make a move 
against the Nicaraguan Government within the next two months. 
The Ambassador said that the activities of the exiles in Costa Rica were 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 717.00/2–2158. Confidential.
