Afghanistan
649
preparations for the UNGA.3 We might need a common position at
any one of these and hence the value of this exchange. The group then
considered the Elements point by point.
Point One was generally acceptable to the group and several called
it essential. De Laboulaye described it as “the ultimate aim,” apparently
thinking that withdrawal might take place sequentially. Mr. Christo-
pher made it clear that all Soviet troops would have to come out first;
otherwise we might expose ourselves to a situation in which the Soviets
would control the transport lines and communication points with a
reduced military force and claim that they had returned the country
to Afghan control.
Point Two drew considerable discussion. Hermes warned that the
search for a government acceptable to the Afghan people could go on
for years and the Soviets would continue to say that nothing was
acceptable. De Laboulaye speculated that there could be a new govern-
ment in place before the Soviet troops all withdrew and it could serve
as a transitional government. Henderson said that Point Two should
be the outcome of Points One and Three, i.e., withdrawal of forces and
non-interference could create a state of affairs which would permit the
evolution of a government which would be acceptable to the Afghan
people.
Point Three led to a discussion of the Afghanistan/Pakistan bound-
ary. Hermes asked if we thought the Pakistanis would accept the Dur-
and Line. Mr. Christopher thought they would. Thereafter there was
some discussion about whether the right words should be “no interfer-
ence” or “no intervention” since a range of activities such as radio
broadcasts could lead to a situation where it would be hard to differen-
tiate between normal contacts and interference. In the end the group
preferred the words “intervention by neighboring other states” rather
than “by its neighbors or any other state.”
Point Four was reasonably acceptable to the group and Henderson
thought it would be acceptable to his government.
Point Five. Henderson was worried that the proposal for guarantees
was too sweeping and implied that the guarantor powers might have
to use force; he did not think Britain would be ready to go to war
automatically in such a situation. Hermes as well thought that the
countries involved could not give substance to guarantees. Henderson
continued that any breach of neutrality or interference would call for
the parties to re-establish the status quo. The group were inclined to
3 For the Islamic Foreign Ministers’ meeting, see footnote 4, Document 270. The
G–7 Summit was held in Venice June 22–23; see footnote 2, Document 281. The U.N.
General Assembly convened in New York September 16.
