Chapter 2, January–June 1989  183
Tab B
Paper Prepared by the Policy Coordinating Committee27
Washington, June 2, 1989
START 07D
NSR 14 START Review Paper Seven—Mobile ICBM Verification
Purpose. To review options for modifying the U.S. approach to ver-
ifying mobile ICBM limits under START.
Background. Because of verification and stability concerns, the pre-
vious administration sought to ban mobile ICBMs under START. The 
United States did indicate, however, that if an effective verification 
scheme could be agreed we would consider allowing a strictly limited 
number of mobile ICBMs.
Although maintaining its formal position in the Joint Draft Text 
that mobile ICBMs should be banned, the United States agreed in 1988 
to work on verification provisions for mobile ICBMs. A joint working 
paper has been prepared. The basic U.S. proposal would:
— Monitor additions to the mobile inventory through Perimeter 
Portal Monitoring (PPM) of production facilities producing the account-
able stage of mobile ICBMs.
— Monitor the legal inventory through a verification scheme 
which confines mobile ICBMs and their launchers to relatively small 
locations in peacetime except for notified transits and, in the case of 
deployed mobiles, infrequent exercise or operational dispersals.
— Guard against illegal activity through a guaranteed right of 
short-­notice on-­site inspection at an agreed list of facilities and through 
the ability to conduct suspect site inspections (SSI). Except for the 
agreed list of facilities, suspect site inspections would be subject to a 
right of refusal.
— Deter use of the legal infrastructure by any illegal missiles and 
their launchers through a system of tagging (not yet accepted by the 
Soviets and not yet technically proven in an operational environment). 
Periodic short-­notice inspections of legal facilities would check that 
only tagged (i.e. legal) missiles were present.
On April 22, 1989, the President adopted a U.S. ICBM modern-
ization program consisting of (a) rebasing the existing 50 silo based 
Peacekeeper missiles in a Peacekeeper rail garrison mode by the early 
1990s and (b) development of the small ICBM for deployment in a 
27 Secret.
