Arms Control and Disarmament 1537 to last summer in Geneva. By unexpectedly accepting such a system, the Soviets could place us in the position of either going along with a dangerous agreement or backing away for reasons extremely difficult, if not impossible, to explain to the world. Our position would then be most awkward. Strong voices would argue convincingly that the system is inadequate and that the criteria of “fool-­proof inspection” has not been met. I conclude from the tes­ timony last week on the Hill that almost any agreed threshold would be questioned by the Congress. Certainly, the validity of a 20 kiloton threshold would be vigorously attacked by some very knowledgeable and respected people. I fear, also, that the American public would in time feel they had been misled by our Government. I therefore feel, Chris, that we are moving along a very danger­ ous course in this negotiation. While I do not wish to inject myself into “quarter-­backing” the negotiation, I urge in all sincerity that you find a way at this time to alter the course of the negotiations along the lines expressed in our letter to you of December 23, 1958. To summarize our position, we propose taking the initiative at Geneva with a positive two-­phase program. First, we would urge an agreement with the nuclear powers to suspend atmospheric tests and to establish an adequate detection system to insure compliance. Such a system would be relatively simple and inexpensive, and would be dependable because of our very extensive experience over a period of years with this type of detection. Moreover, this step would eliminate the fallout issue. Second, conduct more underground tests as quickly as possible and in diverse geographical and geological environments to seek solid information on identification and detection of underground nuclear explosions. From this information we could determine whether a sys­ tem could be designed in which we would have sufficient confidence to negotiate for a complete test cessation. This program of experimentation could be a joint effort by the par­ ties to the treaty, or could be done by the parties individually with inter­ national inspection and with all data developed being shared among the participating nations. Sincerely yours, John A. McCone
