190  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
Indian representation will be a useful entering wedge, especially if they 
can sell the concept of India as a protecting power. Phleger remarked 
that it would have been better if we had insisted on some non govern­
mental agency such as the Red Cross, to serve as a contact with those 
Chinese who wish to return to the Mainland.
Your 642 has just come in. The dinner conversation certainly does 
not bring up anything new or add to our hopes for a successful out­
come of item one. The one comforting thought is that it certainly does 
not indicate any intention on the part of the Chinese Communists to 
precipitate an early break.
We are trying to assemble information for you on current depar­
tures of Chinese for the Mainland via Hong Kong. Immigration tells us 
that it takes at least 60 days to process the outgoing passenger manifests 
of the American President Lines and the air lines. This is bureaucratic 
red tape at its worst. We hope to get the information promptly, perhaps 
using our Consulate General at Hong Kong to monitor all arrivals of 
Chinese in transit to the Mainland.
At Phleger’s suggestion we are working on an outline which spells 
out our objectives at Geneva, the limitations imposed, the courses of 
action that are called for and under this the arguing points that might 
well be brought up in the course of the talks. The outline also includes 
some thoughts on the sort of statements the two sides might issue by 
agreement if there has to be a recess. This statement would explain 
the postponement of discussion of item two until all U.S. civilians are 
released. We believe that there are some telling points you could make 
to Wang regarding the unusual efforts we have made to reduce tensions 
and the Chinese Communist actions which have actually increased ten­
sions. For instance our restraint in not giving publicity of the story of Ber­
sohn, who has now come around and whose account is utterly damning 
to the Chinese Communists, is something of which note might well be 
taken at some stage. The same is true of the forbearance we have shown 
in suppressing the full story of the 11 airmen. We have even gone to the 
Deputy Secretary of Defense in order to make sure that the airmen do not 
tell any more of their stories for the present.
We are anxious to get your reaction to the suggestion that meetings 
be reduced to twice a week.
Good luck and regards,
Sincerely,
Walter P. McConaughy
