1957  1421
19. Wang continued, as far as whole question of correspondents was 
concerned, the measures taken by authorities his country last year to 
permit entry was one matter. The statement of August 22 of my govern­
ment denying reciprocity was another matter. This step altered nature 
of problem and closed door on exchange of visits of correspondents. If 
our authorities insist on August 22 statement then the responsibility for 
obstructing visits of correspondents entirely lies on U.S. If the idea of 
simultaneous visits by correspondents is accepted, then he cannot see 
why the statement proposed this morning cannot be accepted.
20. I replied that all I could say was that it was entirely up to him 
whether his government wished to permit the visits or not. I had not 
and would not attempt to dictate to him on that any more than I would 
accept dictation from him. If his government decided not to grant visas, 
he was certainly not going to hear any protest from me. All I could do 
was to express surprise at the change in his decision and express even 
greater surprise that he could allege that the United States had dictated 
his decision.
21. I continued. The question of who is to be permitted entry into a 
country is certainly one of the oldest aspects of sovereignty that exists. 
It is up to his government to decide whom it would have enter into his 
country just as it is up to my country to decide who will enter the United 
States. If any Chinese correspondent applies for entry into the US his 
application will be considered according to our laws just as I expect his 
government would consider applications in accordance with its laws.
22. Wang replied by expressing his surprise as to why we could not 
come to an agreement on such matters. He stated that wording in their 
proposed announcement was very clear. Nothing in it imposed anything 
on any person. In order to make their position on whole question clear 
they would find it necessary to make text available to public. He regret­
ted that I could not find myself able to accept the draft proposal made 
this morning.
23. Wang proposed next meeting 10 October. I agreed.
Gowen
