First Responses should be limited, particularly so on ground so disadvantageous as Iran. D. Maintenance of Iranian Oil Flow to the West 12. Obviously, a substantial and dependable flow of Iranian oil would, at least in the short run, relieve pressure on the oil market and limit economic difficulties in the West. The market, however, has absorbed a considerable decrease in Iranian production and continuing uncertainties as to its future. A complete cut-off of exports would drive prices higher, slow Western growth and severely handicap the nonoil LDCs, but would be far less traumatic than the loss of oil from across the Gulf. Its loss has already to a certain extent been discounted in the West; supply will in the longer run decrease in any case. IV. Interests of other Powers 13. It is as critical for the West Europeans and Japanese as it is for the U.S. that the flow of non-Iranian Gulf oil be sustained and that the world power balance not be seriously disturbed in favor of the Soviet Union. There is no question that these states recognize the importance of the flow, but some will believe that they can better protect themselves by bilateral than by multilateral action. Some will not see the balance as so seriously threatened, short of Soviet military operations in Iran. The greater weight they give to avoidance of US-Soviet confrontation will make it difficult to convince them of the reality of the Soviet threat. As to Iranian oil flow, they are likely to view this and to seek ways to maintain it in bilateral, nationalistic ways, regardless of the position of the U.S. 14. The Middle Eastern states, and particularly those of the Gulf, are of course less concerned with the economic well-being of the West than of their own, but their interest in avoiding infection from Iran is as great as ours in protecting them from it. Some are concerned over the general U.S.-USSR power balance (Saudi Arabia) but most (Iraq) would be more concerned over the clear and present danger of a Sovietoriented Iran. They would fear a U.S.-Soviet confrontation, if only because it might force them to chose sides between a USSR that was militarily stronger in the area and a West on which their economic well-being depends. Their attitude toward Iranian oil as opposed to Iranian politics will range from indifference to pleasure at the effect of its loss on a sellers’ market. 15. China desperately needs a strong West to divide Soviet attention, but it sees the West as losing its will in the face of Soviet power. China may well believe it sees the dangers to Western interests in the Iranian situation more clearly than the West itself. It certainly will be more strident in pointing out those dangers. For Peking some degree
