North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 The United States currently provides only about 30% of total OECD Official Development Assistance. The poor countries’ needs for increased concessional aid must thus be met by increased contributions from all donor countries. The US role will be critical in determining whether such an aid effort is forthcoming. Although other countries’ aid as a share of GNP is greater than ours and has been rising, while ours has been declining as a percentage of GNP, we are still the largest single donor, and other countries look to us for leadership. Concessional aid is only one of several means by which the industrial countries assist progress in the developing world. A total policy response to economic development must include such other actions as trade and commodity policy, which are not treated in this paper. But bilateral and multilateral concessional aid is an essential element in the mix. Two contradictory trends bear on the future of concessional assistance: —US interdependence with the developing world is increasing. An improvement in the economic welfare of LDCs benefits the United States, both economically and politically. Higher LDC production of food, energy, and raw materials would serve US interests—as would the decline in the rate of population growth that would likely result from higher LDC levels of health and education. —The difficulties of securing foreign assistance appropriations from the Congress remain; they will grow if aid requests are increased.4 Widespread public support for aid is lacking. In part, these difficulties reflect criticism of the effectiveness of bilateral assistance. In part, they reflect Congressional concern over lack of US control over multilateral aid. These facts underline both the importance and the difficulty of securing the increased US assistance pledged at the Downing Street Summit5 and elsewhere. They point up the need for measures to improve the effectiveness of our bilateral aid programs, if enlarged resources are to be secured. They also point up the need for having a clear foreign assistance strategy and for explaining to the Congress and the American people the link between that strategy and our domestic and international interests. Against this background, three questions need to be addressed in determining the optimum role of US economic aid to developing nations: 4 Nonetheless, AID notes that in recent years the Congress has approved increasing levels of economic assistance, and that AID authorizing legislation has been passed by larger majorities than in the past. [Footnote in the original.] 5 For the text of the Declaration issued at the conclusion of the London G–7 Summit, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I, pp.
