232 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 2. We should make greater efforts to improve the trade-off between inflation and unemployment. The Summit Group’s discussion kept coming back to the fact that most of the industrial countries have unacceptable levels of inflation, and that fears of inflation hinder the efforts of all these countries to reduce unemployment. If the US could show the way in reducing inflation while pursuing steady growth, it would have made an enormous contribution to the economic prospects and confidence of the industrial world. I have a simple-minded suggestion: Why not tell your chief economic advisors that you find 6% inflation unacceptable, and want a report from them as to the actions that would be needed to bring it substantially lower by 1980. The measures they propose may turn out to be politically infeasible, but that’s a decision only you can make. Whether we can get inflation below 6% will do as much as anything else to shape domestic and international economic prospects, and it is not clear that this is going to happen by itself. 70. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, October 28, 1977 SUBJECT Letter to Prime Minister Fukuda Attached is a draft reply to Prime Minister Fukuda’s letter.2 I have cleared its substance with State, Treasury, Commerce, and Bob Strauss. Inter-agency work is going forward in preparing a package of measures on which the US and Japan could agree to reduce Japan’s external surplus. Our thought is that Bob Strauss would discuss these measures with Fukuda and other Japanese officials, when he goes to Japan in early December—with the object of reaching an agreement 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda, 2–12/77. No classification marking. Sent for action. Brzezinski initialed the memorandum. 2 The attached draft is not printed. In his October 19 letter to Carter, Fukuda discussed his government’s economic stimulus program and urged industrialized country cooperation. (Ibid.) In an October 27 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tarnoff characterized Fukuda’s letter as an appeal “for patience and U.S. understanding of the efforts his government has taken to deal with the current account surplus.” (Ibid.) Carter’s reply to Fukuda is printed as Document 71.
