Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII vention are likely to be adverse for us for the following domestic and international reasons: Domestic A. The Soviet intervention is likely to stimulate calls for more immediate U.S. military action in Iran. Soviet “decisiveness” will be contrasted with our restraint, which will no longer be labeled as prudent but increasingly as timid; B. At the same time, regional instability may make a resolution of the Iranian problem more difficult for us, and it could bring us into a head to head confrontation with the Soviets; C. SALT is likely to be damaged, perhaps irreparably, because Soviet military aggressiveness will have been so naked; D. More generally, our handling of Soviet affairs will be attacked by both the Right and the Left. International A. Pakistan, unless we somehow manage to project both confidence and power into the region, is likely to be intimidated, and it could eventually even acquiesce to some form of external Soviet domination. B. With Iran destabilized, there will be no firm bulwark in Southwest Asia against the Soviet drive to the Indian Ocean; C. The Chinese will certainly note that Soviet assertiveness in Afghanistan and in Cambodia is not effectively restrained by the United States. Compensating Factors There will be, to be sure, some compensating factors: A. World public opinion may be outraged at the Soviet intervention. Certainly, Moslem countries will be concerned, and we might be in a position to exploit this. B. There are already 300,000 refugees from Afghanistan in Pakistan and we will be in a position to indict the Soviets for causing massive human suffering. That figure will certainly grow, and Soviet-sponsored actions in Cambodia have already taken their toll as well. C. There will be greater awareness among our allies for the need to do more for their own defense. A Soviet Vietnam? However, we should not be too sanguine about Afghanistan becoming a Soviet Vietnam: A. The guerrillas are badly organized and poorly led; B. They have no sanctuary, no organized army, and no central government—all of which North Vietnam had;
