1955 471 I was not suggesting he say anything that would prejudice his position. I was simply asking whether it is intent of his draft to make clear that force will not be resorted to except defensively. 40. I said it was of extreme importance that we be absolutely clear between ourselves on this. It would be most unfortunate and discus­ sions here would be counterproductive if we produced words that meant one thing to him and another thing to us. 41. I said that I was honestly not clear what his position was. 42. Wang replied that his side “used to maintain” in discussions between us that US should withdraw its armed forces to express its sin­ cerity. I had repeatedly urged that a statement be issued to effect that all disputes should be settled peacefully without resorting to force. Draft was intended to satisfy this request by our side. 43. Wang said any draft must represent common point of view between our two countries. His draft contained three points suitable to both of us: A. First, it contained article from UN Charter on which he was sure we could have no difference of opinion. Nearly everyone has learned stipulations of UN Charter by heart. B. Second, draft provided for peaceful settlement of disputes with­ out resorting to force. He was sure we could agree on this point. Draft provided that both China and US will not resort to force. C. Third, draft suggests conference at higher level should be held to settle question of tension Taiwan area. Even some responsible per­ sonages in US had expressed this desire. 44. Wang said it seemed therefore his draft proposal was reason­ able and able to facilitate our talks. The position of his side was quite clear, and if I had intent to understand it, I would be able to do so. 45. Wang said his side was in full agreement with provision UN Charter I had quoted. Articles quoted provide for peaceful settlement international disputes without resorting to war. That is what his side is striving for. However in these articles and in other portions of UN Charter there are no provisions permitting one country to interfere in internal affairs of another. 46. Wang said that is why he had stated we must not mix up two distinct problems. Distinction must be made between internal and international issues. First point we must be clear on is that internal con­ flict is not mixed up with international. 47. Wang said second point is question of interference in internal affairs of other countries. Fact that US has used armed force against Tai­ wan has brought us together in present talks. We should discuss ques­ tion of interference in Chinese internal affairs on part of US. If American armed force is withdrawn from Taiwan and US avoids interference in
