Arms Control and Disarmament 1343 in fact provide all of the much needed answers for presently foreseen military applications. Even if the HARDTACK tests are a complete success, there will be a continuing requirement for additional testing. Cessation of testing by us at any time in the foreseeable future would freeze our weapons research at a point far short of the objectives cited above. Moreover, if the USSR continued testing on a clandestine basis, both offensive and defensive weapons in our stockpile could quickly become obsolete. Further, it is believed that the matter of parity with, or supremacy over, the USSR may have been accorded undue emphasis in past considerations of test cessation. It is fallacious to assume that a present superiority in either numbers or types of atomic weapons would be maintained or that numerical superiority would in itself pro­ vide the free world with the capability to cope with all future situations. 5. In light of the above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff wish to empha­ size their great concern over the numerous proposals for cessation of weapons tests, especially when this cessation is divorced from a larger disarmament proposal which would provide also for complete suspen­ sion of the production of weapons and weapons materials, keyed to an effective system of inspection and verification. 6. The Joint Chiefs of Staff request that you convey these views to the President. For the Joint Chiefs of Staff: /S/ N.F. Twining Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff 322. Record of Telephone Conversation Between Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles1 May 1, 1958, 11:47 a.m. The Pres finished the Sec’s memo re Sat and does not see anything stated about the enactment of the law—and there is a part where we start talking about announcements—the Pres is sure the UK will not agree to anything unless we have a law. The Sec is not sure about that. The Sec did not have in mind doing anything for a month or more until we know what 1 Source: Congressional role in possible suspension of nuclear testing. No classi­ fication marking. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations.
