92  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
should not produce both THOR and JUPITER. The President said that 
so far as he is concerned there is no problem with dropping either of 
these. He asked what could be done with the team at Huntsville, which 
he understood was a group of outstanding ability. Dr. Killian said that 
they are working on the PERSHING missile family. He also said that 
this group is well suited to conducting space program activities, either 
under ARPA or NASA.
The President asked why Drs. Killian and Kistiakowsky thought 
that the THOR was a better missile than the JUPITER. Dr. Kistiakowsky 
said it is not better, but simply nearer to quantity production. He feels 
that the shift to industrial producers of the JUPITER (Chrysler, Ford 
Instrument, and Goodyear) would delay its availability. The President 
said that he would agree to closing out the JUPITER, but thought the 
Huntsville force should be promoted to space and similar activities. 
He thought consideration should be given to taking them out of their 
present assignment and assigning them to ARPA, or even to NASA. 
Dr.  Kistiakowsky commented that the PERSHING is an excellent 
approach, and the President said that the Huntsville group could work 
on that project too.
The President asked Dr. Killian to prepare for him a series of deci­
sions very tightly drafted and very positive in tenor to accomplish what 
had been recommended. He said he strongly agreed with the basic pro­
posal to obtain centralized direction and thought this should be done 
soon.
Dr. Killian asked whether he should ask the Secretary of Defense 
to carry out studies to give effect to the proposals. The President said 
this would be all right, but that we should make clear what the sci­
entific conclusions and recommendations are. Dr. Killian said he was 
prepared to do this.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
26.	
Letter From the Special Assistant to the Secretary of 
State (Farley) to the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense 
(Atomic Energy) (Loper)
Washington, March 10, 1958
[Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5611/3-1058. Top 
Secret. 2 pages of source text not declassified.]
