854
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
259.
Memorandum From Robert Putnam of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Intelligence Exchanges with Yugoslavia—Possible VBB Lunch Topic
Yugoslav Defense Minister Ljubicic raised the issue of military
intelligence exchanges with Harold Brown during their private talks
in September.2 Brown agreed, and said we would follow up through
intelligence channels. The intelligence side of DOD is now reviewing
the problems this would pose and some in OSD are known to be a bit
skeptical. (We have already asked that the matter be referred to you
before any final decisions are taken.) This memorandum suggests a
course of action for moving ahead with an appropriately cautious
policy on these exchanges.
The benefits of the exchanges would be primarily political:
—We can demonstrate support for Yugoslav efforts to remain inde-
pendent of Soviet advances
—We might expand our contacts with the Yugoslav military, which
could be useful in the post-Tito period.
—We might gain otherwise unavailable useful intelligence, if the
exchanges are genuinely mutual.
The risks, to which some in OSD call particular attention, involve
military and intelligence considerations:
—The likelihood of KGB penetration of the GOY means that any
information we pass is likely to surface in Moscow.
—Therefore, we cannot give the Yugoslavs any really useful
information.
—Therefore, we are unlikely to get any useful information in
return.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject
File, Box 32, Luncheon Meetings (BBV): 7–12/78. Secret; Sensitive. A copy was sent to
Bartholomew.
2 On October 7, the Department notified the Embassy in Belgrade of the issues that
came up in private discussions between Secretary Brown and Yugoslav National Defense
Minister Ljubicic including the Yugoslav idea of intelligence sharing between the two
countries. The Department informed the Embassy that Brown had agreed to “exchanges
of information on the Soviets and said we would follow up through intelligence chan-
nels.” (Telegram 256055 to Belgrade, October 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780411–0986)
3 Aaron highlighted the three points above and wrote on the margin: “ZB—No
worse than an exchange with the FRG.”
