Comprehensive Test Ban
423
Attachment:
Memorandum from Paul Warnke.4
4 Not attached.
180.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 4, 1977
SUBJECT
Instructions for CTB Negotiations
The CTB negotiations will resume on Monday, December 5, in Ge-
neva for about two weeks, followed by a holiday recess until mid-
January. The SCC has completed an analysis of Brezhnev’s recent pro-
posal along with a Working Paper2 on the key elements of a CTB Treaty
which we would plan to hand to the Soviets during the December
session.
The SCC met3 on Friday4 to discuss the key issues in these negotia-
tions. Agreement was reached on a recommended position on dura-
tion, PNEs, and internal seismic stations, but ACDA reserved its posi-
tion on on-site inspection (OSI). To attempt to bridge the gap between
our mandatory and the Soviet voluntary OSI positions, the Working
Group had recommended that we propose a “challenge” OSI formula-
tion that would require some justification for any decision to refuse an
OSI request. I pointed out that in my view there would be little value in
such a provision (it is really not a “challenge inspection” but just a right
to receive an explanation) and suggested that we insist that in addition
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 6, Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB), 3–12/77. Secret. Sent for action. In the upper-right
hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig I agree with Paul/Cy—Keep black boxes & ‘right to
challenge’ strong. J.”
2 Telegram 290032 to the Mission in Geneva, December 5, contains the elements of
the Working Paper. (National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disar-
mament Agency, Office of the Director, Standing Consultative Commission and Compre-
hensive Test Ban Files, Accession #383–98–0146, Box 1, CTB Working Papers on Per-
mitted Experiments Under Test Ban, December 1977)
3 See footnote 2, Document 179.
4 December 2.
