Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
9
what general approach should be taken in seeking limitations? Clearly
the decision cannot be approached in isolation, but must be integrated
with overall analysis of space policy. It would be premature to draw up
detailed negotiating options at this stage, but it is important to set
broad objectives before proceeding with preparations on an initial pro-
posal. This paper reviews ASAT status and background, relates the
ASAT issue to other policy issues, and describes four approaches for
ASAT arms control. Given a decision on approach, it will be possible to
develop an initial proposal to the Soviets, and to pose technical ques-
tions for more intensive study.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Prior Statements
(S) As described publicly, the President has suggested to the So-
viets that each side “forego the opportunity to arm satellite bodies and
. . . to destroy observation satellites.”3 Further, Secretary Vance raised
the issue of controlling ASAT systems during the March Moscow
meeting with Minister Gromyko; Secretary Vance emphasized the need
to maintain strategic stability, suggested the need for discussions on
ASAT’s, and indicated that during the interim it would be useful if the
sides exercised restraint in their testing of ASAT systems.4 Minister
Gromyko replied that he could not say that no problem existed in this
area, and stated that the Soviets would examine any proposal the U.S.
submitted on the subject. It was agreed to establish a bilateral Working
Group on antisatellite limitations. The U.S. has agreed to make a sub-
stantive proposal on ASAT limitations to the Soviets. Following this,
the Working Group would be convened. [2 lines not declassified]
B. Summary of the Issues
(S) In overview, the ASAT issue reduces ultimately to a few key
points. On the one hand,
—ASAT limitations might preclude a long-term arms competition
characterized by action-reaction cycles, increased defense costs, peace-
time tensions, and crisis instability; furthermore,
—limitations on Soviet capabilities to attack satellites would be de-
sirable since the U.S. is becoming increasingly dependent on satellites
for basic functions in peacetime, crisis, conventional war, and strategic
war.
However, we must take into account:
3 Not found.
4 See Document 3.
