August 8–September 17, 1978
17
negotiations and progress on the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian com-
plex of questions including the fundamental territorial issue. This rela-
tionship will underlie all of the discussions, although you may find
only Begin and the Israeli team interested in getting it out in the open
and pinned down.
Stated very briefly, the two fronts are linked in each man’s mind in
the following manner: Israel has placed top priority since last No-
vember on reaching a separate agreement with Egypt on the Sinai.
Having now realized that that is not in the cards, Begin will be trying to
acquire Sadat’s commitment to conclude a final Sinai agreement, or
failing that a “partial” Sinai agreement, in return for the minimum
change in the present Israeli position on the West Bank/Gaza. Sadat
also seeks a Sinai agreement that will bring about Israeli withdrawal
from Egyptian territory, but cannot politically afford to pursue such an
agreement in the absence of a clear change in the Israeli position re-
garding military withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza, the settle-
ment of Israeli citizens there, and Palestinian involvement in the ulti-
mate disposition of the territory.
Background
The two committees established after the Ismailia Summit2—mili-
tary and political—rather quickly established a division of labor dif-
ferent from what their names might imply. The Military Committee,
meeting in Egypt under Gamasy and Weizman, became the venue for
discussing a Sinai agreement. The Political Committee, which met for-
mally for only two days in Jerusalem at the Foreign Minister level but
whose work continued through U.S. mediation, addressed the task of
developing the framework for a comprehensive settlement and came to
focus increasingly on the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian complex of
problems.
The Military Committee made substantial progress in defining the
essentials of a Sinai agreement, including an Israeli offer to return all of
pre-1967 Sinai to Egyptian sovereignty. The Defense Ministers were
able to agree in principle on the outline of a timetable for Israeli with-
drawal and on at least the rudiments of such arrangements as the estab-
lishment of buffer zones and limited armaments areas. Such potentially
contentious issues as the status of Sharm el-Sheikh, which controls the
Straits of Tiran, together with the land bridge to it from Israel—both of
which Israeli Labor governments had insisted on retaining under Is-
raeli authority—were agreed upon in principle.
2 For documentation on the December 1977 summit meeting between Begin and
Sadat at Ismailia, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January
1977–August 1978.
