Negotiating Channels dence of good faith. The Iranians also regard your written message to Congress as a positive step on our side.5 —To establish the channel, at least in the next stage, we could send a message via Cottam to Ghotbzadeh from Hamilton that we have taken the Washington talks with the Frenchmen seriously and are sending a message to Tehran with them. They could also carry a letter from Hamilton. —To establish the procedure we could send a message via the Frenchmen to both Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh that we are prepared to begin a series of reciprocal moves. We would start by removing our objection to Waldheim’s appointment of a commission of inquiry provided Ghotbzadeh (a) will ask Waldheim for a commission “to hear Iran’s grievances and to help achieve an early end to the crisis between the U.S. and Iran” and (b) will assure Waldheim in writing that the commission will, in the course of its investigation, meet with each of the hostages. —Since we would be changing our position to allow the commission to go to Tehran and begin work before release of the hostages, we would need to be able to say publicly that the commission is going on a fact-finding mission to Tehran to hear Iran’s concerns, to meet with each of the hostages, and to report on the present situation to the Secretary General. We would object publicly to any contact with the hostages for interrogation in connection with the inquiry. We would say it remains important for us to determine the well-being of each of the hostages. The Iranians, of course, would play the appointment as a victory and the visit to the hostages as part of the inquiry into Iran’s grievances. —We would need to assure ourselves that Waldheim is prepared to cooperate with us on this basis. I would send Hal Saunders to see Rafi Ahmed and perhaps go to talk with Waldheim myself. We would need to assure that Waldheim puts a responsible person in charge of the commission and that Waldheim has some agreed control over the limits within which the commission will operate. We would want to work with him on its terms of reference. Because the Iranians have stressed that U.S. objections on technical grounds to the creation of the commission would enhance its credibility in Iran, we would have to work this out with Waldheim. —Step 2 would bring the commission of inquiry into being only when the Iranians had made their formal request to Waldheim under Step 1: —Waldheim would announce appointment of the commission. He would act using his good offices authority and referring to his talks
