Negotiating Channels
445
dence of good faith. The Iranians also regard your written message to
Congress as a positive step on our side.5
—To establish the channel, at least in the next stage, we could send
a message via Cottam to Ghotbzadeh from Hamilton that we have
taken the Washington talks with the Frenchmen seriously and are
sending a message to Tehran with them. They could also carry a letter
from Hamilton.
—To establish the procedure we could send a message via the
Frenchmen to both Bani Sadr and Ghotbzadeh that we are prepared
to begin a series of reciprocal moves. We would start by removing
our objection to Waldheim’s appointment of a commission of inquiry
provided Ghotbzadeh (a) will ask Waldheim for a commission “to hear
Iran’s grievances and to help achieve an early end to the crisis between
the U.S. and Iran” and (b) will assure Waldheim in writing that the
commission will, in the course of its investigation, meet with each of
the hostages.
—Since we would be changing our position to allow the commis-
sion to go to Tehran and begin work before release of the hostages,
we would need to be able to say publicly that the commission is going
on a fact-finding mission to Tehran to hear Iran’s concerns, to meet
with each of the hostages, and to report on the present situation to the
Secretary General. We would object publicly to any contact with the
hostages for interrogation in connection with the inquiry. We would
say it remains important for us to determine the well-being of each of
the hostages. The Iranians, of course, would play the appointment as
a victory and the visit to the hostages as part of the inquiry into Iran’s
grievances.
—We would need to assure ourselves that Waldheim is prepared
to cooperate with us on this basis. I would send Hal Saunders to see
Rafi Ahmed and perhaps go to talk with Waldheim myself. We would
need to assure that Waldheim puts a responsible person in charge of
the commission and that Waldheim has some agreed control over the
limits within which the commission will operate. We would want to
work with him on its terms of reference. Because the Iranians have
stressed that U.S. objections on technical grounds to the creation of the
commission would enhance its credibility in Iran, we would have to
work this out with Waldheim.
—Step 2 would bring the commission of inquiry into being only
when the Iranians had made their formal request to Waldheim under
Step 1:
—Waldheim would announce appointment of the commission. He
would act using his good offices authority and referring to his talks
5 For the “evidence of good faith,” see footnote 2, Document 165. The reference to
Carter’s written message is presumably to Carter’s January 21 State of the Union message
to Congress. In it, Carter wrote that the United States had “no basic quarrel” with the
Iranian revolution and that the threat to Iran came not from the United States but from
Soviet action in the region. He also wrote: “We are prepared to work with the government
of Iran to develop a new and mutually beneficial relationship” once the hostages are
freed. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 163–164)
