344
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tional interests: issues such as human rights, energy, trade, nuclear
non-proliferation, and conventional arms sales.
We realized, but perhaps did not adequately explain to the Amer-
ican people, that progress on these issues would be slow, and that by
raising some of them we would complicate certain of our bilateral
relations.
We decided that these global problems had to be addressed at
once, because it is clear that we cannot approach the key issues in our
foreign policy seriatim. For example, we cannot so concentrate our en-
ergy on the political diplomacy of international peace, essential as it is,
that we discover, too late, that poverty and injustice within nations
makes peace among nations impossible.
The relationship between energy and nuclear proliferation illus-
trates this point. We can use the connection between the two issues to
find progress on both: while seeking through cooperative international
efforts to fire a safer nuclear fuel cycle, we can use progress on develop-
ment of non-nuclear energy sources to reinforce our arguments against
the development of unsafe nuclear facilities. Conversely, we emphasize
also that the dangers of nuclear proliferation make the development of
non-nuclear and safe nuclear power all the more important.
Our reluctance to set one or two rigid conceptual doctrines—to
pretend that the complexities of a mature American foreign policy can
be summarized in one or two catch phrases—is a matter of conscious
choice. We will apply ourselves with more vigor to the necessity of ex-
plaining this reordering of our strategies and inter-related priorities in
the coming year.
Some lessons that we can draw, in the light of the last year’s expe-
rience, include:
—We recognize that since we are more deeply engaged than ever
in long-term efforts, results may come slowly: in many areas, we do not
expect dramatic developments in the first year or two. We do expect to
be judged on whether measured progress is being achieved, however—
and on how much will have been achieved by the end of President
Carter’s first term in office.
—The fact is that, without a single over-arching concept, we will
have to build a national consensus behind American foreign policy on
new premises and new approaches: if there is a lag in public perception
of our design, it is partly because many people still think in terms of bi-
polar diplomacy, when relations with the Soviet Union dwarfed all
other concerns. Now, however, we must operate on a broad range of
issues in a pluralistic world, in which relations with the Soviet Union
are central but not all encompassing.
—In discussing and debating our policies, we will ask also that the
press and public be willing to wrestle with complexity and eschew the
comfort of simple slogans and a belief in quick solutions.
