Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 429 this last component, the Secretary suggested that he intended to address it “in its African context, where interest is presently focused.” Commenting that he would devote greater attention to the specifics of the policy in an address the next day, Vance explained that the administration’s strategy “is based upon an affirmative and constructive approach to African issues: helping African nations meet their pressing human and economic needs; strengthening their ability to defend themselves; building closer ties throughout Africa; and assisting African nations to resolve their conflicts peacefully.” (Department of State Bulletin, August 1978, pages 14 and 15) On June 20, Vance addressed the annual meeting of the U.S. Jaycees, who had convened in Atlantic City, New Jersey. After highlighting the importance of the African continent in human, economic, and political terms, the Secretary referenced his July 1, 1977, address (see Document 50), noting: “I said that we can be neither right nor effective if we treat Africa simply as an arena for East-West competition. Our Africa policy has not changed. Its objectives remain forward looking and positive.” After summarizing the objectives as ones that prioritized commitment to social and economic justice, resolution of disputes, respect for nationalism, support for defense needs, and respect for human rights, Vance explained how the administration had applied them to issues of the greatest concern in Rhodesia, Namibia, the Horn of Africa, and Zaire. He then discussed the objectives in greater detail: “—We will rely on our strengths—our trade, aid, economic, and cultural ties—which have developed over the years. To these we have added our common commitment to social justice and human development. These are the most enduring elements in the relationship between Africa and America. They bind us to nations throughout the continent. “It is essential to the success of our policies that Africans know that we share their goal of economic development. This means increasing trade and investment in ways that benefit both Africa and the United States. And it means continuing to increase our aid to African nations. We will do so because there is genuine need, because it is important to our own economic well-being, and because it will strengthen the independence of African nations. “—Our strategy is to work with others in Africa and beyond for the peaceful resolution of disputes. We can help African nations avoid human suffering and prevent the diversion of resources from human development. Moreover, a potential conflict resolved is a conflict of which others cannot take advantage. We will help to strengthen the effectiveness of the United Nations and regional organizations such as the Organization of African Unity which can play a vital role in
