North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980
1089
nomic and financial issues. It was adopted unanimously by its mem-
bers, including Pete Peterson and Katherine Graham.2
The Report’s main conclusion is that there is a crisis in North/
South relations, and that both developed and developing countries
have a mutual interest in finding ways to restructure the international
economy to end the crisis. The main thrust of the recommendations is
on transferring additional resources to LDCs.
A compilation of the recommendations in the Report is at Tab A.3
Major proposals include:
—an increase in industrial country concessional aid to 0.7 percent
of their GNP by 1985, from 0.3 percent at present;
—an international energy package, including commitments on oil
supply and price, and new investment in new energy sources;
—introduction of some form of “automatic” international taxes
(e.g., on trade and tourism) to finance development;
—a doubling of the legal borrowing-to-capital ratio for the IBRD,
to take place in addition to the just-negotiated General Capital Increase,4
to allow it to lend up to $160 billion compared with the present ceiling
of $40 billion;
—consideration of creation of a World Development Fund that
would fill the alleged gaps—particularly for program lending—in pro-
grams of the existing institutions (IMF, IBRD);
—an SDR/aid link;
—use of the IMF gold stock as collateral for loans to middle-
income LDCs;
—an international summit meeting of 25 or so heads of gov-
ernment to launch the program
The Report could improve the public and Congressional climate
for foreign assistance to developing countries. On the other hand—by
endorsing numerous demands of the developing countries that there is
no realistic expectation of meeting—the Report may create false expec-
tations which will lead to future disappointments. Most likely, it will
have little or no effect on public opinion in this country and marginal
effect in a few places abroad (Germany, U.K.).
2 Peter G. Peterson was President Nixon’s Assistant for International Economic Af-
fairs from 1971 until 1972. Katherine Graham was the Chairman of the Board of The
Washington Post Company. The book-length report of the Brandt Commission is entitled
“North-South: A Programme for Survival.”
3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Annex I, Summary
of Recommendations.”
4 Bergsten discussed the U.S. position on the IBRD General Capital Increase in a
February 5 memorandum to Miller. (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection,
1977–1980, Chronological File, Box 8, 2/1/80–2/14/80)
