532
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
would also expect Ceausescu to try to take advantage of Soviet internal
problems to expand his maneuvering room as in the immediate post-
Khrushchev era.
Eastern European context—We see Romania as the least likely of
the Eastern European countries to be affected by the ups and downs
of U.S.–USSR relations. Leaving aside a serious post-Tito disintegration
of Yugoslavia, Romania is also less likely to be influenced by the general
effervescence of a restive region. Except for Bulgaria, however, it is
also potentially the most susceptible in Eastern Europe to internal
ferment because so relatively little has taken place and the sparks could
come from outside. We definitely agree with the S/P assumption that
planning be done for a broadening of U.S. relations with the countries
of Eastern Europe, so as to position ourselves to take advantage of
opportunities as they arise. At the same time we assume the USSR and
some individual countries like Romania will, perhaps almost in rhythm
with CSCE, resort to a policy of increasing ideologicalization to “pro-
tect” their peoples against hostile influences.
Romania’s international role—We anticipate no diminution of
Romania’s active and often frenetic pursuit of cordial relations with
all Communist countries and parties, Balkan cooperation, courtship of
the Third World, strengthened ties with the countries and economic
institutions of the developed West, disarmament, a new international
political/economic order, the role of “honest broker” in such crisis
situations as the Middle East or Korea—all designed somehow to raise
the cost to the Soviets of any drastic behavior toward Romania, to
obtain both increased quantities of raw materials or access to markets
to dispose of manufactured products, and to establish Romania’s cre-
dentials as a “developing” country eligible for trade preferences and
easy credits.
Internal factors—With his overriding goal of perpetuating himself
in power, Ceausescu has built a highly centralized system in which he
exerts total control subject only to very general limits. For the next
year or two, we see practically no chance of his being unseated in a
party power struggle or of being forced from office by explosive discon-
tent among the populace. His internal approach is based more on his
perception of how Romania should be governed than on worries about
Soviet pressure. Nonetheless we believe, even if Ceausescu doesn’t,
that present controls could be substantially relaxed without risking
either Soviet intervention or spontaneous internal combustion. There
is no doubt that Romania’s rapid pace of industrialization has strained
the social fabric, produced large inefficiencies and misallocation of
resources, and produced a potentially serious energy crisis. Ceausescu’s
post-earthquake policy of meeting and exceeding five year plan goals
while at the same time recouping the losses and providing for
