First Responses 95 Brazil would be needlessly antagonizing a source of needed oil while closing a potentially lucrative market. Given appropriate inducements, such as US guaranties to make up oil losses, however, Brazil could probably be persuaded to join. [portion marking not declassified] If Iran shut down its oil production, the Big Six and Brazil might be induced to cooperate with the United States in a collective embargo. Under these conditions, the other members of the IEA probably would demand that the United States, at a minimum, bear its share of the burden of the reduction in oil supplies based on its total consumption. Complete cooperation for a collective embargo is unlikely; in particular Turkey would be unwilling to stop cross-border trade in the absence of major Western incentives. Brazil, while probably going along with a trade embargo, might use the occasion to demand a substantial restructuring of its foreign debts. [portion marking not declassified] Arab support and reaction also depends upon the timing of events. If the United States imposed a strict embargo while the hostages remained unharmed and oil continued to flow, a strong negative Arab reaction could be expected. This could possibly include a cutback in Arab oil production. [portion marking not declassified] Even if the trade embargo or naval blockade followed extreme Iranian provocation, the Arabs would probably condemn it publicly. Privately, however, many Arabs would be pleased to see Khomeini replaced so long as a more radical alternative was not likely. Many would also like to see the United States take a strong position. The Iraqis have indicated that they might even be willing to help, though indirectly, by not objecting if other OPEC members increased oil production to offset an Iranian cutback. [portion marking not declassified] 39. Editorial Note On November 19, 1979, the White House released the following statement: “Three of our hostages in Tehran have been released and have left Iran. After a brief period of rest and care, they will be reunited with their families here in the United States. The remaining hostages must also be released. Their detention is without justification. The Government of Iran is responsible for achieving their immediate and safe release, and the United States has the right to expect that Iran will do so. The specter has been raised of other American diplomatic hostages being placed on trial. Such a step would be a further flagrant violation
