Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 331 from their homeland. And abroad, our ambassadors regularly meet with opposition leaders. These meetings enable us to hear both sides of the story, to learn how a human rights problem is seen by those directly affected, and to demonstrate that we are concerned about all the people of the country involved, not just those in power. Public Comment. Beyond private diplomatic discourse and important symbolic steps, the diplomacy of human rights must sometimes include criticism of regimes implicated in serious human rights violations. Public comment by our government is an official act that directs the attention of the entire world to the objectionable practices of another government. We believe that such criticism can have some inhibiting effect on such governments. We do not generally prefer this approach but neither will we shrink from it. Needless to say, public comment has been our first line of approach with respect to countries like Cambodia and Uganda, where we have little or no diplomatic contact but yet where unspeakable violations of human rights are occurring as a matter of deliberate state policy. We deplore these policies. We hope other governments which have the contact that we lack can make known the extent of international concern and bring about improvements. We have also, of course, spoken openly and forthrightly at the Belgrade meeting that has been reviewing implementation of the Helsinki Final Act.4 That document contemplates a full and frank review of whether the signatories have lived up to their human rights commitments. It is clear that the Soviet Union and the East European countries, in varying degrees, have not done so. We have not hesitated to say so publicly, to request an explanation, and to seek compliance. Our comments and those of West European governments have helped sustain the Helsinki accord as a living force in the cause of human rights, an engine for keeping constant pressure on governments to respect the rights of their people. Our silence would have effectively permitted that force to fade away. In speaking of our public efforts, I should note that we are actively using our public diplomacy tools such as the U.S. Information Agency to convey our human rights concerns to various nongovernmental audiences abroad. The Voice of America has increased its attention to these issues. Our embassies and offices abroad have organized sem- 4 For an outline of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) Final Act, see BULLETIN of Sept. 26, 1977, p. 405; for full text of the CSCE Final Act, see BULLETIN of Sept. 1, 1975, p. 323. [Footnote in the original.]
