1210
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
action of the SSOD. I believe it would be far better for you to present
this proposal on our own terms, rather than for the U.S. to appear to
have abandoned it—and eventually to have to respond to other na-
tions’ proposals less acceptable to us.
I am confident that such a proposal, particularly in a SALT/CTB
regime, would be fully consistent with our national security interests
and that such an agreement can be adequately verified. The proposal
would be formulated to protect continued tritium production and fuel
for nuclear propulsion.
Our offer to negotiate on the cut-off would contribute significantly
to our non proliferation policy by rectifying the widely resented dis-
criminatory situation where the nuclear powers continue to expand
their nuclear arsenals and are not themselves subject to the inspection
procedures we are pressing on non-nuclear weapon states. Conversely,
a repudiation (explicit or implicit) of the long standing policy on cut-off
would contribute to an international environment clearly counter-
productive to our overall non-proliferation strategy. As you know, this
point has been clearly articulated by Desai and other leaders of the non-
nuclear weapons states. More fundamentally, failure to reaffirm this
policy at some point during the SSOD would undercut the credibility of
your call for worldwide reduction in nuclear forces. Finally, if we stand
silent on this issue, we leave the initiative to the Soviets. They are ex-
pected to advance major proposals, foreshadowed by Brezhnev’s pro-
posed ban on the production of nuclear weapons,2 which, although at-
tractive internationally, would not be acceptable to the U.S.
While I recognize there are differences in the government on the
impact of such a proposal on U.S. and Soviet forces, there is no question
that it would presently constrain the USSR more than the U.S. and I be-
lieve on balance would clearly be in our national security interest, par-
ticularly in the context of SALT and CTB agreements. At present, we
are producing no highly enriched uranium and relatively little pluto-
nium for weapons, [8½ lines not declassified] For the U.S. to expand its
stockpiles would require shifting capacity from low enriched produc-
tion for power to high enriched material for weapons production (of
which there has been none since 1964) and to reactivate, at substantial
cost and high visibility, plutonium production reactors now moth-
balled. These actions, which would have to be launched almost im-
mediately in view of long lead times, would be politically difficult, de-
stabilizing, and would undercut your disarmament objectives in a dra-
matic fashion.
2 See footnote 3, Document 482.
