Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX hand, children are taught hatred. This along with her points about journalists, Havemann and Heym were what she wished to convey. She said she had heard that Havemann’s wife and six-year old daughter were subjected to tight controls; Heym could not travel out of the country. These are unusual and unexpected measures that create tensions. She would appreciate an explanation. Dr. Nier said he would have to begin with a clarification of what are properly questions relating to bilateral relations and what are internal matters and therefore not appropriate to bilateral discussions. He had explained the basic GDR position on Helsinki Final Act implementation in Berlin and again this morning. The GDR does not consider that the Final Act deals only with family reunification or humanitarian cooperation. It has three baskets, and success in further implementation is only possible if the Final Act is considered in its entirety. Overall there are many positive results. There can be no doubt that the GDR is prepared to continue along the way of implementation in cooperation with other participating states, but there will always be the need to keep all aspects of the Final Act in mind. Dr. Nier said he had also explained the GDR’s fundamental position on human rights in Berlin. Nothing has changed or can change in this position. He had already spoken to one question, that of family reunification, this morning. He had referred to the GDR’s regular practice with the U.S., which was a generous one. More than 100 cases had been resolved. Other cases are under review and will be decided on the basis of GDR laws and regulations. He had to mention that GDR citizens, GDR laws, and internal GDR affairs were involved. But there was no basis to doubt the GDR’s generous practice in this area. Dr. Nier said he had also discussed the competence of foreign journalists in the morning. The new regulations were fully in accordance with the Final Act. Every state has the right to enact its own laws and to safeguard its own interests in so far as there is no conflict with international law. Every state, the GDR included, has the right to prevent any interference in its internal affairs. The GDR knows how to exercise this right. Foreign correspondents are afforded every opportunity to do their work and to engage in objective reporting. So long as they act in a professional and serious manner and comply with their Helsinki Final Act obligations, they will be given every support and opportunity to do serious reporting. There were individuals, however, who tried to abuse their work for interference in internal affairs. They will be prevented from doing so because the GDR knows how to protect its interests, as do all states. He said that an important part of the Final Act is the recognition that noninterference in internal affairs is recognized as one of the leading principles that should guide relations between states. He repeated that there was no reason to express concern
