1955 181 reports for its background information, even though there was nothing positive to report. He inquired as to the apparent reasons for the lack of progress in getting our detained nationals released. Mr. Sebald said that it was difficult to say exactly what the stum­ bling blocks were. There were differences over words in the proposed announcement, and differences over the interpretation to be attached to the words. The general concept of the Chinese Communists as to the right of the individuals to return seemed to be different from ours. Wang Ping-nan was not specific on action the Chinese Communists were prepared to take. Wang was, of course, pressing for an enlarge­ ment of the very limited role envisaged by us for the Indian Embassy. He wanted it to appear that the Chinese Communists had a right to assert an interest in Chinese nationals generally in this country. We, of course, were not prepared to accord the Chinese Communists any access through the Indian Embassy to Chinese nationals in this country other than the small number who might express a wish to return to the China mainland. There appeared to be no flexibility in Wang’s position. Of course, Ambassador Johnson was standing firm on the basic princi­ ples inherent in our position. Mr. Sebald summarized the situation as amounting practically to a stalemate, but with no actual break-off of the talks appearing to be in immediate prospect. Ambassador Koo then referred to what he termed the great anxiety of Chinese communities in all the large cities of the U.S. over the pos­ sible outcome of the Geneva talks. His Foreign Office and the Depart­ ment of Overseas Chinese Affairs at Taipei were greatly concerned over this matter and had instructed him to take it up with the Department of State. He said that there was a general apprehension among Chinese residents of this country that they might be subjected to interrogation by representatives of the Chinese Communists. There seemed to be a fear that they would be exposed to Chinese Communist pressures, either through the Indian Embassy or through their families on the mainland. The Ambassador said he hoped that the American Government could do something to relieve this feeling of uneasiness. He thought it could best be done through an official statement by some high official of the U.S. Government which would assure Chinese everywhere that the U.S. Government would not agree to anything at Geneva which would expose Chinese residents of the U.S. or their families to intimidation at the hands of the Chinese Communists. He mentioned that a large number of letters from Chinese had been received indicating that they were greatly disturbed. He said there was a general feeling among the Chinese that Wang Ping-nan was pressing for information regarding all Chinese in the U.S., and not merely the students. Even the Chinese who had American citizenship and considered themselves “dual nationals” were disturbed and suffered from a feeling of insecurity. The same was true of long-time Chinese residents of this country who did not have
