Chapter 6, June–December 1990  829
issues faster than we are solving them. At a minimum, we probably 
need a ministerial push to solve the following:
— Backfire
— Heavy ICBMs
— Non-­circumvention
— Whether to destroy missiles/warheads/ALCMs
— Perimeter and Portal Continuous Monitoring (PPCM)
— Third country basing and inspections
— Inspection and notification regime for ALCMs
Other issues will doubtless emerge as we move toward the end. 
The INF experience shows minor and arcane issues can sometimes 
become sticking points requiring high-­level political resolution. An 
additional problems is that, when decisions are taken, the Soviet nego-
tiating group sometimes must wait weeks for instructions on imple-
menting them.
2. Washington is taking far too long to determine U.S. positions or to 
respond to ad ref agreements reached in Geneva. Some examples:
— It took over a year to establish our PPCM position.
— It has been more than a year and we still don’t have a firm posi-
tion on suspect site inspection.
— Our position on new types and RV counting for future types has 
been under review since November. We are weeks away from having 
an initial position on this major hole in the Treaty. When we do, we will 
have less than four months to sell a position it took us nine months to 
establish.
— New tagging procedures were drafted early this year but took 
over four months for Washington review. It is unclear that they are any 
better for this effort.
— Basic issues on tagging, supposedly resolved earlier, are being 
reopened and reexamined. The schedule for some of them runs into 
next year.
— The average time to respond to routine guidance requests is 
going up. Of the last 20 Round XIII requests for guidance where the 
Negotiating Group requested a response by a specific date, only four 
were answered by the date requested; the remainder averaged over 
two weeks late.
— A review of what data the United States will require in the 
Memorandum of Understanding has been underway intermittently for 
over two years, with most difficult issues yet to be faced.
— An ad ref agreement on launch control facilities was sent for 
Washington approval on June 29. Five weeks later, it is still under 
review. There are well over 100 issues left of comparable scope.
3. Geneva is in danger of becoming a bottleneck. Reaching general 
agreement can be done quickly. Turning that agreement into treaty 
language is inherently a slow process. Reaching agreement with the
