First Responses
137
The President: Authorization of telephone tap through Attorney
General. Newsom to talk to Reed about the Shah leaving.6
What means should we use to warn Khomeini of consequences
of trial?
Dr. Brzezinski: What is the message?
The President: We should say: (1) any trial would result in interrup-
tion of Iranian commerce; (2) any harm to any one would result in
direct retaliatory action.
Secretary Vance objects to the first.
The President: How can I sit here as President and watch the trials?
Dr. Brzezinski: Either the Iranians understand we will do something,
in which case it is a useful repetition; or they don’t, in which case they
need to be told.
The President: We need to put more pressure on our allies. We
should communicate the foregoing also to our allies.
General Jones describes modalities of blockade; also it variants. Min-
ing best.
Secretary Vance objects to threats.
Secretary Brown supports Secretary Vance. You have a bigger effect
by military deployments.
Dr. Brzezinski: So far they have done daring things without advance
warnings from us. So we know they do outrageous things if or when
not warned by us.
The President asks the Vice President.
The Vice President: It is very difficult.
The President: This puts our allies under pressure. There is no way
I could sit here. We would have to take action if there is public trial.
Secretary Vance: You would not be ruling it out.
Admiral Turner: Khomeini said you have been bluffing. You need
to make it clear.
The Vice President: Might not this threat imperil the success of the
negotiating track? Might not a few days be needed—then if hostages
are hurt, national honor will come first.
The President: National honor comes first.
Jody Powell: The longer we wait, the less we deter.
6 Reed told Newsom that the Shah intended to leave for Mexico if his scheduled
surgery was successful, wanted advice, and was embarrassed by the problems resulting
from his presence. (Memorandum from Newsom to Vance, November 23; Department
of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs,
Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Misc on Shah)
