August 8–September 17, 1978
41
ever, there is no indication that President Assad, who would personally
make the decision to implement one of the other options, has decided
to do so. Nevertheless, Christian provocations and the unproductive-
ness of the present policy probably will eventually force him to recon-
sider. A withdrawal from Lebanon—partial or complete—would be an
open admission of a massive policy failure and would entail serious
risks to the stability of the Assad regime. Before taking such an irrevers-
ible and dangerous step, Assad will most likely essay a military solu-
tion. Although Damascus is thoroughly aware of the Israeli factor in
such a decision, Tel Aviv’s low profile during the fighting in Beirut in
the latter half of July may have led Syria to believe that Israeli support
of the Christians has its limits. Certainly, there is some support in the
Syrian military—especially in Lebanon—and government for a more
militant policy. At some point, it will probably seem preferable to
probe Israel’s commitment to the Christians, rather than move directly
to the withdrawal option. However, if Damascus feels it can count on
Israeli forbearance, it is probably miscalculating. In the final analysis,
Tel Aviv will not permit the Christians to be crushed.
Israeli Perceptions and Responses
(S/NOFORN) The developments that prompted Israel to shift its
policy are not known, but Israeli policymakers may have concluded
after early July that Syria had no intention of ever leaving Lebanon;
there was no chance to restore Lebanon to a unified state; and that Syria
would inevitably attempt to crush the Christians. They probably rea-
soned that, if these conclusions proved correct, Israel’s ultimate night-
mare of a Syrian puppet state on its northern border would become an
accomplished fact.
(S/NOFORN) Israel has consistently opposed such a development
and has worked to avoid it. Additionally, termination of Syria’s pres-
ence would remove a direct threat to Israel’s northern border and leave
the Christians in a dominant military-political position. Ultimately of
course, such a policy would lead to the Balkanization of Lebanon. This,
however, has already occurred to a degree, and Israel might find such a
situation quite comfortable.
(S/NOFORN) Israeli actions since early July suggest that it has
made and is implementing a decision to force a Syrian withdrawal. Tel
Aviv provided an unprecedented level of support to the Christians fol-
lowing Syrian shelling of east Beirut in early July, and allegedly en-
couraged the Christians to harass Syrian forces. The Israelis have made
increasing references to the need for Syria to withdraw from Lebanon
and have alleged Syrian intentions to massacre the Christians.
(S/NOFORN) Pursuit of such a policy is not without risks, for
dealing with the mercurial Christian leadership is at best a delicate pro-
