Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 economies to changing patterns of world trade, arriving at a common understanding of the responsibilities of both governments and corporations to create a better environment for international investment and the flow of technology, assuring adequate assistance to nations facing acute financial difficulties, strengthening the scientific and technological capabilities of developing countries, increasing aid flows to countries which need it most and can use it effectively, and finding ways to assure an appropriate role for developing countries in international economic institutions. This is a heavy agenda. And these are difficult times in which to address it, since most of the industrial nations face difficult domestic economic challenges. In a period of fiscal austerity, there is a danger, which we must frankly address, that negotiations between North and South could return to the rancor of earlier years. This will happen if each nation becomes so concerned with its own problems that it forgets the essential reality of an interdependent age: that each nation can surmount its own difficulties only if it understands and helps resolve the difficulties of others as well. The industrial nations must maintain their commitment to the well-being of the developing nations. The developing nations must recognize that making demands which the industrial nations cannot meet will only produce international acrimony, not progress. And the oilproducing nations must recognize their special responsibilities for the health of the global economy and their fundamental stake in its continued vitality. A Practical Focus This brings me to a central point. Our progress in North-South negotiations—our progress toward a more equitable and healthy new international economic order—will turn on our common ability to avoid endless debates on sterile texts and to focus instead on concrete development problems which we can tackle together and which directly affect people’s lives. Only by focusing on practical ways to meet human needs can we remain clear about our goals and clear in explaining them to our peoples. I know that the American people will never be convinced that there is an inherent value only in resource flows among nations. They want to know, and have a right to know, how their taxes are being used to better the lives of people abroad. It is this practical—and human—focus which compels us to concentrate our aid on programs that directly improve the lives of poorer people abroad. We believe it is important that we concentrate our re-
