Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
581
economies to changing patterns of world trade, arriving at a common
understanding of the responsibilities of both governments and corpo-
rations to create a better environment for international investment and
the flow of technology, assuring adequate assistance to nations facing
acute financial difficulties, strengthening the scientific and techno-
logical capabilities of developing countries, increasing aid flows to
countries which need it most and can use it effectively, and finding
ways to assure an appropriate role for developing countries in interna-
tional economic institutions.
This is a heavy agenda. And these are difficult times in which to
address it, since most of the industrial nations face difficult domestic
economic challenges.
In a period of fiscal austerity, there is a danger, which we must
frankly address, that negotiations between North and South could re-
turn to the rancor of earlier years. This will happen if each nation be-
comes so concerned with its own problems that it forgets the essential
reality of an interdependent age: that each nation can surmount its own
difficulties only if it understands and helps resolve the difficulties of
others as well.
The industrial nations must maintain their commitment to the
well-being of the developing nations. The developing nations must rec-
ognize that making demands which the industrial nations cannot meet
will only produce international acrimony, not progress. And the oil-
producing nations must recognize their special responsibilities for the
health of the global economy and their fundamental stake in its con-
tinued vitality.
A Practical Focus
This brings me to a central point. Our progress in North-South ne-
gotiations—our progress toward a more equitable and healthy new in-
ternational economic order—will turn on our common ability to avoid
endless debates on sterile texts and to focus instead on concrete devel-
opment problems which we can tackle together and which directly af-
fect people’s lives.
Only by focusing on practical ways to meet human needs can we
remain clear about our goals and clear in explaining them to our
peoples. I know that the American people will never be convinced that
there is an inherent value only in resource flows among nations. They
want to know, and have a right to know, how their taxes are being used
to better the lives of people abroad.
It is this practical—and human—focus which compels us to con-
centrate our aid on programs that directly improve the lives of poorer
people abroad. We believe it is important that we concentrate our re-
