Non-Proliferation materials that it might acquire under IAEA safeguards which would survive any termination of the agreement. Some favor this formulation as a fallback to our obvious first preference for NPT adherence. They believe that the NPT-type international commitment covering existing and future facilities inherent in the British formula is necessary to preclude the possibility that a country would use outside assistance while developing indigenous capabilities with intent to forego safeguards once they achieve independence. Those who support this formulation also believe that U.S. adoption of such a policy would significantly improve chances of supplier agreement at the April meeting of supplier countries to require full-scope safeguards as a condition of new supply commitments, or, failing that, of getting the French and Germans to agree not to undercut the application of such a policy by other suppliers. Others favor (again as a fallback to our first preference for NPT adherence) a bilateral formulation. Under this formulation, the U.S. would simply require as a provision in new bilateral agreements for cooperation that the recipient have all its facilities and materials under safeguards as a continuing condition of U.S. nuclear supply. As an example, Brazil, because it presently has all its nuclear facilities and materials under safeguards, would qualify for U.S. supply under this formula. However Brazil or any other nation would not be required to make an international commitment to full-scope safeguards but would understand that U.S. nuclear supply would be terminated if it acquired any unsafeguarded nuclear facilities or materials. Those who favor this formulation believe it achieves full-scope safeguards but avoids forcing key recipients of concern, such as Brazil and Spain, to make a highly-visable and long-term NPT type commitment which they have publicly rejected in the past. They believe that while its negotiability is uncertain, it may be more acceptable to certain countries of concern. They also believe that this approach may prove more acceptable to the French and therefore a greater chance of full supplier agreement. Issue: That you authorize the U.S. to require in new agreements for nuclear cooperation the proposed controls A) and B) over foreign fuel irradiated in U.S.-supplied reactors and: i) Either NPT adherence or, failing this, a full-scope safeguards formulation along the lines of the British formula involving an international commitment to full-scope safeguards. APPROVE (ACDA)
