Non-Proliferation
859
materials that it might acquire under IAEA safeguards which would
survive any termination of the agreement.
Some favor this formulation as a fallback to our obvious first pref-
erence for NPT adherence. They believe that the NPT-type interna-
tional commitment covering existing and future facilities inherent in
the British formula is necessary to preclude the possibility that a country
would use outside assistance while developing indigenous capabilities with in-
tent to forego safeguards once they achieve independence. Those who sup-
port this formulation also believe that U.S. adoption of such a policy
would significantly improve chances of supplier agreement at the April
meeting of supplier countries to require full-scope safeguards as a
condition of new supply commitments, or, failing that, of getting the
French and Germans to agree not to undercut the application of such a
policy by other suppliers.
Others favor (again as a fallback to our first preference for NPT ad-
herence) a bilateral formulation. Under this formulation, the U.S. would
simply require as a provision in new bilateral agreements for coopera-
tion that the recipient have all its facilities and materials under safe-
guards as a continuing condition of U.S. nuclear supply. As an example,
Brazil, because it presently has all its nuclear facilities and materials
under safeguards, would qualify for U.S. supply under this formula.
However Brazil or any other nation would not be required to make an inter-
national commitment to full-scope safeguards but would understand that
U.S. nuclear supply would be terminated if it acquired any unsafe-
guarded nuclear facilities or materials.
Those who favor this formulation believe it achieves full-scope
safeguards but avoids forcing key recipients of concern, such as Brazil
and Spain, to make a highly-visable and long-term NPT type commit-
ment which they have publicly rejected in the past. They believe that
while its negotiability is uncertain, it may be more acceptable to certain
countries of concern. They also believe that this approach may prove
more acceptable to the French and therefore a greater chance of full
supplier agreement.
Issue:
That you authorize the U.S. to require in new agreements for nu-
clear cooperation the proposed controls A) and B) over foreign fuel ir-
radiated in U.S.-supplied reactors and:
i) Either NPT adherence or, failing this, a full-scope safeguards for-
mulation along the lines of the British formula involving an interna-
tional commitment to full-scope safeguards.
APPROVE
(ACDA)
