Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II he wants to move toward by 1980 so that a measure of his Administration’s progress on hunger and malnutrition in foreign countries can be taken by the American public. Broadly stated, the policy review should focus on the following basic areas: a. Policies to provide more equitable access to available food. People are hungry today not only because there is a scarcity of food but because many are poor; food goes to the highest bidder not the neediest person. Therefore, —U.S. policies should be designed to encourage poor nations to become more self-reliant in the development of their own agricultural capacity. —U.S. policies should encourage an increase in income and development for the poorest billion people on earth. b. Policies to increase the supply of food in relation to demand. This includes the following types of actions: —Policies to increase food production and rural development in the developing nations. —Policies to encourage a higher level of food production in the United States. —Policies to provide food security through our international system of grain reserves. Perhaps serious consideration should be given to an international insurance scheme as now being debated within the World Bank community for this particular problem area. —Policies to eliminate the waste of food, particularly post-harvest food losses. c. Policies to provide food or food assistance for those unable to purchase sufficient food for adequate nutrition. d. Policies to deal explicitly with the organization, management, and resources appropriate for the United States government to implement these policies. This is a universally accepted problem of governments’ inability to come to grips with this important responsibility area. This would lay the groundwork for a set of goals broadly stated with which the President could establish the basis for specific actions designed to move toward an action-oriented government policy. It is extremely important that we do not send a signal to the Congress or to the American people and our neighbors abroad that the most President Carter is going to do is “study” the issue. At the same time, we certainly would not want to pursue a policy of “quick fixes” as is pointed out in the first draft discussion paper outline. However, this is not to suggest that short-term, intermediate and long-term approaches cannot be developed throughout the process. Having established a broad policy framework, the President then can decide with minimum delay what kind of measurable goals he wants to move toward so that by 1980 the public and Congress will un-
