730 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX the CSCE process as the only one that brings all European nations together. The US would try to shape the Madrid meeting to achieve that objective and not destroy the process. 10. East-West relations. Describing US-Soviet relations as “poor,” Ridgway noted that this applied only to the Soviets and that the US pursues a different policy toward East European countries, particularly Romania. Andrei expressed appreciation for the wisdom of this policy but regretted the downward spiral of US-Soviet relations and the deepening of mistrust between the two nations over so many issues (Ethiopia, Angola, C[amp] David Agreements, NATO, TNF decision, and postponement of SALT process). Noting that the East-West framework was dependent on the world situation, Andrei again argued for the safeguarding of the CSCE process and the improvement of the international climate. Aggrey 230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Romania1 Washington, June 19, 1980, 2210Z 162131. Subject: US-Romanian Military Supply Relationship. Ref: USDAO Bucharest 060740Z March 80.2 1. S-entire text. 2. We have given careful consideration to the question of establishing a military supply relationship with Romania. It has been decided at a high level that we should respond to Admiral Dinu’s request (reftel) by going back to the Romanians in a low-key way to ask that they be more specific about their interest in establishing such a relationship. 3. Several factors have changed since 1975–76 when the Romanians made a similar request. The most restrictive provisions of the Battle Act3 are no longer in force, and the US has a growing interest in 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870104–0590. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to the White House. Drafted by Courtney and Barry; cleared by O’Donohue, Kramer, Larrabee, Schmidt, and in PM and T; approved by Bartholomew. 2 See footnote 3, Document 223. 3 The Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act, also known as the Battle Act, restricted export of certain strategic and military items to countries allied with the Soviet Union.
