Haiti 741 and Minister Interior Duvigneaud he produced large volume miscellaneous identification papers and photos allegedly removed from corps of subjects thereof apparently establishing that four of seven members of rebel expedition were residents Miami and presumably U.S. citizens. At least two held deputy sheriff badges or commissions from Florida authorities. This in apparent conflict with information made available to Embassy representatives earlier in day who were invited view cadavers two participants said to be American citizens with explanation other two foreigners were Dominicans. However this conflict understandable view excitement and general confusion. Furthermore there are widely divergent accounts of events of day including version raiders were denounced in advance to GOH by army officers thought to be defectors and were shot on landing and bodies brought to Port au Prince where fighting at Casernes led by several army officers members of conspiracy. President agreed permit our Consular representatives examine and photograph papers to establish identify of alleged Americans. Results will be forwarded Department promptly. President further claimed papers, photographs, weapons et cetera found on auxiliary sail boat abandoned at Deluge south of St. Marc established its U.S. identify. However Haitian authorities unable identify boat either by name or number although claiming it flew American flag. In tone of exceptional gravity President reminded me of my previous offer to be of assistance which he had declined for time being by saying “I now formally request immediate expulsion Magloire3 and Dejoie from U.S. territory on grounds they have organized and launched armed expedition against my government with participation U.S. citizens”. He stressed his desire keep whole matter confidential in Haiti to avoid disturbing friendly relations between two governments but said he would expect favorable action on his request within 48 hours. I agreed forward his request to Department promptly. I endeavored explain that commission as deputy sheriff in many jurisdictions in U.S. was honorific title frequently bestowed for personal or political reasons and disclaimed it implied official knowledge of or support for expedition. When Thebaud said boat could only have sailed with connivance federal officials I entered strong denial indicating that boat could well have sailed clandestinely or from some point outside U.S. territory. 3 Paul E. Magloire, President of Haiti from December 6, 1950, until December 12, 1956.
