1038  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
212.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, May 17, 1991, 1638Z
5637. Subject: START: Brooks-Obukhov Dinner, May 15, 1991
1. This is NST/START MEMCON-XV-M-094. Secret—Entire Text.
2. Meeting Date: May 15, 1991
–Time: 7:00 p.m.–9:00 p.m.
–Place: Obukhov’s Apartment, Soviet Mission, Geneva
3. Participants:
U.S.	
	
USSR
Amb. L.E. Brooks	
Min. A. A. Obukhov
4. Summary: Brooks reviewed the results of his recent trip to 
Washington, stressing U.S. interest in prompt START completion once 
CFE was resolved. Obukhov said these political reassurances were 
welcome but should be matched with practical steps. Obukhov was 
negative on either using throw-­weight plus volume in a new types defi-
nition or attempting to deal with specific missiles separately. Obukhov 
claimed U.S. attempts to get dates on which the maximum throw-­
weight of existing types was demonstrated were an attempt to “cali-
brate U.S. NTM.” End summary.
5. Subject summary: U.S. attitude toward START; Stage dimen-
sions; new types; PPCM/SSI; throw-­weight information; CFE meetings 
in Washington; final complaints; and follow-­up phone call. End subject 
summary.
U.S. Attitude Toward START
6. Obukhov invited Brooks to dinner following the latter’s return 
from a brief trip to Washington. Obukhov said he was anxious to learn 
the results of the trip.
7. Brooks said that he had seen Secretary Baker while in Washington.2 
Brooks had told the Secretary that the Soviet side had shown renewed 
interest in making progress since the resumption of negotiations. As evi-
dence, Brooks had cited Obukhov’s presence in Geneva, Soviet propos-
als (generally helpful) on three major issues, and the rapid turn around 
time in responding to proposals in Moscow. Brooks had acknowledged 
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Lot 02D360, Edward M. Ifft 
Files, Baker-Nazarkin Memcons 1991. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent Priority information 
to Moscow, the Mission to NATO, and USNMR SHAPE. Drafted by Brooks; cleared by 
Kangas; approved by Brooks.
2 No minutes were found.
