other shall be added to or deducted from the amount to be received or paid by such
Party, making the advance, under the second paragraph of Article 3 of the Treaty of
Ancon; That all the periods hereinbefore mentioned may be extended or changed by the
Arbitrator; That the holding of the plebiscite as hereinbefore provided shall not be
delayed to await the proceedings or report of said Special Commission on boundaries
but that either Party may challenge the right of any person to register or vote in said
plebiscite upon the ground that he was born or resided as the case may be, outside the
limits of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon as defined in this
Opinion and Award, and the Plebiscitary Commission shall cause a separate record to
be kept of all such persons whose right to register and vote may be affected by the
report of the Special Commission on boundaries, and the votes of such persons shall
also be separately kept.
That the Arbitrator reserves the power and right to pass upon, adopt, modify or reject
the report of said Special Commission, or to appoint a new Special Commission and
pass upon its report in like manner; That if it appears from the report of the Plebiscitary
Commission that the result of the plebiscite may depend upon the votes of persons
whose right to register or vote may be in doubt until the boundaries of the territory
covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon have been fixed as hereinbefore provided,
the Arbitrator shall withhold the proclamation of the result of the plebiscite until said
boundaries have been fixed and the right of such persons to register and vote has been
determined accordingly.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to
be affixed.
DONE in triplicate at the City of Washington on the fourth day of March in the year one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-five, and of the Independence of the United States
the one hundredth and forty-ninth.
[SEAL] CALVIN COOLIDGE
By the President:
CHARLES E. HUGHES,
Secretary of State
32 For text of treaty of Oct. 20, 1883, see Foreign Relations , 1883, p. 731; for texts of
the protocol and supplementary act of July 20, 1922, see ibid., 1922, vol. I, p. 505.
* (N. B. This text is the translation given in the Appendix to the Peruvian Case. The
Chilean translation, which is taken from the Foreign Relations of the United States for
1883, is not materially different.) [Footnote in the original.]
