582 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI In tandem to these steps, Shevardnadze said the Soviets suggested bilateral negotiations between the USSR and the U.S. regarding radical reductions and elimination of non-­strategic nuclear armaments beginning with nuclear weapons on surface ships. This had been proposed by Gorbachev at Malta. Shevardnadze said he had one additional point: he believed we had to have serious discussion of strategic stability in the very broad sense of the phrase. By this he referred to strategic arms, conventional arms and naval forces, all taken together. It was necessary to have a serious discussion with the involvement of major experts in the field—­ academics, military representatives, and political specialists. He added that he was talking about strategic stability both in global terms and in regional terms. The experts could address Europe, the Middle East or Asia and the Pacific. In this respect, he noted that we had no discussions on the Asian-Pacific region even though many states in that area favored such exchanges. Shevardnadze concluded that he wanted to raise this problem even though he knew that it would be difficult to find a solution right away. Nevertheless, we should strive to establish a mechanism that would be useful to both the U.S. and USSR. The Secretary responded that he was underwhelmed and Shevardnadze would not be surprised to hear this. He would not cite again the reasons why we believed naval arms control was inappropriate, such as the geographical differences between our two countries and the special role naval forces played for the U.S. We understood the Soviet position and had heard the arguments before. He hoped we could put this issue to one side, including the issue of Asian arms control (particularly as we had differences regarding the sources of instability in Asia). Given the extraordinary difficulty we would have in finishing START by May 30 and in completing a CFE agreement this year, the boat really was loaded already. The Secretary repeated that we had very serious issues between us on which we should concentrate our talent and resources in order to find solutions. We should see if we can complete START and CFE agreements before we took on this even more difficult issue. Shevardnadze replied that he did not expect any different reaction. Nevertheless, he wanted to recall the talks in Malta at which Gorbachev raised this question and provided a rationale for limiting naval forces. The President had said that he understood that there was a question here. Well, if there was a question then we needed to find an answer. The Soviets understood that we would not be able to have a specific dialogue. But it was inadvisable to put this question off for very long. [Omitted here is discussion not related to START.]
