Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
513
dicated in your Annapolis speech.3 And, if that reciprocity is missing,
as it has been on Africa, Cuba, and the Persian Gulf, we are prepared to
assert our interests. (S)
2. It means cooperating with Europe and Japan in drawing China
into a more genuine involvement in global cooperation, pointing
toward a world of diversity. You should explain to Teng, and also to
the “Gang of Guadeloupe,” that diversity is the same thing as non-
hegemony; i.e., pluralism. In that sense we have genuinely compatible
strategic objectives with the Europeans, Japanese, and the Chinese. This
compatibility has to be cultivated cautiously but consistently. More-
over, if the Chinese were to sense that we are timid, or that we are using
them only to obtain a better bargain for a bilateral accommodation with
the Soviets, they could swing quickly to the other extreme. (S)
3. It means facing up to the danger that the Soviet military build-
up is likely to intersect with regional instability. In fact, it has already
started doing so, first in Africa, and now, and potentially much more
dangerously, in the Persian Gulf. (S)
The required response involves not giving the Soviets gratis guar-
antees on China. Whenever the Soviets ask for assurances regarding
China, we should be responsive by saying that we do not intend to ex-
ploit China against the Soviet Union, but couple that with a pointed re-
quest for the withdrawal of Cubans from Africa and for a halt to Soviet
activities in the Persian Gulf. (S)
In any case, we should not allow ourselves to be drawn into spon-
soring a blockade of China from defensive West European arms, since a
strong and secure China is an essential contribution to global stability,
and the Chinese are entitled to acquire defensive arms from the West.
(In the past, the Soviets were not shy about arming the Chinese against
us.) (S)
4. It requires a U.S. military posture which is adequate to balance
the Soviet Union through essential equivalence and adequate collective
conventional forces. In brief, it means carrying out PD–18,4 with or
without SALT. (S)
5. It means affirming our position on human rights, which greatly
increases the moral appeal of the United States and provides an effec-
tive response to Soviet ideology. (S)
There is no doubt the global yearning for human rights is ready to
be tapped, and you have started tapping it in a genuinely important
fashion. I notice that the new Pope is beginning to join you in it. (S)
3 See Document 87.
4 PD/NSC–18, “U.S. National Strategy,” issued August 24, 1977, is scheduled for
publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IV, National Security Policy.
