3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 181 weapons. The message concludes by noting your personal interest in non-proliferation and asking for your views on what effective measures might be taken. The Minister added that a public statement, roughly along the same lines, will be issued in Moscow on Monday3 and that similar messages from Brezhnev had been sent to London, Paris and Bonn. The Soviets do not plan to announce the fact of these messages, however. I told the Minister that I would relay the message immediately to you and that you would consider how and when to reply. I did note to the Minister that the Soviet information did not seem to be in accord with our own information on the imminence of the South African test but this was not my area of expertise. I have informed Warren Christopher of this message and I will send you the full text as soon as it is translated. We will also send you a draft reply, though it is obvious that the Russians intend this primarily for propaganda since they intend a public statement on Monday. Attachment Oral Message From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President Carter4 undated We would like to draw your attention to a matter which in our opinion is of quite considerable importance from the point of view of its consequences to the development of the international situation and furtherance of detente. This matter concerns our countries as Permanent Security Council Members which carry a special responsibility for the maintenance of peace and international security. According to incoming data on the South African Republic, they are completing work on building nuclear weapons and on carrying out the first nuclear test. In the desert of Calabari they have built a testing site which is practically ready for such tests underground. These facts testifying to the possibility of building nuclear weapons in South Africa could not but cause us a grave apprehension. Naturally if this state, which carries out a policy of apartheid with regard to the African population of their land and does not take into account United Nations decisions, acquired nuclear weapons then this 3 August 8. 4 Secret; Sensitive.
