rug factories at Tientsin, and I note your statement that you would be glad to receive from the Legation any general or special instructions that may be deemed appropriate as outlining either the American policy or the course to be pursued by the Consulate-General. I share your misgivings in regard to the probable trend of political affairs in North China during the coming months. The present Government in Peking, like the Provisional Government of Chihli, is financially destitute, and there is only a slight prospect that it will be able to secure the funds necessary for it to meet the financial settlement day at Chinese New Year, February 13th, with any show of success. Since there is no large industrial class in Peking with any semblance of organization there is no reason to fear industrial disorders of a serious nature, however, in the Capital itself. I allude to these circumstances as indicating that there is little hope that any politically stabilizing influence will emanate from Peking, unless assistance comes from some source unforeseen at the present. The course of events in Tientsin resembles ominously the course taken by events at Canton under the late Sun Yat Sen Government While conditions at Canton are now greatly improved, for a long time, as you are doubtless aware, the strikers’ organization there had, to all intents and purposes, an official status. The professed government deferred to it and appeared to accord recognition to its regulations. There remains, as yet, this dissimilarity, that the Chihli Government has not yet announced its open support of the labor unions, so far as I am aware. In these circumstances I consider that you have decided wisely in insisting that it is the duty of the Chinese authorities to decide as to the measures that must be taken for the protection of the property of the American factories, and in pursuing and urging on American interests a policy of patience, caution and tolerance. It is obviously impossible for American officials in connection with labor disturbances, to make good the deficiencies of the Chinese authorities, except insofar as urgent official representations may awake the latter to a realization of their duties. You should, of course, at all times apprise the
