711.4216 M 58/72 [Document 397] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard) WASHINGTON, November 24, 1925. EXCELLENCY: Referring further to your Embassy’s note No. 813 of September 15, 1925, bringing to my attention certain remarks and inquiries of the Canadian Government in regard to the diversion of water from Lake Michigan by the Sanitary District of Chicago, I take pleasure in submitting the following statements: The Sanitary District of Chicago to which the permit of March 3, 1925, was issued by the Secretary of War, is a municipal corporation separate and distinct from the City of Chicago. The operations of the Sanitary District are conducted under direct authority of the legislature of the State of Illinois without reference to the operations of the municipal government of the City of Chicago. Diversion of water for domestic consumption in the City of Chicago being purely a function of the municipal government of the City, it is considered that the authority granted the Sanitary District could not be made to apply to or include this other diversion as well. The case before the Secretary of War for action involved the granting of a permit for diversion of water for sanitary purposes only, and the instrument of authority was worded accordingly. On the other hand, it seemed to the Secretary of War that the diversion of water for domestic consumption by the City of Chicago was larger than it should be, and that the amount wasted was not a negligible portion of the gross diversion. He also considered that this excessive diversion for domestic purposes made the cost of sewage treatment plant construction and operation unnecessarily high and consequently added to the length of the construction period and the difficulties of financing. For these reasons the Secretary of War took cognizance of the diversion for which the City of Chicago is responsible, in a restrictive way, rather than by permissive means, and included a condition in the permit making the instrument voidable in case the City of Chicago fails to take specified steps looking to a curtailment in the amount of water diverted for domestic purposes. In the judgment of the Secretary of War the average diversion which should be authorized for sanitary purposes under the conditions known to exist should be not less than 8,500 cubic feet per second. The safety of the lives and health of citizens of the locality cannot be disregarded, and until the conditions of the permit of March 3, 1925, have been complied with no substantial reduction in the amount of diversion could be made without endangering health if not life.
