788  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
is ratified, to proceed promptly to negotiate further reductions and 
limitations, but their aims would be complicated by the new Western 
programs. Moreover, the Soviets might find it difficult to accept con-
tinuation beyond 1985 of the SALT II limitations on new ICBMs, ICBM 
fractionation, and perhaps total numbers of launchers. These provisions 
would limit their options for increasing the counterforce capabilities 
and survivability of their land-­based missile forces in response to the 
US MX/MPS and other programs. We are, therefore, uncertain whether 
the Soviets would be willing to extend such limits beyond 1985.
12. Economic considerations are also a factor in Soviet planning 
for strategic forces in the 1980s. Energy, demographic, and productivity 
problems are adding to Soviet economic difficulties. To help ease these 
difficulties, the Soviets might consider reducing the rate of growth of 
military spending. However, the evidence available to us on current 
and planned Soviet programs leads us to conclude that growth in total 
defense spending and in spending for strategic programs over the next 
few years will be at or near the historic long-­term rate of 4 to 5 percent a 
year. If the Soviet leaders should perceive economic pressure so severe 
that they had to consider a moderation of the rate of growth in their 
defense spending, we believe they would not single out strategic pro-
grams for a major reduction in growth.
13. Several major factors lead us to believe that the Soviets are not 
likely to alter significantly their commitment to long-­term strategic 
force improvements. These factors include the following:
—Continued progress toward the achievement of Soviet objectives 
for strategic nuclear forces remains a priority element in leadership 
planning.
—A cutback in Soviet strategic forces would have only a limited 
effect on the USSR’s most serious economic problems.
—The momentum of Soviet strategic programs would be hard to 
arrest, particularly in a period of leadership transition.
—New signs of Western determination and the deterioration of 
detente probably will contribute to continued Soviet determination to 
seek to shift the correlation of forces in the USSR’s favor.
—The possibility, however remote, of large-­scale nuclear war will 
continue to support efforts to improve Soviet war-­fighting capabilities.
Thus we believe that, while seeking to slow or halt US and NATO 
weapon programs, the Soviets will at the same time initiate and con-
tinue programs designed to overcome current weaknesses, especially 
in their strategic defenses, and to give themselves options to counter 
the prospective Western programs.
B. Main Current Trends in Soviet Programs
14. Much evidence on past and present Soviet strategic programs 
leads us to believe that the Soviets have been striving to acquire and
