1955 139 those remaining for further concessions from us. Of course one cannot be sure, but I still have the feeling that they consider just about the maximum amount of capital has been squeezed from the prisoners and that the others would gradually be released in their own way and in their own time. It seems to me that also we are running some risk, slight though it may seem at the time, that the maintenance of our present position just might result in a breakdown of these talks, if not because of devel­ opments here but because of incidents elsewhere and that this would result in indefinite detention by the Chinese of those whose release we could have otherwise obtained. Of course, the only way in which I could fully and finally test the Chinese Communist position on this and bring maximum pressure would be to force the issue to the point of threatening a breakdown from our side. We would be gambling that their desire is so strong to go on to item two that they would not permit it to happen, but, on the other hand, if they called my bluff it would indefinitely delay the release of any Americans. I do not say our present position is wrong and will, of course, continue to present it to the best of my ability. However, I hope that in reaching a decision full weight has also been given to these other considerations. I have never felt the situation was so simple as throw­ ing in the sponge when we were near agreement on all Americans because I did not feel that we were that near that point. I hope that I am wrong. I sent an “eyes only” to the Secretary last night on the possibility of my very privately having Wang to a meal, and, if it is our intention maintain our present position, putting it to him just as forcefully as I can. It is my feeling that if I would do this in this atmosphere it would be much more effective than anything further I might say in our meet­ ings and that the gesture of inviting him to dinner just might help in bringing Chou around. I think that it is a situation which calls for using all the arts of our profession. If I do not do this, it seems to me that I should probably adopt the opposite tack and, while trying to avoid anything that would precipi­ tate a break, could take a much less “reasonable” attitude at meetings and attempt to give him a feeling that if we don’t get what we are ask­ ing for we would be willing to see a break develop. This would be a difficult operation to perform without its leading to a break if they are in fact willing to break over the issue. I am also glad to see the improvement in the press. From what Doug Forman tells me, I fear that I had perhaps in the past not made clear enough to all of you, including Carl McCardle, that I have been spending a great deal of time seeing individual correspondents and believe that it has done some good.
