September 18–December 16, 1978
499
We will also help to resolve the question concerning oil. My under-
standing from Secretary Vance is that this is not as difficult a problem
as we had anticipated. The Egyptians are willing to assure Israel that
you will have access to the oil, not to the exclusion of everyone else. I
understand that is their position, but certainly your proximity to the
wells gives you a natural advantage. In the meantime, because at this
moment oil supplies are somewhat doubtful in the Middle East as you
described yourself, I have already instructed Secretary Schlesinger to
carry out our own obligations to you to fulfill Israel’s oil needs, so you
need not be concerned about any transient or temporary problems with
your energy supplies. We will assure that you have access to enough oil
to take care of any temporary absence of oil supplies caused by the
problems in Iran.
Prime Minister Begin: I am very grateful.
President Carter: Overall the situation has moved forward substan-
tially, but we still have the same basic question not resolved yet con-
cerning the West Bank and Gaza elections as it relates to the schedule
for implementing the Sinai agreement. This is very important, as you
know, to President Sadat. I hope he will be as flexible as possible on this
issue and I think obviously the Israeli decision to adopt the treaty text is
a step in the right direction. As we have contact with the Egyptians, we
will let you know what President Sadat’s response is. Mr. Prime Min-
ister, let me ask you about your plans concerning Dayan and Weizman
coming back to Washington. Do they have plans to come back to con-
tinue the negotiations concerning oil and other matters.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, sir.
President Carter: All right. I will get in touch with President Sadat7
as quickly as possible. I’ll be meeting with Secretary Vance8 in about
ten or fifteen minutes on another matter. I’ll discuss my conversation
with you to him.
Prime Minister Begin: The financial help, what I discussed with
you?
President Carter: Yes, I’ll discuss it with my advisors, too. Obvi-
ously we recognize that Israel has special financial obligations. We
have been reluctant, as you know, to make any specific commitments
on this until we see the prospects for having a peace treaty between you
and Egypt. But we recognize your special difficulties, Mr. Prime Min-
ister, and we have historically been willing to give to Israel and we will
7 See Document 143.
8 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter held a meeting with Iranian Am-
bassador Ardeshir Zahedi from 10 a.m. to 10:40 a.m. on November 21, at which Vance
was also present. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
