708
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Vance: I will read the letter. (The Secretary reads the text
of the draft letter).
Prime Minister Begin: We’ll have to break with consultations to
discuss this. There are improvements compared to the drafts submitted
at Camp David. There is a return to the Camp David language, but
there are problems. I will start with page 3. You have changed the word
can to will. I remember that we agreed on can. And you accepted the
phrase “as expeditiously as possible”.
Mr. Rosenne: The Prime Minister suggested the change “as expedi-
tiously as possible”.
Prime Minister Begin: I said so. I sent this to the Cabinet. Then there
is the phrase “possibly first in Gaza”. This is put in the sentence on set-
ting up the self-government one month after elections. I never heard
such a proposal. I cannot agree. (The Prime Minister misunderstands,
and corrects himself when he notes that the establishment of the self-
government one month after elections is part of the Camp David
Agreement.)
Here is the idea of starting with Gaza. I use the words Judea and
Samaria. We exchanged letters8 on this. We can’t use the phrase West
Bank. This is a serious matter. It is a distortion of geographical and his-
torical facts. The West Bank refers to all of the area west of the river, not
just the area annexed by King Abdullah. If we sign a letter, either in pa-
renthesis or as a footnote to the Israeli version, we must refer to Judea
and Samaria.
President Carter: No problem.
Prime Minister Begin: The idea of implementing the self-governing
authority first in Gaza is a deviation from Camp David. If we both
agree, it would be okay. What is the idea? I’ll say openly that Secretary
Vance asked me if autonomy could first be established in Gaza. I re-
plied that if we have the commitment from President Sadat that he will
not then interfere in Judea and Samaria, then we will consider this pos-
sibility, with the authority of the Cabinet. We cannot agree that we will
go first in Gaza leaving Judea and Samaria, and then later negotiate
Judea and Samaria separately with Egypt. That would be completely
paradoxical. We agreed to negotiate with Egypt alone in order to show
our good faith. No one wants to be truer to the Camp David Accords.
Why did we agree? We could have waited for Jordan. Autonomy was
our idea, and it is one of the most beautiful ideas ever proposed by
Zionism and Judaism. Egypt has no right to Gaza. Gaza is a foreign
8 Reference is to the September 22, 1978, side letter from Carter to Begin acknowl-
edging that the “expression ‘West Bank’” would be “understood by the Government of
Israel as Judea and Samaria.” The letter was attached to the Camp David Accords. See
Document 57.
