Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I The Middle East I suspect that the root cause of our current difficulty is that Begin feels he can get away with almost anything; and that Sadat and the Saudis no longer have confidence that we can deliver either on the wider peace nor on regional protection from the Soviets. Not having pressed at Camp David for some direct linkage between the accords, we have failed to respond in any concrete way to Begin’s subsequent negative actions regarding the West Bank.6 South Africa The basic reason why our difficulties are mounting is that our middle-of-the-road solutions are collapsing as the situation becomes polarized. The fact of the matter is that neither the whites nor the blacks take us very seriously. There is no bite to our proposals, because we are visibly reluctant to press the Soviet-Cuban issue (and thus leave the radical blacks with an increasingly attractive militant option), or to apply sanctions to the whites (thus encouraging them to engage in dilatory tactics).7 In brief, we should be prepared to demonstrate to all concerned that the U.S. has clout as well as patience, and that there are evident and predictable costs for disregarding U.S. interests. Instead, we have given rise to the view that the best way of dealing with us is to simply keep nibbling away, and that eventually the U.S. will simply adjust its position. Stonewalling or even breaking off negotiations is an established part of the negotiating tradition.8 The Soviets, the Israelis, the French and others practice it well.9 We should, too—and every one of the above negotiations should be reviewed from that standpoint. 2. Alert The Arc of Crisis If you draw an arc on the globe, stretching from Chittagong (Bangladesh) through Islamabad to Aden, you will be pointing to the area of currently our greatest vulnerability. All at once, difficulties are surfacing in Iran and Pakistan, and they are thinly below the surface in India and are very manifest in Bangladesh, and there is reason to believe that the political structure of Saudi Arabia is beginning to creak. Turkey is also becoming more wobbly. 6 The President bracketed this paragraph and added the following in the left-hand margin next to this paragraph: “What have you suggested?” 7 The President underlined the phrase “the radical blacks” and added the following in the left-hand margin next to this sentence: “Almost all blacks.” 8 The President wrote “when?” in the left-hand margin next to this sentence. 9 The President underlined “Soviets,” “Israelis,” and “French.”
