Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII one on November 7.9 With regard to the first one, we have formed a psychological operations team in Washington which is generating material for covert broadcasting in Afghanistan. A clandestine radio was established in Afghanistan in November and indeed the Amin Government had already complained to the Pakistanis about it. We have also placed 150 articles in the world press. We have spent [amount not declassified] under this finding and have [amount not declassified] left. In the field of non-military support, we have disbursed $620,000 of the $695,000 available. Some of this went through Pakistan and some unilaterally. Under the second finding we have to work with the Saudis. We were doing fairly well with them until the attack on the Mosque in Mecca.10 I spoke to Prince Turki last week and he seemed less enthusiastic than he had before. Apparently, Prince Fahd wants to see the color of our money before he does anything. Perhaps he wants to see us buy arms for the rebels as well as do it himself. We can go back to Turki and Fahd on the basis of the original understanding that we would supply all facilities short of weapons. Alternatively, we could ask for a different finding. Under this we would be able to move appropriate materiel out of our storehouses [less than 1 line not declassified] within a week and get it to Saudi Arabia for further forwarding to Pakistan. The Pakistanis would probably prefer that. We would at that point tell the Saudis that it is up to them to pay for the next load of arms although we would of course help them find it. This is certainly the quickest way to get things moving. Vice President: What kind of material do you have available? Turner: [less than 1 line not declassified] anti-aircraft guns, [less than 1 line not declassified] anti-tank weapons, AK–47 rifles and 82mm mortars. Vice President: That sounds good to me. Brzezinski: We will need a new finding. Vice President: Is that a lightweight anti-aircraft gun? Turner: It would be effective against a helicopter but not against aircraft. But we cannot deliver any of this material without Pakistani assistance. Brzezinski: We will have to discuss this in the high-level mission we send to Pakistan. Brown: Good. We should ask something from the Pakistanis. Hayward: (Expresses agreement.)
