Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA 227 The membership of BIB has at no time contained more than one or two people with special or recognized capacity to perform such complex studies. The Board’s present and projected membership is not of the stature which would compel high respect by RFE/RL, its staff and, especially, its corporate board and officers. The exceptional stature and experience of the RFE/RL Board further intensifies the disparity in quality, depth, and competence, between the two Boards and virtually assures reluctant and minimal cooperation. Although it is intended that BIB concentrate on certain defined areas of “oversight” and the Board of RFE/RL concentrate on “operations”, these distinctions are largely artificial. More importantly, one purpose cannot be pursued without “invading” the other. Since the part-time membership of BIB is clearly inadequate to its task, more than normal or desirable authority resides in its staff. That staff, especially its chief members, has become the most significant part of the problem. Of five professionals, two appear to have a potential for useful contribution. The Executive Director of BIB’s staff and at least one of the staff assessing program content and quality maximize the friction (inherent in the present arrangement) between the two Boards and unnecessarily burden both. The distance of both Boards from the main sites of broadcasting operations further complicates the oversight functions. It is difficult to imagine a laboratory more suited than is the BIB to the proof of several of Parkinson’s propositions. Quite presumptuously, but with deep conviction, the following steps (not easy to accomplish quickly) are recommended: The next Chairman of BIB must, whatever the resistance from his colleagues who may cherish their distinction and tasks, move to bring the existence of the Board for International Broadcasting to an end. In the interim, in order to improve cooperation between the Boards and assist the Chairman of BIB to perform the responsibilities assigned by law to BIB, all or a large part of the Board’s present staff must be replaced promptly. It may not be necessary to fill more than two of the five positions if this diagnosis is correct—the position of executive secretary and the staff member concerned with financial oversight. To fill the other vacant positions risks creating a greater number of people with a vested interest in perpetuating their positions. The most important purpose which should be pursued by the chairman and executive director, should be the designing of the means to terminate the Board’s existence, with the approval of Congress and in such a way as to satisfy the Congress that its serious purpose will,
