National Security Policy  399
Also attending the meeting were the Director of Central Intelligence; 
the Acting Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Acting Director, U.S. 
Information Agency, the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs; 
the Assistant to the President; the Special Assistants to the President 
for National Security Affairs, for Science and Technology, and Security 
Operations Coordination; the White House Staff Secretary; the Assistant 
White House Staff Secretary; Mr. Howard Furnas, Department of State; 
from the Department of Defense: Assistant Secretary Perkins McGuire, 
Donald F. Bradford, and Harrell B. Altizer; the Executive Secretary, NSC, 
and the Director of the NSC Secretariat.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. STATUS OF MILITARY MOBILIZATION BASE PROGRAM
(NSC Actions Nos. 1680, 1698, and 1918; NSC 5810/1, para. 47)
Mr. Gray introduced the subject to the Council2 and called upon 
Mr. Quarles for a presentation by the Department of Defense.
Mr. Quarles said the presentation which would be given by 
Defense would show the basis for mobilization planning, i.e., for the 
procurement of materials and the establishment of reserves. This basis 
as it now exists has some weaknesses. However, the test of a mobiliza­
tion base should be, what is procured and what reserves are set up? The 
Department of Defense has attempted to establish a pattern of mobili­
zation and is seeking to improve the pattern. Mr. Quarles then called 
upon Assistant Secretary McGuire to make the presentation.
A copy of Mr. McGuire’s presentation is filed in the Minutes of the 
meeting and another is attached to this memorandum.
At the conclusion of the presentation, Mr. Quarles remarked that 
fundamentally the report just made represented a transition from 
World War II mobilization concepts to concepts consistent with the 
atomic age. From this point of view, the base has some inconsistencies, 
e.g., the National Guard and reserve programs. Defense can set up a 
logistics plan for the reserves, but Congress can upset that plan by its 
reserve legislation.
The President said he was intrigued by the assumption of a six 
months’ period between M-Day and D-Day. He would repeat an 
old saw: plans are worthless but planning is absolutely invaluable. 
Plans would probably be inapplicable to the actual war situation, 
but their value lay in the study and thinking required to produce 
them. The mobilization base presented represents a doubt that war 
2 A copy of Mr. Gray’s briefing note is filed in the Minutes of the meeting and 
another is attached to this memorandum. [Footnote is in the original.]
