3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 389 frontations. The Secretary concluded by saying that he had tried in perhaps an oversimplified way to lay out some of the issues and problems and some of the steps that might be taken to move our relations to a better level. Gromyko said he would try very briefly to react to the Secretary’s statement, avoiding repetition of what had already been said in his talks with the Secretary and with the President in Washington. Naturally, he perceived positively the Secretary’s statement to the effect that the United States will seek to conduct affairs in such a way as to find solutions to the problems before us and not to permit the development of tensions in Soviet-American relations that could return our two countries to the atmosphere of the cold war. In this connection he could only say that he shared the wishes the Secretary had expressed and knew that the entire Soviet leadership, including Brezhnev personally, would agree with the sentiment expressed. He could say this because he was fully aware of their views in this respect. This constituted his reply to the first part of the Secretary’s statement, the constructive part. It would be very good indeed if words here were accompanied by deeds, if the U.S. Administration did indeed conduct affairs in the manner the Secretary had described. His second comment would deal with the thought expressed by the Secretary that one of the reasons why there was such an upsurge of propaganda that was hostile to the Soviet Union was that the Soviet Union had allegedly been engaged in an intensive arms buildup over the past several years. This, as the Secretary had said, worried the United States and the other Western countries. Gromyko could only say that he categorically rejected such an assertion. In fact, that had also been most categorically rejected at the very highest level quite recently by L.I. Brezhnev himself. This was simply not so. There was no such arms buildup. An artificial myth had been created in the West, pursuing a certain objective—to cover up the expanded arms programs of the Western powers themselves. Of course, the Soviet Union did have competent armed forces that were adequate to ensure the peaceful life of its people in the face of the constant buildup by NATO countries. However, the Soviet Union was not so foolish as to spend more on arms than was absolutely necessary to ensure the security of its people. One might ask why, in the face of such a policy by the Soviet Union, did the Western countries continue to build up their arsenals and military forces? The Soviet Union had constantly emphasized the need to take genuine steps toward disarmament, including ultimately steps aimed all the way toward general and complete disarmament. In this connection he would mention the proposal Brezhnev had recently made in his speech before the Komsomol, to halt the production of nuclear weapons and to conduct a policy that would ultimately lead toward
