Eastern Europe Region
85
intelligentsia. They are politically dedicated, idealistic men and women
of all ages whose zeal and commitment make them willing to pay the
substantial personal price that the regimes exact for openly noncon-
formist behavior. (U)
The broad spectrum is evident in the Polish dissident ranks, which
includes academicians, lawyers, writers, journalists, retired non-Com-
munist politicians and soldiers, Catholic priests, and university stu-
dents. In East Germany, the voices of dissent have been scientists-
turned-political philosophers, popular entertainers, writers, and frus-
trated emigrants. Czechoslovak dissidents, largely those persons who
helped generate or implement the reform ideas of 1968, include philoso-
phers, writers, dramatists, entertainers, and politicians. In Romania,
aside from a few writers and scholars and a group of Baptist clergy,
the majority of dissidents have been would-be emigrants or, more
recently, members of discontented national minorities. (U)
While the dissidents have had some success in expanding their
numbers, they have generally failed to enlarge their circle5 of political
activists beyond a small portion of the intelligentsia and have been
unsuccessful in politicizing other segments of the population. [classifica-
tion not declassified]
The most success at attracting a broader following has been evident
in Poland. One dissident group initially championed a cause—help for
and the release of jailed workers—that garnered considerable popular
support. This and another dissident organization have enlisted students
into dissident work and may have won popular good will through
efforts to counsel people about their everyday problems. The second
group also claims to have financial backing and considerable moral
support from private farmers (an important class in Poland where
three-quarters of the farms are in private hands) and retired, probably
World War II, military veterans.6 Some of the changes that Polish
dissidents advocate are looked on favorably, if passively, by liberal
members of the Communist Party establishment. Despite considerable
effort, however, the Polish dissidents have not enlisted much worker
support. The influential Catholic Church, moreover, has not backed
them, even though some Catholic priests, seeking to win greater reli-
gious freedom, are also dissidents. [classification not declassified]
Despite the rapid increase in the number of Czechoslovak dissi-
dents, they continue to be mostly drawn from the intelligentsia. In
Romania, Goma’s “following,” swelled from seven to 300 in less than
5 An unknown hand underlined “failed to enlarge their circle” in this sentence.
6 An unknown hand underlined “financial backing and considerable moral support
from private farmers,” “and retired,” and “military veterans” in this sentence and wrote
“STATE MEMCON” in the left-hand margin next to it.
