Afghanistan
667
unity” of views between Moscow and Kabul and promised continued
aid and support.
Soviet Tactics
The main lines of Moscow’s tactics in response to a further round
of Western probing are likely to be:
—not to reject discussion of the Afghanistan crisis;
—to refuse to negotiate over the future regime in Kabul; and
—to emphasize the theme of cessation of outside interference as a
precondition to any other moves toward a settlement.
To the extent that the Soviets find they have to elaborate on the
theme of guarantees, they may build a position in which a formally
negotiated guarantee of noninterference, and Kabul’s acceptance of it,
becomes an additional precondition for Soviet withdrawal.
245.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
GC 80–10035
Washington, April 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, a security information page, and a
cover page.]
The Afghan Refugees: An Irritant to Soviet-Pakistani Relations
([classification marking not declassified])
Summary
Afghan resistance efforts are receiving support from families
encamped as refugees in Pakistan and from related tribes who live
in the Pakistani borderlands. Soviet and Afghan military forces may
attempt to curb cross-border activity when weather conditions improve
in April and May. ([classification marking not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 82T00154R, Box 1, The Afghan Refugees:
An Irritant to Soviet-Pakistani Relations. Secret. A typed note at the bottom of the page
reads: “The author of this memorandum is [name not declassified] Office of Geographic
and Cartographic Research. This paper was coordinated with the Offices of Economic
Research and Political Analysis, the Afghan Task Force, and the National Intelligence
Officer for Near East and South Asia. Information available as of 1 April 1980 was used
in the preparation of the text. Comments and queries are welcome and may be addressed
to the Chief, East Asia Branch, [less than 1 line and classification marking not declassified]”
