630
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
become persuaded that they are faced with what would at most amount
to no more than a low-level nuisance threat capable of bringing down an
occasional Soviet aircraft, or embarrassing the Soviets and marginally
encouraging the insurgents, but not capable of materially affecting the
course and outcome of the counterinsurgency campaign, they might
be prepared to confine themselves to harsh threats and minor, or even
ambiguous, retaliatory actions against Pakistan designed primarily to
discourage an enlargement of the activity in Afghanistan.
a. A possible scenario in these circumstances might take the form
of a sharp warning directed to the Paks after several incidents involving
the firing of SA–7s in Afghanistan with a clear implication that if
the activities were not quickly terminated, unspecified but unpleasant
consequences would follow. The Soviets then might wait for a period
of time (up to several weeks) to observe the effect of their warning on
the level of activity on the assumption that the Pakistan government—
even if sufficiently frightened—would probably not be able to control
the use of rockets already in Afghanistan, but that it could take meas-
ures to prevent the introduction of additional weapons or missiles
thereafter.
b. Should the scope and intensity of the use of these weapons
against Soviet forces proceed at the same or similar levels beyond the
stipulated time, the Soviets would probably take retaliatory actions
against Pakistan, e.g. starting low and gradually escalating from more
to less ambiguous forms, employing either Afghan ground forces or
Soviet aircraft with Afghan markings. [classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified]
4. Should the Soviets either conclude at the outset that they faced
a substantial military threat from the rockets, or that the low level of
attacks they initially faced was bound to be raised by the introduction
of substantial numbers of weapons unless the Paks reversed course,
we would not be surprised to see the Soviets deliver a virtual ultimatum
to the Paks followed thereafter by strong, unambiguous retaliatory
attacks against a variety of targets that could directly or indirectly be
said to associate Pakistan and the Afghan insurgents (refugee camps,
real or alleged training sites, military supply depots). If this did not
suffice, the Soviets could step up the pressure by attacking Pakistan
army encampments or airfields for the purpose of severely embarrass-
ing if not destabilizing the Zia government, and demonstrating Paki-
stan’s impotence. [classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified]
5. We would rate Soviet preference as follows:
a. The Soviets would prefer to threaten or coerce Pakistan into
terminating the activity rather than engage in high-level retaliatory
action against Pakistan because Moscow would not wish unnecessarily
to accept the risk that the Paks would reconsider the desirability of a
closer security relationship with the US.
