3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
255
most important was a broad statement of principles, which would be a
framework for Geneva. The second would be a discussion of possible
guidelines for the West Bank/Gaza matters. The third, of minor impor-
tance, was a discussion of the essential elements for a treaty, which
would include, for example, a definition of peace and what would flow
from that. It would also include the provisions for withdrawal from the
occupied territories.
Dobrynin asked if this were just a treaty between Egypt and Israel.
The Secretary replied that yes, it would be in the first instance, but that
it would be essentially the same as in any of the peace treaties. Do-
brynin asked what kind of principles would be specified regarding Pal-
estinian representation. The Secretary replied that the Palestinians
must be enabled to participate in the determination of their own future.
Dobrynin asked what principle would be advanced regarding troop
withdrawal. He commented that as of now Israel claimed that no
troops would be withdrawn for several years. He said that if this kind
of principle were applied elsewhere, for example in regard to Syria, it
would be difficult to accept. The Secretary observed that this was an
opening bargaining position. He thought that in the negotiations it
would come down to perhaps one year. He said that the principle of
242 would prevail,3 that Israel must withdraw from occupied terri-
tories, and that this would be part of establishing “secure and recog-
nized borders.” The details, as for example, when the withdrawal
should take place, would be up to the negotiating parties.
Dobrynin returned to the question of what kind of principles
would be established regarding the Palestinian questions. The Secre-
tary replied that if agreement could be reached on self-determination,
this would be a break-through. Dobrynin observed that as of now the
position was “self rule.” The Secretary replied it was unclear for what
period this would be, whether it would be just for the interim period.
Dobrynin said that in general he was worried that in their dealings
with the Palestinians, it looked as if there would be no clear end in sight
beyond the interim solutions. The Secretary replied that we would
have to see if we can get a solution, and an element involved in this
would be how long the interim period should be. Dobrynin asked if
you could get a solution without the presence of the Palestinians. He
also asked what kind of guidelines would be established—would this
provide for self rule in five years or ten years? The Secretary replied
that self rule would apply in the immediate future, leading up to a final
role in which the Palestinians would participate in determining what
kind of homeland would be established. Dobrynin thought this would
still be unclear. The Secretary replied that this was why we need the
3 Reference is to U.N. Resolution 242.
