184
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
82.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
Geneva, February 16, 1978, 1340Z
2411. CW message no. 31. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons
Negotiations, Seventh Round: Summary of Developments to Date.
1. Summary: As of February 13, the activity level of the seventh
round of the US–USSR Chemical Weapons negotiations was reduced
so experts would return to capitals for consultations. So far the round
has been devoted to detailed exploration of the positions of the two
sides. No further drafting has been undertaken so far. While the Soviets
have moved closer to the U.S. position on some points, they have
moved away in several areas which we previously believed were close
to being resolved. All in all, only modest progress has been made in this
round in resolving major issues. The tone of the meetings, however,
continues to be workmanlike. End summary.
2. The seventh round of US–USSR Chemical Weapons negotiations
began 10 January 1978. Eleven plenary and seven drafting group
meetings have been held to date. As of 13 February 1978 the activity
level was reduced so experts could return to capitals for consultations.
Meetings of both the plenary and drafting groups will continue in the
interim. (The period of reduced activity was requested by the Soviets,
who indicated that they had “run out of material.” Judging from the
comments of the Soviet experts, the Soviet Delegation had not expected
the round to run past the end of January.) The seventh round is ex-
pected to resume on 29 March.
3. So far the round has been devoted to exploration of the positions
of the two sides. No drafting has yet been undertaken.
A. At the beginning of the round the Soviets presented a “supple-
mented” draft convention containing twenty-four articles and two an-
nexes. In effect, this represents an expansion of their previous articles
on key issues into a fully elaborated draft convention.
B. At the outset the U.S. Del put forth detailed proposals for
dealing with “important” precursors, “important” lethal and other
highly toxic chemicals, and riot control chemicals. In addition, it pre-
sented the revised U.S. position on challenge inspection (i.e., to be re-
quested by a state party rather than by the consultative committee).
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780071–0895.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow, USNATO, London, Paris, and
Bonn.
