752
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Sincerely Yours,
Mohammed Anwar El-Sadat
Menachem Begin. End quote.
4. Israelis wish to add footnote following signatures reading as
follows: Quote: in each paragraph in which expression West Bank ap-
pears it is being and will be understood by the Government of Israel as
Judea and Samaria. Unquote. Since Egyptians have been very insistent
that letter be a joint one signed by both President Sadat and Prime Min-
ister Begin, we need to include the footnote in a manner that will meet
Israeli objective without directly associating Sadat with it. We propose
to prepare the letter so that the signatures will be at the bottom of a
page and the footnote will be on an attached page which the Egyptians
can disregard if they wish. To avoid misunderstandings, the above
footnote should be reflected in the letter as you deliver it to both
governments.
Vance
217.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel1
Washington, March 17, 1979, 0345Z
65824. Entire text. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With Weizman
March 16.
1. Secretary met with Weizman for about an hour afternoon March
16, for first half hour with group comprising Evron and Tehila on Is-
raeli side and on US side Mrs. Benson, Atherton, Saunders, Hansell and
Korn, and for second half hour alone. Following are main points that
came up in group session.
2. Weizman expressed concern that in their talks this weekend on
sub-phasing General Ali might press him for withdrawal from Al Arish
in three months. He said Dayan has already told the Likud Knesset
group that withdrawal from Al Arish would be in four months; short-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
State Department Out, Box 115, 3/17–21/79. Secret; Sensitive; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for
information Immediate to Cairo and the White House. Printed from a copy that indicates
the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Drafted by Korn; cleared
by Joseph Hulings (S/S–O); approved by Saunders. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P850050–2633)
