1956  909
out agreement with regard these specific Americans. Whole situation 
certainly does not establish very sound or hopeful basis to consider 
entering into new agreements.
17. I said facts of matter were that neither my government nor 
anyone else could consider that our agreement September 10 was 
really being carried out by his authorities with respect these specific 
Americans. I again renewed my request that this agreement be imple­
mented and these Americans be permitted return.
18. Wang said my statement with regard ability of foreign nationals 
to depart freely sounded very good. He would very much like take my 
words here for granted. However, fact that nearly 50 persons, whose 
names given me, had not been able make departure and still under 
obstructions from doing so made it very hard accept my statement.
19. Wang said he entirely prepared accept information given by me 
regarding exit procedures currently being practiced in European coun­
tries including Switzerland. However, in Switzerland their Chinese 
nationals had never been subject obstructions their departure by Swiss 
authorities and he had never heard of such setup as immigration service 
in Switzerland. If situation was indeed similar to practice in Switzerland 
in which foreign nationals including Chinese nationals could freely make 
their departure, then it would have been entirely superfluous for both us 
to make agreement which we did last September.
20. Wang said specific persons whose names he had given me and 
whose number about 50 persons had in fact encountered obstructions 
and difficulties in departure. It a matter for steps to be taken to look into 
cases all these nearly 50 people and is not matter of one or two persons 
encountering obstructions.
21. Wang said in speaking about implementation our agreement 
last September, first of all they expect American side to implement or 
carry out agreement between us. For since agreement reached between 
us U.S. Government not known to have taken any necessary measures 
to help Chinese in U.S. make free departure. U.S. Government also has 
not taken measures to permit expeditious return of Chinese nationals. 
Any excuses with regard this matter cannot explain matter of return 
of Chinese. I had said I found it very difficult make this matter clear to 
them. Best method in which I could make this clear them was to allow 
these Chinese return.
22. I said if these people he had mentioned or any others really 
desire return and really felt they being obstructed, why was it that at 
least one them has not brought his case to attention Indian Embassy 
and if Indian Embassy felt there any substance his allegations it has not 
brought case attention my government?
