404 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI You are also authorized to indicate to the Soviets that we are prepared to consider ways in which differences might be narrowed between mandatory and voluntary on-site inspection provisions. 8. We should maintain the position that the treaty should provide for entry-into-force without the adherence of all nuclear powers, and that parties should have the right subject to suitable notice provisions, to withdraw if, after five years, all nuclear powers have not joined. You may indicate to the Soviets that we are prepared to reduce the duration provision to three years if in your judgment this will elicit commensurate Soviet moves on other outstanding differences.” End quote. Christopher 171. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, October 7, 1977, 1920Z 8586. Limdis USCTB. Subject: CTB Negotiations—Assessment of First Week (Oct 3–7). CTB No: 13. NSC For Dr. Brzezinski. Summary: Principal development of opening week—during which there were no apparent changes in substantive positions of the three participants—was distinct shift in Soviet perception of US position on PNEs. In the wake of recent high-level meetings with Gromyko,2 President’s UNGA statement,3 and hard line taken by US CTB 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770367–0343. Secret; Limdis; Immediate. Sent for information to London and Moscow. 2 See Document 168. 3 On October 4, Carter told the UN General Assembly that negotiations for a CTB “are now being conducted by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. As in other areas where vital national security interests are engaged, agreements must be verifiable and fair. They must be seen by all parties as serving a longer-term interest that justifies the restraint of the moment. The longer-term interest in this interest is to close one more avenue of nuclear competition and thereby demonstrate to all the world that the major nuclear weapon Powers take seriously our obligations to reduce the threat of nuclear catastrophe. My country believes that the time has come to end all explosions of nuclear devices, no matter what their claimed justification—–peaceful or military—–and we appreciate the efforts of other nations to reach this same goal.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, pp. 1715–1723)
