778
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
We recommend that you avoid entering into the debate among
these various proposals although you may wish to question whether:
—Each of the options has the correct balance between political and
economic considerations.
—Whether by doing more in other (non-commodity) areas of the
North-South relationship, we can buy more support among the LDCs
for a less forthcoming US position on commodities; how we can gain
support from the moderates for an economically reasonable package.
—Whether our indicating in advance our willingness to be forth-
coming with respect to negotiation in certain individual commodities
(e.g. copper and rubber) would buy support among important coun-
tries enough to moderate demands for more extreme generalized
measures.
The Broader North-South Issue
The second paper to be discussed at the meeting is the State draft
(not yet received by us) of an “overview” to North-South relations7
which, at last writing, was almost totally lacking in longer-term con-
ceptualization of North-South relations. It is a source of distress to
many bureaus in State and representatives of OMB who are looking for
a longer-term analysis and orientation.
Perhaps one exchange—between Dick Cooper and Jules Katz—
captures the issue at stake and the need for your presence on Saturday.8
When examining all the papers prepared for the EPG early this week,
Cooper expressed his mild surprise that there was no paper on Law of
the Sea problems, to which Katz responded, “But Dick, that’s not a
North-South issue”. This exchange suggests how seriously an integra-
tive and conceptual track—focusing on longer-term political, security,
humanitarian and organizational aspects of North-South relations—is
needed as a fundamental part of the PRM–8 study, and how appro-
priate your presence to express this message would be on Saturday
morning.
7 Cooper circulated an undated summary of a paper entitled “PRM–8: Institutional,
Political and Conceptual Aspects of North/South Strategy” to EPG members under cover
of a February 25 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional
Files, Box 25, PRM–08 (1 of 3) [1])
8 February 26.
