478
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
150.
Memorandum From the General Counsel, Office of the
Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Rivers) to the
Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss) and
the Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations
(Wolff)1
Washington, July 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Extending the Countervailing Duty Waiver
Very shortly you must decide whether and under what circum-
stances, you will ask Congress to extend the authority to waive coun-
tervailing duties.2 As you know, the present authority expires January
3, 1979, and Congress has announced its intention to adjourn sine die on
October 7, 1978. The key question is whether you believe the recent
progress towards a subsidies agreement—in particular the prospect of
progress on agricultural export subsidies—provides a defensible basis
for asking Congress to extend the waiver authority 6, 8, or 10 months in
the hope of concluding an acceptable agreement this fall.
Needless to say there are risks, whatever you decide. Treasury has
exercised the waiver fifteen times, on trade valued at approximately
$500 million, on products ranging from canned ham and cheese, to
butter cookies and handbags, and most recently, Canadian groundfish.
(See attached table.)3 There is little doubt that collecting the duties on
January 3, 1979 would disrupt the trade and complicate our efforts to
negotiate a satisfactory conclusion to the MTN. (Treasury and Agricul-
ture are preparing economic analyses; State, a political analysis, of the
consequences of collecting duties on the products involved.) Clearly,
the Europeans (Gundelach, in particular) expect you to seek a waiver,
and failure to even seek one would damage their trust in you. On the
other hand, it is equally clear that seeking an extension of the waiver in
the present climate risks a pre-election Congressional debate on the
MTN and trade policy in general, and the likelihood of undesirable, ex-
traneous amendments.4 Time is short, but there is no shortage of legis-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Sub-
ject Files, 1977–1979, Box 2, Countervailing Duties 1977. No classification marking.
Printed from a copy that does not bear Rivers’ initials. A handwritten notation at the top
of the page reads: “discuss Finance Committee + Both Staffs.”
2 Congress had granted the President temporary authority to waive the imposition
of countervailing duties on subsidized imports.
3 Attached but not printed is a February 2 table entitled “Current CVD Waivers.”
4 John Donaldson of the STR staff discussed Congressional attitudes regarding an
extension of the countervailing duty waiver in a July 21 memorandum to Strauss and
