36 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI To accomplish this review, the Arms Control PCC will: — Conduct a series of reviews of specific elements of the U.S. START position in accordance with the schedule set forth at Tab A. In each case the review should result either in a recommendation to reaffirm existing U.S. negotiating positions or in proposed options for change. Recommendations for change should include explicit consideration of the impact of altering positions to which the Soviets have previously agreed. (C) — Identify not later than April 3, 1989, those incomplete elements of the United States position listed at Tab B, if any, which must be ­completed prior to resumption of negotiations. For each element so identified, establish a work plan to present options for presidential decision by June 1, 1989. In addition, by June 1, 1989, the Arms Control PCC shall promulgate a work plan for completing those elements of the U.S. position not requiring resolution prior to resumption of negotiations. (C) — Supervise a thorough and complete interagency technical review of the existing Joint Draft Text. The review should be completed by April 21, 1989. By June 2, 1989, a second review should be completed resulting in recommended treaty text changes to accommodate decisions resulting from the defense strategy review and the arms control review. (C) — Forward not later than June 7, 1989, draft START instructions for my review. (C) Conventional Arms Control. By April 14, 1989, the Arms Control PCC will review the concept of stabilizing measures associated with the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) negotiations. The review will include (a) recommendations on whether such measures can be monitored with high confidence, (b) if not, options for determining what verification standards are appropriate, and (c) options for new stabilizing measures the United States should propose. (C) By May 10, 1989, the Arms Control PCC will review the concepts of thinout zones and exercise constraints, as proposed by the Eastern Bloc in the Vienna negotiations. The review will identify options for United States action. (C) By May 24, 1989, the Defense PCC will review the military and political implications of reductions in NATO and Warsaw Pact forces in Europe which exceeds those in the initial Western proposal in the CFE negotiations. The review should identify acceptable levels of reductions and should explicitly consider whether such reductions require restructuring of existing forces and/or changes in existing NATO strategy. Based on the results of this review, I will issue guidance, if appropriate, to examine alternative arms control options. (S) By May 31, 1989, the Arms Control PCC will review possible confidence building measures which might be proposed in the East-West context. The review will identify options for proposing additional CSBMs. (C)
