problems of land and air armaments are most susceptible of
solution by regional agreements covering regions within which
the land or air armaments of one country could constitute a
potential threat to another country. Geographical continents have
been suggested as regions appropriate for land and air limitation
agreements.
The American land and air force constitute a threat to no one.
They are at minimum strength; their reduction has been suggested
by no one as a necessary condition precedent to general arms
limitation. This reduction of our land forces has been rendered
possible by our favored geographical position. I realize that the
problems of armaments on land and in the air in Europe are beset
with difficulties which in all justice we must recognize and,
although this Government will always be ready to lend its
assistance in any appropriate way to efforts on the part of
European or other Governments to arrive at regional agreements
limiting land and air forces, it would hesitate to make specific
proposals on this subject to European nations.
The problem of the limitation of naval armament, while not
regional in character or susceptible of regional treatment, has
been successfully treated, in part, by an agreement among the five
leading Naval Powers, and, in my opinion, can be definitely dealt
with by further agreements among those Powers.
It will be a contribution to the success of the preliminary work
now going on at Geneva should the Great Naval Powers there
agree upon a further definite limitation of naval armament.
It is my intention that the American representatives at Geneva
should continue to discuss with the representatives of the other
nations there the program for a general limitation of armaments
conference. If such a conference should be possible in the future,
on a basis generally acceptable, this Government would, of
course, be highly gratified. Pending the formulation of the plan
for such a general conference, however, I believe that we should
make an immediate and sincere effort to solve the problem of
