Afghanistan
105
38.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
for Members of the Special Coordination Committee1
Washington, February 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Covert Action Options for Afghanistan
Attached is a paper outlining Covert Action (CA) options in
Afghanistan. It is circulated in order to obtain your views for the
forthcoming Special Coordination Committee (SCC) meeting regarding
the appropriateness of the options described. It is our present intention
to draft a formal CA proposal for SCC consideration and a Presidential
Finding based on your reactions.
However, if our CA program is to include support to a possible
insurgency, the acquisition of additional operational intelligence on
the various rebel groups will be necessary before a proposal can be
submitted.
On the other hand, if the decision is made simply to publicize the
Soviet role in Afghanistan through our international network of media
assets, agents of influence and liaison contacts, the General Finding
authorizing us to “expose and counter Soviet interference in other
countries’ affairs” already provides us with policy sufficiency.
The options presented vary in degree of risk and cost, but are not
mutually exclusive. For example, a program of support to an insur-
gency would also include some or all of the less risky options, such
as a worldwide propaganda campaign on both Soviet involvement in
Afghanistan and the abuses of the Taraki regime.
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–047, Afghanistan: 8 May 1978–7 Dec 1978. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
No drafting information appears on the memorandum. Attached but not printed is an
undated covering memorandum from Inderfurth to Brzezinski, which characterizes the
attached CIA paper as “not a set of concrete proposals,” but rather an offering of options
ranging from propaganda “through sponsorship of large-scale insurgency to bring about
a change in government in power in Kabul.” Inderfurth noted the paper’s “principal
deficiency” was that “it gives only a vague impression of CIA’s capabilities,” which
meant that the CIA was unprepared to implement some of the options laid out in
the paper. Inderfurth recommended that Brzezinski “step up operational intelligence
collection as an essential first-step toward planning more concrete programs.” Also
attached but not printed is Brzezinski’s February 21 memorandum to Henze. See Docu-
ment 37.
