September 18–December 16, 1978
531
case in point. May I tell you that a number of the greatest authorities in
international law share our view that under the circumstances this Ar-
ticle VI is absolutely vital to make our document a treaty of peace.
Therefore, should you, Mr. President, now give your approval to
the text5 of the draft peace treaty as elaborated by our delegations, then
no obstacle whatsoever exists to its signing within the specified three
months, before the 17th of December 1978. This is the positive sugges-
tion I make to you today.
On page nine of your letter you enumerated six points about
which you express criticism of the attitudes of the Israeli delegation
and government. May I respond:
A) and B): It is true that your delegates and our delegates talked
about the possibility of sub-phases in the interim withdrawal and the
feasibility of reducing this withdrawal period to six months. Never did
they reach an agreed protocol on these two subjects. In the natural
course of discussion it was mentioned by the Israeli representatives as
an idea, as a concept, or a possibility to be looked at. And, indeed, as the
negotiations proceeded, the Government of Israel considered the issue
and decided that we could not undertake to reduce the interim with-
drawal period to six months. We will fulfill completely our commit-
ment under the Camp David Framework of the interim withdrawal
within three to nine months. On the other hand, sub-phases will be con-
sidered, in accordance with the decisions of the government, within the
framework of a joint Egyptian-Israeli commission.
C): We have not objected to the concept of an exchange of letters
concerning Judea, Samaria and Gaza.
D): We do, indeed, reject what you call “a tangible Egyptian pres-
ence in the Gaza Strip.” Such a tangible or any other presence in Gaza is
nowhere mentioned in the Camp David Accord.
E) and F): In the course of the negotiations we objected to several of
your proposals as you did to ours. Certain of our objections were ap-
proved by your delegation and vice versa. Such is the nature of free
negotiations.
Respectfully, I must take exception to the sentence in your letter
that reads:
“In my view you should not attempt, or appear to attempt, to
evade your obligations under the Camp David ‘Framework’”.
We shall carry out our commitments fully under the Camp David
Agreement. We signed the framework. Our signature is the commit-
ment. We live by the famous rule: pacta sunt servanda.
Permit me to illustrate this truth by referring to the matter of the
autonomy in Judea, Samaria and Gaza. The Camp David Framework
states:
5 See Document 131.
