906 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII between Afghanistan and Pakistan were acceptable and that UN Special Representative could only participate in these discussions as an observer, not as a participant. 9. Shahnawaz said he had told Smirnov that he was “deeply disappointed” by what he had heard. There had been a clear understanding that Iran and the SYG’s Special Representative would be participants. He would have to consult his President. Shahnawaz said that he was quite taken aback to hear Smirnov at this late date say that he did not see how it would be possible to have a conference under UN auspices in view of General Assembly resolution “hostile to USSR and Afghan Government.” 10. Zia took over at this point to say that as a result of these developments GOP position was firmer than ever that any initiative must be under General Assembly resolution or “at least under auspices of Secretary General whose authority in this matter derives from that resolution.” Obviously any conference must include Iran. Zia’s conclusion: “The Soviets have got cold feet.” I asked Zia for a few clarifications. Had Smirnov blamed all of this sudden shift on the Afghans? Yes. Including unwillingness to include Iran in discussions? Yes. In fact, said Zia, Babrak Karmal was directly quoted as saying, “Relations between Iran and Afghanistan are none of Pakistan’s business.” Would the Kabul regime accept participation as a party and not as a government? Yes. In fact, that was one thing Smirnov said Afghans were satisfied with. 11. Shahnawaz added that GOP still felt it had made a wise move. If initiative had moved in the right direction everybody would have benefitted. If it didn’t, as it now appeared would be the case, the onus would be on Soviets. I replied that in view of what I had just been told it seemed that many of our concerns were quite justified. Shahnawaz and Zia concurred. Shahnawaz said that obviously next move was up to Soviets, after he formally conveyed President Zia’s negative reaction to Ambassador Smirnov. I said that there was still one point of difference between us which I thought was important: While GOP would be prepared to see some kind of discussion take place simply under auspices of SYG Special Representative we felt that link to General Assembly resolution must be quite explicit. Neither Zia nor Shahnawaz reacted positively to this thought. As to what happens next, Zia said I could be assured I would be kept fully informed on each development and that the details of what had taken place between Shahnawaz and Smirnov he and I had heard together for the first time. As to the future we were in complete agreement that the Islamic Summit must not in any way dilute the Islamic world’s stand on Afghanistan. He was totally committed to this position until there was some sign that the Soviets were genuinely ready to compromise.
