Nicaragua  877
same as those used in Cuba itself. They seek to provoke incidents which 
will create mass repression. He said he found it necessary to explain 
constantly to the police who is truly responsible for these incidents 
in order to avoid taking rigorous action against those who are merely 
being used to perpetrate them. In General Somoza’s opinion Castro 
exercises a great influence in Central America and he must be stopped. 
The General realizes that denunciations of the Somozas propounded 
by pro-Castro elements are in themselves unimportant and, in fact, are 
to be expected by a person in political life. He considers the supplying 
of funds to these people through Cuban sources a much more serious 
matter and stated that Cuba is furnishing about $100,000 per month to 
pro-Castro people throughout Central America.
General Somoza states that the pro-Castro opposition has adopted 
the flag of the late opposition leader-­bandit, Sandino, as its symbol and 
pays homage to Lopez Perez, the assassin of his father, as its leader. He 
estimates that the strength of this group once reached about 4,000, but 
since the shooting of a policeman and subsequent uncovering of a plot 
he feels that the number has dwindled to about 600.
Mr. Mann stressed the importance of timing in the matter of taking 
action against Cuba. He feels that public opinion in Central America 
is beginning to turn against Castro, an opinion with which General 
Somoza agrees. The General thinks the other Latin American countries 
will follow the sample of the U.S. in respect to trade controls on Cuba.
General Somoza also noted that the U.S. has done a very fine ser-
vice to the hemisphere through training Latin American military offi-
cers at the U.S. Army School, Fort Gulick, C. Z. He stated that Latin 
Americans appreciate the opportunity it affords and as a result of its 
successful operation the U.S. now has 2,000 propagandists throughout 
Latin America.
NI–24.	
Editorial Note
On November 11, 1960, a group of Nicaraguan insurgents, esti-
mated between 150 and 300, staged a number of armed attacks against 
administrative and National Guard facilities in the towns of Jinotepe 
and Diriamba. Within the next twenty-­four hours, the Nicaraguan 
National Guard retook the two cities and were engaged in subduing 
the insurgents. By November 15, about fifty rebels, pursued by the 
National Guard crossed the border into Costa Rica. Documentation on 
the uprising is in file 717.00.
