3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
213
4. CSCE. Dobrynin, saying he was speaking on his own personal
initiative and not under instructions, said the Soviet Union had re-
ceived the impression from Western delegations at Belgrade that Gold-
berg5 had received new instructions recently, to raise the level of attack
on human rights issues, and to discuss specific issues. The Secretary
said that Goldberg had been authorized to mention specific countries,
as, for example, the recent egregious trials in Czechoslovakia, but he
said the main intention remained to develop the broad sweep of the
issue, and to avoid confrontation. He added that Goldberg would be
coming home in the near future for consultations.
5. Soviet UNGA Detente Resolution. Dobrynin asked why the US
had not given support to this omnibus proposal to the UNGA on
strengthening detente.6 The Secretary said he would examine the reso-
lution, but as a general proposition, he urged that advance consultation
before resolutions were introduced would help to eliminate some
problems.
6. Lithuanian Hijackers. Dobrynin raised the question of the two
Lithuanian hijackers now in the United States,7 and urged their extradi-
tion, relating the matter to the recent hijacking episode. The Secretary
said in the discussion which followed that early action by the UN on
the hijacking resolution would be important.
7. Patolichev. Dobrynin said in response to a question that travel
plans for Foreign Trade Minister Patolichev were not yet firm, but the
Minister would probably prefer to stop in Washington before pro-
ceeding to Los Angeles for the Joint Trade and Economic Council
meetings in November.
8. Trade Relations. In the course of the earlier discussion of Congres-
sional attitudes toward SALT, Dobrynin mentioned that Senator
Jackson had expressed an interest in addressing the meeting of the
Trade and Economic Council in Los Angeles, and wondered what he
might say. There then followed a discussion of recent exploratory con-
versations with members of Congress on the possibility of resolution
that would provisionally extend MFN and Ex-Im Bank Credits, subject
to Presidential finding that this action would be in the national interest.
Dobrynin, asked about the Soviet attitude toward this approach,
shrugged and indicated that it would be better than no action at all.
5 See footnote 7, Document 48.
6 For the text of the “Declaration on the Deepening and Consolidation of Interna-
tional De´tente” and the resolution’s history, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1977, pp.
120–126.
7 In 1970, two Lithuanians hijacked a Soviet airplane. After having entered the
United States illegally, they were denied political asylum and deportation seemed likely.
(“U.S. to Deport 2 Jet Hijackers,” Chicago Tribune, May 14, 1977, p. 5)
