Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 597 —To be effective, a White Paper would have to be presented as an objective account of current and past policies. In portraying earlier problems, we could stimulate charges of having attacked previous administrations. To the extent the Paper fell short of complete objectivity, we could be open to charges, here and abroad, of “covering up” the acts of this or previous administrations. —Past experience with White Papers, such as those on China (1949) and Vietnam (1965), is not encouraging. Regardless of how well they were prepared (the China White Paper, for example, was very well done), they became more of a liability than an asset. The Vietnam White Paper was clearly a minus in public attitudes towards our Vietnam policies. —A White Paper covering the entire range of our policies with Iran could arouse serious concern in other states in the region, including Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Pakistan, that their confidential exchanges with the U.S. could be brought into the open at some point. —We would have difficulty controlling the timing of its presentation; once it was completed, we could encounter FOI and Congressional requests for its release. —Lastly, if issued before the hostages were released, a spirited public defense of U.S. policy in the form of a White Paper would almost certainly complicate our efforts to gain their freedom. Depending on how it were perceived, it could make still more difficult a face-saving solution for the Iranians, or strengthen those elements in Iran demanding other inquiries into U.S. actions in that country. 225. Message From the Swiss Chargé d’Affaires in Iran (Kaiser) to the Department of State1 Tehran, March 27, 1980 (1) This morning, following a prolonged siege which enabled me once again to observe how strongly the President is assailed from all sides with various concerns, I personally transmitted the State Department message to Bani-Sadr2 as you had once again urged me to do. 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update Mar 1980. Secret; Sensitive. 2 See Document 220. In the March 27 Iran Update, Saunders informed Vance and Christopher that Villalon strongly urged that the letter not be delivered. (Briefing memorandum, March 26; Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update Mar 1980)
