Comprehensive Test Ban
505
weapons and 60% on energy activities and they would supply the tech-
nical effort wherever the President wanted it.
The President asked what else they would do in maintaining the
stockpile. Harold Agnew said they had been examining this question
and, in his view, their present surveillance procedures were adequate,
although they could, of course, increase this program if it made anyone
feel better. He pointed out they used to test one out of fifty weapons
each year, but now did much less of this sort of testing.
Frank Press asked the lab directors whether they saw any real hope
for reliability testing at the 100 KT level. Both replied they didn’t think
this was likely. Harold Agnew pointed out that [2½ lines not declassified]
Harold Brown asked [2½ lines not declassified] Harold Agnew concluded
that [1 line not declassified]
The President, noting the particular names of some of the tests,
asked Agnew for the origin of those names. Harold Agnew responded
that many of them were place names from New Mexico. James Schles-
inger pointed out that there was a great deal of empiricism in nuclear
weapons, that in theory, it always appeared they would work well.
The President said his only remaining concern after this discussion
was the need to consider the relative effect of no testing on the Soviets.
As he understood there was no real effect, except for the massive
weight of their warheads. Harold Agnew said there was another point in
that Soviet missiles have much greater throw weight, which meant that
if a problem arose they could simply put another warhead on, which
might be less optimal in terms of weight or size, more easily than we
could. Harold Brown pointed out that since the size of their warheads
were larger, they might have to test at a higher yield than 3–5 KT. On
the other hand, since their warheads were less sensitive, they might not
have to test at all.
James Schlesinger [3 lines not declassified] Harold Brown [2 lines not
declassified] John Marcum [1 line not declassified]
Roger Batzel [5 lines not declassified]
The President asked Batzel [1½ lines not declassified] Batzel [1½ lines
not declassified] Harold Brown [1½ lines not declassified]
The President said he had a question for Frank Press, that he had
just heard we didn’t have sensing devices monitoring the treaty. Frank
Press assured him that we did have these devices for use in internal
seismic stations and they had been installed in bore holes in New
Mexico for testing. Although we had not completed packaging of these
sensors, we should be ready to begin installation in the Soviet Union as
soon as the treaty entered into force. He estimated it might take two
years to install a complete network of single stations and perhaps three
years for arrays.
