Hungary to those of Poland and the Soviet Union. His response was positive in regard to all the above contacts and exchanges. He stated in his direct simple way these “exchanges were reality.” 15. Finally, I said that in addition to bilateral issues, I hoped that our dialogue would also deal with important international issues of common interest. I recalled that when Secretary Vance had seen Foreign Minister Puja in New York, the Secretary discussed at some length Middle East developments and progress in the SALT negotiations, as well as bilateral subjects. 16. Before the conversation ended, Kadar asked me again to be sure and convey his appreciation to the President for the decision to return the Crown and to emphasize that he foresaw increased cooperation between our two countries. We could accomplish a great deal on a realistic basis, he added. We could live normally with each other, and we don’t have to announce our achievements in “bright neon lights.” 17. Comment: A. Although Kadar has the complexion of a man of his actual years—it is slightly blotchy and puffy—the vigor of his movements and the liveliness of his mind belie his age. He walks with an attractive strut which reminds one of a confident athlete. He articulated easily and with animation in spite of the fact that the only other person present was a woman interpreter. This is in contrast with his public speaking style which is apparently rather diffident. One is struck by his poise. He has the dignity of a man who has gone through severe trials and emerged on top, but has learned the appropriate lessons from his earlier experience. He is a smoker. He consumed about five cigarettes. Early in our meeting two scotch and sodas were brought in which we imbibed at about the same speed in the course of our conversation. B. Perhaps the most striking aspect of our substantive discussion was his emphasis on the economic side of Hungarian life. More than once he referred to the political importance of Hungary’s economic progress. There is not only pride in what has been achieved, but determination to effect a steady improvement in the standard of living. He appreciates the fact that the achievement of this objective requires important economic ties with the West. Kaiser
