3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 413 since this began in Moscow, and we still are not on the offensive in an effective way. Third principle: Make things so outrageous that the opponent is afraid to go public with it. The Norwegian Prime Minister in 1974 went to Moscow with agreed conditions that the Spitzbergen issue would not be discussed. Kuznetsov, an hour before the meeting in Moscow, announced that it would be discussed. When the Norwegians tried to resist, Kuznetsov cursed them in “the vilest language” and told them they had no choice. Reportedly the Norwegians did not give in, but they were afraid to tell anyone, even the home office, of this treatment because it would make them look impotent. Even today this incident is virtually unknown because the Soviets clearly understood how an outrageous tactic can trap an opponent with what Stalin called the “dilemma of one alternative.” When we let the Soviets put us off balance in this episode for a week, we look as helpless as the Norwegians. 123. Memorandum From Samuel Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, June 9, 1978 SUBJECT Moscow Chimney Affairs The Soviets are stepping up their campaign to put us on the defensive in the “Moscow Chimney” affairs while continuing to physically violate our embassy property. Yesterday the Soviets went public with their outrageous charge in TASS that we are making unlawful alterations to the heating facility of the neighboring Soviet building, charges that we are making unfounded and provacative allegations about Soviet electronic surveillance of the embassy, and threatening to reveal “subversive activities” conducted from the U.S. embassy building. At the same time, the Soviets are continuing to physically penetrate the chimney—U.S. sovereign territory—to the extent that we have been 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Unfiled Files, Box 152, USSR: Technical Penetration of US Embassy in Moscow: 5–6/78. Secret. Sent for action. Inderfurth and Aaron also initialed the memorandum.
