470
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Even without further provocations by the Soviets, the President
has called the invasion of Afghanistan the worst crisis we have faced
since the Second World War. But—to deal with just one of the post-
WW II crises—after construction of the Berlin Wall to provide needed
manpower draft calls were doubled and tripled, enlistments were
extended, and the Congress promptly and unanimously authorized
the mobilization of up to 250,000 men in the ready Reserves and
National Guard, including the activation of two full divisions and fifty-
four Air Force and Naval air squadrons. Some 158,000 men, Reservists
and Guardsmen, mostly for the Army, were actually called up; and
altogether the strength of our armed forces was increased by 300,000
men. Some 40,000 were sent to Europe, and others were prepared for
swift deployment. Six “priority divisions” in the Reserves were made
ready for quick mobilization, and three Regular Army divisions
engaged in training were converted to full combat readiness. (U)
Along with the manpower, the Berlin build-up provided enough
equipment and ammunition to supply the new troops, enough sealift
and airlift to transport them, and enough airpower to cover ground
combat. Some three hundred tactical fighter aircraft, more than 100,000
tons of equipment, and several thousand tanks, jeeps, armored person-
nel carriers and other vehicles were placed in position on the European
continent, and still more on “floating depot” ships. (U)
If the Soviets carried on with further objectionable actions in
Afghanistan and adjacent regions, unless we reacted with the same
kind of vigor that President Kennedy did, i.e., actions stronger than
anything so far being contemplated, the press would almost certainly
begin to make unfavorable comparisons between our reactions to Berlin
and Afghanistan and try to paint the President as weak and ineffec-
tual. (S)
I believe we should be staffing-out the pros and cons of the
following specific options which the President could use at some later
date, in the face of almost inevitable further Soviet objectionable action:
—Calling up the Reserves.
—Establishing a manpower commission to study the reinstitution
of the draft.3
—Increasing our military presence in the area.
—Providing security guarantees for the nations of Southwest Asia,
thereby drawing a clear line as to where we see our vital interests in
the region.
3 Carter reinstated draft registration, but not conscription.
