National Security Policy 71 sources—­for financial aid in the likely event they are unable to obtain sufficient sums from the colonial powers. 57. The USSR will make an increasing effort to establish diplomatic and economic relations with the new African governments. Since the latter, like the USSR, maintain a high level of governmental participa­ tion in the economy, government-­to-­government trading is facilitated. Many African territories are dependent upon the sale of one or two pri­ mary commodities for an important share of their national income and foreign exchange, and thus are highly vulnerable to world market price fluctuations. By absorbing commodity surpluses and extending credits for development in selected countries, the USSR could gain substantial benefits both in prestige and in the opportunities thereby offered for gaining greater influence on the continent. 58. In North Africa, despite several years of a highly revolutionary atmosphere, Communism and Pan-Arabism have made comparatively little headway. Throughout the three areas of Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia the current prevailing attitude, while strongly anti-French, is not anti-West. This is due in part to the cultural affinity for the West of the Moroccan and Tunisian leadership and in part to the US pol­ icy of extending support to Morocco and Tunisia. Even in Algeria, Communists have gained little leverage within the revolutionary orga­ nizations. In all three territories, however, there are serious potential dangers. Unless the Algerian rebels are soon able to gain some kind of acceptable conditions from France, a gradual continued radicaliza­ tion of the revolutionary movement and a rise of Communist influence seems unavoidable. Moreover, in both Tunisia and Morocco, there are radical forces in opposition to the present moderate leadership. If the situation in Algeria should further deteriorate or if the Tunisian and Moroccan governments cannot make noticeable progress toward solu­ tion of their serious economic problems, they are in danger of replace­ ment by forces less sympathetic to Western interests. 59. Latin America. Although Latin American society has generally been more developed and better organized than that of other under­ developed areas, it also is passing through a social and economic rev­ olution marked largely by industrialization and urbanization. These changes have produced serious economic problems—­inflation, exhaus­ tion of foreign exchange reserves, and labor and agrarian unrest. Traditional ruling groups, particularly the military and the landed aris­ tocracy, are coming under increasing attack by new social forces. These forces are dominated variously by an urban and educated middle-­class, by military elements with a more modern and liberal orientation than in the past, and by labor. The common denominator in most of these groups is the desire to break with the forms and the stagnation of the past. Often the groups are in conflict with each other as well as with
