3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 878 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI party’s authority had been established. There is no reason to believe, however, that this is the case and that the Soviets have gone that far in their thinking—let alone their contingency planning. We believe that the Soviet decision to intervene will depend on where the situation goes from here, not on what has happened so far. [handling restriction not declassified] Even if the Soviets had decided in favor of intervention—and there have been no signs of Soviet military preparations that would precede such a move—Kania’s accession to power would call for a delay in plans. If Kania can erode the concessions and restore the Polish party’s shaken authority, thus obviating the need for Soviet military intervention, Moscow would be delighted. It would much rather achieve its goals without suffering the substantial damage to Soviet global interests military intervention would bring. [handling restriction not declassified] Possible Precipitants of Intervention The Soviets nevertheless realize that the situation in Poland will continue to be unpredictable and unstable for the immediate future and that they must monitor events closely during the coming months for any signs that their concerns are materializing. The breakdown of the Polish party’s control does not appear imminent, but should it occur, the development could be a rapid one and the Soviets would move in quickly with force. [handling restriction not declassified] The essential grounds for Soviet military intervention in Poland are: —the Communist Party’s loss of control over Poland, including its ability to contain the political actions of the workers and the dissidents, and —any compromise of the basic socialist orientation of the regime’s domestic and international policies. The path to either or both of these worst case scenarios (from Moscow’s point of view) could be lengthy and full of zig-zags. An accumulation of seemingly minute factors could convince the Soviet leaders to intervene. We will not necessarily realize when the Soviets, themselves, actually cross that decision threshold to intervene, but once they do there may not be any turning back even if it appears to Western analysts that the Polish regime is getting the situation under control. [handling restriction not declassified] Moscow will keep a particularly sharp eye on the development of the new independent trade unions, which pose a potential serious threat to the Communist Party’s control over Polish society. Moscow would be particularly concerned if unions spring up across the country, cohere into a potent political force, and influence national economic
