and Collectors of Customs and Excise; for the United States of
America, Consuls, Collectors of Customs and United States
District Attorneys. In addition, other officers may be designated
and authorized, for Canada, by the Minister of Customs and Excise,
and for the United States by the Secretary of the Treasury or the
Attorney General.
Section 2. Advance or immediate information respecting the
clearance of vessels to any port shall be so furnished where there is
reasonable ground to suspect that the owners or persons in
possession of the cargo intend to smuggle or illegally introduce it
into Canada or the United States. It shall be the duty of any such
officer of either government having reasonable ground to suspect
an intent to smuggle or illegally introduce any merchandise into the
other country, immediately to inform by telegraph or telephone, at
the expense of the receiving government, the appropriate officer of
such government, as provided in Section 1. Arrangements may be
made to furnish such information to a specially-named officer
when it is deemed advisable to do so.
Section 3. For the purpose of Section 2, reasonable ground to
suspect an intent to smuggle or unlawfully to introduce goods or
merchandise shall be deemed to exist not only when the officers of
the country from which the goods are being conveyed suspect that
unlawful operations are contemplated but also when the Minister of
Customs and Excise, for Canada, or the Secretary of the Treasury,
for the United States, or the duly authorized representative of
either, certifies, one to the other, that he has reasonable grounds for
believing that such vessel or the owner or possessor of its cargo or
of such goods or merchandise is engaged in or about to engage in
such unlawful operations.
Section 4. All information furnished under the provisions of this
article of the Convention shall be for official use only and may be
designated as confidential by the officer furnishing it. The source
of all information furnished as confidential shall not be disclosed
without the consent of the officer who furnished it and any officer
who violates the provisions of this section will be subject to severe
disciplinary action.
ARTICLE II
