290 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 91. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, December 28, 1977 SUBJECT Year-End Review Last summer I sent you my views about the Administration’s first six months’ foreign policy.2 Here are some thoughts about the first year, and also about the lessons to be drawn for the year ahead. I have concentrated on the area I know best: Economics may not be the most glamorous aspect of foreign policy, but few things so directly affect the average man and woman. 1. Overall Economic Policy (a) Domestic Targets. The London Summit marked an advance in fixing domestic growth and stabilization policies internationally. Germany and Japan failed to achieve their 1977 Summit targets, but there would have been less growth in both countries in the absence of Summit commitments and of post-Summit consultations. The Summit agreement also strengthened the ability of the French, British and Italian governments to hold to needed and painful stabilization policies. We should build on this good start in 1978: keeping the pressure on Germany and Japan to follow expansionist policies, and focusing 1978 Summit growth commitments on 1979—which is far enough in the future for Summit-induced policies to take greater effect. (b) Balance of Payments. The Japanese did not fulfill their Summit commitment to bring their external accounts into better balance, but recent U.S.-Japanese consultations foreshadow some progress on this point. Meanwhile, you are on the right track in trying to reduce the U.S. deficit by pressing Germany and Japan to follow more expansionist policies, by urging Japan to open up its import markets, and by seeking a more effective U.S. energy policy—instead of treating the symptoms by raising interest rates or intervening in money markets (except to counter disorder). 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 121, Trade: 1977. Confidential. Sent for action. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Good memo. J.” Brzezinski also initialed and wrote: “Concur.” 2 Owen sent Carter an August 26 memorandum entitled “Foreign Policy: The First Six Months.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 26, Foreign Policy: 5/77–11/29/77)
