116 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II respected member on this issue, and apparently supports the Administration’s position. If Fraser got appointed and agreed to argue the Administration’s case, we could get at least a split House vote in Conference and come away with either the Humphrey language or a watered down Harkin. All of this however demands a vigorous, coordinated and well-handled Administration lobbying effort, such as we have not yet seen. This issue has importance far beyond the IFIs. This language is now in both the military and economic assistance acts. If it gets added to the IFIs bill, there will be efforts to also include it in trade, monetary and food for peace legislation. If we lose it now these efforts are very likely to succeed. II. Pending Actions 1. International Treaties—Decision needed on general vs. specific reservations. Immediately thereafter these should be sent to the Hill so that the President can go a little on the offensive, prodding Congress for action on these treaties in order to demonstrate their seriousness on this issue. 2. Coordinated Planning for ECOSOC and UNGA—As described above, more work is needed, particularly in integrating human rights with other objectives. 3. Decisions on and implementation of Visa study. 4. Planning for CSCE Review Conference. 5. Congressional lobbying on Harkin. III. Principal Actors The major actors on this issue so far have been the President, yourself, Andy Young, Patt Derian (Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs at State), and Warren Christopher, to whom Vance has delegated the authority for the interagency group created in response to your memorandum.16 Also, Fred Bergsten has been actively involved in the IFIs issue. Various assistant secretaries at State, notably Holbrooke and Todman (ARA) have testified on this issue as it affects their regions. Both Derian and Young are pretty unpredictable. Derian has been talking to all the fanatics in Congress and in the NGOs, and has therefore absorbed a pretty lopsided view of things. Christopher is just getting into this, and it is difficult to assess either his interest or feelings on it. Bergsten is tough and clear on the IFIs issue. Assistant Secretaries at State often confuse the issue through testimony which serves their in- 16 See Document 31.
