Human Rights 523 social indicators to enable better measurements of human rights progress. 3. We decided that an initiative on the “boat” people should be explored, leading perhaps to a resolution calling upon the UN High Commissioner for Refugees to draw up a proposed code of conduct for all ships at sea who encounter boat refugees, and for nations upon whose shores refugees land. We will also explore the possibility of a resolution speaking to the problems of relocating refugees to receiving nations. 4. To strengthen our initiative in the social development area, we will explore a resolution to establish the struggle against hunger as a major human rights priority of the General Assembly and urge consideration of the establishment of an international volunteer food corps.4 5. We decided that the torture initiative should be strengthened by the proposal of a resolution establishing torture, missing persons and the treatment of political prisoners as major priorities for consideration by the General Assembly and the formation of a committee of experts to report each year to the General Assembly on urgent measures and problems, with recommendations to the General Assembly. 6. Concern was expressed that in responding to Southern African initiatives, the United States finds itself reacting negatively on matters which are of great importance to Africans and the majority of the United Nations. In addition to determining what it is in such a resolution that we cannot accept, alternate language should be developed on such resolutions to propose positive approaches compatible with U.S. goals and interests. In this regard, the questions of endorsement of the Sullivan Code and the closing of the Rhodesian information office should be reopened. Because of our inability to participate in the activities of the Decade Against Racism, we should be aggressively searching for other means of participating domestically and internationally in the effort to combat racism and apartheid. 7. On the anticipated resolutions condemning Israeli practices in the occupied territories, it was generally recognized that there will be a more rigid position on both sides at this UNGA, making it more difficult to negotiate acceptable language in resolutions directed against Israeli practices in the occupied territories. It was decided that a paper should be developed addressing itself to likely alternatives available to the U.S. in approaching such anti-Israel resolutions. 8. Although the discussion at the UNGA on Chile may be influenced by the report of the working group sent to Chile by the Human Rights Division, it is thought unlikely that the report will be ready for distribution before the end of October. When the report is submitted, 4 See Document 247.
