Non-Proliferation 1011 —give increased support to IAEA safeguards; 5. Enhance U.S. nuclear supply reliability by —transferring the export licensing function from NRC to the Executive Branch, —eliminating duplicative reviews of export activities to allow some predictability concerning U.S. actions in authorizing requests, and —eliminating certain sanctions provisions in the NNPA and the Foreign Assistance Act. Gerard Smith9 Tab C Letter From Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters Smith to President Carter10 Washington, October 31, 1980 Dear Mr. President: I am sending along separately my final report. But I would like to stress two matters which I believe to be central to success for your non-proliferation policy—[less than 1 line not declassified] and a Comprehensive Test Ban. While we have urged our allies to set a good example by limiting their power programs’ [less than 1 line not declassified] we have set a bad example by acquiescing in [less than 1 line not declassified] While we, by law, cut off aid to Pakistan11 [1 line not declassified] a large percentage of American [less than 1 line not declassified] The international community is well aware of this inconsistency and discrimination. I trust [less than 1 line not declassified] can be introduced into the Middle East negotiations. CTB—For ten years we have had an obligation under NPT to get on with arms control and disarmament. That was the quid pro quo for the non-weapons states to forego weapons. As clearly demonstrated during last August’s NPT Review Conference, a large number of states believe we have failed to keep our end of the bargain. That belief bodes badly for the credibility of your program and the life expectancy of the NPT regime. That argues strongly for ending the subordination of our proliferation interest to possibly marginal weapons refinement. 9 Smith signed the paper “Gerry.” 10 Secret. Brzezinski initialed the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum. 11 The United States cut off aid to Pakistan on April 5, 1979. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
