660
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—Liquidity. We should work toward enhancing the role of SDR in
system, reducing system’s reliance on dollar and averting a move to an
unstable multiple currency system.
2. Substitution account represents one possible step in liquidity
area. Could, over time, contribute to several improvements:
—Provide off-market, non-disruptive means of diversification out
of dollars.
—Reduce system’s overwhelming reliance on dollars, and thus
our exposure to exchange market pressures from shifts in foreign dollar
balances.
—Ultimately, development of SDR as main reserve asset, whose
creation would be subject to conscious international decision.
3. Reports of “shift” in U.S. position on substitution account over-
stated. Current discussions have been going on for nearly a year, with
consistent U.S. support.
4. Speech does, however, for first time, a) elaborate broad systemic
framework in which we view the substitution account possibility, and
b) set out certain basic principles that would have to be incorporated to
make such an account acceptable to the U.S. (permanence, wide partici-
pation, mutually acceptable financial characteristics, support develop-
ment of SDR, sharing of any costs).
5. U.S. has an interest in seeing such an account established—on
certain conditions—but must not appear as demandeur, or we will not
be able to negotiate acceptable conditions. The principles we have set
out will ultimately determine the detailed financial conditions.
6. This general approach, and basic principles, have been dis-
cussed extensively and agreed in the IMG.3
7. Key decisions to be taken at Belgrade on whether this approach
and these principles will be broadly acceptable.4 If so, subsequent de-
tailed work by IMF Executive Board. If not, U.S. will at least have
shown positive, constructive attitude, leadership role in monetary
negotiations.
3 In a May 17 memorandum to Cooper, Clark reported on a May 10 IMG meeting on
the substitution account, during which Solomon explained his support for the initiative.
(National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for Economic Affairs, 1978–1980
Files Pertaining to International Monetary Affairs, OECD, Documents, External Re-
search, Etc., Lot 81D145, Box 2, IMG—International Monetary Group)
4 The Interim Committee met in Belgrade on October 1. At the conclusion of the
meeting, the Committee announced its agreement that the creation of a substitution ac-
count should be given “priority attention.” (“Substitution Fund Set By I.M.F.,” The New
York Times, October 2, 1979, p. D15)
