711.4216 M 58/68
[Document 396]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., September 15, 1925.
[Received September 17.]
No. 813
SIR: At the request of the Governor General of Canada I have the honour to inform you
that the Government of Canada has carefully considered your note of June the 15th last
on the subject of the interpretation of the permit granted by the United States Secretary
of War on the 3rd of March, 1925, for the diversion of water from Lake Michigan by
the Sanitary District of Chicago.
The Government of Canada is constrained to point out that despite repeated protests
against the diversion of water from Lake Michigan, the above-mentioned permit of
March 3rd, 1925, authorizes a diversion in amount over twice that stipulated in any
previous permits.
In this connection I have the honour to state that the Canadian Government also views
with apprehension the interpretation which has been placed upon the permit in your
note under reference. As set forth in the note which I had the honour to address to you
on this subject on May the 7th last, the Government of Canada believed that the present
permit, as in the case of previous permits, would limit the amount of the total diversion
and be applicable to all waters passing Lockport. The interpretation of the permit of the
3rd March, 1925, as contained in your note under reference, would indicate, however,
that the point of measurement is changed from Lockport to the intake works of the
Sanitary District and through such change the permit recognizes an actual diversion
much in excess of the stipulated amount of 8,500 second feet set forth in the permit. In
other words, it is clearly stated that the permit does not embrace water diverted by the
City of Chicago’s pumping stations which at the present rate of pumping amounts to
some 1200 second feet thereby increasing the authorized diversion from 8,500 second
feet to 9,700 second feet.
In addition, it would appear that if measurement be made at the intake from Lake
Michigan the result would be to exclude from the operations of the permit the
intercepted flow of the Chicago and Little Calumet Rivers, which varies in amount but
is equal, it is understood, to an annual average of about 1300 second feet. In these
circumstances it would appear that the effect of the permit of the 3rd March would not
merely authorize an average annual diversion of 9,700 second feet as above noted, but
