426 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Hungary’s attitude toward family reunification is the most liberal in the Warsaw Pact. It has also been the Eastern front-runner in the CSCE implementation. Hungary’s media treatment of the United States, even during the present period of Eastern reaction to human rights criticism, is by and large restrained and lacking in the stridency exhibited by other Communist nations. Vietnam and the Hungarian role in the ICCS are now behind us. The outstanding problem of MFN will not be resolved without legislative action on our side or Hungarian abandonment of an important Soviet policy position. Thus, aside from MFN, our continued possession of the Crown and other coronation regalia is the only major problem separating us from achieving “normalized” relations with this Communist state. It is evident therefore that, unless we expect a basic change in Hungary’s foreign policy alliance with the Soviet Union, Hungary has done virtually all that can be expected to bring about that substantial improvement in US- Hungarian relations which we have related to return of the Crown. Our policy and position over the past four years has, in effect, encouraged positive action on the part of the Hungarians and created a feeling of anticipation within the Hungarian Government that we will now follow through and return the Crown. Although they appeal to each important U.S. visitor to Budapest, the Hungarians have consciously avoided making the Crown a public issue. However, if no action is taken by us within the next twelve months on this question (frequently likened to another country holding on to the Liberty Bell), an adverse reaction within the Hungarian leadership is certain to grow. Hungary and Human Rights With current attention focused on human rights, Hungary presents a substantial contrast to most of its allies. The Communist regime there, as elsewhere, is a far cry from being democratic, but internally and externally, Kadar now runs the least restrictive regime of any in Eastern Europe. He has been more successful than any other Warsaw Pact leader in satisfying the social needs of his people and in tolerating pluralism. The confidence Kadar has gained among Hungarians was demonstrated by his ability to increase meat prices without conflict last summer immediately after the Polish riots. Hungary’s sole known contribution to this winter’s dissident movement was by a small group of intellectuals who sent a letter of solidarity to the Charter 77 group. The Hungarian Government pointedly took no action against the signatories. (The report at Tab A5 provides revealing evidence that the Hungarian regime is prepared to continue this toler- 5 Not attached.
