526  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
not declassified] Accordingly, there is a divergent view in the Intelligence 
Community which holds that graphs showing the gross area of theoret-
ical coverage of air defense systems, particularly when standing alone, 
can be misleading as indicators of trends in Soviet air defense potential. 
Because such graphs cannot incorporate the more important deploy-
ment and operational considerations noted above, this view concludes 
that the graphs are not useful.11
21. The estimates that follow represent our best judgments about 
the nominal capabilities of Soviet air defenses against the several ele-
ments of the programed US aerodynamic force, without taking opera-
tional factors into account.
—In general, we estimate that at least through the early 1980s, 
improved Soviet air defense systems will not be available in numbers 
large enough to markedly improve defense against bombers and cruise 
missiles at low altitudes.
—In the middle and late 1980s, Soviet air defenses will probably 
have reduced the USSR’s vulnerability to US defense avoidance tactics. 
Undegraded, the defenses would have the nominal potential to inflict 
considerably higher attrition against an attack by US bombers of cur-
rent types. We believe that these defenses, however, will probably have 
little or no effective capability against SRAMs carried by bombers.
—It is especially difficult to estimate the likely capabilities of Soviet 
air defenses against cruise missiles in the middle and late 1980s. We 
believe that in the mid-1980s the USSR could have a gradually increas-
ing nominal capability to defend some key areas against currently pro-
gramed US cruise missiles. Nevertheless, throughout the next decade, 
because of technical and numerical deficiencies, the USSR’s nominal 
capability to defend against a large force of US cruise missiles will 
probably remain low.
—While we cannot quantify the effects of [2 lines not declassified] 
it is likely that these factors would weigh heavily against the overall 
effectiveness of Soviet air defenses. Thus we believe that the actual 
performance of the defenses against combined attacks involving large 
numbers of US bombers, SRAMs, and cruise missiles will remain low 
during the period of this Estimate.
22. Antisubmarine Warfare. Soviet forces with ASW capabilities are 
not now an effective counter to US SSBNs. The USSR is attempting, 
however, to overcome its deficiencies in ASW. Major R&D programs 
include the development of improved sensors for submarine detec-
tion. The number of nuclear-­powered attack submarines having ASW 
capabilities which are relatively good by Soviet standards will prob-
ably increase from about 25 at present to 75 or more in the late 1980s, 
or as many as 100 if a number of Y-­class SSBNs are converted to SSNs. 
There is tentative evidence suggesting a trend toward quieter SSNs. 
11 The holders of this view are the Senior Intelligence Officers of each of the military 
services. [Footnote is in the original.]
