3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
329
and Lebanon. Therefore it is essential that we resolve the Palestinian
question in all its aspects and find a way to take care of Palestinian ref-
ugees no matter where they are. This could best be done at a broad in-
ternational conference.
The Secretary had one final point. He would be happy to have a
full discussion of Middle East problems with Gromyko at some suit-
able time. Perhaps this could be done when Gromyko comes to the
United States to attend the U.N. Special Session on Disarmament.
Perhaps they could then set aside the time required to have a full dis-
cussion of the Middle East which would not merely be a part of discus-
sions of other problems.
Gromyko said that while he did not want to repeat himself, he did
want to draw the Secretary’s attention to the fact that when our two
countries had adopted the Joint Statement last year, the chances for
convening the Geneva Conference were better than at any other time
except the time when it had actually been first convened. The question
of a Pan-Arab Delegation had indeed been discussed between various
Arab countries, and the Soviet Union had also discussed it with a
number of Arab countries, coming out in favor of that solution as facili-
tating overall resolution of the Middle East problem. The Arabs were at
one time inclined to accept such a solution; he would not say all the
Arabs, but the overwhelming majority. Then a strange situation had
developed: if Syria took one position, Egypt immediately took an oppo-
site position, and that had gone on and on. After a relatively short time
had come Sadat’s trip to Jerusalem. Then it became quite clear why
Egypt had been acting in that manner. In words Sadat was for recon-
vening the Geneva Conference, but in actual fact he was against it. The
United States, too, had not been too much in favor of reconvening the
Conference once it found out what was going on, not to mention Israel.
Thus he would suggest that it was not necessary retroactively to belittle
the chances existing last fall for reconvening the Geneva Conference.
The Secretary said that was not true.
Gromyko asked what had happened to the Joint Statement of last
year. Was it still alive?
The Secretary said it was alive, and he had said so publicly. He had
to take exception to what Gromyko had said about U.S. attitudes. We
had really been trying hard to get the Conference going, but the Arabs
could not themselves agree on the necessary framework.
Gromyko said that the U.S. did, however, know what Sadat had
done. He suggested that he and the Secretary find the necessary time to
discuss this subject from a practical point of view and in a businesslike
manner. The Secretary agreed.
MBFR
Gromyko said that just a few days ago the Soviets had received the
new proposal of the Western Powers at the Vienna negotiations. That
