February 1951–February 1952
31
that of accepting without counter-action Iran’s reversion to an attitude
of neutrality, would probably result in eventual loss of Iran with the
consequences noted in paragraph 2 above.
Second Contingency: The overthrow of the present Iranian Government and
the establishment of a pro-Soviet puppet government by subversive or
other means not involving the use of Soviet military force.
14. The weakness of the Iranian Government and the growing ac-
tivity of dissident elements, including the Tudeh Party (despite the fact
that this party is outlawed and has to function underground) make this
event a possibility. Several leading Iranians have expressed the view
that communist overthrow of the government is not only possible but
even probable unless steps are taken to improve the economic and so-
cial condition of the people and increase the efficiency of the gov-
ernment. The appointment of General Razmara, formerly Chief of Staff
of the Iranian Army, as Prime Minister gave promise of improved lead-
ership and direction; but up to the time of his assassination on March 7,
1951, his accomplishments had been singularly few.
15. The assassination of Prime Minister Razmara underlines the
basic political instability of Iran and emphasizes once again the need
for strong and vigorous leadership. It had been hoped at the time of his
appointment in June 1950 that Razmara possessed the qualities and in-
fluence needed to give Iran forceful government. However, he proved
unable to make headway against the selfish interests of the politicians
who control the Iranian Parliament and at the time of his death, he had
been obliged to resort to one compromise after another in order to stay
in power.
16. His murder will greatly increase the existing political insta-
bility in Iran at least for a temporary period. The opportunities avail-
able to the communists will thus be enhanced and it therefore becomes
more than ever necessary that there be firm direction of the gov-
ernment at almost any cost. The only source of the required type of
leadership at the moment appears to be the Shah. He can only succeed
with strong support from the United States and the United Kingdom.
During the next few months the political situation will be extremely
fluid and give rise to many difficulties.
17. If the second contingency occurred the United States would
have three alternative courses of action:
a. To accept the loss of Iran to the Soviet orbit. This would require a re-
versal of basic United States policy regarding the Mediterranean and
Middle East and would mean acceptance of the consequences summa-
rized in paragraph 2 above.
b. To support, in conjunction with the United Kingdom, the legitimate
government by all means short of commitment of United States military
