February 1951–February 1952
97
been to nail down the nationalization of the company and they are only
now beginning to grapple with the details. In doing so, however, they
are not likely to grant the British any rights tending to preserve a sem-
blance of British ownership, even though it means cutting off their nose
to spite their face. As Ambassador Grady says in regard to the latter
point, they prefer to do it that way.
3. CIA stands ready to proceed at any time with the plan it had in
mind when Ala was Prime Minister, provided a useful purpose can be
perceived. At present, however, the feeling is that such an effort would
be wasted. Ala himself is no longer in a position to utilize the scheme
effectively, and there is no one else who can be trusted. I concur in this
view.2
4. An American physician, Dr. Forkner of New York, is scheduled
to leave next week to examine the Shah and diagnose his trouble. No
question of an operation by this American is involved, so I suppose
there can be no objection to the move.
The Iranian Government today delivered a virtual ultimatum to
the AIOC to nominate a representative within one week for the pur-
pose of discussing nationalization of the oil company. Although the
British are reluctant to accept this invitation to “participate in the cere-
mony of digging their own grave”, as Grady puts it, we are urging
them to go ahead. I feel that this represents the last chance the British
may have to pull something out of the fire, by bringing up for discus-
sion the realistic problems of production and marketing.
If the British decline the invitation and the situation deteriorates to
the point where troops must be sent in, it seems to me that this would
mean the end of Iran as a Western-oriented nation. It would completely
disorganize the Government and drive the remnants into the arms of
the Tudeh, with the result that the Tudeh would soon take over the
country, even if it were unable to control the southern part. I doubt that
the USSR would find it necessary to send troops into the north at all.
The better part of Iran would fall into its hands like a ripe apple.
In any case, I should think the use of British troops in Iran would
have serious repercussions not only in the Middle East, but in other
parts of the world as well. Even if no lives were lost, the propaganda
advantage to the Soviet Union of this “imperialistic action” would be
enormous. We should therefore be on our guard against any attitude of
the British which would incite the Iranians to take over the oil fields by
force, leading to the employment of U.K. troops to “protect British
2 Reference is presumably to the program first outlined in Document 5.
