1980  907
Komer offered the caveat that we separate tactical from strategic 
issues. We are not talking about Japan taking responsibility for the 
defense of Korea now but rather about this policy aim as a strategic 
objective for the future. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski responded to Muskie that the paper and the 
SCC discussion could help the President in considering most of the 
defense issues. Although some foreign policy issues are included, 
the paper admittedly does not address the full range of foreign policy 
problems. (C)
Turner offered the following general comment: he accepts the 
premises that (1) we cannot meet a Persian Gulf, European, and East 
Asian war simultaneously, (2) a coalition with our Allies is essential to 
meet our defense requirements. Because coalitions work only in war-
time, U.S. strategy must not be dependent upon our allies to protect our 
vital interests. We need a strategy for a better defense deployment. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski and Brown challenged the soundness of Turner’s 
conclusion by citing the impossibility of defending Europe and Japan 
without their help. Dr. Brzezinski added that Turner had made one 
valid point: the Persian Gulf region is an exception; only the U.S. could 
defend it; we should face up to that now. (S)
Turner accepted Dr. Brzezinski’s argument but added that we need 
more flexibility because our past record of predicting locations of con-
flicts has been poor. (S)
Harold Brown said that if you look at the U.S./Soviet relationship 
you see that we play down areas far away from the Soviet Union like 
South Africa, the Caribbean, and the South Pacific. Geography is not 
against us there, but in Europe, East Asia, and Southwest Asia/Persian 
Gulf, the USSR is very close. Thus, we need advanced preparation for 
those regions. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski closed the general discussion and directed comment 
to the list of eight issues. (C)
Issue #-1—Do the 1980s pose a significantly greater danger of major 
regional or global conflict? Dr. Brzezinski asked if this is true, or if there is 
anyone who disagrees with it. (S)
Muskie raised a question about post-Tito Yugoslavia3 creating a 
greater danger of a regional conflict. Brown explained that we mean the 
Soviets might exploit centrifugal forces in that country. Komer added 
that the National Intelligence Estimate says that the first six months are 
not likely to be a problem; the real danger will come later; therefore, we 
should not be surprised that it has been quiet to date. (S)
3 Reference is to Yugoslavian President Josep Bronz Tito, who died on May 4.
