there is furnished to the Federal Narcotics Control Board proof
deemed adequate by it that the narcotic drug is to be applied
exclusively to medical and legitimate uses within the country to
which exported, that it will not be reexported from such country,
and that there is an actual shortage of and a demand for the
narcotic drug for medical and legitimate uses within such country.
An individual permit for each shipment is issued by the Federal
Narcotics Control Board upon proper application accompanied by
an import certificate issued by a duly authorized official of the
country of destination covering information required under (2)
and (3), as stated in the preceding sentence, fulfillment of (1)
being prerequisite to the issuance of such an import certificate.
No exportation is permitted by post. No permit is issued for the
exportation of crude opium or coca leaves as such. All exporters
must be properly qualified under the internal revenue law and all
narcotic products exported are duly sealed with United States
internal revenue stamps.
Importations are by this law restricted to crude opium and coca
leaves, and are limited to such quantities thereof as are considered
necessary by the Federal Narcotics Control Board for legitimate
and medical uses only. Individual import licenses for specified
quantities within such limits are issued by this Board to
manufacturers, properly qualified under the internal revenue law,
having apparatus or equipment in use in the manufacture of
derivatives of opium and coca leaves. The American Consul at the
port of exportation will not certify the invoice covering such
shipments until duly informed of the issuance of such a permit.
All narcotic drugs arriving in the United States without due
authorization are subject to seizure and confiscation.
In-transit shipments of smoking opium or opium prepared for
smoking are forbidden by law. Other narcotic drugs may be
shipped through the United States or a port thereof only upon
permission of the Federal Narcotics Control Board. The general
policy of this Board with respect to the issuance of permits
