Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —their right to practice their religion and official and unofficial restrictions thereon; —participation in the worldwide Islamic resurgence; —how they are influenced by urbanism and modernization in technologically advanced environments; —the perceptions of these minority Islamic communities held by their non-Islamic neighbors and similar issues. Such an approach will be most effective, in our judgment, because: (a) it will be credible; (b) it will be more than a solitary program; (c) it will permit us to compare and contrast the treatment of Muslims in the Soviet Union with their more favorable conditions elsewhere; and (d) it will provide a format for discussing some aspect of Soviet treatment of the Muslims in each of the programs. The series will initially consist of eight or more ten-minute programs. It will be broadcast primarily in languages that reach the Islamic heartland—e.g., Arabic, Indonesian, Turkish, Persian, Urdu as well as French and English—but in Uzbek, Serbo-Croatian, Georgian, Chinese, Swahili, Hausa, Hindi and Tamil as well. We are consulting with a wide range of authorities to develop material for the instant series; that research will lead to other VOA program possibilities as well. Among those to be consulted: Sheikh Ahmad Zaki, Imam of the Islamic Center of Chicago; Dr. Muhammed Abdul-Rauf, Director of the Islamic Center Mosque in Washington, D.C.; Fazl Al-Rahmam, Professor of Islamic Thought, University of Chicago; Professor John Esposito, Professor of Religion, College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Mass.; Professor Jaroslav Stetkevych, University of Chicago; Dr. Muzammil Siddiqui, Muslim World League; Imam Khalil Al-Min, World Community of Islam; Imam Muhammed Hirri, Shiite Imam, Detroit, Michigan; Mr. Leo Orleans, The Library of Congress; Ms. Kirkland of the University of Chicago; Professor Alexandre Bennigsen, University of Chicago and Paris, France; Dr. Murray Feshbach, Foreign Demographic Division, Department of Commerce; Professor Gail Lapidus, Political Science, University of California, Berkeley; Professor Teresa Rakowska-Harmstone, Carlton University, Canada; Professor Edward Allworth, Columbia University; Professor Michael Rywkin, City University of New York (CUNY); Professor Steven Burg, Oberlin College; Professor Mobin Shorish, University of Illinois; Ms. Ann Sheehy, Radio Liberty analyst. VOA correspondents abroad will also develop material in the major regions to be covered. The material developed for the VOA series will also be utilized as appropriate in other USICA media: —The VOA programs will inform coverage on the Agency’s Wireless File for use by our posts abroad.
