Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
201
tions with the help of the Department of State and give us a status
report by September 1, 1979. (C)
We find your conclusions in respect to expansion of broadcasting
time and broadcasting staff realistic and recommend you also provide
in current budget planning for the modest expenditures this expansion
will entail over the next two or three years. (U)
On language priorities, we welcome your plans for further expan-
sion of the Persian service which you have recently inaugurated. Atten-
tion should be given to the need to adjust broadcasting hours to
improve prospects of attracting an optimum audience in Afghanistan
and Soviet Central Asia as well as in Iran itself. (C)
In respect to new languages, we concur in the priority of Azeri,
but as next priorities we propose Amharic, Pushtu and Tamil rather
than Mongolian and Lingala. The potential audience for Mongolian
seems too small. Broadcasts in Lingala would undoubtedly be useful
but the need for better communication with Ethiopia, where Soviet
influence is continually becoming more predominant, is greater. (C)
We have noted from your current broadcast schedule that VOA is
still beaming 35 hours per week to the three countries of Indo-China,
with 64 million people, while only 21 hours per week go to the whole
Indian subcontinent, with a population between 800–900 million. I
should think there would be a case for reducing broadcast time in
Vietnamese, if necessary, to permit more broadcasting in the native
languages of the Indian subcontinent. Exactly what mix of Indian lan-
guages would be best should separately be evaluated but we clearly
ought to do more than we are now doing. (C)
I will be happy to meet with you and your staff to discuss any of
these plans further.4 (U)
Very sincerely,
Paul B. Henze
4 Reinhardt responded on June 21, suggesting that the ICA would proceed with
the NSC suggestions. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Agency File, Box 9, International Communication Agency: 6–8/79)
