March 27–December 31, 1979 927 —Begin message 3. President Sadat held talks with PriMin Begin on September 4 and 5. President Sadat found the talks satisfactory. The attitude of PriMin Begin and other Israeli officials was by and large positive.2 They seemed to realize the necessity of achieving some progress on the Palestinian question. President Sadat emphasized the necessity of reaching agreement on certain key points in the coming few months to give the negotiations on the self governing authority the shot in the arm they need at this point. 4. President Sadat also emphasized the need for achieving progress on the question of Jerusalem. He indicated that the present status of Jerusalem was not acceptable to 800 million Muslims and many Christians. He added that it should not be impossible, however difficult, to reach an agreement that would meet the aspirations of Muslims and Arabs while maintaining a united city. In the absence of such an arrangement, Jerusalem would remain an explosive point of hot contention and would cloud the peace making process. 5. PriMin Begin reiterated his views but was not as forceful as before. President Sadat noticed that PriMin Begin’s health was failing and that he was not in his best shape, so President Sadat did not want to press him harder on this issue at this point. But President Sadat left PriMin Begin with the impression that this is a sine qua non for progress and a point on which Israel must reach the necessary decisions. 6. President Sadat told PriMin Begin that they cannot reach a comprehensive peace without a solution to Jerusalem. Any solution perpetuating the status quo would be rejected by all Arabs, most Muslims and many Christians. President Sadat also said that East Jerusalem should be under the jurisdiction of the self governing authority as a first step, without prejudging the issue of its permanent status. Otherwise, most Palestinians would be reluctant to cooperate with the Camp David formula. 7. With respect to negotiations for the self governing authority, President Sadat told PriMin Begin that the Israeli conception of the powers and responsibilities of the self governing authority is too narrow and quite inadequate. He emphasized the need for giving the self governing authority real powers and responsibilities, without jeopardizing Israel’s security. President Carter will notice that President Sadat made a point of mentioning in his public speeches during his 2 Begin’s account of the Haifa meetings, the outcome of which the Prime Minister was “exceedingly pleased with,” was conveyed to Lewis and is in telegram 19336 from Tel Aviv, September 7. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–2030)
