Afghanistan
799
on this matter. Iran has refused to recognize the Soviet puppet regime
in Kabul, and at the recent Islamic conference, the Iranians accepted
six Afghan rebel groups as part of their own delegation. President
Carter noted that the Iranians have also told the Soviets to reduce their
presence in Iran, and that some of the 2,000 Soviet “advisors” will have
to move out.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan and remarks
by Carter and Hua agreeing to exchange visits in the future.]
302.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, July 12, 1980, 8:30–9:20 a.m.
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin
The Ambassador opened by saying that he wished to ask me two
questions prior to his return to Moscow, because he will be asked them
by the Politburo: (1) who will win the elections; (2) what outcome
would be better for U.S.-Soviet relations?
I responded by saying that my objective judgment is that Reagan’s
lead will evaporate as the public nears the moment of decision regard-
ing who ought to be the President of this country, especially since
Reagan will not be able to withstand close press scrutiny, and that the
reelection of the President is obviously better for U.S.-Soviet relations
because the President can pursue both a policy of firmness in dealing
with Soviet expansionism and arms control as well as detente. Accord-
ingly, his reelection can avoid the decade of the 80’s being a repetition
of the unmitigated Cold War of 1945–1955.
Dobrynin responded by saying that he fully agrees but wanted to
know what, in that case, prevented an improvement in our relations.
I told him that there is no point in playing games with each other, that
Afghanistan was clearly the issue because it not only posed a strategic
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
tive File, 1979–1983, Lot 96D262, Box 3, ES Super Sensitive, 1980 (3). Secret. The meeting
took place at Dobrynin’s residence. Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum of conversa-
tion to Muskie on July 12.
