International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1009 development assistance,5 to stress aid to the poorest people in the world, we feel attention to this group should be given the highest priority in the International Health initiative. We recommend the following goals: —To develop and pursue a strategy aimed at improving the health status of the 1 billion poorest people in the world. —To emphasize the delivery of community based primary health care, cost-effective training at the most appropriate level of health personnel as near to the point where they will deliver services, and the development of research programs which place a priority emphasis on the remaining major health problems, especially infectious diseases, of the developing world. —To encourage special emphasis on dealing with the generic problems of ill health, malnutrition, lack of clean water supplies, over-population and poverty, putting greatest emphasis on the prevention rather than the treatment of disease. —To focus, coordinate, and when appropriate reshape U.S. goals in International Health to achieve a government-wide coordinated program which would reduce current fragmentation, and insure that existing resources were used more effectively. —To strengthen existing institutions in our government which already deal with International Health problems, and build a greater awareness of International Health and concern for basic human needs as a more legitimate and consequential element in our foreign policy. —To establish certain specific new initiatives with which you personally could be identified. —To engage, through your leadership, the active participation of nations around the world both bilaterally and through multilateral organizations, especially WHO, UNICEF and the World Bank, in this endeavor. —To encourage greater private sector involvement in International Health activities, and a closer partnership with the Federal Government. —To plan a more coordinated and effective use of medicine as a tool in our overall diplomacy particularly in dealing with countries that have not traditionally been friendly towards the U.S. 5 Presumable reference to a November 9 memorandum from Owen to Carter scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume III, Foreign Economic Policy.
