International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1009
development assistance,5 to stress aid to the poorest people in the
world, we feel attention to this group should be given the highest pri-
ority in the International Health initiative. We recommend the fol-
lowing goals:
—To develop and pursue a strategy aimed at improving the health
status of the 1 billion poorest people in the world.
—To emphasize the delivery of community based primary health
care, cost-effective training at the most appropriate level of health per-
sonnel as near to the point where they will deliver services, and the de-
velopment of research programs which place a priority emphasis on
the remaining major health problems, especially infectious diseases, of
the developing world.
—To encourage special emphasis on dealing with the generic
problems of ill health, malnutrition, lack of clean water supplies,
over-population and poverty, putting greatest emphasis on the preven-
tion rather than the treatment of disease.
—To focus, coordinate, and when appropriate reshape U.S. goals
in International Health to achieve a government-wide coordinated pro-
gram which would reduce current fragmentation, and insure that ex-
isting resources were used more effectively.
—To strengthen existing institutions in our government which al-
ready deal with International Health problems, and build a greater
awareness of International Health and concern for basic human needs
as a more legitimate and consequential element in our foreign policy.
—To establish certain specific new initiatives with which you per-
sonally could be identified.
—To engage, through your leadership, the active participation of
nations around the world both bilaterally and through multilateral or-
ganizations, especially WHO, UNICEF and the World Bank, in this
endeavor.
—To encourage greater private sector involvement in Interna-
tional Health activities, and a closer partnership with the Federal
Government.
—To plan a more coordinated and effective use of medicine as a
tool in our overall diplomacy particularly in dealing with countries that
have not traditionally been friendly towards the U.S.
5 Presumable reference to a November 9 memorandum from Owen to Carter sched-
uled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume III, Foreign Economic Policy.
