478
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
7. Sadat closed by recalling that he had told Secretary Vance that a
confrontation with Begin is needed. He had asked the Secretary
whether the USG is prepared for “brinkmanship” and the Secretary
had replied in the affirmative. What is now needed, Sadat said, is a con-
frontation between President Carter and Begin, if the latter remains ad-
amant, in order to obtain the necessary Israeli concessions. I told Sadat
that in a sense there is already a confrontation between President
Carter and Begin. This is evident by the negative Israeli reaction to
some elements of the treaty package. Begin is under no illusions as to
President Carter’s view. I pointed out, however, that it is necessary to
take one thing at a time. To escalate the confrontation with Begin to
public dimensions would only rally public support for the Israeli Prime
Minister. It would not achieve what both Sadat and President Carter
want. What is needed is to conclude the Egyptian/Israeli peace treaty
and then proceed with equal vigor on moving ahead with West Bank/
Gaza matters. Sadat said he disagreed. A confrontation with Begin is
needed, as he saw it, if the outstanding issues are to be satisfactorily re-
solved. VP Mubarak, he reiterated, would amplify on his views.
8. As I was leaving, I noted that the treaty package is being deliber-
ated in the Israeli Cabinet and Knesset. Many things will be said pub-
licly which may seem outrageous. We urge that Sadat continue to avoid
being drawn into public debate until the process is completed in Israel
otherwise he will only weaken supporters of the treaty and give ammu-
nition to critics. I said we would urge Israel to act in the same way.
Sadat said he has no desire to engage in a rhetorical battle with the Is-
raelis, but much would depend upon what comes out of Israel during
the treaty debate. He recalled that GOE had made no public statement
when Israel announced settlements expansion. Subsequently, Begin
had pointed to Egyptian silence, claiming that this showed GOE has no
objection to such expansion. This is clearly not correct and GOE will
have to make a judgment on whether the protection of its interests re-
quires answering the Israelis lest silence again be taken by Begin as
acquiescence.
9. Comment: Sadat’s tough line continues. He was clearly disap-
pointed in the President’s letter and unusually emotional in his com-
ments. Sadat is a consummate actor and his performance was doubtless
partly show. However, despite our efforts, he does feel that the treaty
package, as presently constituted, is inequitable to him. He professes to
believe that it will hurt him and, as he likes to point out, also President
Carter in the Arab world. He is himself engaging in a game of brink-
manship, but I believe he will as a minimum insist on some change in
the draft package if he is to sign it. I sense some unhappiness that
Boutros Ghali may not have been tough enough in the negotiations.
Hence, the dispatch of Mubarak at the very time Ghali is being recalled
