1546 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement might break if we table our present duration clause. There is, of course, always the chance that they might be looking for a pretext and might take this as an opportunity. And in addition to the recent Sov Govt’s statement, the Russians here have been making noises to the Brit and ourselves which are obviously calculated to give us the idea that they may be thinking of winding up the conf. But my personal assessment really is that they probably will not break in the immediate future. My guess is that we will have a few more weeks to go anyway, and I am confident that we can keep the focus on the issues of control. Villard 416. Telegram Nusup 184 to Geneva1 Washington, January 28, 1959, 8:24. p.m. Nasup 184. Department appreciates considerations outlined SUPNU 230 and USDel belief that we may now or soon be more vul­ nerable if we do not table duration article than if we do, in view fact that our present position is fully on public record and that we are open to charges of stalling and unwillingness show our full position. Accord­ ingly USDel may, in its discretion, table further articles, including dura­ tion, in accordance previous approved texts if USDel, in light changing negotiating situation, continues feel that this would be best tactic to preserve most favorable U.S. position in negotiations. Department’s concern is that we do not make it easy for Soviets to shift discussion to other issues now that their feet are to the fire on controls as indicated SUPNU 232. Department believes other articles, do not involve any major issues and that peaceful uses article in its present form would be hard for Soviets to attack as providing way for covert evasion weapons test prohibition. Paragraph 2 of duration article as authorized NUSUP 172 should be amended by substituting “finds” for “considers”. Department believes that before tabling duration article USDel should refuse to be drawn into substantive discussion this question and should make following points: 1 Source: Approves tabling duration clause. Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/1–2759.
