832 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 be a religious element in whatever group succeeded Khomeini. He thinks Khomeini, however, cannot be challenged as long as he is alive. The overall conclusion from this discussion would be that if he is right that any new government cannot be secular only, Iran is in for an indefinite period of the same kind of struggle that Bazargan had between the secularists and the clerics and it has been going on ever since with Bani Sadr, etc. [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is material unrelated to hostage crisis.] Stansfield Turner2 2 Gates signed for Turner above this typed signature. 305. Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the Department of State1 Tehran, June 30, 1980 I believe that I have lived through another unforgettable day . . . . After the Imam’s thundering tirade,2 the holy cohorts of low-level officials—all hardliners—at the ministries have gotten going. They are taking it upon themselves to bring their own small-minded theories into the offices, with total disregard for rank—the minister is entitled to no more respect than the secretary—and they are launching an assault on drawers, desks, and other furniture, emptying them of their contents, taking them into the corridors . . . there they begin sorting what is satanic from what is not satanic. Ostermann’s catalogue is 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 33, Iran Update 7/80. No classification marking. Brackets are in the original. The document was found attached to a July 3 briefing memorandum from Saunders to Muskie, Christopher, and Newsom entitled “Iran Update—July 4.” Also found attached was the July 1 message from Lang to the Department of State; see Document 306. 2 According to an article in the Los Angeles Times, on June 27 Khomeini had delivered a “sharp attack on the troubled Iranian government,” threatening to “order a new political upheaval” if Bani-Sadr did not solve the country’s problems. In particular, Khomeini decried “reports that insignia of the old regime were still in evidence in government offices” and “denounced governmental ministries as ‘ineffective,’ ‘imperial,’ and ‘satanical.’” He gave the government 10 days to remove the offending insignia in favor of the symbol of the Islamic republic. (“Khomeini Raps ‘Ineffective’ Bani-Sadr Regime for Laggard Action on Problems,” Los Angeles Times, June 27, 1980, p. A2)
