Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 1. (S) Entire text. 2. The West Bank/Gaza negotiations began in Beersheva Friday2 afternoon almost as planned with the one exception being the last-minute absence of Prime Minister Khalil. While the opening statements presented each side’s starting positions, the meeting was conducted in a conciliatory and businesslike atmosphere. The principal achievement is that the opening session is now behind us and with that hurdle surmounted, it will probably be easier for the parties to get down to work. The meeting concluded with agreement to meet next on June 6–7 in Alexandria with efforts between now and then to work out an agenda for that meeting, perhaps through a private meeting between Khalil and Burg in Egypt in the next few days. 3. The one development that marred the day’s events was Khalil’s decision not to come. This had been developing since Wednesday when Khalil told our Charge in Cairo that he would not attend the meeting if Burg were going to chair it. When I got to Egypt, I found Khalil firmly opposed to attending a meeting on the Palestinian issues in Israel chaired by the Minister of the Interior rather than Prime Minister or Foreign Minister. I believe he was concerned both about the reaction in the Arab world and about Burg’s lesser rank against the background of Begin’s refusal to meet with him in Washington last February.3 He suggested either a roundtable with no chairman or a meeting chaired by me. Despite our late-night and early-morning efforts to resolve the issue, Burg with Begin’s support ignored Dayan’s efforts and held to the position that Sadat and Begin had agreed that each meeting in this negotiation would be chaired by the host country. The Israelis, for their part, were upset over Boutros Ghali’s action in a meeting with Dayan in El Arish on Wednesday4 which seemed to the Israelis to reverse Sadat’s commitment to Begin in Cairo to open the border this weekend. When Burg insisted on chairing the meeting himself, Khalil sent General Kamal Ali to head the Egyptian delegation in his place. Ali stated simply that Khalil did not come “for procedural
