848
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1. (S) Entire text.
2. The West Bank/Gaza negotiations began in Beersheva Friday2
afternoon almost as planned with the one exception being the
last-minute absence of Prime Minister Khalil. While the opening state-
ments presented each side’s starting positions, the meeting was con-
ducted in a conciliatory and businesslike atmosphere. The principal
achievement is that the opening session is now behind us and with that
hurdle surmounted, it will probably be easier for the parties to get
down to work. The meeting concluded with agreement to meet next on
June 6–7 in Alexandria with efforts between now and then to work out
an agenda for that meeting, perhaps through a private meeting be-
tween Khalil and Burg in Egypt in the next few days.
3. The one development that marred the day’s events was Khalil’s
decision not to come. This had been developing since Wednesday
when Khalil told our Charge in Cairo that he would not attend the
meeting if Burg were going to chair it. When I got to Egypt, I found
Khalil firmly opposed to attending a meeting on the Palestinian issues
in Israel chaired by the Minister of the Interior rather than Prime Min-
ister or Foreign Minister. I believe he was concerned both about the re-
action in the Arab world and about Burg’s lesser rank against the back-
ground of Begin’s refusal to meet with him in Washington last
February.3 He suggested either a roundtable with no chairman or a
meeting chaired by me. Despite our late-night and early-morning ef-
forts to resolve the issue, Burg with Begin’s support ignored Dayan’s
efforts and held to the position that Sadat and Begin had agreed that
each meeting in this negotiation would be chaired by the host country.
The Israelis, for their part, were upset over Boutros Ghali’s action in a
meeting with Dayan in El Arish on Wednesday4 which seemed to the
Israelis to reverse Sadat’s commitment to Begin in Cairo to open the
border this weekend. When Burg insisted on chairing the meeting him-
self, Khalil sent General Kamal Ali to head the Egyptian delegation in
his place. Ali stated simply that Khalil did not come “for procedural
2 May 25.
3 Boutros Ghali, in his memoir of the negotiations, explained Khalil’s absence was
due to the latter’s refusal to “preside over the Egyptian delegation because the talks were
at the ministerial level and he was the prime minister. He insisted that his counterpart
was Begin.” (Boutros Ghali, Egypt’s Road to Jerusalem, p. 220)
4 Meeting with Dayan at El Arish on May 23, Boutros Ghali stated that the “terms of
treaty would be observed and there would be no normalization in principle for another
eight months, unless Begin and Sadat agreed to make exceptions. The frontier will be
closed after the El Arish turnover, no Egyptian workers will work in Israel, no Israelis
will fish on Egyptian side, there will be no moving back and forth across the line, except
as agreed on [an] ad hoc basis (emergencies, illnesses, etc.), the air corridor will be used
only on agreement of Sadat and Begin.” Matthews reported that Dayan “agreed to this
because this is what the treaty says.” (Telegram 10630 from Cairo, May 23; National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790234–0848)
