402
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. The Begin government’s decision to thicken a number of settle-
ments on the West Bank has raised our ongoing test of wills with the
GOI on the settlements issue in the post-Camp David period from one
of words to one of deeds. While Begin’s domestic political vulnerabil-
ities, not to say his own deeply held convictions, make it nearly impos-
sible that we could bring about a formal revocation of the decision, nei-
ther can we allow it to go unchallenged or to become just another in an
ongoing series of steps toward unlimited expansion and proliferation
of Israeli settlements in occupied territories. There are already sugges-
tions by government sources that the U.S. is overreacting, that Wash-
ington will come to understand this and that the problem will fade
away, this despite the extraordinarily stiff phrases in the President’s
letter of October 26.2 Israelis, of course, have many examples in the his-
tory of our relationship which lead them to conclude that the U.S. will
eventually back down in order to avoid a bilateral crisis. Because of this
history, it will be especially difficult to convince Israel that on the settle-
ments issue, we are prepared for a long and, if necessary, public and
vehement disagreement. In the following paragraphs are set out what
we believe are the options for American policy and actions on this cru-
cial matter.
3. The problem:
To limit to the greatest extent possible the scope of implementation
of the GOI’s decision to augment existing settlements on the West
Bank, and to dissuade the GOI from inaugurating any new civilian set-
tlements, at least until negotiations over the establishment of the
self-governing authority are completed.
4. Background and analysis:
During the Knesset debate over the Camp David Accords, Begin
assured his critics that the decision to withdraw from the Sinai settle-
ments constituted no precedent for the settlements in the West Bank
and Golan Heights, which are far more important to Israelis for both se-
curity and emotional reasons. He promised that existing settlements in
those areas would be strengthened and new ones set up. Thereafter,
Begin ducked the issue for several weeks. During the Cabinet debate
over the draft Israel/Egypt treaty, and especially the linkage issue,
which was conducted under the shadow of an extremely emotional ov-
erreaction to the U.S. replies to Hussein and to tendentious press ac-
counts from Arab sources about the Saunders visit, Begin encountered
unexpectedly strong criticism. He apparently felt this ministerial re-
sistance could only be propitiated by an explicit decision to augment
the West Bank settlements. The overwhelming nature of the Cabinet
2 See Document 108.
