Arms Control and Disarmament  1433
372.	 Telegram Dulte 2 From John Foster Dulles at USUN1
New York, August 21, 1958, 1 a.m.
Dulte 2. For Acting Secretary for President from Secretary.
Following is text of letter I have handed Selwyn Lloyd for Har­
old Macmillan: (Revised statement enclosed with letter in separate 
telegram.)
Dear Harold:
I have just returned from Washington where I went to discuss 
with the President your two messages of August 20. The message with 
respect to exchange of information is being handled from Washington. 
The other message I am answering through Selwyn Lloyd in line with 
the President’s views.
We feel that it is important, as you say, that there be “some pub­
lic response” to the report of the experts. We believe, however, that 
unless this public response indicates a significant program, we shall 
be subjected to a serious propaganda barrage, and if as you suggest we 
only make our statement on suspension at the opening of the General 
Assembly, we will then appear to have surrendered to Soviet pressures 
rather than have taken ourselves an initiative.
Our standing in the world is at a point where there is real danger 
to us in [illegible in the original] adjudged militaristic. That danger can 
have consequences as serious as the foregoing of some nuclear weap­
ons knowledge. The United States has already held back on this sus­
pension matter for several months largely in deference to our desire not 
to confront you with a possible test suspension before we could give 
you the benefit of our own knowledge in this field. We have through 
great exertion obtained an amendment of the Atomic Energy Act in 
your favor and the President has undertaken to act generously under 
it. We really wonder in the light of this whether you should ask us to 
take further serious risks in relation to world opinion.
We do not share the fear you express that if we temporarily sus­
pend testing we will never be able to resume, and therefore the Soviets 
will have gotten something for nothing. Of course this is a risk. But it 
seems to us that if we made clear that we are suspending only in order 
to get some constructive progress in the field of disarmament, that will 
1 Source: Transmits for Eisenhower text of letter from Dulles to Macmillan on sus­
pension of nuclear testing. Secret; Niact; Eyes Only. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 
700.5611/8–2158.
