1154 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement clarified by my amendments, other than switiching over to new and unsatisfactory basis your May 11 draft. C. Nevertheless, I have not refused exchange views with you on what you term embargo. On contrary. I have consistently expressed willingness take note of whatever views you may wish put forward this regard, while at same time expressing our attitude toward matter. Such attitude my part is not inconsistent with my position our first immedi­ ate task should be that of reaching agreement on renunciation force. In fact, believe any rational and dispassionate consideration of matter of trade would only reinforce point have so often made here: —that trade problem stands in collateral relation to problem we dealing with in our discussions renunciaton force. That is, so long as threat and possibility exist that goods received in trade would be used support hostile action against forces my country, it not realistic expect my country look with favor on such trade. D. Another reason why I should be glad hear your views on topic trade is that in your remarks so far you given no indication what advan­ tage you expect or demand from discussion that topic. You have talked in vague general terms of what you call policy international blockade and embargo, and demanded its abolition. I not aware any blockade by my country. As for what you term “embargo” you have repeatedly avoided my questions as to just what aspect or aspects this matter you had in mind. You have denied your country has experienced any diffi­ culty as result trade policies my country. You have acknowledged prin­ ciple trade should take place only on terms mutual benefit; yet that precisely purpose trade policies my country. Where trade can or may have effect supporting use force against one of parties to exchange, how can it be considered mutually beneficial? E. So far your remarks on subject trade seem be utterly out of keeping with your position in introducing topic, when you seemed have in mind some specific advantage your country. You say what you call policy embargo should be abolished, not for good your country, but for good of my counry and other countries. Inasmuch as measures with regard trade with your country which are in effect my country and other countries have been effected accordance their respective sovereign decisions and interests, I find this position yours hard understand. F. You also say what you seek in demanding abolition these meas­ ures is general improvement relations between our two countries. As have often pointed out you here, in addition carrying out our agreed announcement Sept 10 last year first essential step to improvement rela­ tions between two countries is agreement on meaningful renunciation force. Only by so doing can we approach peaceful resolution our differ­ ences—whatever their nature—in atmosphere free from overhanging
