456 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX text of the statement will be treated within the U.S. Government with the utmost confidence. 4. To meet the intent of Congress the statement must address emigration across the board (not only family reunification), it must apply to emigration to all countries, and it must speak to future practice. We consider that the following statement, in the context of discussions indicating that Hungarian law and administrative practice do not in fact preclude emigration, would be appropriate: Quote: I am authorized to state to you on behalf of my government that Hungary will satisfactorily solve any emigration problems which may arise. Unquote. This statement may be coupled with references to traditional Hungarian policy or to the Helsinki Final Act if the Hungarian Government prefers. (Here we note Bartha’s phrase—Budapest 1907 “Resolution of these issues is an integral part of Hungary’s approach to human relations”). The term “emigration problems” could be adjusted to “problems of the type we have been discussing” or to “humanitarian problems” if the context clearly shows that the parties are talking about emigration. 4. If the Hungarian Government wishes to propose other language, that must be referred to Washington to insure that it would meet the requirements of the law. 5. If necessary in order to assist in your discussions of Jackson- Vanik and Hungarian emigration as well as provide guidance if the Hungarians wish to discuss further the language of the statement, we are prepared to send a Department representative who is directly familiar with Section 402 of the Trade Act5 and the Romanian talks. 6. Circular 175 authority6 has been obtained for negotiation of a trade agreement. We are now preparing a draft trade agreement. Vance 5 Section 402 of the 1974 Trade Act outlines the requirement for freedom of emigration from bloc countries seeking to receive MFN. 6 Circular 175 refers to regulations developed by the Department of State to ensure the proper exercise of treaty-making power. Typically, a Circular 175 is an action memorandum seeking authority to negotiate, conclude, amend, extend, or terminate an international agreement.
