776  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
concerned regard welfare these people. Now question of those Chinese 
in US prisons is not question of whether or not there are Chinese in 
US prisons, but is question of how many them in US prisons. I had 
repeatedly referred to imprisoned Americans in China. He sure I able 
understand similar concern their part regarding Chinese in prison in 
US. They would like learn about information on their situation.
94. I said I had nothing more on that subject but did have another 
brief subject.
95. I said he would recall that at our 23rd meeting on October 27 
I had raised with him and discussed at that meeting as well as at 24th 
meeting October 3, the question of American personnel missing during 
Korean hostilities for whom no accounting been made from his side. 
I would not review reasons set forth that time regarding reasons why 
we thought his side had information concerning them.
96. I said he would recall that he had said he felt that MAC in Korea 
was proper place for discussion this question and I had asked whether 
he would recommend his authorities that they agree discuss this ques­
tion there. My government accepted this suggestion in good faith and 
in meeting of MAC November 26th raised this question. Although 
representatives his side made some statements regarding individuals 
held outside Korea as not coming under authority of MAC, I pleased 
note that they did accept list. I wanted point out that although almost 
three months had passed since lists received and discussed in MAC, no 
information yet received and no indication of intent his side provide 
information. I simply wanted state at this time that my government 
considered itself entitled to reply whether in MAC or here, because my 
government considers this still to be one of practical matters between 
us which these talks were convened to consider.
97. Wang said I did not seem to have replied to questions he had 
put to me.
98. Wang said as to US military personnel missing in Korea, he had 
at beginning pointed out this not matter to be discussed these meetings. 
It was proper for US to raise question at MAC in Korea. It should expect 
any reply in same place—that is, in Korea.
99. Wang said he would like remind me not to confuse those mat­
ters in Korea with present talks between China and US. He did not 
consider it proper or wise raise this matter at this conference.
100. Wang said as he had said, if US was concerned over impris­
oned Americans in China, his side also entitled know about situation of 
Chinese being imprisoned in US. Their request for information regard­
ing imprisoned Chinese in US was exactly within scope our talks and 
was matter which concerned implementation of agreed announcement.
101. I said it not necessary raise matter here if his representatives 
in Korea would be instructed give reply. I hoped this would be done.
