564
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
189.
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff1
Washington, undated
MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS
Major progress was made in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations
(MTN) during the month of December. Few issues remain outstanding.
The United States has reached close-out understanding with a large
number of developed and developing countries covering agricultural
and industrial tariffs as well as non-tariff measure codes of conduct. (U)
European Community (EC)
The United States and the European Community have not re-
solved all bilateral issues. We are both seeking a more “balanced”
package. However, a U.S./EC joint statement was issued on December
22 reflecting our present level of agreement.2 We and the EC have es-
sentially resolved our differences on non-tariff measures, agriculture,
and reforms of the General Agreement. We have reached bilateral
agreement on the safeguards code, but the EC must bring the LDCs on
board before negotiating positions can be finalized. Tariff negotiations
with the EC will recommence on January 7th. (C)
The French Position. The French continue to voice dissatisfaction on
several points and remain among the only holdouts in the negotiations.
First, the French oppose agricultural agreements that they perceive
might undermine the EC Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). This has
led to French opposition to an agreement on agricultural subsidies as
well as to the establishment of an agricultural council in the GATT.
Second, the French maintain that the U.S./EC tariff package is not suffi-
ciently balanced. Third, the French have stated that a significant tariff
cut staged over an eight year period is politically unacceptable. They
have proposed implementing tariff reductions in two stages. The
second stage would not be implemented automatically but only after a
review of the economic situation and a positive decision by participants
to continue. (U)
French opposition on these issues is clearly linked to the French
domestic political situation. The Gaullists and the French Communists
together are attacking the MTN and exerting considerable pressure on
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects
File, Henry Owen, Box 26, Summit: Guadeloupe (Briefing Book): 1/79 [I] Confidential.
Sent to Carter under cover of an undated memorandum from Owen, who noted that the
paper was being forwarded at the President’s request. (Ibid.)
2 Telegram 19785 from Geneva, December 22, transmitted a copy of the U.S.–EC
joint statement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780529–0576)
