1980  777
adequate programs of our own. But we are responding, by moderniz-
ing each leg of our Triad, to prevent that from happening.
• In Central Europe, NATO will be much more nearly in bal-
ance with the Warsaw Pact within the next few years, provided that 
the Allies proceed with the modernization of their forces and other 
increased defense efforts, and provided that our programs for rapid 
deployment of reinforcements are brought to fruition. Even with these 
improvements, however, we will not have as high a level of confidence 
as I would like of containing a large attack against NATO launched by 
the Pact with little preparation and warning.
• The disparity between U.S. annual defense expenditures and the 
dollar cost estimates of annual Soviet expenditures has continued for so 
long and grown so great that it has begun to bring the credibility of our 
defense posture into question. A prolongation of the past 15 year trend 
for another 10 or even 5 years would clearly consign us to inferiority.
• To prevent us from falling behind, or from appearing to, our 
efforts devoted to defense must increase in real terms. If we do not 
respond now to the sustained expansion of Soviet military power by 
increasing our own, we will condemn the United States to an inferior 
military position. We need a steady, sustained, and significant increase 
in effort. This Administration has set that in train.
• What needs to be done is to set a pattern of growth and then sus-
tain it over a period of years—­rather than have a large growth in one 
year and then assume that the problem has been solved. The program 
that the Administration has proposed will arrest and then turn around 
the relative disparity in momentum between the Soviet and U.S. pro-
grams. This will require not only the projected growth in our defense 
efforts, but greater efforts by our allies, more effective coordination of 
U.S. and allied defense programs, higher efficiency in our own defense 
program, and correct choices on our own part to take advantage of our 
technological lead.
• The Administration has responded to the adverse trends in the 
military balance and to increased dangers to U.S. interests through 
steady increases in defense budgets, culminating in substantial growth 
in the FY 81 defense budget. The FY 81–85 Five Year Defense Program 
projects continued real growth in defense spending through FY 1985.
• In the first year of this Administration, we placed the major 
weight of our efforts behind improving NATO’s early conventional 
combat capability, primarily through the LTDP and the three percent 
real growth commitment. We next turned to the problem of modern-
izing our strategic TRIAD. Most recently, we have taken steps to mod-
ernize our theater nuclear forces in Europe. Thus, programs in each of 
these areas are underway and have momentum. We can now concen-
trate special attention and resources on improving our capabilities to
