1072 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI The possibility of increasing the throw weight approximately by one third in the process of modernizing an existing missile would result in making this missile potentially capable of carrying one-third more warheads than it would be accounted for in the Treaty. And, for such a missile it would not be possible to apply the “forty percent rule,” as it is envisaged for new types of ballistic missiles. In my opinion, such a situation would truly open wide the “window of instability” and would increase unpredictability and mistrust. The parameters within which I think we must seek a mutually acceptable figure should be between ten and thirty percent. Therefore, I would propose here the following compromise: a new type of missile would be a missile whose throw weight exceeds by at least fifteen percent, and the length of whose first stage differs by at least five percent, from the corresponding features of the earlier missile. First of all, the fifteen percent increase in throw weight is sufficiently large to differentiate a new type of missile from an existing one and, besides, it can be effectively verified with the assistance of NTM. Now, on the matter of downloading the accountable number of warheads on existing types of ballistic missiles. This issue has its own history. Initially, it was the U.S. side which put forward the proposal to permit change in the earlier stated number of warheads on ICBMs and SLBMs. Based on the need to bring current weaponry into line with new strategic realities which will be established by the START Treaty, we agreed with such an approach. The possibility of altering the number of warheads on ballistic missiles was also recognized in the Soviet-U.S. statement of summit results in December 1987. In addition, in June 1990 you and I agreed that one of the main guidelines for subsequent negotiations on nuclear and space weapons would be “reducing the concentration of warheads on strategic delivery vehicles.” If we are guided by the desirability of promptly achieving this future agreement, then sooner or later we will have to reduce the number of warheads on existing types of missiles. It would make sense to take measures now in that direction and by all means not to batten down a door which we will have to open tomorrow anyway. Also, establishing a ban on downloading the accountable number of warheads in the START Treaty can lead to a situation in the future when instead of re-equipping existing missiles there will be a need to manufacture new ones with smaller concentrations of warheads. That would not be justifiable from the economic viewpoint, and ultimately would promote continuation of the arms race. As regards your concern about the possibility of “restoring the initial number” of warheads on those missiles where their number had been cut, this could be avoided by way of substituting new platforms for the warheads whose design would make it impossible to equip a missile with the previous number of warheads. By the way, this is
