770  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
bring us back to merits our disputes. He kept referring to his views 
regarding our dispute in Taiwan area terming it continuously a matter 
of US occupation of Taiwan. I had in past and continue resolutely to 
reject validity any such characterization of question. However, I did not 
intend repeat that this morning. Because that, I felt, again gets us down 
unproductive side road of discussion merits our respective positions.
48. I said however whatever term is used characterize our dispute 
that area, seemed me that position he taking was that solution of that 
should precede or accompany issuance our declaration.
49. I said he spoke again this morning of what he termed their right 
expel American forces from Taiwan area. His government has in its 
public statements also often spoken along same line. This is, and can be 
interpreted as, nothing else than a threat to initiate hostilities in order 
to resolve questions at dispute in Taiwan area in their favor. This is 
principal reason we are here discussing whether or not his government 
willing give up threat or use of force to resolve our differences.
50. I said this one of reasons I asked him at last meeting and again 
asked this morning the question as to whether in issuing this declara­
tion they considered that only peaceful means were to be used to settle 
our disputes.
51. I said there no confusion my mind in this regard. I relating my 
question exactly to text our declaration. In spite my explanations this 
morning, he still insists in interpreting amendments I had suggested as 
attempt by US to trick him into prejudicing their position. That neither 
my intent nor is it in plain language of draft we discussing. Let me read 
that. “The USA and the PRC are determined that they will settle dis­
putes between them through peaceful means—and if I may here leave 
out the self-­defense clause—and that they will not resort to the threat or 
use of force in the Taiwan area or elsewhere.” However in saying this, 
each of us is also saying in own behalf simply that we doing this and 
saying this without prejudicing what each of us considers his inherent 
rights to individual collective self-­defense. As I said my statement this 
morning, neither us by saying that is recognizing or giving appearance 
recognizing merits position of other in this regard. (At this point Lai 
had whispered conference with Wang over Chinese December 1 draft.) 
Both us are simply making clear fact that if either us is attacked we 
intend defend ourselves. It simply says, when we in declaration say 
we not going use force, that we not carrying it to point of saying we 
not intend defend ourselves if attacked. It applies equally to both of us 
and, as previously pointed out, I would think they would consider it of 
equal importance.
52. I said it just didn’t seem to me that their objections to it had 
any validity; and that their demand that it be withdrawn constituted,
