528
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
eration of this matter was completed, we would be in touch. On the
question of verification—the form of the instrument to be used in con-
nection with verification was important from the standpoint of ratifica-
tion in the United States, and it was a matter that would receive major
attention during Congressional discussions in the process of ratifica-
tion. Finally, on the fourth point—what we were talking about was lab-
oratory research. There was no real difference between us in this
respect.
Warnke said he did not have much to add to the Secretary’s com-
ments. On the first point—we had submitted a Working Paper, and
were developing an Article I which we hoped to submit in the near fu-
ture. Secondly, regarding duration of the Treaty. Of course, one of the
things to be considered in this connection was the impact of the Treaty
on other countries, and the need to further the non-proliferation objec-
tives we had in common. The Soviet Union had proposed a three-year
duration. Warnke had listened to the arguments of the Soviet Delega-
tion and had found them to be quite persuasive. Third, on verification.
He did not believe it necessary to comment any further on on-site in-
spection. As for national seismic stations, he had thought that we had
reached the point where the issue was not whether or not such stations
were to be used, but rather when, how many and where. If the Soviet
Union was now changing its position in this respect, Warnke could
only view this as a serious setback to the negotiations. He believed it
was necessary to recognize that neither side anticipated that we would
not have an agreement that would replace the current one after three
years. After all, it would hardly be worthwhile to negotiate on a three-
year agreement unless we expected it to be replaced at the expiration of
that period. He believed that one of the key factors for determining
whether or not there would be another treaty banning nuclear testing
would be the question of whether or not there was sufficient confidence
in the verification procedures in the treaty now being negotiated. As
Secretary Vance had pointed out, acceptability of the Treaty to the U.S.
Senate would depend in large part upon Senate satisfaction with the
verification procedures. He believed that the national seismic stations
would prove to be an important element in such procedures. He fur-
ther believed that from the standpoint of furtherance of our common
non-proliferation objective, and from the standpoint of the impact on
other countries, it was necessary to be sure that there were verification
procedures and facilities that would give them confidence that the nu-
clear powers had stopped nuclear testing. Therefore, he would agree
with what he understood Chairman Petrosyants had suggested—that
there was the possibility of dividing verification into two stages, recog-
nizing that time would be required before equipment could be installed
in connection with these national seismic stations. However, he would
not feel confident unless there was acceptance of the principle that after
