El Salvador 573 The presence of sixteen graduates of Johns Hopkins University highlighted further the close cultural connection between El Salvador and the United States. At the meeting with the businessmen at the Embassy, no translation was required as all of those present spoke English. Unlike other Central American countries, no specific program was submitted, nor were specific requests for assistance made.2 A general expression of need for assistance was made in the three fields referred to previously of housing, education, and health. The President spoke of his desire to complete the Acajutla Port Project. The Salvadorans in a note, now almost a year old, have asked the United States Government for a loan of $8 million,3 but they have never come up with any concrete projects for the rural improvement program in which Lemus appears so interested. We have on several occasions, without result so far, informally explained that before consideration can be given to their loan application, they must provide us with a detailed explanation of their plans for using the money. Without having their explanations, we now believe the DLF would be the only agency that could make such a loan to them, and we doubt present DLF policies would permit it to make such a loan. CONCLUSIONS:—In view of the fact that no specific program was presented in El Salvador, it is difficult to comment in a detailed fashion, but it appears that some of the factors mentioned in connection with other countries of the area would hold true in this country. These are: (a) The need for an inventory of the nation’s assets, both human and material; (b) The need for assistance in determining the feasibility of establishing new industrial enterprises and diversifying agricultural production; (c) An analysis and appraisal of the potentials of domestic and foreign markets, and a better understanding of the revenues that might be derived from tourism, and 2 At a meeting between members of Eisenhower’s mission and Salvadoran Government officials in San Salvador, July 28, 1958, concerning economic matters, Antonio Serrano Langlois, Salvadoran Under Secretary of Economy, distributed a memorandum of proposed development projects of the Salvadoran Government. He said the program required $191 million, including $84 million from his Government and $107 million in foreign aid. (Memorandum of conversation by W. Douglas McLain, Jr., Third Secretary of the Embassy in El Salvador; enclosure 1 to despatch 55 from San Salvador, August 11, 1958; 120.1520/8–1158) 3 Reference is to a memorandum from the Salvadoran Embassy to the Department of State, October 2, 1957. (816.10/10–257)
