82 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX erable frankness in the media. It was during this period that such revisionist theoreticians as Zdenek Mlynar developed theories of how to build a “democratized” Communism, ideas that were to be put in practice in 1968. The period also had its outright dissidents who fell victim to Novotny’s periodic efforts to retrench or at least to set limits to de-Stalinization. (U) In 1966 Novotny began to take a tougher stance toward nonconformist intellectuals, especially the writers. In so doing, he was following the lead of the Soviets, who in February of that year had tried and convicted the nonconformist writers Sinyavskiy and Daniel. These trials sent shock waves through the Soviet and East European intellectual community and marked the beginning of sustained dissidence in the Soviet Union. (U) The East German regime also responded to the pressure of Khrushchev’s second de-Stalinization with moderation of its cultural policies, but with greater hesitation, abrupt policy shifts and considerably less domestic effect than in Czechoslovakia. For example, the nonconformist East German songster Wolf Biermann, who was criticized and stripped of party membership in early 1963, was allowed to publish his poems and perform his songs in 1964 and, in late 1965, was abruptly banned from performing and was labeled an anti-Communist. Another victim of this regime ambivalence was Robert Havemann, an eminent scientist who was prohibited from teaching in 1964 and then retired in 1965 because of his outspoken views. (U) Many revisionist ideas were put into effect in Czechoslovakia during the “Prague Spring” of 1968. Perhaps surprisingly, this institutionalization of reform ideas did not lead to greater dissident pressures for similar changes elsewhere in Eastern Europe. The Soviet-led Warsaw Pact quashing of the Czechoslovak “experiment” in August was protested by dissidents in other East European countries, but it also stifled hope that popular agitation for a “humane” type of Communism would bear fruit. That hope has been rekindled by the convergence of circumstances during the past two years. (U) New Stimuli to Dissident Activity The 1975 Helsinki accord and efforts of the East European regimes to show a measure of compliance with its human rights provisions raised some popular expectation that authoritarian controls might be loosened, and stimulated dissident efforts to that end. There was a widespread anticipation among East Germans in the summer of 1976, for instance, that because the accord signified “international recognition” of East Germany, the regime could not, or would no longer, block foreign travel on the grounds that travel was predicated on such “recognition.” (U)
