Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ever, I believe it is important for me to be sure you are aware of my own appreciation of the present mood there. —I know from my own talks with Israeli leaders during my visit to Israel early this month4 that they remain deeply suspicious of Syria and of Syria’s role in Lebanon. We recognize that the Syrian forces in Lebanon, along with contingents from Sudan, Saudi Arabia and the UAE, are there at the request of the Sarkis government and with the approval of the Arab League for the expressed purpose of preserving the unity of Lebanon and restoring the authority of the central government. The Israelis at times have tacitly accepted this role but in light of recent Syrian moves against Christian areas, they again see Syrian moves as steps in a strategy of assuming a dominant role in Lebanon and preparing a second front against Israel. That perception arouses deep concern in Israel and heavy pressure on the government to take action. I believe these pressures to take action have reached a new intensity in recent days. As long as confrontations in Lebanon occur, misunderstandings and miscalculations about Syrian intentions in Israel could all too easily lead to greater Israeli involvement in Lebanon. It is vitally important that this be forestalled. —These impressions gained during my own recent talks in Israel are underscored by more recent discussions our representatives have had with Israeli leaders. —While the USG and I personally have made sustained and strong efforts in urging restraint upon the Israelis, there is a limit to what we will be able to do if the situation in Lebanon continues to deteriorate. An accidental clash between Israeli and Syrian aircraft flying over Lebanon could all too easily occur, and this could precipitate dangerous new tensions. We are urging the Israelis to exercise the most rigid discipline and prudence to prevent inadvertent clashes or a contest for control of the airspace over Lebanon. We urge Syria to do likewise. —Our purpose in sharing this assessment is not to discuss responsibility for recent events. Syria too is deeply suspicious of Israeli involvement in Lebanon’s affairs. Israel certainly is not without blame for some of the tensions and troubles which have engulfed Lebanon. Our purpose is to be sure Syria fully understands the situation in which its actions are being taken and to urge the utmost caution. —In addition to sharing this assessment with you, I must also express the deep concern of many Americans, some with relatives in Lebanon, about where the situation in Lebanon is heading. The prospect of further changes in the delicate political composition in Lebanon raises questions about how Lebanese unity can be restored. As long as the
