94 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Subject: Sinai and Israeli security requirements. Memcon-Tab 2130–230038 Secretary Vance Foreign Minister Kamel Amb. Eilts Amb. Ghorbal Ahmed Maher Subject: Preliminary Egyptian comments on revised U.S. Framework paper. Egyptian concerns with it. They view it as retreat from previous U.S. positions. It makes no clear reference to withdrawal from Sinai and Palestinians and refugee problems inadequately treated. Memcon—Tab 26. 2040–224039 President Carter Foreign Minister Dayan Professor Barak Subject: Sinai and handling settlements problem. Memcon—Tab . September 12, 1978—Tuesday 081540 President Carter Foreign Minister Kamel Ahmed Maher Subject: The President met Kamel and his associates while bicycling. Brief general discussion in which President Carter said he did not want Sadat to have to bear burden of West Bank. King Hussein should be absorbed into peace talks. President Carter thought Israelis will be willing to look at Egyptian suggestions. 38 See Document 44. 39 In his personal diary, Carter wrote of this meeting: “I found Dayan to be a little more optimistic but willing to accept failure rather than yield completely on the Sinai settlements because of political considerations in Israel. This also would set a precedent for full withdrawal on the Golan Heights. This is what we’ve long suspected, but the Israelis have never admitted any of these things. I guess it is a sign that they now are more trustful of us. “I outlined to them the consequences of failure. They informed me that Begin was not going to reject the paper out of hand but would have several levels of action: acquiescence in an issue; approve it, but get cabinet and Knesset confirmation; disapprove it, but let the Knesset make the ultimate decision. Dayan suggested I proceed with a proposal Sadat might accept. At least it would clarify the issue.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 232) See also, Keeping Faith, pp. 382–383. 40 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met members of the Egyptian delegation enroute while bicycling. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No specific time for these encounters is given.
