74
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
my goal to improve relations with the Soviet Union on the basis of reci-
procity, mutual respect and benefit. That goal will have my close per-
sonal attention, as well as that of Secretary of State Vance.
I have read your public remarks with great interest, and they en-
courage me to believe that we share a common desire to enhance and
preserve the prospect of lasting peace.
As I understood your very important speech at Tula,3 the Soviet
Union will not seek superiority in arms, will oppose the concept, and
will require only a defense sufficient to deter any potential adversary.
The United States seeks nothing more or less for itself. With persever-
ance and wisdom therefore our two countries should be in a position to
avoid a new armaments race. I have said to the American people that
my firm goal is to eliminate all nuclear weapons.
There are three areas where progress can be made toward this
goal. A critical first step should be the achievement of a SALT II agree-
ment without delay,4 and an agreement to proceed toward additional
limitations and reductions in strategic weapons. Moreover, I hope we
can promptly conclude an adequately verified comprehensive ban on
all nuclear tests, and also strive to achieve greater openness about our
respective strategic policies. It is also important to renew efforts for
progress in the negotiations for a balanced reduction of forces in Cen-
tral Europe.
We also have a responsibility to pursue policies that will prevent
the troubled areas of the world from exploding into dangerous con-
flicts. The United States will work to promote a peaceful settlement in
the Middle East on the basis of appropriate UN resolutions. Similarly in
Southern Africa we are encouraging all parties to negotiate a peaceful
settlement which promotes security and justice for all.
It is my belief that the USSR can contribute to the realization of
progress toward peace in both of these critical areas.
My Administration attaches importance to the improvement of
our bilateral economic relations, on the basis of mutual and equivalent
benefits to the peoples of both our great countries. At the same time we
cannot be indifferent to the fate of freedom and individual human
rights.
We represent different social systems and our nations are different
in background and experience. Competition over ideals and ideas is in-
evitable between our societies. But it need not prevent a common effort
to shape a world that is more peaceful, just and humane. We live in a
3 Brezhnev’s January 18 speech, which he delivered in Tula, is printed in Current
Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XXIX, number 3 (February 16, 1977), pp. 1–5.
4 The SALT II negotiations, which began in November 1972.
