International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 219 tion and investment. The objectives of growth, price stability, and balance in external payments have proved difficult to reconcile, even in the countries which were thought to have the greatest freedom of maneuver; fear of heightening inflationary expectations compounds the problem. For all these reasons, a significant lag between commitments and execution in economic policy can often be expected. The fact that concerting economic policy is difficult does not mean that we should abandon the task—only that we need to work harder at it and try to learn from experience as we go along. For example, in planning future Summits, it would be wise to recognize that some time must elapse before policies needed to fulfill Summit targets can take effect. More frequent international monitoring of Summit results may also help to identify shortfalls in time for useful corrective action. Meanwhile, the job is to get on with fulfilling the commitments made at London. Growth and stabilization are still the dominant needs for the countries that pledged to achieve these goals. The two needs are interdependent: The strong countries’ prospects for non-inflationary growth would be damaged by a revival of inflationary pressures in other countries. The stabilization programs that some countries have to follow involve substantial social, political, and economic costs, and it will be difficult for them to continue these programs unless the agreed Summit strategy for non-inflationary recovery is being visibly fulfilled. Whatever happens to 1977 growth targets, therefore, it will be crucial that overall improvement be achieved in 1978. Thus the November meeting of the Economic Policy Committee of the OECD will be of great importance.9 Growth must also be reflected in a much better equilibrium of balance of payments. This will require a reduction or elimination of existing large external surpluses. Failing this, it will be difficult for other countries to reduce their deficits, and existing protectionist pressures will grow dangerously. So far, the international financial system has been able to cope with the counterpart deficits to the OPEC surpluses. But the problems of doing so without further contraction and unemployment will be intensified, in the face of persistent OPEC surpluses, if the only strong economy accepting a corresponding deficit is the United States. Even if the Summit targets are achieved, major economic problems will remain. Inflation will be difficult to reduce to manageable proportions, and the threat of its revival will be a continuing deterrent to precipitate expansion. Unemployment will be hard to eliminate without structural measures to deal with the special problems of young people 9 The OECD Economic Policy Committee dispenses macroeconomic policy advice.
