558  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
EC–22.	
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Ecuadoran 
Foreign Minister (Chiriboga)1
Washington, December 7, 1960, 2:56 p.m.
Excellency:
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram of 
October 23, 19602 in which Your Excellency informs me that the gov-
ernment and people of Ecuador proclaim their rejection of the Protocol 
of Rio de Janeiro of 1942 and state the reason on which this position 
is based. In full agreement with the other guarantor powers to whom 
Your Excellency addressed yourself simultaneously in identical terms, 
I take the liberty of making the following response to Your Excellency’s 
remarks, which are a cause of concern to the powers guaranteeing the 
Protocol.
It is a basic principle of international law that the unilateral win 
of one of the parties is not sufficient to invalidate a boundary treaty 
nor to liberate it from the obligations imposed therein. Only mutual 
agreement by both parties can modify its provisions or attribute com-
petence to an international tribunal to judge questions which may arise 
regarding such an instrument. For these reasons, until the sovereign 
and agreed will of Ecuador and Peru otherwise dispose, my country 
considers that the Protocol of Rio de Janeiro—signed and ratified by 
Ecuador and Peru and already applied in almost its entirety through 
practical acts of demarcation to which the parties themselves attributed 
­definitive character—is a valid instrument and should be complied 
with. Moreover, my government considers that any doubts which may 
arise between the contracting parties in the process of practical exe-
cution of the Protocol in the as yet undemarcated part of the frontier 
should be amicably resolved in accordance with Article 7 of that instru-
ment with the assistance of the guaranteeing powers. Based on this 
viewpoint and in its capacity as a guarantor country my Government, 
faithful to formal undertaking assumed under the terms of the Protocol 
and animated by the most sincere feeling of friendship for both con-
tracting parties, is disposed at any moment, in concert with the other 
guarantors, to render them its assistance in search of a happy solution 
of any disagreement between them.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 622.233/12–760. This telegram, evi-
dently unnumbered, was drafted by Richard A. Poole, Officer in Charge of Peruvian 
Affairs and John T. Dreyfuss, Officer in Charge of Ecuadoran Affairs; and initialed by 
the Secretary of State. The Foreign Ministers of the four Guarantor States (Argentina, 
Brazil, Chile, and the U.S.), named in Article V of the Rio Protocol of 1942 sent identi-
cal telegrams, with the necessary changes, to Ecuadoran Foreign Minister Chiriboga on 
December 7.
2 Not printed; 622.233/10–2760.
