1270  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
not the rule. In general, we record about 300 seismic disturbances per 
year in the USSR above 100 KT, of which about 75% are identified as 
earthquakes, leaving about 75 disturbances which cannot be identified 
either as man-­made or natural.
The problem of detecting and identifying clandestine tests in the 
environment (surface to 50 kilofeet in the USSR) under discussion will 
depend principally upon the success of the combined nuclear and 
acoustic components of the Long Range Detection System. For the pur­
pose of studying the effect of these two techniques, AFOAT–1 detection 
data on 25 Soviet tests and 66 U.S. tests in the range of 3.5 to 50 KT were 
selected. U.S. data are fairly well spread out through all of the seasons. 
Soviet data does not include many tests in the summer and spring.
Acoustic detection at individual stations has a marked diurnal vari­
ation due to the fact that noise levels at night are normally lower by 
a factor of 2 or more than they are in the daytime. A marked seasonal 
variation is noted in the detection of acoustic waves, since stratosphere 
wind patterns in the winter time are most favorable for transmission 
toward the east and, conversely, stratosphere wind patterns in the sum­
mer favor transmission toward the west. Stations to the north or south 
in general show relatively smaller seasonal effects than do east-­west 
stations. Normally, the stratosphere winds permit longer ranges of 
detection in summer and winter than in the spring and fall.
Further complicating the acoustic picture is the fact that the ampli­
tude of pressure waves from an explosion varies greatly due to fluc­
tuations in winds and temperatures encountered in the atmosphere at 
altitudes above the known meteorology. Pressure amplitudes are only 
very qualitatively related to yield.
In estimating the capabilities of the acoustic net, it has been nec­
essary to rely mainly on actual results obtained from U.S. and Russian 
nuclear tests. These estimates cannot be precise but they are believed 
to be as realistic as it is possible to make them at present. Four ranges 
of detectability were established, as follows: excellent—90 to 100%; 
good—60 to 90%; fair—30 to 60%; poor—0 to 30%. The result of the 
study is shown in Table II.
