Romania
623
201.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 12, 1978, 1 p.m.
SUBJECT
Lunch with President of Romania
PARTICIPANTS
Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Adviser
Nicolae Ceausescu, President of Romania
SUMMARY. During lunch Secretary Vance and Dr. Brzezinski dis-
cussed with President Ceausescu the status of the North-South dialogue
and how most effectively to include the socialist countries, particularly
the Soviet Union, in that dialogue; the future leadership of the Soviet
Union and U.S. relations with China. In the latter discussion President
Ceausescu urged early normalization and indicated that China would
play a much more important role in world affairs. Secretary Vance
and Dr. Brzezinski explained the domestic situation and the need for
pursuing priorities in U.S. foreign policy. END SUMMARY.
Secretary Vance asked President Ceausescu his views on how to
proceed on the North-South dialogue. Ceausescu said that the current
situation does not hold much hope, that developing countries need to
play a larger role and the socialist countries in particular should be
more deeply involved. Secretary Vance agreed. Ceausescu said that
developing countries are not playing a sufficient role. He knows
because Romania is a developing country. He said that the United
Nations mechanism is good for discussion of North-South issues but
needs improvement. If we wish to overcome the present economic
crisis it is necessary that all countries work actively to improve not
only their production capacity but their satisfaction of consumer needs.
Secretary Vance observed that the most pressing item in the North-
South agenda is the establishment of the Common Fund because of its
symbolic and its substantive nature.
The Secretary then asked what the President would recommend
as ways of achieving greater participation from the socialist countries
in the North-South dialogue. President Ceausescu said that the socialist
countries, particularly the Soviet Union, have underestimated the prob-
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, Vance EXDIS MemCons, 1978. Confidential;
Exdis. Drafted by Luers; approved in S/S on April 19. The meeting took place in the
Madison Room at the Department of State.
