United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 127 On the IA–ECOSOC, Mr. Dillon said our views are identical. As to commodities, we believe in effort to prevent violent swings in price. The producers should get together but should do so on a commodity-­ by-­commodity basis. In some cases the same commodity is produced in other parts of the world and this means we must have a world agreement. As to coffee, efforts must be made to strengthen the existing arrangements, and to do it in the coffee study group. There should be some way of working out statistical collaboration between the U.S. and the coffee countries, and thus help the coffee countries police their own agreement. We will have to talk to the Africans, but feel they are getting closer all the time to full collaboration. Sr. Eleta then proceeded to emphasize the limited credit potential of the Central American countries. If they are going to give priority to borrowings for hospitals, schools, and so on, they will put down on their ability to borrow for productive economic purposes. Even though they don’t like grants or endowments, Central America needs them. Mr. Dillon replied that when he had presented the new plan to Congress he told them the bulk would be distributed through the Inter-American Bank on the basis described, but the U.S. would reserve the right to utilize part of it for schools and other projects of that nature. We would be prepared to look at these through our IGA mechanism. There was no objection to this so long as it was limited to non-­productive projects. Education is, indeed, basic. There are tremendous accumulated needs in housing, but unless there are more job opportunities people should not be encouraged, through better housing to move to the cities. In the same way it is not a good idea to build hospitals if there are no doctors to man them and equipment to use. In this social development program we don’t intend to push the people to move too rapidly and get out of phase with economic development. The self-­help type of housing is best. Here Mr. Mann interjected that the first priority in housing would go toward fostering building and loan associations, and then mobilize local resources. Sr. Eleta spoke once more, repeating himself on basis commodities. Sr. Buess of Honduras then said that all six republics recognized that the main results would depend upon their own efforts. Some of these republics have been trying to inaugurate their own economics. It has required grant sacrifices and they have to be gaining momentum on a Central American common market, thus laying the basis of future development for greater production our greater consumption. Eventually they hope to became one political unit. Mr. Dillon said the U.S. strongly supports that concept and will help Central America [illegible in the original]. Mr. Dillon will speak to Mr. [illegible in the original] who arrives this afternoon, to see if we can’t get
