Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 265 Soviet connection is under control and that those managing it know what they want. Simply put, we may have something of a problem in how the public sees our conduct of Soviet Affairs. Pat Caddell’s recent poll is one of a number of straws in the wind. It shows a considerable negative shift in opinion concerning performance on Soviet policy and the related area of human rights. To some extent, attitudes toward our Soviet policy reflect a broader concern (one that you are familiar with) that we are trying to do too much too quickly on too many different fronts. To the extent that we can convey coherence and control in our Soviet policy, we will counter this perception and build public confidence in our general foreign policy efforts. A key issue is whether we should try to wrap up CTB with SALT in the near term. There is a strong connection between them in that both are about strategic nuclear capabilities—and to conclude both at the same time would be a powerful realization and demonstration of your commitment to the control of nuclear weapons. Indeed, at one point we accelerated our CTB efforts when it seemed that SALT might be indefinitely stalled. This said, it is not clear that it is feasible to get to a CTB in the desired timeframe without conceding points important to us. Indeed, if the Soviets sense that we are eager to wrap CTB up with SALT, they would have a major incentive to link the two and try to wring more concessions from us. There is also a good risk that Congress and the public, rather than applauding the simultaneous conclusion of SALT and CTB as two blows struck for peace, instead will question whether we bought the double deal with unwarranted concessions. PNE’s, for example, is an area where we may ultimately have to compromise. But it is such an article of faith on the left and the right that they should stop, that any such concession in the SALT II timeframe will be scored as a retreat. On balance, I think we need a controlled and phased strategy to guide us through the minefields I have sketched above. I think that a step-by-step approach is not only the best way to handle the Soviets substantively, but also to convey a sense of competence and control to Congress and to the public, and to avoid the sort of progressive euphoria which, in the past, has been followed with sharp questions and suspicions about what it really cost. In essence, I am talking of building and staging our relations and agreements with the Soviets over the span of your first term in office. The timetable might look something like this: —A SALT II agreement, combined with a Summit, in late winter or early spring after Panama. It could well take us that long to get there in any event.
