Comprehensive Test Ban
445
7. UK Rep said he would report discussions back to London and
would receive instructions in the near future.
8. Text of US Rep’s talking notes follows: Begin text:
—The overall Western objective for the separate agreement should
be to ensure effective verification of the USSR without undercutting
our goal of obtaining broad non-nuclear weapon state adherence to the
treaty.
—We thus have an interest in making effective verification proce-
dures as palatable and negotiable as possible to the Soviets. Our judg-
ment is that we are more likely to achieve Soviet acceptance of such
procedures if we make the arrangements as simple as possible and do
not in any way appear to be subjecting them to double jeopardy.
—We also have an interest in avoiding the perception of discrimi-
natory verification arrangements. In our view, the separate agreement
will be more palatable to the non-nuclear states if it is perceived to be
based on such factors as special mutual security concerns (such as those
between the two super-powers) and geographical considerations (large
land masses with locations suitable for evasive testing).
—We both also have certain domestic considerations to take into
account. We understand that the form of British association could be of
some importance to you, and that there will be other questions, in-
cluding, for example, the costs that may be involved. For us, it is impor-
tant that the separate agreement be seen as capable of operating in a
streamlined and prompt manner.
—For these reasons, we believe that emphasis should be given to
the bilateral, as opposed to the trilateral (or nuclear weapon state), as-
pects of the agreement.
—At the same time, we recognize and welcome the UK’s interest
in being associated. We believe it is important for the measures con-
tained in the agreement to benefit from UK expertise and participation.
And as a leading nuclear weapon power, and the only other nuclear
power to join the treaty from the start, the UK should be able, through a
practical form of association, to obtain a higher level of assurance re-
garding Soviet compliance than would be available to the non-nuclear
parties.
—Taking these factors into consideration, we have devised an ap-
proach to UK association that we believe would meet overall Western
objectives. The agreement we have in mind would be bilateral, with the
US and USSR as its parties. At the same time, the agreement would be
developed on a trilateral basis, with the UK playing an active role in the
negotiations.
—The agreement, under our suggested approach, would apply to
activities on US and Soviet territory. As far as OSIs are concerned, it
