passes a mandatory statute directed against a court of law. The Council and
the Assembly were free to make any request to the Court they pleased. He
considered it the duty of the Court to seek information, and it was not for
the Council and the Assembly of the League to tell the Court if the United
States had an interest in the case. This the Court could do itself. In short, he
opposed the reservation as a direction by the United States to the Court, and
emphasized the necessity for Senate action if the United States gave consent
and the subsequent delay attendant thereto. He believed that the
reservations were prepared on the principle of equality of treatment which
was stressed by Senator Walsh in Senate debates. The United States should
be put on the same plane, as regards obligations and privileges, as other
members.
Sir Francis Bell (New Zealand) devoted a long speech to prove that the
United States was asking preferential treatment and that the power of veto
should not exist. In his opinion, League Council members were not at
Geneva entirely as representatives of governments to protect their own
countries, but were also there to protect the world and all countries. No
member who exercized the right of veto to protect his own country could
retain a seat on the Council and therefore a nation, not on the Council,
should not enjoy such a right.
It became evident during the last three meetings of the Conference that two
very definite points of view had developed. The first, headed by Great
Britain, France and Italy, wished to have the Council propose to the United
States adhesion to the Court on exactly the same footing as Council
members. The second, headed by Belgium, wished to ask the Permanent
Court for a ruling as to Council procedure in asking an advisory opinion. If
it were then found that the American reservations demanded preferential
treatment for the United States, it was hoped that the Senate would be
willing to remodel the reservations. The first school, on the other hand,
believed that a Court ruling has but little value, as there still exists the
obstacle created by the right of abstention from voting of parties directly
interested in the question, and the right of veto in questions in which the
United States is interested is claimed in the reservation.
