Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
71
33.
Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of
State1
Helsinki, June 20, 1978, 0633Z
1926. US ASAT Delegation 0017. Mil addressees handle as Specat.
NASA for Krueger. Subject: ASAT Discussions—Review of First Round.
1. ASAT first round held in Helsinki June 8–16, 1978. Instructions
to U.S. Delegation transmitted State 143176.2
2. The Soviet side came to Helsinki prepared to discuss anti-
satellite topics, and gave every indication that they take this subject se-
riously. They responded as follows to U.S. statements that objective of
discussions should be a comprehensive agreement to limit develop-
ment and retention of ASAT systems and to prohibit attacks on satel-
lites and to U.S. comments on an initial arrangement to prohibit
damage or destruction of satellites and to suspend testing of ASAT
systems:
—The two sides should use language concerning these talks which
would not imply constraining the scope of an eventual agreement to
concerns about the safety of satellites; we should talk about threats to
any object launched into outer space (including, e.g., objects on inter-
planetary trajectories) other than ballistic missiles;
—Soviet side argued that the two sides should focus attention ini-
tially on developing and putting into force and independent formal
agreement prohibiting specified hostile actions against space objects,
without conditions as to progress toward or terms of a future compre-
hensive agreement.
—The Soviet side did not specify unambiguously what (hostile)
actions they would seek to prohibit, but they made clear mention of
kinds of acts of lesser violence than damage and destruction. In partic-
ular, they talked about a prohibition on changing the orbit of a satellite
even though the orbit-changing operation left the satellite undamaged,
and they mentioned prohibition on unspecified forms of interference.
—The Soviet side reserved their freedom to advocate formulating
such an agreement in a way which would permit actions against “un-
lawful” space objects, although they also said that they were not men-
tioning their concern about “unlawful” space objects as a pretext for re-
taining or developing and deploying an anti-satellite system;
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780256–0548. Se-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent Immediate to the National Security Council, the Secre-
tary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration.
2 See footnote 1, Document 32.
