Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1129 are, of course, the only basis for enduring agreements between nations. Deep reductions are especially appropriate as we move beyond confrontation to cooperation. The treaty’s provisions increase stability by a major reduction in the most destabilizing and dangerous of weapons, land-based ballistic missiles and their warheads and by placing restrictions on specific types of strategic weapons. At the same time, the treaty allows the necessary flexibility that assures both sides’ security as we move toward a new world order. If our countries are to continue on the path of cooperation and trust, they must avoid misunderstanding which can lead to mistrust. Perhaps the most important contribution of this treaty is its contribution to increasing predictability and transparency. A protocol containing over 80 different types of notifications will help both sides understand the strategic military activities of the other side. Twelve different forms of inspections and the permanent monitoring of certain ballistic missile production in each country will provide firm assurances that treaty obligations are being met. Finally, the ban on telemetry encryption, along with specific measures to improve monitoring, will lead to a new era in openness between our nations. Mr. Ambassador, treaties are agreed to by governments, but they are created by people. This treaty would not have been possible without the dedicated people on both sides of this table. In this regard, I would like to thank four groups of people; Ambassador Youri K. Nazarkin and his experts, my experts, both side’s interpreters and translators and our long-suffering families. It is because of our experts’ hard work, constructive ideas and non-polemic discussions that we are able to initial this treaty today. The professionalism and dedication expressed by you and your people have made this an experience I will always cherish. Likewise, a special thanks needs to go to our families, most of whom are in our respective countries. Family separation is always difficult, and the spouses and children of those people in this room have made their contribution and deserve our thanks. Mr. Ambassador, completing this treaty has been worth the enormous effort because it worked. We have met our mutual goals: the risk of war will be decreased and the stability of our strategic relationship enhanced. The world is a better place because of our work. On behalf of my government and my delegation I congratulate you on this great accomplishment. Thank you. (End text of statement) 8. Ambassador Nazarkin thanked Ambassador Brooks and then made the following statement: (Begin text of statement)
