Paraguay 995 Maintain policy of strict non-­intervention in Paraguay’s internal affairs, but a. Encourage leaders of Government to move toward more democratic forms. 2. Economic Continue to support Paraguay’s stabilization program with financial assistance for sound development projects but with emphasis on finishing projects now under way. Export-Import Bank Loans: Sympathetically consider applications for specific documented development projects with Paraguay’s debt carrying capacity. Specifically, support Paraguay’s request for additional $917,500 to complete waterworks project. Development Loan Fund: Support Paraguayan requests for loans to a. cover local currency costs of Export-Import Bank projects already under way. b. cover both dollar and local currency costs of a basic communications system and surfacing of road to Brazil. c. cover dollar costs of expansion of electric power facilities at Asunción, Encarnación and Villarrica. d. provide small dollar credits of developmental nature to business and industry through a development bank-­type institution. P.L. 4802 Agreement: Support sale of surplus agricultural products to Paraguay when this will not interfere with normal marketings of other supplying countries. 2 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, see 68 Stat. 454. PA–4. Editorial Note On July 10, 1958, the Export-Import Bank of Washington announced a $1 million credit to Paraguay to finance installation of Asunción’s first water supply system. An original $7 million credit to Corporación de Obras Sanitarias de Asunción (CORPOSANA) was authorized in 1954 to provide a 15 million gallon-per-day water supply and distribution system for Asunción. The additional credit would enable CORPOSANA to purchase the necessary construction materials and equipment in the U.S. in order to increase the number of service connections, in the water system. Documentation concerning the subject is contained in ARA/ EST Files, Lot 62 D 354, “Eximbank.”
