1276  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Hemisphere would produce very poor capability for shots in the low 
megaton range. Electromagnetic capability for detection of tests in the 
Southern Hemisphere is unusually poor because of the high frequency 
of thunderstorms in the inter-­tropical front along the Equator. The 
ability to collect samples of debris in the Southern Hemisphere is very 
limited.
e. Summary of Existing Capabilities and Limitations.
(1) Surface or Air Burst 50 kilofeet within the USSR.
(a) The electromagnetic technique may possibly detect shots 
within the USSR of 25 KT or greater but requires a determination of 
time independently by some other geophysical technique to take care 
of the sorting problem.
(b) The seismic technique is capable of detecting surface or low air 
bursts of 100 KT or larger.
(c) The acoustic system is capable of detecting tests of 15 KT or 
larger.
(d) The nuclear technique is capable of detecting tests as small as 
3 KT as long as the debris does not rise much above 20,000 feet.
(e) The overall detection capability for the Atomic Energy Detec­
tion System is excellent (90–100%) for surface or air burst tests of 10 KT 
and greater between the surface and 50 kilofeet.
(2) Subsurface Tests. The seismic system presently has an excellent 
capability of detecting subsurface shots of about 10 KT or larger over 
90–95% of the area of the USSR. Subsurface tests as large as 10 to 20 KT 
in the remaining 5–10% of the USSR might escape detection by the pres­
ent AEDS. It is estimated from Figure 8 that a total of about 140 earth­
quakes per year of 10 KT or larger occur in the USSR. Identification of 
about half this number is possible, leaving about 70 events which may 
be either explosions or earthquakes.
(3) High Altitude Tests. It is not possible to evaluate the present 
capability of the AEDS to detect high altitude tests.
(4) Nuclear Tests Conducted in Remote Geographical Locations. Tests in 
remote areas in the Southern Hemisphere of from several hundred kilo­
tons to a megaton or two might escape detection by the present Atomic 
Energy Detection System.
Summarizing, the present Long Range Detection System will detect 
and identify surface or air bursts below 50 kilofeet in the USSR having 
a yield of 10 KT or larger. It will detect about 140 subsurface events per 
year (by seismic means) of 10 KT yield or larger of which only 70 will 
be positively identified as earthquakes leaving 70 subsurface events of 
unknown origin. The detection capability for very high altitude bursts 
over the USSR is unknown and for tests in remote geographical loca­
tions is limited to the high kiloton or low megaton range.
