512 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement I am attaching a brief description of the functions of the Inter-­ American Peace Committee.2 Douglas Dillon Acting Secretary 2 Not printed. In a note to Dillon dated May 24, 1960, Goodpaster stated, “As I indicated by telephone, the President, after considering your memorandum of May twentieth concerning a ‘Report on Dominican Republic by Inter-American Peace Committee,’ expressed agreement to the course of action proposed, stating that the report should be forthright, but not caustic or violent.” (Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Dominican Republic”) DR–24. Memorandum of a Conversation between Edwin N. Clark and John C. Hill, Jr.1  Washington, May 25, 1960 SUBJECT General Clark’s Role in U.S. Policy Toward the Dominican Republic. After General Clark had indicated that he could not come to the Department on the afternoon of May 24 or the morning of May 25, he accepted Mr. Rubottom’s offer that I ride out to the airport with him at noon today to brief him about developments with respect to the Dominican Republic which affected the plan on which he had been working. Accordingly, I had a talk with General Clark at the National Airport. Following Mr. Rubottom’s instructions, I told him that the Secretary had wanted Mr. Rubottom to bring him up to date with respect to certain factors bearing on our planning for the Dominican Republic: 1. We had had a number of indications, confirmed by our consultations with Ambassador Farland here, that the Generalissimo had no intentions of retiring from the Dominican scene but that, on the contrary, he intended to go forward with plans for an opposition party and elections solely as window dressing. In this connection, I showed General Clark an extract of a conversation recently held by an American with the Generalissimo in which the Generalissimo had stated that he would not even consider the proposal made to him by General Clark. The Generalissimo had 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.00/5–2560. Secret. Drafted by Hill on May 26.
