578 Foreign Relations, 1958Γאף1960, Volume III, Supplement of high yield weapons suitable for use in bombs or missile warheads. They also apparently sought to improve low yield weapons from the standpoint of size and economy of fissionable materials, probably in order to meet air defense as well as other requirements. 119. We estimate that at present the Soviet stockpile could include nuclear weapons in a range of yields from about 2 KT to about 8 MT; we do not exclude the possibility that untested bombs with yields of as much as 20 MT could be in stockpile on an emergency or provisional basis.12 We have insufficient evidence to support a firm estimate of the numbers and types of nuclear weapons in the Soviet stockpile. There is, however, considerable evidence from the Soviet nuclear test program and from other intelligence sources, providing indications as to what types of weapons the USSR may be stockpiling and on what deliv┬¡ ery systems it contemplates. Based on an analysis of various factors involved, we believe that: (a) nuclear weapons, including high-┬¡yield weapons suitable for bomber delivery, are now widely deployed to Long Range Aviation units, and the Soviets will seek to provide such weapons for all bomb┬¡ ers of this component which are designated for weapons delivery; (b) nuclear warheads are being and will be produced in numbers sufficient to equip substantially all operational submarine-┬¡launched missiles; and ground-┬¡launched ballistic missiles of 700 n.m. range and greater; (c) Soviet doctrine contemplates the tactical use of nuclear weap┬¡ ons by ground, tactical air, and naval forces, and some such weapons are probably now available for this purpose; (d) the SovietsΓאש emphasis on air defense will lead them to provide nuclear warheads for some proportion of their surface-┬¡to-┬¡air and air-┬¡to-┬¡ air missiles, but a sizable allocation for such purposes has probably not yet been made. 120. Considering the estimated availability of fissionable mate┬¡ rials and the level of Soviet nuclear weapons technology, we believe that at present the USSR probably possesses sufficient nuclear weap┬¡ ons to support a major attack by its long-┬¡range striking forces, but that current stockpiles are probably insufficient for large-┬¡scale allo┬¡ cation to air defense and tactical use. We estimate a substantial and high priority Soviet program for the expansion of fissionable material production through the period of this estimate, and we believe that the USSR is capable of considerable further improvement in nuclear 12 For a detailed estimate of the present and future Soviet nuclear weapons devel┬¡ opment potential, see NIE 11Γאף2Γאף58, Γא£The Soviet Atomic Energy Program,Γא¥ 14 January 1958 (Limited Distribution). See also the forthcoming NIE 11Γאף2Γאף59. [Footnote is in the original.]
