374 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement the Cuban Foreign Minister had changed completely. This indicated to President Lleras that even the activities of the Cuban Foreign Minister are directed by and are under the control of the Communists in Cuba and that no Cuban Government official can remain in office unless he follows the Communist Party line. Ambassador McIntosh mentioned to President Lleras that he had read the statement in the Bogotá press that the Government of Colombia had requested the recall of the Cuban Ambassador and asked if this were correct. President Lleras stated that what had happened was that Foreign Minister Turbine at San José had told the Cuban Foreign Minister that Colombia did not like the present Cuban Ambassador at Bogotá, Adolfo Rodríguez de la Vega, that he was very rude, and that the Colombians would be pleased if he were to be replaced by another, more suitable representative. Roa told Turbay that the Cuban Ambassador would shortly leave for Havana and Roa would see that he did not return to Colombia. However, it developed that the Cuban Ambassador made a very short stay in Havana and actually returned to Bogotá prior to the return of Roa to Havana. Upon his return to Bogotá, the Cuban Ambassador took exception to remarks made by the Colombian Minister of Labor and wrote a note to the Colombian Foreign Ministry which the Colombian Government considered highly objectionable. In addition, the Cuban Ambassador wrote an objectionable letter to one of the Bogotá newspapers, and, furthermore, released the text of his note to the Colombian Foreign Office shortly after its dispatch without awaiting a reply from the Foreign Office. Following this, the Cuban Government recalled their Ambassador to Colombia without awaiting any official demand for his recall by the Colombian Government. President Lleras asked Secretary Dillon for his comments regarding the current situation between the Soviet and Red China, referring particularly to the newspaper articles indicating considerable friction. Secretary Dillon said that he thought the differences between the Soviet and Red China at this time were not serious and possibly had been exaggerated in the press, but that, nevertheless, the differences could become much more serious in the future. President Lleras referred to the present political and economic situation in the Argentine and said the situation appeared to be highly unfavorable and quite critical. Some comments were exchanged regarding the difficult situation faced by President Frondizi. President Lleras expressed his appreciation of the assistance being given to Colombia by the United States in the form of the total credit of $70 million just announced by the Export-Import Bank and the Development Loan Fund. Secretary Dillon told President Lleras that we were very glad to cooperate with and help Colombia and that the United States admired the manner in which the Colombian Government was attacking its problems.
