of the minor child shall be determined by the place of birth of the father or of the mother. I suggest that the following provision be added: “If the minor child is accompanied by both parents its nationality shall be determined by the country of birth of the father.” With respect to Section 11 (a) (2), I desire to invite attention to the fact that apparently this Section creates a class of immigration certificates that are not to be counted as quota certificates and are also not issued as non-quota certificates. The issuance of such certificates may cause difficulties in the regulation of the number of immigration certificates to be issued by Consular Officers. I believe that a more definite provision on this subject should be included in the Act. Section 11 (b) incorporates provisions contained in the present Quota Act. In administering these provisions certain difficulties have arisen which, I believe, it would be advisable to remedy in the proposed legislation, as follows: Section 11 (b) (1) refers to changes in political boundaries in foreign countries occurring subsequent to 1890 and resulting in the creation of new countries, the governments of which are recognized by the United States. This provision does not deal with the establishment of a new selfgoverning dominion within the British Empire since 1890. Under the provisions of the present law consideration was given to the matter of establishing a separate quota for the Irish Free State which is a new selfgoverning dominion. It appeared, however, that such a separate quota was not warranted by the terms of the law. For administrative reasons it would be helpful if separate quotas could be given the self-governing dominions. Reference is made in this connection to the fact that the census of 1890 does not contain a separate enumeration for New Zealand or the Union of South Africa. It is therefore believed that the following amendment should be added after the word “States” in line 18, page 15, the words “or in the establishment of self-governing dominions”. I may also observe that questions have arisen under the provisions of the present law, which are incorporated in Section 11 (b) (2) concerning the establishment of quotas covering the territories which had been transferred by the government exercising sovereignty therein in 1910 but where formal recognition of a new sovereign had not been extended by the Government
