plebiscite, and necessarily to deal with any questions which arise as to attempts by coercion, intimidation, or fraud to interfere with the plebiscite. The Commission is entitled to require that Chile shall exercise her authority in such manner as to protect the plebiscite and shall take all appropriate measures to prevent the abuse of that authority by the fostering or permitting of coercion, intimidation or fraud. In expressing the most earnest hope that the Chilean Government will not only issue adequate instructions for the conduct of Chilean officials in the Provinces in dispute but will also see that they are faithfully carried out in order that a free and fair plebiscite as contemplated by the Arbitrator’s Award may be effected, Mr. Kellogg desires to add that it is quite inadmissible that Chile after having invoked the President as Arbitrator, and having insisted upon a plebiscite and upon the recognition of her administrative authority under the Treaty pending the plebiscite should attempt to use that administrative authority to thwart a fair plebiscite. It is hardly necessary to allude to the regrettable situation that would arise should the Plebiscitary Commission formally find, and the Arbitrator, on the matter coming before him, should be compelled to hold, that, on account of the action of the Chilean authorities in opposition to the terms of the Award, a free and fair plebiscite could not be held. The Secretary of State has also been informed that, in connection with the work of the Special Commission on Boundaries, not only were adequate penalties not being meted out to those officers guilty of molesting Peruvians connected with the Boundary Commission but also that adequate measures were not taken to see that they did not recur. Conditions were such that the Peruvian members of the Commission were finally obliged to withdraw until the situation should be remedied. Under the terms of submission the Arbitrator was empowered to determine the claims pending with regard to Tarata and Chilcaya, that is, to determine the northern and southern boundaries of the territory in question. The Award of the Arbitrator sets forth his decision as to the principle which should govern the delimitation of the boundaries. The Arbitrator reserved the power to appoint a Special Commission to draw the boundary lines of the territory covered by Article III of the Treaty of Ancon in accordance with the Award. As the Arbitrator had the authority to determine these boundaries, and it became necessary for the purpose of this determination to ascertain the Peruvian provincial boundaries of Tacna and Arica, it was competent for the Arbitrator to provide for an agency to make investigation, draw the actual lines and report. The Special Commission is the agency constituted for this purpose. The Arbitrator is still in control of the proceeding; his work as Arbitrator is not finished and will not be finished until the boundary lines are fixed. It was for this reason that
