January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1383 Attachment Report Prepared by the President’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz)7 undated PROGRESS IN EGYPTIAN-ISRAELI NORMALIZATION ARRANGEMENTS Since the signing of the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty and the exchange of instruments of ratification on April 25, 1979, Israel has completed on schedule its withdrawal from the Sinai to the interim line specified in the Treaty, including turning over to Egypt the Sinai oil fields. Similarly, Egypt has scrupulously adhered to its commitments under the Treaty. After the parties established normal and friendly relations on January 25, 1980, they exchanged resident Ambassadors one month later and then began negotiations on the normalization measures called for in the Treaty. In March 1980, they signed three major agreements for cultural relations, civil aviation, and trade and commerce. In addition, the Israelis and Egyptians concluded five memoranda of understanding covering communications and postal services, tourism, agriculture, land and sea transport, and arrangements for the travel of Palestinians from Gaza to Egypt. Flights between Israel and Egypt began immediately and are now being expanded to six times a week. Telephone and postal links have been established between the countries, and the newspapers and periodicals of one appear in the streets of the other. Tourists are free to travel from one country to the other and the number of official delegations exchanging visits has been increasing. Teams have been exchanged by the respective Ministries of Agriculture, and they are coordinating their activities to prevent the spread of animal diseases such as Rift Valley fever. Israeli agricultural products including eggs, poultry, seeds and agricultural machinery are beginning to appear in Egyptian markets and an agreement has been reached to exchange agricultural and industrial exhibits to promote trade. President Sadat has recently agreed to the overland transit of goods through El-Arish to supplement the previously agreed access by vessels of each country to the ports of the other. 7 No classification marking.
