January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1383
Attachment
Report Prepared by the President’s Special Representative
for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz)7
undated
PROGRESS IN EGYPTIAN-ISRAELI NORMALIZATION
ARRANGEMENTS
Since the signing of the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty and the ex-
change of instruments of ratification on April 25, 1979, Israel has com-
pleted on schedule its withdrawal from the Sinai to the interim line
specified in the Treaty, including turning over to Egypt the Sinai oil
fields. Similarly, Egypt has scrupulously adhered to its commitments
under the Treaty.
After the parties established normal and friendly relations on Jan-
uary 25, 1980, they exchanged resident Ambassadors one month later
and then began negotiations on the normalization measures called for
in the Treaty. In March 1980, they signed three major agreements for
cultural relations, civil aviation, and trade and commerce. In addition,
the Israelis and Egyptians concluded five memoranda of under-
standing covering communications and postal services, tourism, agri-
culture, land and sea transport, and arrangements for the travel of Pal-
estinians from Gaza to Egypt.
Flights between Israel and Egypt began immediately and are now
being expanded to six times a week. Telephone and postal links have
been established between the countries, and the newspapers and peri-
odicals of one appear in the streets of the other.
Tourists are free to travel from one country to the other and the
number of official delegations exchanging visits has been increasing.
Teams have been exchanged by the respective Ministries of Agricul-
ture, and they are coordinating their activities to prevent the spread of
animal diseases such as Rift Valley fever.
Israeli agricultural products including eggs, poultry, seeds and ag-
ricultural machinery are beginning to appear in Egyptian markets and
an agreement has been reached to exchange agricultural and industrial
exhibits to promote trade. President Sadat has recently agreed to the
overland transit of goods through El-Arish to supplement the previ-
ously agreed access by vessels of each country to the ports of the other.
7 No classification marking.
