Human Rights 65 need to reach new members of the affected committees to build up support. Secretary Blumenthal stated that we are appointing strong new directors to the IFI’s who, he hoped, would be able to deal with many of the concerns that had been raised. Achieving the 25 per cent limit would require time, and he hoped it could be done by getting contributions increased from others. 24. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated SUMMIT MEETING London, May 7–8, 1977 I. U.S. Objectives We should use this meeting to explain the Administration’s human rights policy and its importance, and to seek our allies’ understanding and support for our efforts.2 We should reassure them that this will be a realistic, sustained, cooperative effort; that we are not engaging in a single-handed moral crusade. —If our consultations with the Congress permit it by this time, we might use this meeting to inform our allies of our intention to press for U.S. accession to and ratification of the UN human rights covenants, the convention on racial discrimination, and the genocide convention. —To the extent we have general agreement by early May, we might also advise these governments that we hope to develop a consensus among the members of the international financial institutions on 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770044–1091. Confidential. Drafted by Spear, Rovine, and Vogelgesang on March 9. Concurred in by Daniel O’Donohue (P), Derian, Hartman, Dobbins, Winder, Christenson, and Tarnoff. O’Donohue and Tarnoff initialed the memorandum; Spear initialed for the other clearing officials. Sent under cover of a March 10 memorandum from Borg to Brzezinski. (Ibid.) Another copy is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects—Henry Owen, Box 28, Summit: London (Human Rights), 2–5/77. 2 The President departed Washington for London on May 5 in advance of the G–7 Economic Summit. For the text of the Joint Declaration issued in London at the conclusion of the Summit on May 8, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 819–824. Documentation on the Summit, including the records of the sessions, is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume III, Foreign Economic Policy. Carter also attended a four-nation May 9 meeting on Berlin before departing for Geneva to meet with Syrian President Asad. He then returned to London for the May 10 North Atlantic Council meeting. The President’s remarks made in Washington and London, the transcript of a news conference following the summit, and texts of the joint declaration of the international summit meeting, the declaration on Berlin, and NAC communique´ are printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 6, 1977, pp. 581–607.
