International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
495
sukawa that a swap without these Japanese actions would not have
sufficient effect on the exchange markets to be worth activating is firm
U.S. position, that we are convinced 4 trillion yen stimulus is essential if
Japan’s Summit commitment to 7 percent growth is to be fulfilled, and
that we believe change in discount rate is needed to influence capital
flows. These views should be communicated to Fukuda as a matter of
great urgency and highest importance.2
2. Background: Following information is for Ambassador’s back-
ground: Building on message from Prime Minister Fukuda which was
conveyed to U.S. officials through Nishiyama last week,3 Solomon tele-
phoned Nishiyama Tuesday night4 to indicate a readiness to enter into
discussions with the Japanese on the conditions under which the U.S.
would be prepared to announce readiness to intervene in yen for U.S.
account.
3. Nishiyama had suggested possible readiness of the Japanese to
propose supplemental budgetary measures in the range of 4 trillion yen
and to lower the discount rate by 1 percent. Solomon indicated that
these actions would help create climate of confidence that Japanese
surplus was being appropriately dealt with, and would provide basis
for U.S. to cooperate with GOJ in intervening to deal with market dis-
order. Solomon did not specify trade measures which might also be
taken by GOJ but did say that such measures would add to credibility
of program.
4. Solomon’s message was communicated to Fukuda who then
designated Matsukawa to carry on negotiations on behalf of the Japa-
nese. Timing has become of extreme importance because of develop-
ments in the foreign exchange markets and U.S. desire to announce ac-
tions to deal with this situation at earliest feasible date. In telephone
conversations last night and this morning, however, Matsukawa made
clear that Fukuda could make no promises concerning the size of the
supplemental budget prior to the Cabinet meeting scheduled for Sep-
tember 2. He also said that the lowering of the discount rate would be
extremely difficult since it would bring the rate below the interest rates
offered by the postal savings system. Matsukawa said that the postal
savings rate was under control of a group dominated by consumer in-
terests who would not wish to reduce the rate paid on such savings.
2 In telegram 214420 to Tokyo, August 23, the Department instructed Mansfield to
“make clear that USG conditions for agreeing to a swap should not be interpreted by the
Prime Minister or other Japanese officials as diminishing the importance we attach to all
of the other Strauss-Ushiba undertakings (i.e. other than growth and MTN).” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840140–2395)
3 See Document 154.
4 August 15.
