234
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
he might not be able to control him. Seyid Zia is a patriot who wants to
do something for Iran, and that is why he will never be popular with
Iranian politicians. He is regarded as a British tool, and has been greatly
discredited in Iran by this factor. This may also explain in part the
Shah’s attitude toward Seyid Zia, since the Shah has a fixation upon the
British ejection of his father. With a strongly pro-British Prime Minister
in office, his logic is that there is no guarantee this would not happen to
him. The Shah would also be reluctant to appoint Seyid Zia for the
same reasons which make Qavam unacceptable to him.
4) Hakimi—Hakimi, about 90, is the champion of the “Iranian
Youth Movement”. He probably will not again be considered seriously
as a candidate. The Shah remarked recently when Hakimi’s name was
mentioned as a possible Prime Minister, “He didn’t do a damn thing
before and wouldn’t now. Why should he be Prime Minister?”
5) Entezam—There is some evidence that the Shah has been
thinking about Entezam as Prime Minister. He is highly regarded by
the British in terms of ability and integrity. His past record in the Cab-
inet was very good. His obvious difficulty, of course, is that he has been
out of the country for five years and has no political following. On the
other hand this might be said to be an advantage since he is untainted.
While he is not in the National Front or associated with that party, there
has been some talk of his replacing Kazemi as Foreign Minister in the
Mosadeq government upon his return to Iran from Washington.
6) Ebtehaj—An energetic, patriotic man who is liked by the Shah.
There has been some indication that the Shah has been considering Eb-
tehaj as a possible replacement for Mosadeq. His difficulty is that he
cannot get along with his countrymen and engages in running battles
with key political leaders. He would be “good at anything” but Prime
Minister, except under dictatorship of the Shah. He has no Majlis sup-
port, and his appointment is unlikely.
7) Soheily—Soheily, until recently Ambassador to the United
Kingdom, is about the most useful and practical Iranian political figure.
He is a good operator and has the confidence of the Shah, who would
not be afraid of him. He has no strong principles or convictions re-
garding the oil controversy and should be able to “patch up” a deal if
he were Prime Minister.
Military Figures
1) Ahmadi—Ahmadi is a dead political force who is busy collecting
rent for the 500 pieces of property which he owns in Tehran. His level
of intelligence was not eulogized by Pyman.
2) Zahedi—Zahedi, unscrupulous, energetic and ambitious, has a
rare quality of interest in practical problems and how to deal with
them. He is an opportunist and as such would seek a settlement of the
