Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 775 and grasslands drying to desert—a loss each year equal to the size of my home State of Maine. On energy, from the vantage of a precarious present, we could face a punishing future. Unless trends are changed, oil supplies will be insufficient and, for many, unaffordable. Wood, the main household fuel for over 1 billion people, will be found only at ever greater distances and in dwindling amounts. We have become accustomed to warnings about the need to conserve nonrenewable resources such as oil. But the “Global 2000” study also points up serious stresses on renewable resources—croplands and forests, fisheries, air, water, and land—resources we have taken for granted as endless. Another central observation of the study is that protecting the environment and succeeding in economic development are not competing goals but complementary paths. Poverty worsens the most acute environmental dangers, such as the loss of forests and soil. Thus we will not save the environment unless we also solve the problems of the poor and move the global economy forward. “Global 2000” is not a forecast. It is a projection of present trends. But it is another chilling reminder that our common future depends on our common success, here and throughout the complex of relations known as the North-South dialogue. We must work together to raise food production, to diversify energy sources and to use energy and other resources more efficiently, to protect our common environment, to restrain population growth, to deal effectively and equitably with mounting deficits, and to keep an open system of trade. It falls to us to rewrite the future. It is within our power to do so. But it will require a change not only in the quantity but in the character of our effort. For as fast as we have run in recent years, the challenges still outpace us. Too often, as the Brandt Commission reminds us, we have engaged in a “dialogue of the deaf,” in which “we judge ourselves by our good points and the other side by their failings.3 The result is frustration and deadlock.” Global Responsibilities That deadlock must be broken. The demands of our common future require it. They compel a new inquiry. We must ask not only what individual nations can take from the global system but what each nation must bring to it. Without exception, we must recognize that assigning responsibility for the future to others is not an answer but an 3 Reference is to the Independent Commission on International Development Issues, chaired by former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt. The ICIDI or Brandt Commission report, entitled North-South: A Programme for Survival, was released in 1980.
