28  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
responses would take a certain amount of time. And planning for your 
advance understanding and timely selection of LNO’s is non-­existent.3
2. Deterrence and Parity. I am also struck by the fact that the SIOP 
provides no explicit option [7 lines not declassified].
[1 paragraph (17 lines) not declassified]
Accordingly, I would favor encouraging the Defense Department 
at least to evaluate the strategic consequences of adding such an addi-
tional option to the SIOP.
3. Crisis Communication. I was struck by the question you raised 
concerning our ability to make the Soviets understand the more limited 
character of an eventual nuclear response by us. An assessment of our 
ability to communicate effectively with the Soviets in the context of a 
crisis should be undertaken, and consideration should also be given to 
the possibility of a broader mutual notification of missile test firings.4
4. Planning Integration and Innovation. I was left with the impres-
sion from the briefing that regional command plans, as well as perhaps 
service plans, are not adequately integrated in relationship to possi-
ble crises. For example, the inter-­relationship between our Atlantic 
war planning and our Central European war planning seems to me to 
be inadequate, on the basis of the evidence provided in the briefing. I 
also did not sense that there has been significant adjustment in our war 
planning and deployment because of the termination of our involve-
ment in the Southeast Asian conflict.5
5. [1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified]
6. Length of Decision-Procedures. I wonder whether the short 
decision-­time available (only about 5 minutes) in the event of a Soviet 
depressed trajectory attack on D.C. would permit you and others to 
follow the requisite decision-­procedures.6
7. Deterrence of Lower Strategic Levels. I was impressed by your 
emphasis on the need to scale down the deterrence levels in the 
US-Soviet strategic relationship. You were very explicit in urging an 
aggressive attitude towards this issue, and I feel that a review of the 
inter-­relationship between effective deterrence and lower strategic lev-
els should be urgently undertaken.7
3 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this paragraph: “Work on this. Keep me 
informed.”
4 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this sentence: “Pursue this.”
5 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this paragraph: “This is true. Set up with 
Brown a schedule of 2-­hour briefings for me.”
6 Carter wrote in the right margin next to this sentence: “Alternative?”
