1978  339
tend to play up Soviet military capabilities and downplay our own. 
When we decided to have a public demonstration of our defense capa-
bilities, the cruise missile test failed. We need a careful public relations 
effort to show that we are strong militarily as well as economically and 
politically. We recognize the Soviet buildup, but we are not vulnerable 
or weak. We have to put all of this into proper perspective and cor-
rect the weaknesses we have acknowledged. We have to do this in the 
defense budget for 1980 and decide what is best for us.
Jones: The JCS have had a lot of discussion of this. They see a 
dilemma. Things now are better than they are perceived but the trends 
for the future are worse than they are perceived. And the perception of 
imbalance today takes the focus away from the really serious problem 
of imbalance in the future. There is a deeper underlying concern about 
the military trends in the JCS than I have ever seen, and it is real and 
genuine. What we do today won’t impact on the military balance until 
the future, but it will affect the perceptions of the future and the present.
Brown: There is too pessimistic a view of the military balance now 
and not a pessimistic enough view of the balance in 1982–83.
Brzezinski: We have to separate the global competition with the 
Soviets from the competitions in peripheral areas. We will do well 
enough in the peripheral areas. The Soviets will not sweep over Africa.
I am more concerned about Soviet power and perceptions in two 
areas—Western Europe and the Persian Gulf—­which could affect the 
overall U.S./Soviet balance. In Europe we and the Europeans are doing 
more than ever before to assure a conventional balance. But internal 
politics and instabilities in Europe may mean that Europe’s stronger 
NATO shield will be held with a trembling hand. There are also inter-
nal difficulties in Saudi Arabia and the situation is unstable in Iran and 
Yemen. Both Saudi Arabia and Iran are concerned about the power bal-
ance between us and the Soviets. They see troublesome ambiguities in 
our conduct.
Vance: Some military trends are very disturbing. But we are better 
off politically than we give ourselves credit for. I agree with the Pres-
ident’s presentation, but there could be serious political effects down 
the road from the military trends.
Warnke: The description on pages 10 and 11 of Soviet motives in 
arms control applies precisely to us as well.
Brown: Some events in Europe already can be attributed to the mil-
itary trends and Soviet power. The 3 percent defense budget increase 
is one. But Norway backed off FRG participation in an exercise and, 
though there are domestic reasons, I think perceptions of Soviet power 
were involved. The Germans themselves may be starting to negotiate 
with the Soviets on different security premises—I am thinking of Bahr
