World Hunger and Food Policy
207.
Memorandum Prepared by Cyrus Vance1
New York, October 24, 1976
[Omitted here is information unrelated to food policy.]
L. Economic Assistance.
Here again, the new Administration will be faced with immediate
and difficult budgetary and political questions. As you know, eco-
nomic or so-called development assistance falls into three categories:
US bilateral economic development programs administered by AID
and the Peace Corps, and multilateral development programs, which
receive US funding through the World Bank, regional banks and
various United Nations agencies. A second category is political eco-
nomic assistance. A third category is straight humanitarian or relief
assistance. There is also military assistance, which has often been
bracketed with, but in fact is not, development assistance.
The first question is who should receive economic assistance.
Here, I believe that we should continue to make economic assistance
available to both the least-developed and the middle-level countries, as
it is at present. I believe it would be unwise to adopt a rule that only
very poor countries will receive US bilateral economic assistance. Not
the least important of the several advantages favoring this suggestion is
the fact that the other course of action would make most Latin Amer-
ican countries ineligible for development aid.
A second issue is whether economic assistance should be denied to
countries that flagrantly violate human rights. Current aid legislation
prohibits economic assistance to those who violate human rights,
unless the President can demonstrate that such aid gets to the poorest
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus
Vance, Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Odds & Ends From the Transition. Sen-
sitive. Sent to Jack Watson under an October 24 covering memorandum, in which Vance
commented: “I am sure that never before has there been so much excellent work done in
advance of the election. In the meantime, we are all hoping and praying that things will
come out the right way on November 2.” (Ibid.) According to his memoirs, Vance pre-
pared the memorandum at Carter’s request, noting that it “was to become a kind of for-
eign policy road map and a standard against which I measured our success and failure in
attaining the goals we ultimately set for ourselves.” (Vance, Hard Choices, pp. 29–30) The
complete memorandum is printed in Hard Choices as Appendix I, pp. 441–462 and is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of For-
eign Policy.
643
