1236 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement The Venezuelan Government was dissuaded from issuing a decree expelling Haight only by a promise from Creole that Haight would not return to Venezuela. Recommendations: That, in your conversation today with the Venezuelan Ambassador,5 you emphasize the following points: 1. We are very seriously concerned over the action taken by the Venezuelan Government. 2. We recognize the fact that the Government has a perfect right to take such action, but there are many things that we have the power to do but have refrained from doing out of consideration of the interests of other countries. 3. We have consulted with our friends before taking unilateral action on matters affecting their interests, and we have made a very special effort to consult with Venezuela. 4. We would have expected that the Venezuelans would have consulted with us in advance before taking a step which effected the operation of important U.S. interests in Venezuela, and which may have repercussions elsewhere in the world. 5. An additional factor was that Assistant Secretary Mann was in Venezuela at the time the decree was promulgated, on his second visit to Venezuela in a year, solely to consult with the Venezuelan Government concerning oil import policies. Nothing was said to him about the decree until it was announced to the public. 6. In the spirit of cooperation which characterizes our relations with Latin America, consultation plays an important part. The Latin American nations never hesitate to tell us what our policies should be, and we are very pleased to receive their views and to consult with them in advance in order to mitigate the possible adverse effects of any action we contemplate taking. 7. In summary, we consider the action the Venezuelan Government has taken as very serious, especially since it was taken without consultation with us, and since it may have repercussions in other areas of the world. We would hope that the Ambassador will report our concern to his Government. 5 A summary of the conversation is contained in the Department’s telegram 382 to Caracas December 24, 1958. (831.112/12–2458)
