320
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
The President said it was a rational approach, not a great victory.
The Vice President said there was a great deal of feeling in the UN
that the Secretary General approach should be played out.
Ambassador McHenry said that the West has often used this very
same approach on many other issues. The only difference in this case
would be the commitment to a vote and specification of a date.
The President asked how sure he was of getting twelve votes.
Ambassador McHenry said he would have to work hard, but he
thought we could get it. Maybe even the Soviets would be embarrassed
enough to vote for it.
The Vice President agreed that was the way to go.
Mr. Powell said that if we get down to a week or two and cannot
get what we want this way, we will get great pressure to act unilaterally.
The difference is between getting the pressure in one week or two.
The President said he had watched what Beheshti said on TV. He
was under the impression that Beheshti was one of the more reasonable
members of the Revolutionary Council. He said flat out that there
would be a trial of the United States, not the hostages, and that the
hostages would be released whether guilty or not.4 If we had to face
public pressure for strong unilateral action, he would rather face it on
January 6 rather than January 1. He noted that when we talked to
Giscard on the phone yesterday, he had been quite evasive when asked
if France would impose sanctions in the event sanctions were voted
down in the Security Council.5
Secretary Brown noted that they were all getting more cautious as
they listen to their bureaucracies.
The President said he hated to shift gears and start working on
Niger and others that had not previously been involved.
Admiral Turner said he did not believe that sanctions would get
the hostages back. There are three groups we are working with: the
Revolutionary Council; the kidnappers; and Khomeini. We had had
some success in getting our message through to the Revolutionary
Council. There is no way to get through to the kidnappers. He still
thought that Khomeini could work his will on the students, so the
question was how to impact on him. He wondered if the correct
4 Apparent reference to Beheshti’s comments at a December 27 meeting with report-
ers in Tehran. (Edward Cody and Michael Weisskopf, “Iranians Seek Testimony, Release
of U.S. Hostages,” Washington Post, December 28, 1979, p. A1)
5 Carter, who was still at Camp David on December 27, talked to Giscard on the
telephone from 11:20 to 11:27 a.m. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record
of the discussion was found.
