714 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement on United States interference in Cuba, while alarming and rallying to our cause some significant formerly critical left-­of-­center elements, has also undoubtedly given increased confidence and power of conviction to agitators. These took advantage of a minor strike of Social Security workers in January to stir up demonstrations, whereas that effort was short-­lived, the same agitators have had for more spectacular success in building up a minor student grievance into a teachers’ strike that has lasted well more than a month and, in conjunction with terrorist activities (i.e. bomb throwing), has whipped Guatemala into a state of extreme tension, alarm and pessimism, Although it seems possible that the extreme left has now overplayed its hand, and although Ydígoras appears to have played his cards with his characteristic astuteness, (using a much lighter touch than most persons to the right of center would like) reports indicate that the left, now well organized and directed (with the plans mayor of the Arbenz regime now congregated in Habana), will continue to exploit even the most insignificant incidents to create an impossible situation. We cannot therefore afford to go on the assumption that Ydígoras will successfully outmaneuver all future agitators and plotters. We should, we believe, take positive steps to help him reduce the susceptibility of the mass of the population to leftist blandishments. Accordingly, we urge that DLF and/or Eximbank be asked to act favorably and expeditiously (in a matter of days, not of weeks or months) on the two applications for loans now pending before them. The one given top priority by the GOG is for $9 million (with a foreign exchange component of $3.6 million) for the completion of a highway from Rio Hondo through Esquipulas to the Honduran Border. The chief qualms harbored by our people in Guatemala and by Eximbank revolve around the possibility that such a loan would increase competition for the IRCA railway and possibly finish it off. Eximbank particularly is concerned by the fact it refused a loan to IRCA not long ago, and considers itself exposed to criticism if, on the other hand, it were to facilitate competition for this American concern. However, the directness of the competition in arguable. From a purely political standpoint it may be regarded as unwise to bolster an American investment that has long been the source of infinite anti-American sentiment in Guatemala while disregarding the desirability of opening up a large area to economic exploitation and improvement, and of fostering the aim of Central American unification pursued by Ydígoras. The second loan application now pending before DLF and Eximbank is for road construction to the El Salvador border from El Molino through Jalpatagua. This is for $4.5 million, and reportedly is considered the more viable application in Eximbank.
