World Hunger and Food Policy
837
The Commission has agreed that the underlying cause of world
hunger is poverty and that its recommendations must necessarily
be development-oriented. The staff proposed that it recommend a
country-by-country action plan whereby the U.S. would try to develop
a consortium of donors that would meet with each recipient country
and map out a coordinated food strategy for that country. However, at
the May 1 session of the Commission,4 some of the members pointed
out that the scheme would not be very different from what AID
already does and that the Commission needed broader policy
recommendations.
At the May 1 meeting, the individual members made statements
about what priority areas and future approaches the Commission
should pursue. This resulted in a long list of suggestions with an un-
derlying conclusion that before the Commission could proceed with
specific recommendations, it needed a better understanding of the
hunger problem and a clearer definition of its responsibility in trying to
solve it.
The staff is to provide an “underlying analysis” in the next two
weeks and then target 5–20 areas where practical recommendations
could be made.
Edwin Martin5 has recently been hired as a consultant to the Com-
mission and he has privately expressed some concern to us that in
trying to cover the waterfront of the causes and cures of hunger, the
Commission may come up with a long list of unrealistic and duplica-
tive recommendations.
A few probable recommendations emerge from the Commission
meetings and staff discussion papers:
—Make alleviation and eventual elimination of hunger the pri-
mary objective of U.S. foreign assistance policy. This would involve
providing a greater proportion of aid in the agricultural sector and em-
phasize projects supportive of agrarian reform programs.
—Support the IBRD’s inclination to develop grain storage facilities
in LDCs.
4 Transcripts of the Commission meetings are in the Carter Library, RG 220, Presi-
dential Commission on World Hunger, Transcripts, Boxes 30–33.
5 Martin was the former Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
(1962–1964), Chairman of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organi-
zation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (1968–1974), Senior Adviser
to the Secretary of State and Coordinator of U.S. participation in the 1974 UN World Food
Conference, and Deputy Chairman, U.S. Delegation to the Conference.
