1979  541
13. A step higher on the ladder of involvement and risk is the 
assignment of Soviet advisory personnel to Third World combat units. 
Since 1967, when Soviet pilots flew combat missions against rebels in 
North Yemen, Soviet personnel have seen actual combat in at least three 
Third World countries—Egypt, Syria, and Iraq—­and have played a 
direct combat advisory role in two others—Angola and Ethiopia.
14. The USSR supports a number of insurgent movements in the 
Third World, but the type and extent of this assistance vary. It is usually 
channeled through third parties because insurgents normally do not 
operate where Moscow can provide direct aid and because the Soviets 
may want to play down or conceal their role. By leaving the degree 
of their support ambiguous, the Soviets gain freedom for political 
maneuvering.
15. East European states have provided a wide variety of military 
equipment and experts to Third World nations and insurgent move-
ments, often in close cooperation with the USSR. While in most cases 
this support has furthered Soviet objectives, the East Europeans have 
had their own political and economic motives. The East European gov-
ernments have not committed combat troops in the Third World and 
would be reluctant to do so.
16. Naval surface ships and submarines are the principal Soviet 
military forces deployed in distance areas and are supplemented by 
periodic deployments of naval aircraft. Although Soviet concerns over 
potential strategic threats from Western carrier-­launched airstrikes and 
submarine-­launched ballistic missiles remain prominent in Soviet dis-
tant operations, the Navy continues to perform important missions 
related to the projection of power and influence in the Third World, 
primarily by maintaining forces in regions of Soviet interest which can 
be augmented relatively quickly in times of crisis.
17. We have no evidence of Soviet contingency plans to exert politi-
cal or economic pressure on the United States or its allies through inter-
diction of sea lines of communication in the absence of a NATO-Warsaw 
Pact war. The Soviets probably believe that such an operation would 
lead to war with NATO.
18. In the principal areas of their normal deployments in distant 
areas, Soviet diesel submarines and naval ships have access to a number 
of ports for crew rest, replenishment, maintenance, and in some cases 
major overhaul. Moscow is seeking additional access, but the only good 
prospects in the near term are in Angola, Ethiopia, and South Yemen. 
Staging facilities for Soviet naval reconnaissance aircraft are currently 
limited to Cuba and Angola, but Ethiopia and South Yemen probably 
will grant access for this purpose. Hanoi is unlikely to grant the Soviets 
any formal base rights in either Vietnam or Kampuchea but there are 
circumstances in which it might permit Soviet access to air or naval
