World Hunger and Food Policy 821 because they feared that the food they sent would rot on ships waiting to be unloaded in Ethiopia’s clogged port—the FAO quickly supplied an emergency 10,000 tons of cereal in early June. Outlook Several years of good crops and the accumulation of substantial reserves in several countries have lessened the pressure on both developed and developing countries to make the necessary changes in national and multinational policies to solve food distribution problems. Nonetheless, the world is somewhat better equipped to deal with another food crisis—in terms of food aid—than it was in 1972–74: a food policy oversight mechanism is now operating, and talks on reserves are under way. Food production in the food-importing poorer countries is growing, and some countries, such as India, have been able to build substantial reserves. Food production, however, is still generally not able to keep pace with population growth in these countries. The aid commitment by developed countries to agricultural development has increased, but a larger commitment is needed to adequately support developing country efforts toward food self-sufficiency. International financial institutions have increased their efforts in rural development, but the increase in funding recommended by the Manila Communique´ has not materialized. Most important, however, channels for international cooperation, negotiation, and discussion, laboriously set up since 1974, are now open. Progress in the coming year will be measured by developments within the IWA negotiations in London and by the World Food Council’s attempts to gain the active cooperation of governments and agencies for its programs. In particular, further movement toward agreement in IWA negotiations, which now seems possible, might have an impact broader than just ameliorating the specific grain supply and price problems under discussion. If the industrialized countries can develop positions on those issues sufficiently of interest to the developing countries to justify convening the full Negotiating Conference in November, then this advance might encourage the Group of 77 to limit acrimony in other international forums in order to provide a cordial climate for these important talks. 251. Editorial Note On September 5, 1978, President Jimmy Carter issued Executive Order 12078, formally establishing the Presidential Commission on
