upon the matter of disputes between a Member of the League of Nations and State not belonging to the League. His Majesty’s Government hope that they may consider that this jurisprudence, as formulated in Advisory Opinion No. 5 (Eastern Carelia), given on July 23rd, 1923, meets the desire of the United States. As regards disputes to which the United States are not a party but in which they claim an interest, and as regards questions other than disputes in which the United States claim an interest, His Majesty’s Government, in agreement with the Governments of the other signatory States, understand the object of the United States to be to assure to themselves a position of equality with States represented either on the Council or in the Assembly of the League of Nations. With this principle His Majesty’s Government are quite prepared to agree. But the fifth reservation appears to rest upon the presumption that the adoption of a request for an advisory opinion by the Council or Assembly requires a unanimous vote. No such presumption, however, has so far been established. It is therefore impossible to say with certainty whether in some cases, or possibly in all cases, a decision by a majority is not sufficient. In any event, His Majesty’s Government are disposed to guarantee to the United States a position of equality in this respect—that is to say, in any case where a State represented on the Council or in the Assembly would possess the right of preventing by opposition, in either of these bodies, the adoption of a proposal to request an advisory opinion from the Court, the United States shall enjoy an equivalent right. His Majesty’s Government attach great importance to the value of the advisory opinions which the Court may give as provided for in the Covenant. They are confident that the Government of the United States entertain no desire to diminish the value of such opinions in connection with the functioning of the League of Nations. Yet the terms employed in the fifth reservation are of such a nature as to lend themselves to a possible interpretation which might have that effect. The Members of the League of Nations would exercise their rights in the Council and in the Assembly with full knowledge of the details of the situation which has necessitated a request for an advisory opinion, as well as with full appreciation of the responsibilities which a failure to reach a solution would involve for them under the Covenant of the League of Nations. A State which is exempt from
