896 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement B. In light foregoing as well as from standpoint style suggest fol­ lowing for phrasing latter portion first paragraph “Agree, without prejudice to the inherent right of each side to individual or collective self-­defense, to announce:” (if phrase mentioned subparagraph “A” above included suggest same order of words, that is “agree” at begin­ ning of clause and “to announce” at end.) C. With respect paragraph 2 sugguest substitution of “means” for “negotiations” and “and that” for “without” as in our January 12 draft for reasons considered that time. If Department willing accept wording this paragraph set forth Deptel 1836 would still prefer adhere formula­ tion as in our January 12 draft and be authorized offer accept form this portion December 1 draft during course debate if appeared be useful tactic. 2. Do not believe there much likelihood that CHICOMS will accept any of the foregoing formulations as “individual and collective self-­ defense” has now become such a red flag to them. Therefore likely issue will again become crystallized around those words in spite of their repositioning. However believe introduction such reformulation pro­ vides useful material for several subsequent meetings, gives CHICOMS opportunity to move if they are looking for way to do so, and greatly improves our public position. 3. However, dependent on our immediate objectives suggest con­ sideration could alternatively be given to inclusion some general phrase in first paragraph such as “without prejudice inherent rights either side” which would preserve our position, make draft much harder for CHICOMS to reject and should give us even better public position if they do so. However, anything of this nature would have to be done in initial new draft as reintroduction of self-­defense clause may again face us with situation where its acceptance by Wang or alteration by us could appear as yielding on substance Taiwan area dispute. 4. Am returning Geneva Saturday. Johnson
