148 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement of March 24, 1958—­to the Director, Office of Defense Mobilization, and the Federal Civil Defense Administrator in consultation with the Spe­ cial Assistant to the President for Science and Technology. James S. Lay, Jr. Executive Secretary cc: The Secretary of the Treasury The Attorney General The Director, Bureau of the Budget The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission The Federal Civil Defense Administrator The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Director of Central Intelligence The Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology The Special Assistant to the President for Public Works Planning Enclosure MEASURES TO CARRY OUT THE CONCEPT OF SHELTER 1. By NSC Action No. 1882–­b, the National Security Council agreed that the following measures should be undertaken to carry out the con­ cept of fallout shelter for protection of the civil population against radi­ ation hazard, in accordance with NSC Action No. 1842–­d: a. A research and development program along the lines of the rec­ ommendations in paragraph 1–­a of NSC 5807, which reads as follows: “(1) Research and Development, including prototype construction (exploiting multiple-­use principle to the maximum) $Millions “(a) Research $6.5 (annual rate) “Although sufficient knowledge of weapons’ effects and of shel­ ter design now exists to permit proceeding with a complete and effec­ tive fallout shelter program if this were deemed desirable, expanded research is necessary to refine our knowledge, particularly of blast shelter, and develop more economical and efficient shelter models. In a program of this magnitude, well considered research should save many times its initial cost. “The following program of research is already identified and can be undertaken as rapidly as funds are made available. “(i) The field testing, with nuclear weapons, of shelters, other struc­ tures, and shelter equipment; provision for development and execution of radiological defense measures; exposure of animals to weapons’ effects; and the instrumentation necessary to evaluate results obtained. -----$2.0 Millions
