International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1095 1975, at the International Women’s Year Conference in Mexico, virtually all nations joined in a major effort to promote women’s opportunities in the “International Women’s Decade” of 1976–1985, taking as themes “equality, development, and peace.”13 Preparations are underway for a mid-term World Conference in Copenhagen next July to assist progress and discuss opportunities for action in three areas: employment, health, and education.14 IDCA will help in developing a U.S. position for this Conference, and will encourage the pioneering efforts of AID in the women-in-development field. Women-in-development is not a sector, such as energy or agriculture; it is a subject that cuts across all sectors. IDCA will work to ensure that development projects are designed to benefit women. We shall continue to help focus more attention on women in the Development Assistance Committee of OECD and the multilateral development banks. There must be universal recognition that equitable development requires the vigorous participation of women, and that this participation must be an objective at the level of project design throughout the development field. 2. Manage Economic Interdependence with Developing Countries for Mutual Prosperity Energy —Programs are being designed to increase the amount of energy available to developing countries from their own resources. Solutions to the energy problem are as crucial to the developing countries as they are to us. Those countries can not bear indefinitely the increasing financial burdens of importing their needed energy. In our bilateral assistance programs we plan to increase the amount of funds spent in the energy field. In particular, we plan to begin a program for training engineers, geologists, chemists, and other scientists from developing countries to enable them to accelerate their own exploration and production. Our target is to have students enrolled in the program here by September 1981. At a recent DAC High Level Meeting, the United States urged our OECD colleagues to initiate similar programs. We will also work with the multilateral development banks and the UN specialized agencies in this area, urging that they increase the amount of funds devoted to training in the energy sector. All of the multilateral development banks are now placing more emphasis on lending programs to expand and diversify sources of energy in non-OPEC developing countries. Over the next five years, 13 See footnote 4, Document 310. 14 See Document 342.
