Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III ities for Saudi Arabia. Therefore, there would be a counterproductive reaction. Second, there is total opposition to this approach in Congress. The exchange risk is great. The Roosa bonds,3 for example, were very costly to us. Mr. Couzens said that they cost the U.S. an arm and a leg! The Prime Minister mentioned Roosa—who is on Wall Street making a fortune! Secretary Blumenthal asked how we could account for these in the Exchange Stabilization Fund? It was nearly broke. With the Roosa bonds, we borrowed in Swiss francs at 4 to 1 to the dollar, and now it is 1.8 to one. The paper loss is enormous. Some people are saying that we should borrow even more—$10–20 billion worth. They should see Senator Proxmire’s comments! Thus we don’t want to do this, and would have difficulties if we did. The Prime Minister agreed that we should focus on the long-term. The Market is short-term. Therefore, how do we get from here to there? He does not say that Roosa bonds are the answer, but with market psychology, we must show we are dealing with real fundamentals. This is a similar time to ten years ago in Britain. Secretary Blumenthal asked whether the Prime Minister feels that, if the U.S. is seen as acting on energy and on inflation—in believable ways, and if people saw international concord and commitment to reach growth targets, and with swap lines, and with U.S. drawings on the IMF, and with SDRs, and maybe the U.S. were prepared to sell gold—can’t we turn the situation around? The Prime Minister replied yes—for two to three years (although there were a lot of “ifs”). It is vital to make this the focus for July. The President said that none of the “ifs” listed by Secretary Blumenthal are difficult for the U.S. to do; all are possible for us. The Prime Minister said that other steps are needed in some (countries?). It would be tough to get Germany on board. Sir John Hunt agreed. If the United States did all these things, this would be a considerable help. The present problem is to relate these steps together, as energy action is related to the wider situation—this helps considerably. Mr. Couzens referred to the latter part of the list—like IMF drawings: these are goods in the shop window. They show that we are using the international system, and not acting just bilaterally, handto-mouth. This will help, if it looks like a score on the Summit list. 3 During the 1960s, the Treasury issued medium-term securities that were denominated in foreign currencies; these were called “Roosa bonds,” after Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs Robert Roosa.
