World Hunger and Food Policy 705 paring for future sessions that the Council can be a useful negotiating forum. Such a stance would contrast with past positions that negotiations could not take place in this forum, and that the United States could only accede to policy statements which conformed with actions already taken unilaterally. There is ample opportunity for reciprocal commitment in the important field of food and agriculture and the United States ought to be prepared to seize such an opportunity. It is remotely possible that the Third Session’s results contain wider implications for the atmosphere in which other North-South discussions are conducted. The session helped demonstrate to those developing countries which participated a feasible alternative to confrontation tactics. Although the absence of confrontation probably resulted from several unique circumstances including meeting outside Rome and the relatively high level of representation, the planning and other events preceding the WFC merit further analysis to determine if a spread of this non-confrontational experience to other fora is possible. At any rate, if a more conciliatory approach is tried again by developing countries as a result of the Third Session, it is likely to appear either within the WFC itself or in the FAO Conference,8 where many of the issues and the participants are the same. 8 The 19th session of the FAO Conference was held in Rome on November 14. 222. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne) to the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat)1 Washington, August 24, 1977 SUBJECT Food Aid Assistance As I discussed earlier today, I suggest we carefully examine the potential economic and political benefits of establishing a Federal purchase guarantee of five or six million tons under a new Title III of the 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 324, World Hunger [2]. No classification marking. A notation on the memorandum indicates that a copy was sent to Daft. Another copy of the memorandum is in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770173–0348.
