1022
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Successful resolution of the Common Fund issue would result in a new
institution believed important by the LDCs. There are additional
changes which could usefully be made, and we should have some con-
crete suggestions before UNCTAD V. We have over a dozen ideas for
alterations in international institutions or in the way we fund our mul-
tilateral and bilateral assistance programs. The most important are:
—GATT Special Assistance Unit: The US could support the continu-
ation of the GATT Special Assistance Unit after the end of the MTN to
assist LDCs in handling trade complaints within the GATT dispute set-
tlement mechanisms, particularly during the next two–three years
when new codes will be put into practice.
—Compensatory Finance Facility (CFF):* Successful commodity
agreements and a Common Fund may provide greater price stability
for a few commodities, but still leave some problems with income sta-
bilization for LDCs dependent on commodity earnings (during a reces-
sion or after a crop failure, stable prices will still mean lower incomes
for an LDC). Rather than bow to pressure for a new Stabex program, ei-
ther worldwide (the Schmidt proposal) or regional (ASEAN approach),
we could consider further modest changes in the IMF’s CFF, such as al-
lowing drawings when export earnings from specific commodities
suffer temporary shortfalls, gearing payback of drawings to restoration
of earnings from the affected commodities, and increasing the per-
centage of a country’s quota which may be borrowed in single year.
—IMF–IBRD Special Financial Assistance Unit: LDCs argue that the
IMF conditions are too tough and disrupt economic development. The
IMF complains LDCs approach them only when events have reached a
crisis stage and drastic measures are needed. A joint IBRD–IMF unit
could assist LDCs approaching debt difficulties with a mix of develop-
ment and financial advice, thereby encouraging LDCs to seek advice
earlier. Such a unit might also advise LDCs which are dealing with a
creditor club.
—IBRD Bond Guarantee Facility: Only a handful of upper tier LDCs
obtain long-term financing through international bond markets. The
IBRD has the authority to guarantee such bond issues, but technical re-
strictions have precluded use of this facility. We should examine
changes which would allow this facility to be utilized.
—International Development Cooperation Administration (IDCA):*
Depending on the final stance of the Administration on the establish-
ment of an IDCA, a new institution could have symbolic and real value
in demonstrating our commitment to development.
—Callable Capital: Appropriating callable capital (and some guar-
antees) in the same manner as funds to be disbursed inflates our for-
eign assistance bills and limits more imaginative uses of guarantee
schemes. We suggest establishment of a callable capital guarantee fund
