Panama  917
At the Pentagon meeting agreement was reached on the following 
points, which had been discussed previously at the White House:
1. Housing Project
With regard to the proposal for the construction of “middle class” 
housing located in Panama for Panamanian employees of the Canal 
Zone, the Department of the Army representatives discussed the pos-
sibility of financing this project along the lines set forth by Mr. Dillon 
at the White House, i.e., one thousand dwellings costing approxi-
mately $5 million to be financed directly from Panama Canal Company 
funds. Governor Potter stated that the Canal Zone Government did 
not have sufficient funds available for this purpose and that a direct 
Congressional appropriation for housing would be required unless 
another source of funds was found. The Department of the Army 
agreed to seek means for financing such construction.
2. Third Country Purchases
The Department of the Army representatives agreed to change 
existing procurement procedures to eliminate insofar as possible fur-
ther purchases from other than United States or Panamanian suppliers 
of imports for resale in this Canal Zone. (This would raise questions 
of compliance with United States obligations under Article XVII of 
the GATT.7 In the past, we have taken the position that limitations on 
third country purchases by the Canal Zone authorities do not contra-
vene Article XVII.) General Gaither pointed out that those principally 
affected by this change would be his troops and United States employ-
ees of the Canal Zone.
3. Sales of Luxury Items
The Department of the Army representatives agreed to establish a 
uniform definition of “luxury items” and the price limits of these items 
which may be sold in commissaries, post exchanges and other sales 
outlets in the Canal Zone. There was considerable discussion as to what 
should be considered as a “luxury item” and a list of such articles is 
being prepared for guidance. General Gaither was not convinced that 
the maximum value of PX items should be less than that prevailing at 
other overseas bases.
4. Single Wage Plan
The Department of the Army representatives (1) agreed to institute 
an incentive program to attract Panamanian participation in an apprentice 
7 Article XVII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, concluded at Geneva 
on October 30, 1947, dealt with non-discriminatory treatment on the part of state-trading 
enterprises. For the text of Article XVII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 
see 4 Bevans 664.
