September 1953–December 1954
941
associated with the pro-Mossadeq National Resistance Movement.
Some of these, however, may be able to develop contacts and influence
among dissatisfied elements.
22. There is likely to be a marked increase in political ferment. The
settlement of the oil dispute has removed an important deterrent to re-
sumption of the political maneuvering and intrigue characteristic of the
pre-Mossadeq era and has probably increased the desire of deputies
and senators, many of whom paid heavily to insure their election, to
benefit personally from the oil settlement. The efforts of the govern-
ment to move ahead with an internal reform and development pro-
gram are likely to encounter strong opposition from some deputies and
senators and indifference from many others. At the same time the gov-
ernment is likely to be confronted with demands, sincere and other-
wise, for speedier action to control inflation and improve living
standards, for improvements in education, public health, working con-
ditions, and for restoration of freedom of the press and assembly. Per-
sonal antagonisms and rivalries are also likely to come to the surface
and provincial and tribal resentments against the government may be
intensified.
23. Zahedi could probably survive these difficulties if he had the
strong support of the Shah, since the various aspirants for his job are
likely to remain too weak and divided among themselves to bring ef-
fective pressure for his removal without active encouragement from
the Palace. The Shah’s continued willingness to provide such backing,
however, is uncertain. His underlying distrust of any strong person-
ality, his predilection for political intrigue, and his tendency to vacillate
all militate against his supporting Zahedi on a sustained basis, particu-
larly now that the oil settlement has been achieved. Moreover, the
probable increase in political activity in the months to come is likely to
make it easier for Zahedi’s rivals to persuade the Shah, who is keenly
sensitive to political currents within Iran, that Zahedi no longer is ac-
ceptable to the political community and should be replaced. The Shah
may be dissuaded from making an early switch by the difficulty of
finding a satisfactory replacement, by fear of losing US or UK support,
or by concern over the future of the reform and development program.
However, his personal inclinations appear to be in the direction of
eventually replacing Zahedi.
24. Zahedi’s chances of survival through 1955 are considerably less
than even. We believe that the most likely time for his replacement will
be shortly after the Shah returns to Iran in February–March 1955. Par-
liamentary maneuvers to unseat him may develop during the Shah’s
projected three months trip to Europe and the US beginning in De-
cember 1954 but would be unlikely to succeed in view of the Shah’s
probable desire to have no change of government during his absence.
