1956  1257
of course could not and would not do. Since decision had been taken 
to extend provisions of agreed announcement to such prisoners, my 
government on own intitiative took measures allow those wishing do 
so expeditiously exercise their right return. Prisoners were interviewed 
individually by representatives of American Red Cross in order entirely 
impartially determine their wishes. In keeping with your desires, no 
representative of Indian Embassy,—nor of any third country—­was 
present these interviews.
F. I can now inform you, on October 29, as result these measures, a 
Chinese prisoner desiring return your country, Mr. James Lew, departed 
from my country. I understand he arrived Hong Kong November 19, 
and has now presumably crossed into your country. I might mention 
Mr. Lew was permitted proceed your country even though he had 
served only about one and one half years of 7 to 20 years sentence for 
manslaughter and would not for many years have even become eligible 
for our very lenient parole procedures or reduction sentence for good 
behavior.
As for balance of Chinese prisoners my country, they have freely 
and formally indicated to impartial representative ARC they have no 
desire return your country and are thus clearly outside terms reference 
our talks.
G. Have given you this information not in order demand your 
authorities enlarge, as my government has done, scope of announce­
ment. My government asks no more than plain terms of our agreement 
be implemented, with respect to very Americans about whom you and 
I were talking when announcement was issued. My government is 
clearly entitled expect 10 remaining Americans will be allowed without 
further delay return their country.
H. I mention this matter in some detail this morning because think 
it important we be clear as to which side really been resolving issues 
between us. I mention it because of great importance fulfilling under­
standings and commitments already arrived at and great importance 
knowing whether pledged words have any value. This had importance 
which transcends even importance of these individual Americans and 
this issue. Importance relates to whole range of relations between our 
two countries. Basis of mutual confidence absolutely essential if there is 
to be possibility of negotiating resolution of our other disputes.
5. I continued, performance his government thus far with respect 
first agreement between us had not established that basis confidence. 
I had at each meeting here and continue to express my hope that his 
authorities would establish that basis of confidence by carrying out that 
agreement. This is not anything which any form of words or proposal 
from my side could possibly resolve. Neither could any form words or 
proposals from my side resolve problem of decision by his authorities
