326 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement and it would indeed appear to be contrary to the charter of the United Nations and many other international instruments, for us as a government to seek to uphold those principles in other nations, since they are normally considered internal matters. We should not permit our private sense of outrage to override diplomatic prudence. We must then, as I see it, fall back on a second method in seeking to defend Protestant interests in this country. Many of the Protestant missionaries and ministers active in this country are Americans; much Protestant church property is owned by American individuals and and companies; many churches and schools derive a substantial part of their support from American contributions; and I believe there are cases in which, while no immediate connection with the United States exists, there is a historical and sentimental tie. Since cases in which legitimate and long standing private American interests exist are so large a proportion of the cases which come to our attention, it seems to me that we should make them the basis for our official representations to the Colombian Government. We cannot claim that these pastors, churches and schools should be permitted to function as a matter of international right, but we can legitimately make representations on their behalf on the basis of comity without raising inconvenient questions of propriety. As a practical matter, it seems unlikely that the Colombian Government would yield in the many cases in which United States citizens and organizations had legitimate interest without establishing general rules equally applicable to churches and schools in which no legitimate American interest can be shown. Without, therefore, spelling it out that we are not making representations on behalf of Protestant pastors, churches and schools where no American interest can be shown to exist, I believe that our representations should be more restricted and explicit in order that we may not lay ourselves open to charges of improper interference in this highly controversial matter. 2. What is the present Colombian Government’s attitude towards this question? The Department will recall that Assistant Secretary Rubottom and the Embassy have been steadily making representations regarding Protestant schools and churches ever since the new Government came to power. Unfortunately, none of our representations has accomplished much. We have succeeded in reopening a few churches and in getting a few other concessions (such as visas for incoming missionaries and pastors) but the problem is almost as unsolved as ever. We have every reason to believe that the present Government is moderate, broad-­minded and basically friendly to the United States. Why, therefore, has it not acted in response to our repeated representations? There can, of course, be no doubt that the Government has some reasons for procrastination. One undoubtedly is that the Government does not wish to take an
