Afghanistan for visiting USAID official Wheeler, the Embassy’s protocol officer has been told that the Afghan party will return to Kabul on December 7. 3. The Afghan view of the Soviet connection: The pro-Moscow mind set of Taraki and his closest advisors, particularly his two principal lieutenants, Foreign Minister Hafizullah Amin and Acting Planning Minister Dr. Shah Wali, has been well documented since the April 27 revolution, both through domestic pronouncements and by high-level speeches before international fora. In the initial post-revolutionary period, however, the leadership generally tried to camouflage its pro- Soviet views with explanations that the USSR and Afghanistan have had good and friendly relations for decades, and that the new regime in Kabul was merely carrying on in the same tradition. The Khalqi leaders publicly denied that their PDPA was “Communist,” “Socialist,” or “Marxist-Leninist,” although they admitted its Marxist-Leninist character in private fora. 4. In recent weeks, however, a deeper pro-Soviet attitude has emerged from the PDPA closet; the Afghan leadership has made no effort to disguise its belief that Kabul’s relationship with Moscow is of overriding importance, not only in the foreign policy field, but also probably domestically as well. Amin’s November 7 speech, which portrayed Afghanistan’s Saur revolution of April 27 as an historical extension of the “great October revolution” (Kabul 9145) was typical of the obsequious degree to which Taraki and his colleagues are willing to reveal their political convictions.3 In this connection, Taraki himself took the unprecedented and well-publicized step of attending (with virtually the entire Afghan Cabinet) the November 7 Soviet National Day reception, a far cry from the regime’s standard practice of sending one minister to the similar celebrations of other countries. Most recently, Taraki, in his lengthy speech to the plenum of the Party’s Central Committee echoed the Soviet line of international issues, ranging from the inevitable victory of socialism over imperialism to support for Vietnam in its struggle against intrigue by its neighbors.4 The presence of the Afghan Minister for Higher Education in the Taraki party might indicate a desire to involve the Soviets more intensively in the tertiary education field to ensure ideological purity and harmony in a critical area which has heretofore been an arena for extensive American participation and influence.
