878
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
this nation’s ability to maximize its potential contribution to elimi-
nating hunger and poverty.
Although the United States is still the world’s largest aid donor in
absolute terms (and is the world’s largest donor of private assistance),
it ranks twelfth behind other Western donors of Official Development
Assistance (ODA) in percentage of Gross National Product (GNP). The
United States defines ODA as including the bilateral programs (AID
development assistance and economic support funds, food aid, and the
work of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and Peace
Corps), U.S. contributions to international financial institutions, and
U.S. contributions to international organizations. At the peak of the
Marshall Plan to rehabilitate post-war Europe, America’s ODA came to
2.7 percent of GNP. Over the past 30 years, that percentage has shrunk
to 0.22 percent of GNP, or less than a tenth of its earlier level.
These reductions have the most adverse impacts on the very
poorest (“food priority”) developing countries, which depend on
grants or highly concessional aid for 80 percent of their development
capital.
U.S. educational, scientific and technical institutions constitute a
unique resource for global development efforts. However, budget cuts
prevent AID from taking full advantage of these facilities. AID’s insti-
tutional capacity to deliver high quality technical assistance has been
allowed to deteriorate dramatically, due to a shift to outside contractors
and because the Agency has not dramatically shifted the composition
of its personnel to implement the New Directions strategy. Although 60
percent of its development assistance program funds are for rural de-
velopment, food and nutrition, only a small percentage of the Agency’s
own staff is expert in these fields.
Moreover, research in the physical, biological and social sciences
as related to development is seriously underfunded. While the realloca-
tion of existing research funds would help to accelerate the production
of basic food crops in tropical zones, the long-term need is to direct a far
larger share of America’s research capabilities and research budget to
the task of overcoming hunger and poverty in developing nations.
In addition, U.S. development assistance legislation is burdened
with requirements that prohibit assistance to particular nations, or in-
hibit the development of certain industries in developing countries,
even though these restrictions seldom have a development rationale.
These restrictive legislative provisions have especially negative effects
on U.S. participation in the multilateral banks and other international
organizations. In the Commission’s view, measures that allow narrow
domestic economic or political interests to interfere with development
assistance objectives are ultimately counterproductive to the process of
development and an obstacle to the elimination of hunger.
