848  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
due to internal and external causes; Internal: inadequate credit, high 
cost of production, lack of rural roads, high taxation. External causes: 
low prices in world markets, high sales cost to the American consumer, 
low  world consumption, lack of preferential treatment for Central 
American coffee by the United States, lack of a broad scale United States 
assistance program for Latin American countries. To remedy the situ-
ation they recommended United States cooperation for stabilization of 
prices and volume of sales, granting of long-­term credits at low rates 
of interest to improve the coffee industry (current rates being from 9% 
to 13%), and long term credit to the Government of Nicaragua for the 
construction of rural roads.
The labor groups received by Dr. Eisenhower expressed their con-
cern at the low standards of living in the country and the acuteness of the 
housing shortage. They expressed great interest in an ICA-­sponsored 
program for self-­help, low-­cost houses to be built by the prospective 
inhabitants of the houses during their spare time. With labor being 
furnished by the prospective inhabitants and the land donated by the 
Nicaraguan Government, the only cost would be for materials. It was 
indicated this would run between $800 and $1500 per house.
The Government’s presentation was made through the National 
Economic Council. It indicated that at the present time public as well 
as private investment had reached the highest level in Nicaragua’s his-
tory. The per capita income had risen from $l40 in 1950 to $208 in 1955. 
Cotton production increased from 22,000 bales in 1950 to 205,000 in 
1954. Industrial production rose three-­fold in the same period. During 
the same period there was a 53% rise in the cost of basic foodstuffs. In 
1956 Nicaraguan economy suffered a severe setback in all fields. The 
drop in coffee prices became more severe and the Government resorted 
to measures of fiscal and monetary correction which tended to reduce 
the country’s economic activity. During this period the number of 
unpaid debts to the National Bank (which controls 80% of the credit in 
the country) rose to some $12 million. This is a sum equivalent to one-­
third of the outstanding agricultural credit in the country.
The Nicaraguan Government stated that it had maintained an 
unchanged policy of cordiality toward foreign investors. The general 
law for exploitation of natural resources as well as the law of incen-
tive and protection of interest gives equal treatment to foreigners and 
Nicaraguans. The foreign investment law of 1956 guarantees the right 
to send profits abroad and the Nicaraguan Government states that it 
recognizes that private investment flows only to those countries where 
attractive conditions prevail. Nicaraguans stated they believed Central 
American economic integration was indispensable and that only the 
formation of a common market would permit satisfactory economic 
development. The National Economic Council requested assistance in 
measures to stop price declines and in measures to diversify national
