10
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
General Climate
The industrialized countries and LDCs are hoping that steady ex-
pansion of the United States, West German, and Japanese economies
will generate worldwide recovery. While the United States is com-
mitted to sustained economic expansion and has been willing to accept
the resulting trade deficit, Japan, in particular, has continued to main-
tain large trade surpluses both with the United States and the rest of
non-OPEC world. While the United States has shifted from a surplus
trade balance in 1975 of $4.2 billion to a deficit of $14.3 billion in the first
11 months of 1976 (annual rate on a CIF basis), Japan continues to run a
large trade surplus with ourselves and the rest of the non-OPEC world.
There is a significant danger over the next six months that the com-
bination of the slow economic recovery of the Western countries and
their growing oil-related trade deficits will result in an increasing
number of protectionist trade measures being imposed. The first sub-
stantial movement in this direction has taken the form of requests by
the European Community (EC) for Japanese export restraints.
The Japanese surplus, and its concentration in certain products,
such as automobiles, consumer electronic products, and steel, has led
to near hysteria in Europe. The EC Commission has wrung from the
Japanese export restrictions on steel and inter-industry discussions on
curbing other Japanese exports. The dangers to U.S. trading interests
are that the limitations on access to the European market will result in
diversion of these products to the U.S. market in injurious quantities,
that the Japanese will open their market in a way which discriminates
in favor of European exports at the expense of our trade, and that the
maintenance of an open trading system is threatened by the EC-
Japanese arrangements.
Strenuous U.S. efforts will be required to rebuild the commitment
of Europe and Japan to cooperate with us to manage bilateral trade
problems responsibly and to move now toward improving the frame-
work of the international trading system. A further Japanese response
to the EC on concrete trade advantages (and export restraints) is due in
just over a month. U.S. concerns must be made known to the EC and
Japan soon and forcefully, if we wish to avoid having bilateral arrange-
ments take the place of broader solutions.
Specific Trade Actions
A number of specific problems which have been raised by peti-
tions under the Trade Act of 1974 will have to be dealt with over the
next few months. These petitions have generated concern abroad about
the general direction of U.S. trade policy. United States leadership in
the effort to avoid a drift towards protectionism is greatly complicated
