796 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 asking that these students be granted the right to complete their courses of study. They stress that these students are in many cases non-political or friendly to the U.S., and they represent a new generation of Iranian leadership. It is not in our interest to alienate these individuals simply because of a technicality. (U) Justice/INS pointed out that these students could have applied for alteration of their status prior to the President’s announcement. Normally, the specific time provision was assigned because of projected periods of study. INS would prefer simply to enforce the President’s initial decision and grant no extensions. Jody Powell observed that this goes to the nature of the policy decision itself: are our interests served by having more Iranians in this country? Do we want them to get out or not? (C) Dr. Brzezinski said he was inclined to be lenient in this case, which he thought would serve the national interest. Mr. Cutler agreed that these students should receive equal treatment. It was not necessary to grant extensions on a near-permanent basis. Rather, he would favor an option which would grant extensions for such students to complete only their current course of study or degree level (e.g. Bachelor’s, Master’s, PhD. etc.), at which point they would be required to leave. Those individuals who have already been accepted to graduate schools, law schools, medical schools and the like would be permitted to continue with those studies.4 Those students in this country on scholarships or international exchange (“J” visas) would be accorded the same treatment. Dr. Brzezinski, State, Justice/INS, Treasury, and Defense all agreed that such an approach would be equitable, and the SCC unanimously recommended it to the President. INS agreed that it could administer such a program. (C) Approve5 Insist that the 7,000 students depart as their present visas expire. 3. ICJ Decision. Secretary-General Waldheim has not circulated the ICJ decision as a Security Council document as yet, since he is waiting for the official text of the decision to be forwarded to him by the Court. Reportedly, the ICJ has sent the text, but it has not been received.6 We will press this to insure that the ICJ decision is circulated in the immediate future. That is the first necessary step. The second step is consultations with the new President of the SC and other SC members. Don 4 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “But be very strict in identifying such students. J.” 5 Carter checked this option and initialed in the right margin. 6 The United States sent the text of the ICJ judgment (see footnote 2, Document 286) to the United Nations in a June 9 letter. (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, p. 311)
