Afghanistan
691
out its international obligations, in a perfectly normal manner. In early
April, the USSR agreed to a $150 million economic grant for Kabul,
and appears to be encouraging the East Europeans to help alleviate
the dismal Afghan economic situation and to give the illusion at least
of socialist solidarity. Soviet propaganda has extolled the reforms of
the Kabul regime and attempted to portray the rebels as, “bandits”
controlled by reactionary mullahs and egged on by outside “imperial-
ist” provocateurs. Hardly a week has gone by in which the Soviet
media have not highlighted the visit of an Afghan delegation or senior
official to the USSR or Eastern Europe. Similarly, the Soviets have
given favorable play to the Cuban foreign minister’s recent trip to
Afghanistan and have used the occasion to re-emphasize Kabul’s
nonalignment.
Soviet Hopes
Although they underestimated the intensity of international and
Islamic criticism, the Soviets certainly anticipated some trouble. How-
ever, they apparently expected it to be short-lived and no greater in
duration and severity than after Czechoslovakia in 1968. In this they
were wrong. But they may be heartened by signs of obvious differences
in tactical approach between the US, the West Europeans, and Japan
on issues of current political, cultural, and economic relationships with
the USSR. Moscow is still probably counting on the stake of America’s
allies in detente in Europe to lead them to accept the intervention as
a fait accompli.
In terms of the regional response to the Soviet action, Moscow may
also believe it has seen the worst. Relations with Iran appear no worse
than they would have been if there had been no invasion, and, in any
case, US-Iranian relations remain in shambles. Similarly, Pakistan has
yet to embrace openly the rebel cause and is hesitating to align itself
with the US. Moscow probably believes that this is a result of its policy
of playing on Islamabad’s fear of Soviet retribution while offering
reassurances and increased aid. Moscow probably also judges that the
damage to its relations with India has been negligible because of New
Delhi’s concern over increased US aid to Pakistan and its suspicions
of China. Further afield, the Soviets are probably still calculating that
they can eventually refocus Arab attention away from Afghanistan to
the Palestinian and Iranian problems and, thus, on the US.
Military Commitment Remains
In any case, Moscow is not backing away from its military commit-
ment in Afghanistan. During Afghan Foreign Minister Dost’s visit to
Moscow in March, the Afghans and Soviets signed an agreement on
the stationing of forces which provides for the “temporary” presence
of Soviet troops in Afghanistan. Presumably, this agreement is similar
