474 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI question preventing taking the Krasnoyarsk radar structures down to the ground. The Secretary added that some on the U.S. side wanted the Soviets to go further and destroy the foundations too. We could forgo this, however. This was not necessary or desirable. The previous night he had spoken of a disconnect between the Soviet people in the SCC and Shevardnadze’s position in Wyoming. Shevardnadze had reassured him, having made the point very forcefully that a decision had been made at the political level and it would be carried out at the technical level. The Secretary recalled that Shevardnadze had also spoken in Wyoming about visiting U.S. radars at Thule and Fylingdales. He had told Shevardnadze in Wyoming that we would discuss this among ourselves. We had now reached a decision allowing us to facilitate visits to these radars. We had discussed the question with the Danes and the British. The visits would, of course, need to be closely coordinated with them, particularly in the case of the UK since Flyingdales was an RAF base. As he had told Shevardnadze, it would be important that if these visits were to be conducted that they be done so in a manner that put these issues behind us rather than making the problem worse. He had also suggested that the U.S. would like to visit two large Soviet radars at Pechora and Baranovichi. He understood that Shevardnadze had agreed to look into these requests and reply later. Shevardnadze said that, the previous day, he had said with full responsibility, and would reaffirm today, that everything he had said in Wyoming about Krasnoyarsk would be put into effect in full. He was not in a position to say exactly what procedures would be carried out. He had put this question to Karpov; notwithstanding the latter’s clarifications, he would now repeat that the Wyoming statement would be carried out. As for the request to visit U.S. radars in Greenland and the UK, Shevardnadze thought the Secretary’s reply was a very important step forward. The visits would serve to enhance confidence and help the Soviets to arrange their further relationship with the U.S. on the basis of reciprocity and mutual trust. The Soviets were prepared to contact the British leadership and find a mutual agreement on the terms for a visit. He expected the U.S. would work to the same end, given that these were American allies. Regarding Pechora and Baranovichi, as he had said the previous day he did not even know where these were. But in principle he favored openness—Open Skies, Open Lands, etc. Nevertheless, the Soviet side would need to work on this specific request. To repeat, Shevardnadze said their position on Krasnoyarsk had not changed. The Soviet side would look into the question of visits to
