660  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the treaty must be ratified, and an official undertaking would make 
ratification difficult. We are proposing an approach that is unofficial, 
informal, not legally-­binding, not requiring ratification. This responds 
to what your Secretary has told us are your concerns. An informal 
understanding we will hold to without a juridically-­binding document 
that must be ratified by the Senate. A gentleman’s agreement.
Bartholomew: Moving on to para 9, first an observation. The 
words compliance, obligations, and verify are of course out of keeping 
with the character of the politically-­binding declarations we are talking 
about. Karpov: Don’t nit pick the words. We can fix this editorially.
Bartholomew: What does the last phrase on cooperative measures 
mean? Karpov: We have already talked about the type of ships capable 
of carrying nuclear SLCMs. In the future we might come up with other 
ideas that make it easier to assure ourselves on the numbers on each 
side. We are not talking about more than that.
Bartholomew: If I understand this does not establish a future 
requirement. This says such measures as may be agreed by the parties 
in the future. Karpov: It is very simple. In the future we might agree on 
other measures. Bartholomew: This is not required. Karpov: It would 
be my mutual agreement, it is not excluded.
Bartholomew: Let me make a couple of observations. First, let me 
underscore to you that what the Secretary had to say, and I have had to 
say, are initial observations. They do not cover all of your proposals. I 
want to be careful to tell you that if neither Secretary Baker nor I have 
not addressed a proposal or asked a question, that does not mean there 
is not a problem. Karpov: This goes without saying. Bartholomew: It 
is important to be clear. Again to be clear, the questions I have asked 
should be understood as seeking clarity, and not as an indication of 
interest. Karpov: Or more than that, as the establishment of one or 
another position.
Bartholomew: I have to underscore what Secretary Baker said 
about the particular problems he cited—ALCM range, ALCM heavy 
bomber limit, SLCM common limit. I also want to underscore what 
he said about appreciating what Shevardnadze has sent with you and 
the work it represents. In terms of following up, the Secretary spoke of 
taking this up at their next meeting. He almost gave me a heart attack 
when he said he did not rule out the possibility of responding before 
that. Karpov: Just work on it, don’t get excited. Bartholomew: We will 
see if we can give you a response before their next meeting. There is no 
guarantee.
Karpov: I think these questions that you have raised and the 
answers we have tried to give have made clear our sense in introduc-
ing this. I hope this helps you to give a positive response to our ideas. 
We put a lot of effort into this. I wanted you to know that. If something
