72  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
impossible, then the smaller number could make a start and set up their 
arrangements by consultation in such a way that the other countries 
could join later.
Dr. Prebisch said that ECLA had been requested to prepare a list 
of products on which trade barriers should be reduced in the first step 
toward Central American economic integration in mid-1960.
Mr. Kybal remarked that some sectors of United States public opin-
ion apparently fear that a Latin American common market might have 
a trade diverting effect. Mr. Mann agreed that protectionist sentiment 
exists in the United States and that there is some fear that regional 
economic integration movements may harm the export trade of the 
United States. He said that we realize that there will be future trade 
benefits from regional common markets (e.g., the European Economic 
Community); there is a feeling, however, that the short-­term results 
may not be beneficial to the United States. It is important that regional 
arrangements be nondiscriminatory and outward-­looking.
Dr. Prebisch said that the Latin American countries will import all 
the goods they can pay for, so the United States need not fear a reduc-
tion of exports to Latin America because of any effects of regional eco-
nomic integration. He said that, with good fiscal, trade and monetary 
policies, Latin America in a few years would be able to pay for its own 
development. He said that if Latin America set up its own automobile 
industry, over-­all purchases from the United States would not decline 
but the pattern of imports would, of course, change.
Mr. Mann said that it would be wrong to create an artificial or 
uneconomic industry in automobiles or any other product that could 
never compete.
In reply to Dr. Prebisch’s remark that a subregional group might 
be too small, Mr. Mann said that we should not be concerned about the 
size of the initial group—­only that it be outward-­looking and based 
on the idea of competition. He said that the division of the world into 
a number of discriminatory blocs is contrary to the over-­all multilat-
eral principles of the GATT which we believe in. He said that in Latin 
America we are concerned over the population growth and believe that 
the formation of a true common market in Latin America can help solve 
the economic problems connected with fast population growth.
Mr. Mann then asked Dr. Prebisch what he thought, of the idea of 
an inter-American common market as suggested by Senator Mansfield.2 
Dr. Prebisch said he did not believe public opinion either in Latin 
America or in the United States was prepared for such integration. He 
said that, in any such arrangement, Latin America would insist upon 
2 Senator Mike Mansfield (D-Mont.) prepared the formation of a common market 
for North and South America in a letter to Secretary Herter which was related to the press 
on October 31, 1959.
