750 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 252. Report Prepared by the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen)1 Washington, January 2, 1981 Report of Meeting of Summit Personal Representatives, Paris December 9 and 10, 1980 1. General. At the evening meeting of December 9, three general questions were discussed: (a) Summit Arrangements. Canadian representatives explained that the heads of government were expected to arrive at Ottawa July 19; they will dine July 19 and meet July 20 in a nearby resort (Montebello), and will return to Ottawa for the second day’s meeting (July 21). Dinner on Sunday, July 19, will be a tete-a-tete among leaders only, to help them to get to know each other. The Tuesday, July 20, session in Ottawa will include Ministers, as in the past. There remained a difference of view about the appropriate format for the Monday, July 20, session in Montebello. Three possibilities were discussed: —The Canadian Personal Representative proposed that all Monday should be spent in private talks among leaders, with only the Personal Representatives present as note-takers. Ministers would meet separately in either Ottawa or Montebello—preferably to discuss issues requiring Ministerial, rather than heads of government, action. —The German Personal Representative proposed that the Venice format be followed, which would mean that two Ministers would be present with each head of government for the Monday morning economic discussions, and Foreign Ministers, only, would be present for the heads of governments’ Monday afternoon discussion of foreign policy issues. The Germans felt strongly about the need for such Ministerial attendance; the Chancellor would find it difficult, from the standpoint of coalition politics, to exclude either of the Ministers (both being of the other coalition party). —The British accepted the German suggestion regarding Foreign Minister attendance at the Monday afternoon discussion of foreign policy, but wanted to limit the Monday morning discussion of economic issues to heads of government and Personal Representatives. The question was raised by some delegations as to whether heads of 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 60, Chron: 1/81. Confidential. Sent to Brzezinski under cover of a January 5 memorandum from Owen; Brzezinski initialed Owen’s cover memorandum and wrote “fine.” (Ibid.)
