842 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX “where was Cuba in 1961 when we began things?” and added that the effort by “some” to turn the NAM into a “third factor between the blocs, but supporting one bloc, could only make the world situation worse.” Yugoslavia did not intend to let that happen. Tito went on to say that Castro will not succeed in his attempts to split the movement into what Cuba describes as “progressive” and “reactionary” factions, and that Yugoslavia had strong allies in its battle against Castro’s attempts to take over the movement. These allies, he said, include Algeria, Tanzania, India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Zambia, and “many others.” “We are not afraid,” he said, “and we are ready to do battle.” 4. In response to a Harriman question on Soviet and Cuban activities in Africa, Tito said that “some intervention” in African affairs may be a necessary evil, given the current state of relations on the continent. But no African country will let its policies be changed by the presence of foreign elements within the country. President Tito noted that he was particularly pleased that in the speeches given at the opening session of the NAM Conference this week in response to his address, the spokesmen from each of the four continents went out of their way to stress the need for NAM unity and to pay tribute to Yugoslavia for its leading role within the movement. 5. US-Soviet relations. Governor Harriman noted that US-Soviet relations had deteriorated in the period since the Governor had seen President Tito in Washington last March. The Governor said he wanted to reassure President Tito, however, that President Carter remains firmly committed to both SALT and a CTB. He added that Secretary Vance has developed a very good relationship of mutual confidence with Foreign Minister Gromyko and that he believes that this personal relationship will be a great asset in the months ahead. He went on to explain to President Tito the severe impact that the Shcharanskiy trial4 has had on Congress and public opinion in the United States and that as a consequence the President’s room for maneuver would continue severely restricted in the absence of some conciliatory move on the part of the Soviets. The Governor asked whether President Tito saw any way for the US and the Soviets to move to free themselves from their present difficulties. 5. President Tito replied that he had heard that there was a possibility of an exchange of the two Soviet spies arrested in New York for Shcharanskiy, and that if this exchange went forward it might at least serve to remove the case as a cause celebre. Governor Harriman said 4 Anatoly Borisovich Shcharansky, human rights activist and spokesman for the Moscow Helsinki Group was considered one of the founders of the Refusnik movement in the Soviet Union. In 1977, he was arrested on charges of spying for the United States and sentenced to 13 years in a labor camp. Released in 1986, he emigrated to Israel.
