Mr. Mathieu also said that treaty of 1904 between Bolivia and Chile8 created certain obligations for Chile towards Bolivia as well as rights with reference to port of Arica and Arica-La Paz railroad; and that inasmuch as large majority of population and practically all business and industry of Arica were Chilean, the Government believed that Chilean Congress would not consent to surrendering Department of Arica at this time, but would be willing to give entire Department of Tacna to Peru. He said that the Government believed that the most important thing for Chile, however, was to obtain Bolivian friendship; and that at once after acquiring definite title to Arica, it would negotiate with Bolivia to give that country a port, but that compensation would be expected for it, and intimated that commercial concessions would be satisfactory. I explained to Mathieu that I had no instructions from you to ask him any questions and that he must not infer from any I asked either that you wished the information or that it indicated any idea or plan you were entertaining; then I inquired if he thought that it would be wise to attempt to adjust the entire Pacific question now, including Bolivian aspirations. Mathieu replied that that would complicate matters. He said that your tender of our good offices spoke only of the difficulties between Peru and Chile, and he thought that limiting the matter in this way would be better, leaving Bolivian question for subsequent negotiations between that country and Chile. I inquired if Chile were willing to give Bolivia a strip 5 kilometers wide both sides the railway, Peru in turn to do the same. Mathieu said he thought it might be arranged that way, but he did not appear to have given the question very careful study. He said more than once in his conversation that Chile would accept almost any arrangement which did not take the Department of Arica away from her. It is my impression that Chile wants to use Arica for trading purposes, and earnestly wishes an arrangement with Bolivia; but that she will be apt to exact a heavy price for it or impose conditions Bolivia will not be disposed to accept. If question is postponed and is left to direct negotiations, these will be protracted and may possibly not terminate successfully, an outcome that would be disturbing to South American harmony and that would create
