568 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Paris. He is after all a European expert, he has previously served in France, and we know he will do very well. And it happens to also be consistent with his wishes. We are now going to assign Ambassador Bessmertnykh to come to Washington. Presently, he is one of my first deputies. He has worked here in Washington for many years; he is a very decent individual; he knows the United States extremely well, and he respects the United States. It is my view that if you don’t respect the country and the people to which you are assigned, you really cannot do a very good job. In any case, we are going to formalize his appointment. I hope and I assume there is no problem with gaining your consent for him. It is important that he participate in all our meetings. He knows the State Department and the President well and he’s also close to Gorbachev. A few months ago he came here with a special message from Gorbachev. Since he’s going to be the ambassador there certainly will be no need for any special envoys. You can fully assume and you can have full confidence that he is very close to both Gorbachev and to me. He knows all the problems of arms control and all the other problems extremely well. You can feel confident that when you talk to him about any issue it will be transmitted to both Gorbachev and to me. Baker: We’ve heard rumors that this might be happening and let me just say that we are pleased to have Bessmertnykh come here. You can count on the fact that he’ll have access, and he will do very well here. In saying this I want you to know while we are pleased to have Bessmertnykh come, please understand that we do believe that Ambassador Dubinin has been an excellent ambassador. He’s discrete, he has good communication skills, he’s efficient, he’s enjoyed good relations with the people here, and he has developed a reputation that is quite good. I’ve trusted him, and I’m pleased that he will be going to Paris because that is something that I know he’d like to do. I am a little concerned that there were rumors that he did not enjoy the confidence of the top levels of the U.S. Government, and I want you to know that’s simply not true. He’s been an excellent ambassador. Shevardnadze: Thanks. The second point I’d like to raise is about how we are going to conduct our work here in this Ministerial. I think the first session will be on arms control and will be attended by the experts. Then we’ll have the regional issues and the bilateral issues meeting and we should invite the leaders of the subgroups and especially the subgroups on the regional questions. Then I think tomorrow we might ask them to give us formal reports. Baker: Fine. That’s the way it’s set up. Shevardnadze: Let me also mention another item—­the SS-24 missile. You remember I said in Namibia there might be other possible variants
