782 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV cruise missiles on the retired POLARIS submarines, giving us initial deployment by mid-1983 and 600 cruise missiles deployed at sea by 1985 at a cost of about $2B. Either of these forces has greater military effectiveness than the FB–111B/C program at substantial less cost.2 Harold Brown 2 At the bottom of the memorandum Brown wrote: “P.S. You are also aware of another factor that I mentioned to you on the phone. So is Jim Wright. But Bob Carr is not. HB.” No other record of Brown’s telephone conversation with Carter was found. 184. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 12, 1980 SUBJECT Strategic Balance in the 1980s Stan Turner has issued the latest NIE on Soviet strategic nuclear forces. Harold Brown has at the same time circulated recent Defense studies of the strategic balance. You should read as much of the NIE Summary Volume I as possible (Tab D). I am summarizing very briefly for you here the essence of what is said about static and dynamic trends and what can be inferred about Soviet programmatic intentions. (TS) The Static Trends The chart at Tab A simply compares numbers of U.S. and Soviet RVs and bomber weapons on the left and the megatonnage on the right [7 lines not declassified] (TS/U) The Dynamic Trends Another view of comparative capabilities is gained by assuming that one side strikes the other first. The chart at Tab B shows the NIE results of such a comparison of U.S. and Soviet SALT-­limited forces. [7 lines not declassified] 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/­Security, Ermarth, Box 3, Defense (Items in the System): 7/79–6/80. Top Secret; Sensitive; [­handling restriction not declassified]. Sent for information. In the upper right corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig—we need clearer charts showing comparisons to a) with/­ without SALT b) with/wo MX. For use w/ Congress—J.” Tabs A–C were not found attached.
