Honduras 829 President said that if he were to receive message from Somoza indicating readiness to participate in such orderly transfer of authority he would reply in like vein. Impression I received is that Villeda Morales would be happy participate in procedure which might be example for entire area and, perhaps, beginning of new era of improved relations between Nicaragua and Honduras. That, at least, was atmosphere in presidential palace today; a personal meeting on border between Somoza and Villeda Morales to formalize agreed procedure and to demonstrate spirit of collaboration was even discussed in my presence by several ranking officials of GOH. Now, it was also suggested, only dispute over Swan Islands is with U.S.6 Foreign Minister and others insisted to me that Swan Islands is basis for different kinds of disagreement which they satisfied can and will be resolved by friendly discussion. Meanwhile, however, there have been repeated references in radio broadcasts and by sound trucks to Swan Islands issue and even to protest meetings. “ICJ resolution calling for execution of royal arbitration award of 1906, which settled frontier dispute between our countries, is motive patriotic jubilation and Central Americanist satisfaction for the Government and people of Honduras because, in this manner, bonds of affection and understanding between two sister republics are fully restored. Justice never one-­sided, wherefore I am sure you will join our celebration of judicial sentence which definitely eliminates cause of resentment between our peoples and rebuilds between Honduras and Nicaragua bases of traditional and unbreakable friendship. I hope as we raise again symbols of Honduran sovereignty in localities which until now have been subject de facto occupation, our two peoples, united in brotherhood since their political emancipation, may strengthen their economic, social and cultural bonds in noble aim of Central American integration. I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to you (sic) the expressions of my high (sic) and distinguished consideration. Ramon Villeda Morales, President of Honduras.” Burrows
