3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
522
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
The conversation ended with Dobrynin recommending as he de-
parted that we look at the statement by Senator Mathias3 about U.S.
policy in Indochina and its relationship to U.S.-Soviet relations.
Attachment
Oral Message From the U.S. Leadership to the Soviet
Leadership
undated
The United States continues to view the situation in Indochina
with the utmost concern and, as emphasized in President Carter’s mes-
sage to Chairman Brezhnev,4 we believe that both of our countries must
act responsibly and effectively in bringing an end to the conflict in In-
dochina and in dampening the high tensions there.
As Ambassador Young said at the UN and as we have said to you
here and in Moscow, we cannot accept the Vietnamese invasion of
Cambodia.
While it has been our consistent desire to treat the dangerous situa-
tion in Indochina in such a way as to minimize the risk of heightened
tensions, in all frankness this approach is made more difficult for us by
the steady outpouring of official Soviet propaganda seeking to impli-
cate the United States in some way in the Chinese decision to use mili-
tary force against Vietnam.
As the Soviet Union knows, we strongly counseled China to exer-
cise restraint and not to attack Vietnam. We are today making another
appeal to China in this regard, and Secretary Blumenthal in Peking will
personally and on behalf of the President urge that China withdraw its
forces.
Continuation of the conflict in Indochina can only lead to the ex-
pansion of region-wide tensions and instabilities. Such concern is
shared by other countries in the area, and has been reflected in public
statements by the Governments of Japan, Australia, New Zealand, as
well as the ASEAN Foreign Ministers in their statement of February 20,
1979.
We believe some constructive proposals for defusing this dan-
gerous situation are emerging from the Security Council discussion
3 Charles Mathias (R-Maryland). Reference is presumably to Mathias’ February 26
statement; the text is printed in Congressional Record, vol. 125.3 (February 19–March 6,
1979), p. 3161.
4 See Document 172.
