United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 49 role and such funds should be segregated so as to avoid any impairment of credit of new institution in capital markets. B. Contributions to funds for both hard loan operations and soft loan operations should come from all the American states and voting power of any state should be broadly related to size of its capital contribution. C. United States Government should not repeat not have majority vote in management of funds for hard loan operations. However, with respect funds for soft loan operations U.S. recognizes limited extent to which Latin Americans able to contribute and hence U.S. willing accept majority contribution and majority vote in respect this department of institution’s operations. D. Capitalization of institution should take account limited capacity Latin Americans contribute gold or dollars to paid-­in capital. Hence reasonable portion L.A. contributions to funds for both hard and soft lending operations should be acceptable in local currencies. E. Payment of capital subscriptions should be spread over reasonable period of years. This desirable view (a) fact that institution will require initial period organization before operations can begin; and (b) desirable maximize total capitalization without undue financial strain on governments any particular year. F. Some portion total capital subscriptions should be in form contingent liability on governments meet obligations of institution. If institution soundly administered, this should enable it in time to raise capital through issuance bonds in private securities market. 4. As indicated Under Secretary Dillon’s statement at Committee of 21 on November 18, 1958 U.S. would consider that new development institution should play effective role in assisting member governments in field development planning, including selection development priorities and preparation projects. While U.S. unable elaborate further this suggestion now, anticipate will be able do so at meeting of financial experts in January. 5. U.S. would appreciate consideration by foreign governments of its proposals re inter-American development institution in preparation for January meeting and would hope to receive comments before then if practicable. 6. Understood that U.S. participation in institution to be negotiated of course subject Congressional approval. You also requested inform appropriate officials that U.S. delegation will be headed by T. Graydon Upton, Assistant Secretary of Treasury, who will be assisted by economic and financial experts. Inform re delegation of govt to which you accredited appreciated soonest.
