708
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
What kind of intelligence capabilities are needed for whatever kind of
world we foresee?
I have been struck in my brief experience here with the difficulty
that even the most thoughtful people have in finding time to think
about the year after next. Iran and Afghanistan have of course imposed
exceptionally heavy day-to-day pressures. But even pre-Iran it was my
impression that the top people in foreign policy, including the Presi-
dent, had little chance to stand off from immediate problems and think
ahead.
I have also been struck by the high quality and quantity of the com-
partmented wisdom within the government foreign policy community. I
had an interesting conversation the other day with our Ambassador-
Designate to Turkey.3 He has quite concrete policy proposals and is
prepared to guess/hope that within specific periods of time these could
lead to certain specific improvements in the internal stability of Turkey
and its dependability as an Ally. These proposals would add up to his
U.S. “program” for Turkey over the next several years. Some of his
ideas may be debatable; there may be Jim McIntyre constraints he
doesn’t appreciate, etc., but I am confident that the intellectual re-
sources exist in Washington to establish a coherent set of U.S. objectives
and expectations for Turkey. And I’m sure the appropriate experts
could build a list of U.S. “programs” and scenarios, 1980–85, for the 30
or 40 most important countries and all the major regions. These could
be valuable pieces of paper; still more valuable would be a systematic
effort to look at the separate programs and scenarios in relation to each
other.
I have asked previously whether you were satisfied there is
enough “contingency” planning in our foreign policy. I ran up a list of a
dozen or so contingencies, some obvious, some perhaps outlandish. A
much larger and more knowledgeable list could of course be drawn up.
This kind of thinking should be a major element in the foreign policy
study I am proposing. And again, there should be a systematic effort to
relate different places and situations to each other. If Contingency A
happens in Country B, does it increase the likelihood of Contingency C
in Country D, and what might be the further consequences in Countries
E and F?
To be factored into all these projections: Assumptions about en-
ergy, trade and investment, aid, the dollar.
3 Reference is to Spain, whom the President appointed Ambassador to Turkey on
February 19.
