Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II a. Evaluation by Bureaus and Missions of current and proposed programs: —to assure that women’s needs, interests, concerns and efforts are not overlooked or ignored; —to determine whether and how AID programs promote the Five-Year Minimum Goals in the World Plan of Action. AID will provide operating units with simple, objective criteria for use in this assessment. b. Allocation of funds in which central AID administrators inform the appropriate operating units of the nature and extent of efforts required to assure that programs provide sufficient emphasis on women’s rights. Tab C Paper Prepared in the Agency for International Development8 Washington, undated USE OF ECONOMIC AND FOOD ASSISTANCE TO IMPROVE HUMAN RIGHTS CONDITIONS Economic assistance and food assistance are potential tools for pursuing our human rights objectives. Both have strengths and weaknesses in this regard. —Economic assistance is perceived to be immediately responsive to policy control—the presumption is that we could cut direct financial assistance to governments pursuing policies of which we disapprove. A distinction should be made between development assistance, which is intended to benefit the poor majority, and security supporting assistance which is extended for political reasons. Manipulation of development assistance programs to achieve short-run political leverage, however, is not consistent with sound development programming since it is aimed at the needy, who may be those suffering most from denial of human rights. Security supporting assistance could and should be more responsive to short-run political considerations. —Food assistance under PL 480 Title I is more amenable to shortrun manipulation, in that it may technically be seen as balance-ofpayments assistance. Such use runs the considerable political risk, however, of appearing to deny food to hungry people in order to achieve U.S. political objectives. (The domestic purposes of the program may also argue against sharp increases and decreases.) Title II, 8 Confidential.
