172
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
a. Evaluation by Bureaus and Missions of current and proposed
programs:
—to assure that women’s needs, interests, concerns and ef-
forts are not overlooked or ignored;
—to determine whether and how AID programs promote the
Five-Year Minimum Goals in the World Plan of Action.
AID will provide operating units with simple, objective criteria for
use in this assessment.
b. Allocation of funds in which central AID administrators inform
the appropriate operating units of the nature and extent of efforts re-
quired to assure that programs provide sufficient emphasis on
women’s rights.
Tab C
Paper Prepared in the Agency for International
Development8
Washington, undated
USE OF ECONOMIC AND FOOD ASSISTANCE TO IMPROVE
HUMAN RIGHTS CONDITIONS
Economic assistance and food assistance are potential tools for
pursuing our human rights objectives. Both have strengths and weak-
nesses in this regard.
—Economic assistance is perceived to be immediately responsive to
policy control—the presumption is that we could cut direct financial
assistance to governments pursuing policies of which we disapprove.
A distinction should be made between development assistance, which
is intended to benefit the poor majority, and security supporting assist-
ance which is extended for political reasons. Manipulation of develop-
ment assistance programs to achieve short-run political leverage, how-
ever, is not consistent with sound development programming since it is
aimed at the needy, who may be those suffering most from denial of
human rights. Security supporting assistance could and should be
more responsive to short-run political considerations.
—Food assistance under PL 480 Title I is more amenable to short-
run manipulation, in that it may technically be seen as balance-of-
payments assistance. Such use runs the considerable political risk,
however, of appearing to deny food to hungry people in order to
achieve U.S. political objectives. (The domestic purposes of the pro-
gram may also argue against sharp increases and decreases.) Title II,
8 Confidential.
