1206 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement announcement in the event of a declaration of DEFCON 1. In addition, the President stated that tests of action to be taken under DEFCON 3, 4 or 5 should be clearly identified as routine drills or exercises to the responsible commanders or officials and, when necessary, to the public. c. Requested the NSC Special Committee on Attack Warning Channels and Procedures for Civilians to revise the chart enclosed with the reference memorandum of December 14, 1960, in the light of the discussion at this meeting, and submit it for consideration by the Council by Memorandum Action. NOTE: The action in b above, as approved by the President, sub­ sequently transmitted to the Secretary of Defense and the Director, OCDM. The actions in b and c above, as approved by the President, sub­ sequently transmitted to the Chairman, NSC Special Committee, for appropriate implementation. [Omitted here are pages 7–10.] 4. EVACUATION AND PROTECTION OF U.S. CITIZENS IN DANGER AREAS ABROAD (NSC 106/3; NSC Action No. 2259–­b–(1); Memo for NSC from Acting Executive Secretary, same subject, dated August 8, 1960; Executive Order 10893, dated November 8, 1960; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated November 29, 1960; NSC 6019; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated December 15, 1960) Mr. Gray presented NSC 6019 to the Council. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s Briefing Note is filed in the Minutes of the Meeting and another is attached to this Memorandum). In the course of his briefing, Mr. Gray referred to the three changes in the agreed Planning Board paper proposed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and called upon General Lemnitzer. General Lemnitzer said one suggestion offered by the Joint Chiefs of Staff was designed to meet the problem that was always arising in planning, i.e., how to divide military forces between the missions of (1) evacuation and (2) military action. In his view the commander in the field was the only one who could properly decide how to divide his forces to meet competing requirements. Mr. Merchant said the first change proposed by the JCS was acceptable to the State Department. General Lemnitzer, turning to the second JCS proposal, said he believed the word “coordinating” was preferable to the phrase “act­ ing under the general supervision of the Ambassador.” The President said that, in his view, the Department of State should approve the pol­ icy of evacuating U.S. citizens from danger areas but from that point on evacuation operations were almost entirely a military matter. It would be wrong to designate the Ambassador as the official in charge
