Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1057 length differs in real terms by at least 5 percent from that missile should be treated as a new type. The second issue concerns the “downloading” of warheads from ballistic missiles. Both sides face the practical need to adapt the forces we each now have to fit the new strategic reality that START will create. Downloading could be a key element in managing that transition. The major problem with downloading is that it undermines the stability and predictability about each other’s strategic forces that START is intended to enhance. Warheads downloaded from missiles could readily be replaced so that the total number of missile warheads on a side could change rapidly and unpredictably, leading to a dramatic, destabilizing change in the strategic balance. That potential for instability is what lay behind the concerns we expressed about the warhead carrying capacity of your SS–18 and SS–N–23 missiles in the exchanges that preceded the 1987 Summit agreement between you and President Reagan. I assume that your questions during those exchanges about the capabilities of our Peacekeeper and D–5 missiles reflected similar concerns. The 1987 Summit agreement represented a fair balancing of our respective concerns, but it also accepted an element of unpredictability about the strategic balance under START. Any changes in the 1987 agreement, including downloading you and I might agree to, would add to that uncertainty. That is the core of the problem and why I believe that downloading must be sharply limited. That also is why I believe that it is appropriate to treat the SS–N–18 issue in the context of an overall approach to downloading. In my view, an approach that strikes the best balance between achieving the stability and predictability that START is designed to achieve, and avoiding wasteful scrapping of current missiles, would be to allow each side to equip and count one type of existing missile with fewer warheads than was agreed at the 1987 Summit. Under this approach, we could remove one or two warheads from our existing three-warhead Minuteman missiles. You could equip and count your SS–N–18 missiles at three warheads each instead of the seven that was agreed at the 1987 Summit. This approach would allow each of us to remove an approximately equal number of warheads while avoiding the risks to strategic stability that more extensive downloading would pose. I recognize that the two sides may well identify other transition requirements that we do not now foresee and new ways to deal with the problems that downloading poses. Accordingly, I am prepared to agree that this approach should permit such additional downloading as the two sides might agree following entry into force of the START treaty. The final issue concerns the ban on denying performance data about ballistic missiles. This provision is crucial to the transparency needed to build confidence and stability. It is indispensable to effective verification.
