Non-Proliferation
791
sense of the importance of our increasing cooperation in the non-
proliferation field, as conveyed in his last letter to you before leaving
office.3 We look forward to continuing our nuclear policy consultations
later this month, as we indicated to your ambassador, so as to further
align our nuclear policies. Presently we are in the process of reviewing
US policy and, in this regard, I would expect to confirm the continuity
of the basic policy directions announced in the October 28th Presiden-
tial statement.4
In the meantime, we have decided to move into official channels in
the contacts regarding sensitive nuclear projects in Brazil, about which
we have kept you informed. I anticipate high-level consultations with
both parties beginning next week, following up FRG State Secretary
Hermes’ visit to Washington and Vice President Mondale’s trip, and
we would look forward to discussing with you any progress as soon as
possible thereafter. This would afford us an opportunity to exchange
further views on the approach most likely to forestall enrichment and
reprocessing in Brazil, taking into account the important principles of
assured nuclear fuel supply and no commercial disadvantage raised
with you by Mr. Kissinger and pursued by US with the FRG.
As you know, President Carter attaches the highest importance to
removing nuclear proliferation risks in both Brazil and Pakistan, as
well as worldwide. I am encouraged by the progress we have made
with Prime Minister Bhutto and reported to you.5 I also believe that the
formula of a joint decision by France and Pakistan to indefinitely defer
Pakistan’s reprocessing plant, and substitution of French reactors, fuel
and perhaps a fuel fabrication plant, will facilitate a successful solution
of this problem.
In view of the forthcoming Pakistani elections I am indicating to
Prime Minister Bhutto that we might resume negotiations in March,
unless he prefers to open these earlier. In the interim, however, we are
making clear to him the seriousness and depth of our desire that he
forego his reprocessing plans, and this period will also give you and me
time to exchange views on the most desirable negotiating package from
our respective standpoints. I would therefore welcome any further
thoughts you can convey to me as to how best to proceed.
I greatly look forward to working with you in my new capacity,
and to contributing to a deepening of the important relationship be-
tween our two countries. Sincerely: Cyrus R. Vance: End text.
3 Kissinger’s January 17, 1977 letter to de Guiringaud is printed in Foreign Relations,
1969–1976, vol. E–15, Part 2, Documents on Western Europe, 1973–1976, Document 343.
4 See footnote 2, Document 317.
5 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
