Yugoslavia 945 hand it seems unlikely that they will be willing to take the lead in international efforts. Yugoslav interests have coincided with our own since no formulation which would legitimize continued Soviet military presence in Afghanistan would be acceptable to Yugoslavia given its concerns about any weakening of nonaligned opposition to intervention. In his February 25 letter to President Tito, the President stressed U.S. support for a neutral nonaligned Afghan government acceptable to the Afghan people and said that with Soviet withdrawal, the U.S. would be willing to join with the neighbors of Afghanistan in a guarantee of Afghanistan’s true neutrality and of non-interference in Afghanistan’s internal affairs.16 The Soviets show no signs of planning to reduce their presence and in a variety of ways have indicated their intention to remain in the country. At the same time, the Babrak regime is experiencing deep internal divisions. Thus, the Soviets seem far from achieving their twin objectives of establishing a viable regime in Kabul and pacifying the countryside. 2. Suggested Points —We believe it is of extreme importance that all countries, especially major nonaligned and Islamic states, cooperate with international efforts to make the Soviets pay a heavy and continued price for their aggression; —The United States has taken a series of strong bilateral and multilateral initiatives to demonstrate to the USSR our resolve. We would welcome any suggestions on how we might individually or jointly proceed in further pressing for an early Soviet withdrawal and the establishment of a popularly supported government in Kabul; —On April 17, the Afghan regime announced a package of proposals allegedly aimed at promoting a political solution of the Afghan conflict. The basic elements of this package are proposals for bilateral Afghan negotiations with Iran and Pakistan to normalize relations to be followed by a regional conference which would agree on a regional peace framework. Ultimately these talks would be expanded to include Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf states with the purpose of making the entire area a zone of peace; —In our view, this Afghan proposal is fully supported by the USSR and probably was drafted in Moscow. We do not believe it represents a serious effort to end the Afghan crisis; and 16 See footnote 6, Document 290.
