586 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI new Soviet proposals had produced for the U.S. side. If the Soviet side persisted, it would be difficult to conclude a START treaty, as had been agreed. Burt noted that from a Geneva perspective, it was important to comment. He did not wish to embarrass Ambassador Nazarkin, since they had an excellent working relationship, but he did want to help the Soviet side to understand why the United States was so surprised. Nazarkin and Burt had reviewed the results of the Moscow ministerial upon their return to Geneva, and had agreed on what had been resolved in the MECG. On SLCMs, the sole question remaining had been range, and whether conventional SLCMs should be included in the political declaration. On ALCMs, to be fair, attribution for future heavy bombers had remained a question. Burt stated that it was his feeling that the issue of an exclusion for conventional bombers and the question of distinguishing nuclear and conventional ALCMs had been settled in Moscow, and he had thus reported to his government. Akhromeyev responded that he would like to analyze the Soviet position on ALCMs, since he had taken part in the discussion in Moscow. He had not taken part in the discussion on SLCMs, but Ambassador Nazarkin had, and could give his own clarifications. Akhromeyev referred to the Soviet minutes of the discussions, saying that they contained all the language exchanged. The first issue, he stated, had to do with conventional heavy bombers. The question was whether 115 (the U.S. number) or 100 (the Soviet number) should be included in the 1600 launcher total. In Wyoming, Akhromeyev explained, Minister Shevardnadze gave his agreement to have 100 conventional heavy bombers excluded from the 1600 total. This offer was part of a package of proposals involving two preconditions. The first involved U.S. agreement to the 600-­km range. The second assumed that the counting rule for bombers would be according to their real carrying capacity. ALCMs would not be counted as the U.S. proposed in Moscow, i.e., 10 missiles per bomber when it could actually carry 20; but realistically, as equipped. Under those conditions, the Soviet side offered to exclude 100 conventional bombers from the 1600 total. The difference between the U.S. and Soviet positions—115 vs. 100 bombers—­was not discussed in Moscow. Not a word appeared in the minutes. For that reason, Akhromeyev stated, the Soviet side had decided to include all heavy bombers in the 1600. Akhromeyev continued by recalling that Under Secretary Bartholomew had asked him to clarify in Moscow whether the 40% rule would apply to future heavy bombers. The Soviet minutes of the meeting showed, Akhromeyev said, that he had responded by saying that all future heavy bombers would be equipped to carry 10 ALCMs,
