428 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 3. Should the United States accept an otherwise advantageous settlement: a. If Communist control were maintained over the satellites? b. If a Communist Government retained power in the USSR? c. Only if all Communist controls were destroyed? 4. In the event of general war initiated by the USSR, should the United States seek to keep Communist China out of the war, or endeavor by all necessary means to reduce the capabilities of Communist China to the point where it would be unable to endanger the security of the United States? 5. In the event of major war initiated by Communist China, or war initiated by a state other than the USSR, in which the USSR did not par­ ticipate at the beginning, should the United States, in order to avoid a clear and immediate danger of general war with the USSR, be prepared to terminate hostilities before the aggressor state had lost its will or ability to continue to wage war? 6. Can and should the United States undertake now to formulate post-­war policies and plans, e.g., terms of enemy surrender, border and territorial arrangements, administration of enemy territory, and inde­ pendence for national minorities? 127. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, January 12, 1959 OTHERS PRESENT Dr. Killian Dr. Kistiakowsky General Goodpastor Dr. Kistiakowsky said that, as the Geneva meetings on Surprise Attack went along, he became more and more impressed with the hazards to the United States of a system of inspection against surprise attack. While we tabled papers asserting the value of such a system, privately he had growing concern about it. Such a system would reveal detailed information on our deployments, our readiness, and the pro­ tective strengths and arrangements for our striking forces. If the system failed to give us warning, it would have given great net advantage to 1 Source: Concerns about inspection against surprise attack and nuclear testing. Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on January 14.
