Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I To be sure we have gained notable diplomatic successes—China normalization, India, and elsewhere—but these do not obviate the impression of assertiveness on the one side and acquiescence on the other—despite Soviet internal weaknesses, bureaucratic stagnation, and the dramatic drop in Soviet ideological appeal. Moreover, those decisions which you took and which were not only the right decisions but the tough decisions—on such matters as China, the MX,2 the defense budget, or even arms to Yemen3—have been interpreted as primarily motivated by the desire either to compensate for past weaknesses (e.g., Yemen vs. passivity on Ethiopia) or to obtain some other desired result (e.g., to obtain SALT ratification). These perceptions, you and I know, are not correct—but they are part of the political reality which provides part of the answer to the two questions with which I opened. In addition, the neutron bomb debacle certainly did lasting damage in Europe4 and today much of the world is watching to see how we will behave on the Soviet/Cuban issue. None of the above is designed to suggest that we should somehow adopt a reckless policy of confrontationism, nor is it meant to hint that our policy has been one of appeasement. But it is meant to suggest that both in tone and occasionally in substance, we have been excessively acquiescent,5 and that the country craves, and our national security needs, both a more assertive tone and a more assertive substance to our foreign policy. I believe that both for international reasons as well as for domestic political reasons you ought to deliberately toughen both the tone and the substance of our foreign policy. The country associates assertiveness with leadership, and the world at large expects American leadership insofar as the Soviet challenge is concerned. That challenge is real, and a recognition of it does not mean that we have to abandon such positive objectives as arms control and notably SALT II. We should be mature enough to be able to seek, all at the same time, SALT II; and more defense efforts; and pursue a more assertive foreign policy. What would a more assertive foreign policy mean? As I said earlier, it does not mean confrontation or war. It does mean, however, the following: 1. We are now beginning to do what needs to be done in defense, but we should keep stressing that this is being done on its own merits 2 See Document 125. 3 Documentation on military assistance to Yemen is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Regional; Arabian Peninsula.
