Costa Rica 391 of facilities to increase loans to farmers and industrialists. He has also recently expressed his firm belief in the necessity of extending security and support to private initiative, limiting the intervention of the State in the field of economic activities to the absolutely indispensable. Suggested Position: That Mr. Echandi be encouraged in his desire to further economic development through increased private investment. It could be pointed out that an increase in private institutions would not only bring new capital into the country’s money market but also capital investment in industry and agriculture, and would also add to the government’s revenue in the form of taxes, without the necessity of the Government to be financially obligated for development and maintenance. It could be suggested that Mr. Echandi, while in New York, get in touch with various banks concerning his desire to permit private banks to operate in Costa Rica. (4) Costa Rican Armed Forces: Mr. Echandi has announced to the press that Costa Rica will abolish the Army and sell its armaments to buy farm implements and medicines. He does plan to keep the Guardia Civil for safety and police service. In this connection he may express interest in having United States assistance in establishing an engineering construction unit, the same as is now being established in Honduras. Our Embassy has recommended that such a battalion be established. Suggested Reply: If this subject is raised, it is suggested that Mr. Echandi be informed that we are very much interested in any disarmament proposals for Latin America, as well as plans any individual country has for reducing its arms; and that a reduction in a country’s expenditure for armaments leaves more money available for expenditures on constructive economic developments. With regard to an engineering unit, Mr. Echandi could be told that careful consideration will be given to his request. FYI: In this connection much depends upon available funds, and comparative priority needs of other Latin American countries in relation to our overall policy objectives. End FYI. (5) Loan Projects: World Bank: In January 1957 Costa Rica negotiated a loan with the IBRD for $3 million designed to finance the importation of capital goods for agricultural and light industry development. The Central Bank of Costa Rica now has a second loan request for its capital goods importation program in the amount of $5 million with the IBRD. This application is now under consideration.
