Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 Soviet and Cuban actions in Africa have exacerbated conflicts and increased bloodshed. No one quarrels with the right of a country to appeal to friendly powers for assistance in maintaining territorial integrity. We have helped meet that call from Zaire. But such help should be coupled with a commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes. And it should not be a pretext for prolonged military intervention and political dominance. We call on the Soviet Union to adopt a policy of restraint in Africa, forsaking the temptation to achieve short-term political gain at the expense of long-term stability. We also call on the Soviet Union to play a constructive part in finding peaceful solutions for the future of Eritrea and for the remaining problems of decolonization and majority rule in Zimbabwe and Namibia. Competition in areas like Africa will not deter our efforts to find agreements that serve the security interests of both countries. But when peaceful competition turns to confrontation, it cannot help but erode the political base for cooperation in both nations. This is not a threat, but a fact of life. Our intention is not to gain an advantage, but to try to head off a deterioration in our relations that would follow a continued pattern of excessive competition. C. We would also expect the continuation of strong defenses on both sides, and the maintenance of the military parity. Despite the Soviet build-up over the past ten years, the United States and our Allies are strong, and fully equal to the challenge we face. D. Support for human rights, not as an effort to undermine governments, but to uphold an international standard to which both nations are committed. II. As we cooperate and compete, we must also remain strong. This will include: A. Demonstrated resolve not to allow any nation to gain military superiority over us. This will involve the strengthening of vital military programs in the U.S. and its Allies, as we are doing. B. Achievement of dependable arms control agreements that enhance our security. C. Public and Congressional support for efforts to assist old and new friends in need of security or economic assistance. D. Maintenance of an American leadership that recognizes the necessity of working with other nations, and that acknowledges the desire of many developing nations to preserve real sovereignty and independence, and to resist an unhealthy overdependence on either the United States or the Soviet Union.
