Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
409
Soviet and Cuban actions in Africa have exacerbated conflicts and
increased bloodshed. No one quarrels with the right of a country to ap-
peal to friendly powers for assistance in maintaining territorial integ-
rity. We have helped meet that call from Zaire. But such help should be
coupled with a commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes. And
it should not be a pretext for prolonged military intervention and polit-
ical dominance.
We call on the Soviet Union to adopt a policy of restraint in Africa,
forsaking the temptation to achieve short-term political gain at the ex-
pense of long-term stability. We also call on the Soviet Union to play a
constructive part in finding peaceful solutions for the future of Eritrea
and for the remaining problems of decolonization and majority rule in
Zimbabwe and Namibia.
Competition in areas like Africa will not deter our efforts to find
agreements that serve the security interests of both countries. But when
peaceful competition turns to confrontation, it cannot help but erode
the political base for cooperation in both nations. This is not a threat,
but a fact of life. Our intention is not to gain an advantage, but to try to
head off a deterioration in our relations that would follow a continued
pattern of excessive competition.
C. We would also expect the continuation of strong defenses on
both sides, and the maintenance of the military parity. Despite the So-
viet build-up over the past ten years, the United States and our Allies
are strong, and fully equal to the challenge we face.
D. Support for human rights, not as an effort to undermine gov-
ernments, but to uphold an international standard to which both na-
tions are committed.
II.
As we cooperate and compete, we must also remain strong. This
will include:
A. Demonstrated resolve not to allow any nation to gain military
superiority over us. This will involve the strengthening of vital military
programs in the U.S. and its Allies, as we are doing.
B. Achievement of dependable arms control agreements that en-
hance our security.
C. Public and Congressional support for efforts to assist old and
new friends in need of security or economic assistance.
D. Maintenance of an American leadership that recognizes the ne-
cessity of working with other nations, and that acknowledges the de-
sire of many developing nations to preserve real sovereignty and inde-
pendence, and to resist an unhealthy overdependence on either the
United States or the Soviet Union.
