August 8–September 17, 1978
45
with or without Hussein. If there are no Jordanians on Al Aqsa, he is
ready to put up an Egyptian flag and deploy Egyptian forces on the
West Bank.
Sadat went on to say that there can be no concessions on the Sinai
borders. He hoped that whatever proposals the U.S. may make, the
idea of Sinai border concessions will not be included. If it is, he will
refuse it. This also applies to the sometimes mooted concept of Israeli
settlements remaining in Sinai, perhaps under Egyptian Government
protection. This is also not acceptable to him. Retention of the Sinai set-
tlements is as a matter of principle refused. He could under no circum-
stances agree to this. He noted that this is a point of disagreement be-
tween him and the U.S. President Carter had at one point or another
suggested something along those lines, but he wanted to emphasize
that he cannot do this. (He did not spell out why not, but negative
Egyptian military reaction has sometimes been cited as the reason why
he cannot.) “Let us have no illusions on this matter,” Sadat said.
Having said this, Sadat wanted President Carter to know that he
will cooperate in making everything go smoothly. On the West Bank,
he recognizes there is a security problem for Israel. He is ready to meet
that security problem. If Hussein comes in, he is sure Hussein will do
the same. If Hussein does not come in, he, Sadat, will take the responsi-
bility. In negotiating the security problem, Sadat suggested that this
should include the termination of the Israeli military government im-
mediately after signature of an agreement, and also the withdrawal of
Israeli forces. If this can be achieved, it will enable him to get Arab sup-
port for the agreement. The rejectionists will disavow it, but no matter.
Over 90 percent of the Arabs can be persuaded to support Sadat if such
agreement is reached.
When the stage of concrete proposals is reached, Sadat indicated
we may want to tell the press about this. He plans to discuss this with
President Carter at their first bilateral meeting.
There will be a role for the United States to play in the implementa-
tion of the agreement. Begin, Sadat was sure, will oppose it, but Sadat
said he wants Begin to come out in the open and to be exposed on his
opposition. Sadat stated emphatically that he has no confidence in
Begin. It would be better to be negotiating with Peres, Weizman or even
Golda Meir. But Begin is the Prime Minister and he will have to be ex-
posed. Begin’s idea of partial separate agreements is also “completely
excluded”. So is the concept of a third disengagement agreement. Sadat
said emphatically that he will not sign anything of this sort with Begin.
Apart from this, however, he was sure President Carter will be sat-
isfied with his strategy. As he had said at the outset, he has broad out-
lines but must still fill in the details. He will probably give President
