564
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ternational support can be generated and other countries also demon-
strate their opposition to particular loans, it will strengthen the mes-
sage of concern with human rights communicated to the violating
governments, underline our concern to bank managements about the
flow of resources to the government, and enhance Congressional ap-
preciation of our efforts, reducing the likelihood of additional legisla-
tive requirements.
Consultations by State and Treasury officials with counterparts
from other countries on human rights and foreign assistance including
an extensive exchange of views in Paris last month (reporting cable at
Tab 1)3 have revealed several points:
(1) Major industrialized and some developing members of the
MDBs are committed to trying to enhance respect for human rights
throughout the world and agree that human rights is an appropriate
and legitimate consideration on decisions concerning foreign assist-
ance, including MDB projects.
(2) In factoring human rights concerns into their decision on spe-
cific MDB projects, the industrialized countries want to avoid a “hit
list”.
(3) Other governments make their decisions on a case-by-case
basis and, in determining whether to support or oppose a specific
project in a country with gross human rights violations, they weigh the
seriousness of the violations against the extent to which the project will
contribute to the country’s development. This criterion is less narrow
than our basic human needs exception and, therefore, leads them to
consider opposing fewer projects. Moreover, they seem willing to con-
sider opposition only to projects in countries in which the more egre-
gious human rights violations have occurred. In some cases, however,
they will oppose even bhn projects because of the seriousness of the
violations.4
(4) They are very concerned about undermining the apolitical and
developmental integrity of the MDBs. Their caution in this regard also
leads them to limit, at least initially, the number of countries for which
they will oppose MDB projects.
(5) All agreed that consultations were useful but that they should
be principally bilateral and that those on specific projects should take
place as far as possible before the projects are brought before MDB
boards. They observed that our present procedure of advising them of
the U.S. position on projects shortly before their consideration by the
boards did not allow them sufficient time to formulate their own posi-
tions. Our interlocutors agreed that lack of detailed information on
projects until only a few days before board decisions was a serious
3 Attached but not printed is a copy of telegram 49899 from Paris, December 14,
1978, reporting upon a December 12 meeting at the Embassy among U.S., UK, Canadian,
West German, Dutch, Swedish, and Japanese representatives concerning human rights,
foreign assistance, and the MDBs.
4 An unknown hand placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to the por-
tion of this paragraph that begins with the word “seriousness” and ends with the word
“violations.”
