1000  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
with the degree and certainty of success required to insure that the USSR 
could win a general war without itself incurring unacceptable damage, 
we do not believe that the Soviets will attempt to build an ICBM force 
sufficient for this purpose. Nevertheless, they will probably build a sub­
stantial long-range missile force. They will almost certainly wish to have 
a high degree of deterrence, and beyond this, should deterrence fail, a 
force offering as much promise of success for a pre-­emptive attack, or 
indeed for a retaliatory attack, as can be bought within acceptable mar­
gins of economic cost. Also, and again consistent with acceptable cost, 
the Soviets will probably build up their planned force rapidly in order 
to capitalize through political exploitation on their lead over the West 
in missile development. On the basis of these criteria, we estimate that 
the probable ICBM program will provide in mid-­1961 a number of mis­
siles on launcher on the order of 140 to 200.3 More tentatively, because 
of technical and political factors which may affect Soviet plans in the 
interim, we estimate that Soviet ICBMs on launcher are likely to number 
in the range of 250–350 in mid-­1962 and 350–450 in mid-­1963.4
11. Despite the effort which we estimate that the USSR will make 
to build long-range attack forces, it will almost certainly not do so at 
the cost of sacrificing its other military capabilities. The Soviets con­
sider that their military policy requires a range of nuclear and nonnu­
clear capabilities permitting flexibility in the choice of means and the 
scale of operations in accordance with the political objectives sought 
in a particular area. The Soviet leaders probably believe that such var­
ied capabilities become even more important under mutual deterrence 
from general war when, in their view, pressure and threat, maneuvers 
and coups even undeclared local wars may be undertaken with greater 
freedom and pushed further than in the past.5 Thus we believe that 
the Soviets will continue to maintain substantial ground, air, and naval 
forces, and that to the maximum possible extent these forces will be 
3 The views of the members of the USIB vary as to the most probable number within 
this range. See the statement of their separate views in Note A following this summary. 
[Footnote is in the original.]
4 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, dissents from this paragraph. See 
his statement in Note B following this summary. [Footnote is in the original.]
5 The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, and the Assistant to the Secretary of 
Defense, Special Operations, do not concur in the estimate that the USSR probably believes 
that it can undertake the actions described with greater freedom and can push them fur­
ther than in the past. Such a Soviet judgment would, in the view of the above members of 
the USIB, necessarily involve an estimate by the Kremlin that Western—particularly the 
United States—response to their pressures and probings would lack the vigor necessary to 
dissuade them. They do not believe that the Soviets will make such an estimate.
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, would revise the sentence in ques­
tion as follows: The Soviet leaders probably believe that if mutual deterrence from gen­
eral war eventuates, such capabilities could become even more important, when pressure 
and threat, maneuvers and coups, even undeclared local wars may be undertaken with 
greater freedom and pushed further than in the past. [Footnote is in the original.]
