1004
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Their proposals raise the issue of whether U.S. assistance pro-
grams in agriculture and health—and by implication in population,
education, technology, environment, and other areas—should remain
principally the responsibility of one development agency or be dis-
persed to various government Departments. This is a fundamental
question of government organization that concerns your work, the in-
teragency study of future directions for foreign assistance, and OMB’s
proposals for reorganization of the Executive Branch.
If the United States is to make a serious attack on problems of de-
velopment, one agency must be the focal point for responsibility,
drawing upon the best skill and experience the U.S. public and private
sectors have to offer. The problems of developing countries must be
this Agency’s priority concern. A long-term commitment must be made
to strategies and programs that meld together various sectors and dis-
ciplines. If development assistance programs are folded into other De-
partments they will inevitably be given less attention than the principal
programs of these essentially domestic agencies.
Meeting basic needs in poor countries—e.g., by improving health
or agricultural productivity—requires approaches radically different
from those required in the United States. In developing countries half
of those who die are children under five, and the underlying causes of
death include malnutrition, high fertility, and parasitic infection. In de-
veloped countries mortality centers in the population over 50 and
arises from heart attack, stroke, cancer, and other conditions often asso-
ciated with rich diets, obesity, and sedentary work habits. The solu-
tions to health problems in developed and developing countries also
differ dramatically; few LDC’s can afford per capita health expendi-
tures of more than a few dollars annually. Thus they must rely less on
hospitals and physicians and much more on paramedicals and tradi-
tional healers.
Similarly in agriculture, American success derives from large
farms with relatively few people but much heavy equipment, irriga-
tion, fertilizer, pesticides, and so on. But poor food-deficit countries
must rely on small farms, labor-intensive approaches, and the sparing
use of capital to spur agriculture.
Furthermore, health and agricultural programs in developing
countries are closely linked. Improved health depends heavily on pro-
grams in agriculture that enhance nutrition and incomes; agricultural
productivity is much influenced by health programs that affect labor
productivity. In general, programs in several sectors, as well as under-
lying economic and social policies, strongly affect the achievement of
objectives in any one sector.
Effective development assistance programs thus require consider-
ation of health, agriculture, and other problems in the framework of a
