278 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement put greater forces to work. For a more complete treatment of this subject, see Despatch 292 of October 9, 1959.4 It has been pointed out above that relations between the Governments of Chile and the United States are excellent. This is not true to the same extent of the sentiments of the Chilean people as a whole toward U.S. government policies. Our enemies are working vigorously and with considerable success to discredit us. Russian successes in their satellite and space rocket program have raised questions in the minds of many Chileans regarding the technical ability of the United States to match Soviet progress; it is unpleasant to learn through a straw poll that the majority of students at the University of Chile feel that the United States is losing the Cold War. Too many Chileans associate the United States with blind maintenance of the status quo and the USSR with social and economic progress and the increasing welfare of the common people. We must therefore be ceaselessly active in putting our case before the people, and we should concentrate on the intellectual and labor groups. It is here that we are at our weakest. The various programs for the exchange of persons operated by the Department, USIA and ICA, have all been extremely useful in spreading a better knowledge of the United States among key figures in Chilean life. These program should be continued at at least the present level and greater care should be taken in planning then to ensure their success. The celebration in 1960 of the 150th Anniversary of Chilean independence presents an opportunity for the United States to participate in a commemoration which will be close to the hearts of the Chilean people. In the near future, the Embassy’s proposals for U.S. participation in this event will be forwarded to Washington, and it is hoped that they may receive the support of the Department and other agencies of the U.S. government. Even in a country such as Chile, where the military traditionally respects civilian control, the armed forces still represent a factor which the government cannot ignore in developing its programs. Recent events, especially the purchase of two fairly modern British cruisers by Peru and of U.S. F-86F aircraft by Argentina, have caused the military to bring pressure on the Government to increase the level of Chile’s military equipment. Unless the United States can offer, over a period of time, to supply reasonable quantities of surplus U.S. equipment to the Chileans free of charge or on easy terms, there is little doubt that they will eventually feel themselves compelled to squander a portion of their limited resources on the purchase of military equipment elsewhere. 4 Not printed; 725.5–MSP/10–959.
