76  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
garrison in peacetime, and some question whether they would disperse 
even in a crisis.
As for the concern that a MIRVed mobile ban would increase the 
number of SS-24s in silos, such an increase could be held down by 
the MIRV limit discussed above.
This said, the primary consideration is the political effect on the 
President’s ICBM modernization program. Clearly a MIRVed mobile 
ban makes no sense unless we are committed to a single-RV, road-­
mobile Midgetman in addition to a rebased MX. With the two-­missile 
approach, a ban proposal could undercut support for MX rebasing 
by indicating the Administration is prepared to live without the rail-­
garrison mode, a shift from the judgment implicit in the President’s 
decision. On the other hand, if support for the ICBM program is wan-
ing, a ban proposal could shore it up by providing a bargaining chip 
rationale for MX.
I conclude that we should propose a MIRVed mobile ban, if we 
judge that such a proposal would be helpful in achieving the necessary 
support for our ICBM modernization program.
Heavy ICBMs
Constraints beyond the currently agreed 50% cut in Soviet heavy 
ICBMs—­deeper cuts, testing and modernization limits, or a ban—­
would further limit the only missile the Soviets have today that is capa-
ble of destroying hard targets. And the SS–18 is becoming more capable 
as the Soviets modernize it.
Up to now, the Soviets have strongly resisted further SS–18 lim-
its. Thus, a US proposal to this effect could require a high price or 
be seen as erecting an unnecessary barrier to progress. Yet several 
Sovietologists have told me the Soviets might be persuaded to recon-
sider, if approached quietly on the subject.
I believe there is much we could gain, and little to lose, by trying a 
quiet approach to the Soviets to gauge their flexibility on this question.
Conclusion
With a MIRVed mobile ban as an integral element, and supple-
mented by a quiet approach on heavies, our package would have real 
meat. It would fit well our theme of nuclear risk reduction and would 
respond to Congressional concerns about START’s effect on ICBM vul-
nerability and breakout potential.
If we judge that a MIRVed mobile ban would undercut our ICBM 
modernization program, the MIRV limit should be the centerpiece of 
our package. In that case, I would favor the more novel option, the 
warhead-­to-­missile ratio, as well as a proposal for future reductions in 
the ratio to encourage further deMIRVing.
