44 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 2. A Net Assessment Group was created composed of senior officials from the interested agencies. This group met on March 11th and discussed the major cross-­cutting substantive issues which will be considered in the context of the net assessment. 3. A Net Assessment Working Group was created, which at its three meetings on March 15, 22 and 29, considered the overall organization and procedures of the assessment, task force terms of reference, and the draft interim report. 4. Eleven regional and topical task forces have been organized as follows: (1) Europe (2) Middle East (3) South Asia (4) Africa (5) East Asia (6) Western Hemisphere (7) Strategic nuclear policy and forces (8) Technology (9) Economic strategy and capabilities (10) Intelligence (including covert action) (11) Political institutions, leadership and national psychology Chairmen and associate chairmen have been appointed, and the membership constituted of individuals nominated by the interested agencies. All the task forces have formulated terms of reference to guide them in the preparation of their reports due May 15th. In almost all cases, work has started on the drafting of the papers which will be included in these reports. 5. A four-­person central staff at the NSC has been created to direct and coordinate the activities of the net assessment and to draft the overall report. Thirteen other members of the NSC staff are participating in the assessment in one capacity or another. 6. Extensive discussions and consultations have been held with officials in State, Defense, the intelligence community, and elsewhere on the substantive issues and methodologies to be employed in the net assessment. The DOD Office of Net Assessment has been particularly helpful in this connection. 7. Efforts have been made to maintain close liaison with the Military Force Posture portion of the PRM/NSC–10 review. Several people are involved in both aspects of the review, and persons connected with the net assessment have taken advantage of the opportunity to sit in on meetings of Force Posture groups.
