National Security Policy 373 expenditures in FY 1959, over FY 1958, $850 million has been required by the military and civilian pay raise. Mr. McElroy then covered what he considered his “key” decisions. These had resulted in reduction of an original estimate of $43.6 billion NOA for FY 1960 to $42.8 billion. He then ran down the individual items, largely by Service, as follows: NIKE-ZEUS—In this program $700 million had been recom­ mended by the Army. A scientific group in the Pentagon had revised this recommendation to include only $626 million, of which $300 mil­ lion should be R&D funds. The reason for this reduction, besides econ­ omy, is uncertainty as to the efficacy of the NIKE-ZEUS. The cost of ZEUS overall would be $7.0 billion. Therefore, Mr. McElroy feels that only the $300 million R&D funds should be released for this year, and the country should be apprised of the overall cost before we go to pro­ duction on this weapon. The President then stated that we have wasted too much money by going prematurely into production on various items. In particular, he mentioned those of interceptors of interim value only. Overseas Deployments—Mr. McElroy then mentioned the impact of cutbacks on the overseas deployments of the Army and pointed out the fact that every squeeze in manpower is difficult on the Army. He cited as an example the fact that 10,000 men are needed in 1962 for dispersion of atomic storage sites in Europe (this figure was questioned and discussed, but was used for illustrative purposes). Additionally, he mentioned the fact that the Army must expend manpower in the mission of training the National Guard. All this, he states, cuts into the Army combat forces. Therefore, in order to save as much as possible, areas other than manpower have been cut in this budget. Mr. McElroy’s concern with overseas deployments applies as of FY 1960. REDSTONE—One of those areas is the REDSTONE, for which there will be no additional funding after FY 1959. To compensate for this cutback to some extent, Mr. McElroy plans to expedite the solid propellant PERSHING. He realizes that the cutback in REDSTONE means that some U.S. commitments in Europe will not be met. Air Defense—One of Mr. McElroy’s key decisions is to cut back missile air defense by reducing both NIKE-HERCULES and BOMARC below NORAD-recommended levels. The Department of Defense feels that if we must be inadequate, the inadequacy should be sustained in air defense on the basis that no air defense is perfect and the best hope for protection of the U.S. is the threat of retaliation. Mr. McElroy feels that we must protect SAC bases and go beyond that only as necessary for psychological reasons.
