464
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
that while some improvements were under consideration, it was un-
likely that we could push the verification threshold [less than 1 line not
declassified]
Secretary Vance then commented briefly on the options, noting
that he could support the review conference approach but that he
agreed with Paul Warnke that we should get out of the negotiations
rather than adopt any provision for continued testing. After some dis-
cussion on the degree of redundancy in warheads for our current stra-
tegic systems, the meeting adjourned at about 6:20 p.m.
191.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 17, 1978, 2:27–2:47 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of Telephone Conversation between the President and Prime Minister
Callaghan
The following is a paraphrase of the conversation:
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test
ban.]
Callaghan: May I raise the Comprehensive Test Ban for just a mo-
ment. Your experts and ours as well, I understand, are now saying that
we will need a few controlled explosions once the treaty has gone into
effect, in order to verify existing stockpiles. I hope you will look into
that. I would need a lot of convincing that it made sense.
The President: There had been discussion here that perhaps after
two, three, or four years, after the expiration of the treaty, then there
might be a need for some explosions. But to have them during the
treaty would short-circuit the basic thrust of the treaty.
Callaghan: Yes, I feel that way very strongly. But the experts are
convinced that some explosions are necessary. What will be necessary
is a political decision, and we will have to assess the risks.
The President: This question has not been brought to me. I know
that Jim Schlesinger, who heads the Energy Department and is respon-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 36, Memcons: President: 4/78. Secret; Sensitive. Carter spoke with Callaghan by
phone from the Oval Office. The memorandum is scheduled to be printed in full in For-
eign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
