World Hunger and Food Policy
791
their ability to bring to bear available resources in a coordinated
strategy or capitalize on world concern about hunger. In addition, the
Americans that we have assigned to those organizations have not
always been of the highest caliber.19
—There has been a failure by the United States and other nations
to instill in the leaders of most developing countries the political will to
give this problem a sufficiently high priority. This is improving, but re-
mains the single greatest impediment to eradicating world hunger.
—The overall level of commitment of resources by the developed
nations has been insufficient to meet the needs of developing countries
necessary to produce the rate of change we would like to see in the
well-being of the poor. The President’s recent decisions and increased
commitments by West Europeans will begin to remedy this, but more
should be done.
Proposed Strategies
Ideally our world hunger policy would be one that, (a) maintained
our domestic farm prices at levels high enough to ensure continued ex-
pansion of production, (b) kept domestic consumer prices low, (c) en-
hanced our balance of payments, and (d) met humanitarian objectives
in the nations where people are starving. Obviously any real policy
must involve hard compromises in some or all of these areas. People in
other countries understand the domestic dilemmas we face, and more
than any specific commitment, they want from the United States a clear
concise statement of our policy on world hunger, an understanding of
the role the United States intends to play, and an affirmation of con-
tinuous and long-term U.S. support for alleviating the world food
problem.
The key themes we should establish are:
• The right to food is the most basic of human rights. The President
is committed to providing the leadership to see that the problem is
19 In telegram 59649 to Rome, March 8, the Department indicated that Bourne’s re-
port had not been cleared by the individual agencies before submission to the President.
With regard to Bourne’s treatment of the FAO in the report to the President, the Depart-
ment noted: “There was no attempt to substantiate this paragraph and we feel it was not
judicious to single out FAO. Had final draft been cleared with departments we would
have suggested specific reference to FAO be deleted. Should FODAG be questioned con-
cerning this paragraph, you should indicate we are aware and support DG’s efforts to re-
vitalize FAO. FAO should understand that view expressed in paper does however reflect
significant concern among American people (120 organizations reportedly contributed to
Working Group effort) that UN programs be carefully conceived, planned and executed.
It is important that agencies set quantifiable objectives for projects and show via objective
evaluation that those goals being realized.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780105–0675)
