Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I to put a lid on FRG military forces levels (something the German right can associate with the Versailles Treaty limitations). Moreover, German paranoia is encouraged by what may look like a tacit negotiating arrangement between NATO and the Soviets intended to keep Germany weak and divided. At the same time, Schmidt acts as if detente were were his private preserve and openly castigates the U.S. human rights policy. The three interacting developments—(1) German military and economic power combined with political weakness, (2) the crisis of Ostpolitik, and (3) the tensions created by U.S. policies—make Bonn uncomfortable with the West and frustrated by the East. This is a step back toward the traditional German predicament of being in the middle. At the same time, the interaction of external and domestic political factors could damage the fragile roots of West German democracy. Economic deprivation, fear of Communism, and growing disillusionment with the Western democracies, including the U.S., could in the long run feed anti-democratic and authoritarian sentiments in schizophrenic Germany. The Soviet Union, to be sure, will attempt to exploit the emerging opportunity to loosen Bonn’s ties with the U.S.” [Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.] Remarks by President Carter1 Charleston, South Carolina, July 21, 1977 [Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks.] And I want to talk to you today about the hopes and problems that we as southerners and as Americans share together. I feel a special kinship with your State legislators. For 4 years I was a member of the Georgia Senate, and I still prize State government not only for the talents of those who work in it but, as Fritz Hollings says, for the closeness to the people it represents. Our Southern States have a proud tradition of local, independent government, and now you’re the heirs of that tradition. But we in the South have also felt, perhaps more directly than many others, some of the rapid changes that have taken place in this modern age. More and
