934 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 3. Begin Text: December 14, 1990 Dear Eduard, – You and I discussed a package that would resolve several major START issues. At our last meeting I told you that the US can accept the package, provided we receive satisfactory answers to the questions I put to you and assuming that it does not change. To help both of us, the attached paper outlines the elements of the package. – I think you will agree that with the summit dates now set for February 11–132 it is important that we nail down agreement on the package rapidly and move quickly to wrap up in Geneva the remaining START issues. – I look forward to hearing from you on the package. Sincerely, James A. Baker, III 4. START Package The following is the package that was discussed during the December 10–12 ministerial. ALCMs and Heavy Bombers A heavy bomber of a type which has not been flight tested with long-­range nuclear ALCMs will not be subject to exhibition or inspection. – Therefore, the B–2 will not be subject to exhibition or inspection so long as it is not flight tested with a long-­range nuclear ALCM. B–1 heavy bombers not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs will count as 1 against the 6000 ceiling. – B–1 heavy bombers not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs will have the following distinguishing features: – The bomb bay bulkhead will not permit long-­range nuclear ALCMs to be loaded. – ALCM pylon attachment joints will be covered except for two attachment joints which also serve as jacking points. – Equipment for reconfiguring the B–1 bomb bay bulkhead and equipment for loading long-­range nuclear ALCM pylons on a B–1 will not be located at airbases for B–1 heavy bombers not equipped for long-­ range nuclear ALCMs. This will not involve any new inspection rights. 2 In a December 12 statement from the Rose Garden following a meeting with Shevardnadze and Baker Bush stated he was “hopeful that we will be ready to sign a treaty at a summit in Moscow on February 11 through 13.” (Public Papers: Bush, 1990, vol. II, p. 1786)
