International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 595 will be significantly smaller this year than in the past two years. They also estimate, however, that it may increase after 1979 and remain large for several years. (C) This large Japanese surplus has adverse effects on the world economy. Together with restrictions on US business entry into Japan, it has generated demands on the Hill for anti-Japanese protectionist legislation, which only intense personal efforts by Bob Strauss have held in check and which will prevail later this year in the absence of changes in Japanese policy. Majority Leader Byrd, Senator Bentsen, Congressman Rhodes, and other influential Congressional leaders are deeply, bitterly, and increasingly concerned with this issue. These US pressures for change in Japanese policy have generated deep resentment in Japan; passage of anti-Japanese legislation would dramatically compound the damage. If we cannot soon devise a cooperative US- Japanese approach to this problem, it could severely damage the wider US-Japanese political and security relationship. (C) 2. Japanese Attitudes. The Japanese feel that they are doing everything possible to reduce their surplus—both in shifting from an exportled to a domestic-led economic expansion and in reducing import barriers. Some progress has been achieved: Administrative steps have been taken by Japan to increase imports, and MTN and textiles agreements have been negotiated. (C) The Japanese are reluctant to accelerate these remedial policies: Their budget deficit is already large and they feel that there would be political difficulties in increasing it further; their business community resists larger imports of manufacturers; and they are chary of trade policies that might lead to later balance of payments deficits. (C) But the Japanese are also anxious to avoid a confrontation with the US. They now understand that Congressional reactions to Japanese policies could place MTN in jeopardy and cause anti-Japaneseprotectionist legislation to pass. And they are anxious to avoid further yen appreciation, which might result from a continuing large current accounts surplus. (C) 3. Short-Term. The task now is to translate the resulting Japanese desire for compromise into specific understandings. Our immediate need is to persuade Japan to take certain MTN-related actions—notably opening government monopolies to outside bidding, and phasing tariff cuts so as to “front load” these cuts in the early years. (C) If these decisions are taken quickly, they will have a beneficial effect on the U.S. private industry advisory reports that must be completed and made public when we submit MTN implementing legislation to the Congress in April. The Japanese understand this, and relevant negotiations between them and us are underway. (C)
