1978  245
57.	
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, March 20, 1978
Attached is the five-­year ship construction program that I plan 
to send forward to the Congressional authorizing and appropriations 
committees. When we eliminated such a table from my defense posture 
statement, I told them in my testimony that they would have it by the 
end of March. You will recall your conversations along these lines in 
January with Senator Stennis and Congressman Price.2
There is also enclosed a point paper that explains the basis for the 
five-­year ship building program. With one exception, it is the same as 
I showed Zbig and Jim McIntyre and to which they agreed. The excep-
tion is the substitution in the out years of two LSD–41s (Amphibious 
Assault Ships) for some auxiliary ships and conversions. This pre-
serves, without irrevocably committing us to, amphibious lift at the 
level of 115% of a one division Marine Amphibious Force (which, given 
ship outages for repair, corresponds to an effective capability of one 
MAF). I think we may want to reexamine this one during the course of 
the year, but omitting it now from the program would cause unneces-
sary opposition in what will already be a contentious debate.
Zbig has some concerns about the rate of Trident construction as 
do I. He believes that the lowering of the rate from three every two 
years to one every year will raise some SALT issues. My view is that the 
corresponding decline in SLBMs, which bottoms in the 1990s, needs to 
be addressed, but that the best way to do so is to find a way of reducing 
the cost per SLBM, rather than simply to build more Tridents. This is a 
course of action that we should prepare in advance rather than surfac-
ing it now.
I would not include the material in the point paper in what I send 
to Congress, reserving it instead for testimony. If, as a result of Congres-
sional actions, the FY 79 program changes, corresponding alterations 
by us in both directions in the out years will maintain a properly bal-
anced program.
In accord with our conversation of last Friday,3 I think it would be 
useful if you, Zbig and I (and perhaps Graham Claytor) could meet for 
20 or 30 minutes later this week to discuss any questions you may have 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, 
Box 11, Navy Department: 6/77–12/79. Secret.
2 See Document 47.
3 March 17. Carter and Brown participated in a tour and military exercise aboard the 
U.S.S. Eisenhower. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
