96
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
25.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for International Organization Affairs (Maynes) and the
Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, March 3, 1977
SUBJECT
President’s Speech at the UN General Assembly
As you requested, we have prepared an outline of a speech which
the President could deliver at the UN General Assembly in late March.2
We see the speech as a major opportunity for the US to take the
high ground in its relations with the new countries—to demonstrate
that the US seeks a new era of sympathetic and mutually beneficial re-
lationships—to give new impetus to cooperative and productive work
in international organizations.
The overall theme we have in mind is this: the time has come to ad-
dress global problems in a manner which serves the interests of all
peoples. That must be the purpose of all of our efforts. But we can act
effectively only by acting together to meet common problems and to re-
alize common benefits.
In suggesting this theme we have in mind that the President could
capitalize on his worldwide reputation as a leader genuinely interested
in improving life for the poor and the disadvantaged.
A possible title for the speech might be: “The Quality of Peace”.
The basic structure would be as follows:
—First, a section on the global challenge and the opportunity that
we and all other nations are facing.
—Second, a section on what the United States will stand for in the
Carter Administration, setting forth broad principles and purposes.
—Third, what we intend to do regarding selected major problems,
including the role of the UN itself.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981: Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 3/1–15/77. No classi-
fication marking. Drafted by Neidle and concurred in by Janeway. Neidle initialed for
Janeway. A notation in an unknown hand reads: “Tony, I signed off for you.” There is no
indication that Vance saw the memorandum.
2 The President delivered a speech at the United Nations on March 17; see Docu-
ments 28 and 29.
