3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
647
the new and extraordinary collaboration between Cuba and the USSR.
This concerns the US, as we believe it does other countries in the
hemisphere.
4. Soviet/Cuban military ties
—Since 1975, the Soviet Union began to transform the Cuban
armed forces from a home defense force into a modern military power
with formidable offensive capabilities, larger than any in Latin America
except Brazil. It is an army of more than 160,000 men, including ready
reserve.
—Soviet arms deliveries to Cuba averaged somewhat more than
10,000 tons annually during the early 1970’s; since 1975 they have aver-
aged nearly double that figure.
—Cuba now has MIG–23’s, AN–26’s, AN F-class (diesel attack)
submarine, T–62 tanks, surface-to-air missiles and multiple rocket
launchers.
—Cuba’s Air Force includes over 200 jet fighters. Cuba is rapidly
expanding its naval base at Cienfuegos.
—Cuba maintains nearly 40,000 troops in Africa as well as military
advisors in Asia and Latin America.
—Cuba receives its military equipment at no cost and makes avail-
able to the Soviet Union military facilities as well as intelligence and
military communications installations.
5. Soviet-Cuban economic ties
—Cuban economic dependence on the Soviet Union has continued
to increase since Moscow first began supporting the Cuban economy in
the early 1960s. The increase in subsidies to Cuba has been particularly
notable since 1975, growing roughly threefold since that year to its
present level of about $3 billion per year, or roughly one fourth of the
Cuban GNP in 1978. By comparison, Soviet subsidies to Cuba during
the entire period 1960–1970 amounted to the equivalent of about $1 bil-
lion. This figure does not include the increasingly large quantity of
grant military aid the Soviets have provided the Cubans.
—Nearly three-fourths of Cuban exports go to the USSR, which
supplies 60 percent of Cuba’s imports—including most foodstuffs and
a large proportion of capital goods.
—Cuba is a full member of CEMA; Cuba, Mongolia, and Vietnam
are the only non-Warsaw Pact members that participate fully in CEMA.
—Cuban dependence is so great that in the absence of Soviet eco-
nomic support, there would be an immediate drop in Cuba’s domestic
economic activity and little chance of economic growth for several
years. The bleak long-term prospects for the Cuban economy and
Cuba’s increasing military activities abroad will probably mean in-
creased economic dependence on the Soviet Union in the future.
