Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 172. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, May 1980 Hungary—Political Overview Foreign Affairs Hungary is allied with the USSR and consistently backs Soviet positions on major international issues. However, on matters of lesser significance to the Soviet Union and of direct importance to Hungary, Hungarian foreign policy displays independent and sovereign aspects. One such area arises out of Hungary’s heavy dependence on foreign trade and its desire for Western technology. Accordingly, since 1977 Party First Secretary Kadar has made official visits to Austria, West Germany, Italy and France, and Hungary has developed an extensive set of primarily economically-oriented relations with Western countries, including the U.S. Western countries, in turn, utilize Hungary’s forthcoming attitude toward the Helsinki Final Act to engage in constructive dialogues with Hungary on all three Baskets of CSCE, including its humanitarian and cultural provisions. (U) Hungary has followed what it calls a “principled” policy in regard to Iran. This couples expressions of understanding for Iran’s grievances against the United States with low-key denunciation of the holding of diplomatic hostages as a violation of international law. After initial hesitation, Hungary has followed the Soviet line on Afghanistan, with emphasis on the arguments that the Soviet intervention was “lawful” under agreements between the USSR and Afghanistan and that the latter had the right to request “self-defense” aid from its neighbor. (U) U.S.-Hungarian relations have improved dramatically in the past several years. The two most important elements in this improvement were the return of the Crown of Saint Stephen to the Hungarian people on January 6, 1978, by a Presidential delegation headed by Secretary Vance, and the entry into force on July 7, 1978, of a trade agreement establishing MFN tariff treatment for the exports of both countries. The trade agreement negotiations entailed discussions and understandings with Hungary on questions of emigration in compliance with the Jackson-Vanik provisions of the Trade Act of 1974. (U) Although there have been no major outstanding political issues between the U.S. and Hungary since conclusion of the Trade Agreement in 1978, deteriorating U.S.–Soviet relations have made more difficult 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
