752  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
In related actions, to assure the highest return for each dollar 
spent, we are also pursuing such actions as: increased contracting out, 
wage board pay reform, improved depot-­level maintenance efficiency, 
realignment of the material distribution system, and increased procure-
ment of commercial products (where these are less expensive than, and 
as suitable as, those built to military specification).
Combatting Fraud and Waste. The Department’s steering group on 
combatting fraud, waste, and mismanagement has programs under 
active review to avoid computer fraud, provide audit and inspec-
tion safeguards, and investigate allegations of fraud. Project teams 
are addressing other areas that need improvement, such as property 
accountability, and auditor and investigator training.
Energy Conservation. The Department of Defense has aggressively 
pursued energy conservation through a restructured energy manage-
ment program. Since the base year of 1975, energy use has been reduced 
almost nine percent; in FY 78 alone, DoD’s energy consumption was 
2.2 percent less than the year before. To maintain combat readiness, we 
are making greater use of simulators and increasing the fuel efficiency 
of our weapons systems. To provide for future needs, we are arranging 
to procure more than 500,000 barrels of shale oil for testing in military 
equipment, and carefully examining in cooperation with DoE the use 
and supply of synthetic fuels.
Personnel Resources. A major accomplishment of the Department of 
Defense since 1977 has been the increased use of women in the uni-
formed services, both in terms of numbers of women serving and in the 
expanded occupational fields and career opportunities open to women. 
In FY 76 women constituted 5% of total military strength. Women today 
are 7% of our uniformed workforce and, as a direct result of our policy 
initiatives, will be 11% of our military population in FY 83. Parallel suc-
cesses have been achieved in the civilian workforce.
As one example of our commitment to assuring equal opportunity, 
we have revitalized the Department’s equal opportunity management 
training program for race relations instructors. We are now providing 
the kind of equal opportunity specialists that our civilian managers and 
military commanders need to pursue dynamic, successful programs.
VI
Planning for the Future
It is clear that 1980 will be a watershed year for U.S. national secu-
rity programs. Stimulated by the national debate on SALT II and by 
events abroad, Americans are recognizing that we must pay greater 
attention to our military capabilities if we are to play a constructive and 
stabilizing role in the international arena. The FY 1981 defense budget 
and the five year program for FY 81–85 have been carefully developed
