Human Rights More broadly in Asia there is confusion about US purposes and uncertainty about the validity of our commitments to long-standing friends. The human rights policy is not primarily responsible, but it is a contributing factor. This could in time affect our relations even with those in the region (e.g. Japan) whose own human rights practices we are not criticizing. International Financial Institutions Some believe that we also risk damaging the IFIs, by politicizing their work in violation of their charters. This did not start with the Carter Administration. We opposed loans to Allende’s Chile on political grounds, and long have used our influence to channel international lending to anti-Communist regimes. Nonetheless, no country has heretofore made non-economic considerations so consistently and overtly a factor in its attitude to IFI loans. This could come back to haunt us if other governments decide non-economic criteria should be applied to governments we want to support. (The discrepancy between our alleged politicization of the IFIs, and our departure from the ILO because others had politicized it,22 is widely noted.) We also are inadvertently strengthening Congressional opponents of the institutions. West European governments have mixed feelings about what we are doing. The British, French, and West Germans have asked for advance notice of our negative votes; the EC has asked for “cooperative exploration” of how to pursue human rights concerns in the IFIs; and Sweden has asked us to consult with the Nordic Group. Some of these requests for consultation may suggest interest in joining us; others from a hope of putting a check on what some European financial officials see as a dangerous American practice. This survey of all the damage our human rights advocacy might have caused to other US interests—but hasn’t—is a useful reminder that other governments’ concrete interest in cooperation with us is often as great as ours with them, and sometimes greater. In the past we sometimes have made the mistake of acting as though we were the only party with much at stake in a relationship, and so must avoid giving offense. Obviously there is a point where national pride or general irritation could loom larger than practical considerations for some governments. Anticipating that point remains one of our chief tasks. But the need of others for us—in security or economic or diplomatic relations—usually is great enough to give us considerable room for human rights advocacy, without serious damage to other US interests.
