World Hunger and Food Policy
877
pendent or powerful enough to defend long-term economic devel-
opment goals against competing short-term political or military
objectives. Hence, the relatively low priority accorded to the elimina-
tion of hunger and poverty overseas not only reflects, but also is per-
petuated by the existing institutional governing structure.
The Commission is convinced, however, that raising living stand-
ards in developing countries is central to long-range U.S. political and
economic interests as well as to a just world order, and that develop-
ment assistance can play a more powerful role than military assistance
in meeting the requirements of U.S. national security. In order to make
credible the United States Government’s commitment to long-term eco-
nomic development and to facilitate the full implementation of that
commitment, clear authority will be required to uphold the goals of de-
velopment assistance within the foreign policymaking process.
The Commission recommends that the Director of the International De-
velopment Cooperation Agency be accorded Cabinet-level status, so that the
objectives of equitable economic development can be more effectively integrated
into U.S. national security policy and planning.
The establishment of the International Development Cooperation
Agency (IDCA) in October 19798 with authority only over the Agency
for International Development (AID), the Institute for Scientific and
Technological Cooperation, and the Overseas Private Investment Cor-
poration (governed by its own Board), represents a step in the right di-
rection but does not, in the Commission’s judgment, go far enough.
The IDCA Director should have Cabinet rank and should have di-
rect access to the President. The Director should also have direct re-
sponsibility for U.S. participation in the multilateral development
banks (still largely under Treasury Department control), U.S. voluntary
contributions to those U.N. agencies still under Department of State
aegis, and P.L. 480 (which at present is only partially within the juris-
diction of IDCA). Moreover, the IDCA Director should also have re-
sponsibility for formulating policy guidelines affecting the conces-
sional lending programs of the International Monetary Fund, as well as
U.S. trade, commodity and investment policies which affect the ability
of Third World nations to carry out their share of the measures recom-
mended in this Report.
2. Levels of United States Development Assistance
As another reflection of the low priority accorded to economic de-
velopment overseas, inadequate funding for official U.S. development
assistance and competing claims upon those funds further undermine
8 See footnote 17, Document 245.
