1955 535 and had never received any reply. This bears out fact present talks inca­ pable settling question tense situation Taiwan area. Essential hold con­ ference of Foreign Ministers to discuss and settle that question. 22. Wang said in light foregoing, it was not PRC side but US side that was attempting impose its views on the other. US draft demands PRC side surrender sovereign rights regarding Taiwan and recognize status quo of US encroachment of Taiwan and US interference Chinese internal affairs. 23. Wang said if his side agreed US draft and recognized status quo of US encroachment Taiwan and US interference Chinese internal affairs, then what would remain to be negotiated? Could it be that US side takes his government to be so naive and so easily led around by the nose? 24. Wang said I had indicated willingness discuss lifting embargo in exchange for agreement US draft. This out of the question. Policy of embargo is of itself unjustifiable. Embargo should be lifted. This is point he had made repeatedly. 25. Wang said US side had not succeeded in intimidating his side into submission by threat and use of force against Taiwan. Nor had US succeeded by these means in forcing PRC side into recognition status quo of US encroachment China’s territory. US will now fail in trying to condition embargo on recognition US encroachment on Taiwan. 26. Wang said nearly two months have elapsed since discussion on renunciation of force initiated, and nearly one month since introduction PRC draft. He had made clear position his side. Substance US draft is demand PRC side recognize status quo of encroachment by US on Chi­ na’s territory. This absolutely unacceptable. 27. Wang said his draft embraces points of view acceptable both sides. If I still considered it essential we issue a statement, then PRC draft is only reasonable and feasible one. He hoped we would be able find agreement on basis PRC draft. 28. I replied Wang had misunderstood our position on question of embargo. In inviting his views, I had pointed out fact that measures he termed embargo taken by US in light of security interests. Measures US takes in regard to trade must take into consideration what we consider to be security interests. If US considers that danger of hostilities is less­ ened or removed, this naturally influences US point of view on trade. However, I certainly did not mean to imply that US willing trade lifting embargo for statement on renunciation of force. 29. I said Wang had properly pointed out that it is two months since renunciation of force discussion initiated. Although I am disap­ pointed we not yet able reach full agreement, I am gratified at progress
