700 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II icies, key commodities, and the balancing of economic, health, and social policy considerations. Having told the agencies where he wants to be by 1980, the President must then ask them to tell him what must be done now to get there: —Mobilize private sector efforts —Refine the objectives —Establish an adequate organization —Propose legislation —Assignment of lead agency responsibility —Develop public understanding and support. Attacking world hunger by mobilizing public support, setting some reasonable attainable 1980 goals (this does not take a year to decide), and assigning a high priority to this human needs initiative can and will foster support for the President’s overall foreign policy objectives. 220. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Secretary of the Cabinet (Watson)1 Washington, July 12, 1977 SUBJECT Bergland Memorandum on Proposed Human Rights Conference on Food At the direction of the President, Frank Press, Peter Bourne, Stu Eizenstat and myself have been involved in an effort to define a sound 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1977. No classification marking. A handwritten notation on the memorandum indicates that it was dispatched on July 12 at 12:20 p.m. Sent to Brzezinski under cover of a July 12 memorandum, from Tuchman, in which she noted that Watson had requested comments “on immediate turn around” concerning Bergland’s proposed human rights conference on food (attached below). She added, “This brings up again the same question we have been debating with Peter Bourne of whether it makes sense to begin generating public support before policy is defined.” According to a notation on the covering memorandum, Brzezinski signed the memorandum to Watson on July 12. A July 7 memorandum to Vance, Brzezinski, and Schultze from Watson and Jane Frank requesting that they forward comments on Bergland’s proposal is ibid. In a July 11 memorandum to Watson, Schultze recommended that the proposed conference’s objectives “need to be brought into sharper focus, however,
