Costa Rica  451
due primarily to the indecision and lack of clarity on the part of the Costa 
Ricans themselves, who never provided clear distinctions between this 
loan project (originally $5 million) and other projects for loan up to $30 
million. The Costa Ricans apparently lost interest in this loan when they 
did not receive favorable consideration of their insistence on provision 
for a long term and a low interest rate for the loan. As an illustration of 
this lack of interest, a request in April 1959 to the Costa Ricans for infor-
mation by the Export Import Bank for data in connection with consider-
ation of the loan remained without reply until March 1960.
With specific regard to the four recommendations for assistance 
made in your despatch No. 14 I can make the following comments:
Suggestion No. 1. Water Works Project: As Allan Stewart informed 
you in his weekly OAP letter on July 15, we had already discussed such 
a loan project with Ambassador Escalante over a year ago and, by coin-
cidence, had just received the Ambassador’s request for assistance in 
activating such a project. An informal discussion between Ambassador 
Escalante and officials of State and the DLF was held on August 14 with 
the result that (1) the Costa Ricans agreed to prepare a formal appli-
cation and (2) that DLF agreed to its engineers informally reviewing 
the report by Rader and Associates to see if any additional technical 
information would be needed in formulating such an application. It 
was informally agreed that the application would include only the first 
stage of development recommended in the Rader report for an amount 
between $4 to $5 million.
Suggestion No. 2. Rural Credit Loan: Allan reported to you in his 
informal letter of April 7, 1960,5 that Alvaro Castro, Manager of the 
Central Bank, during his visit to Washington, informed the Export-
Import Bank that the Central Bank did not intend to press for the 
time being this loan application. The reason given was that that the 
Central Bank wished to see how the loan from Chase Manhattan would 
be applied. Castro indicated that the Central Bank might formulate a 
new project later this year. Approximately ten days ago Ambassador 
Escalante informed us that there was no plan to renew at this time the 
Juntas Rurales loan project since funds from the Chase Manhattan loan 
were being used for this purpose. Instead, the Ambassador stated the 
Costa Ricans wished to press the water works loan project. Until the 
Costa Ricans renew the rural credit loan project we are in no position to 
renew our efforts in its behalf.
Suggestion No. 3. Road Network (Plan Vial): Over a period of almost 
four years the IBRD has discussed with the Costa Rican authorities the 
4 A memorandum of this conversation is in OAP Files, Lot 63 D 127, “Costa Rica, 
1960.”
5 Not found in Department of State files.
