Options Identified
219
including several possibilities which Harold Brown would be prepared
to present.
In this connection Dr. Brzezinski said we should consider how to
address these measures with our Allies to encourage their help on the
economic measures discussed previously in the NSC meeting.
Finally, Dr. Brzezinski said there was the question of timing: is
time on our side or is there a continuing erosion in our position interna-
tionally? He concluded by suggesting that Harold Brown brief the NSC
on the military options which he had under consideration.
The President indicated that he first would like Secretary Vance
to respond to a question he had asked earlier: what should the U.S.
do if the Iranians institute trials. He said that he was at ease about our
military preparations and he felt that Khomeini was ill-at-ease. He said
the Ayatollah knows that we can blockade Iran, that we can destroy
the refineries at Abadan and that we can take out their aircraft and
airfields. He noted that we had reached a consensus on the nature of
these options within the government but that he would decide when
they might be implemented.
On the other hand, there was no consensus on the possibilities that
were available to us short of these military actions. He thought that
as soon as the Security Council finishes its action and the International
Court of Justice renders its decision, the U.S. should proceed to ask
for mandatory sanctions in the UN Security Council and call for other
countries to join us on a voluntary basis. He said he was not certain
exactly when economic sanctions should be applied, but it was clear
that if the Iranians start trials, the U.S. should move forward on sanc-
tions. He recalled that we had already informed the Iranians that we
would seek to interrupt their commerce if they tried the American
hostages.
Secretary Vance said he had no problem with calling for sanctions
but he opposed the mining of harbors to achieve an interruption in
Iranian commerce.
The President explained that he was not in favor of mining harbors
as soon as the trials start as long as the Allies have joined us in imposing
voluntary economic sanctions and the Security Council is debating in
good faith the possibility of mandatory sanctions. However, if this
effort is not successful, he reserved the right to mine Iran’s harbors.
He said he wanted Prime Minister Thatcher, President Giscard and
Chancellor Schmidt to know that this is an option that we have, and
that we are prepared to exercise, if economic sanctions do not work.
The Secretary of State said that he agreed with the President but
was against mining.
The Vice President asked whether the concept was that if the Irani-
ans start trials we would immediately move to sanctions and mining.
