Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Europe would not be very great. On balance, the Soviet Union would probably consider the net effects on Eastern European stability in the short run either to roughly balance out or to be of manageable proportions. They could be somewhat more apprehensive over the longerterm effects of the expanded US contacts and presence inherent in Option IV, worrying particularly over their effects in the GDR. On the other hand, the greater emphasis on human rights and autonomy implicit in Option III is of very great concern to the US. Moreover, Option III also aims at the development of such expanded contacts and presence in the longer-term. West European Attitudes Our West European allies have by and large pursued the Option IV approach to relations with Eastern Europe for some time. France has led the way in seeking to improve relations with East European countries while the FRG spent most of the early seventies in restabilizing its diplomatic presence and normalizing long-suspended relations. However, it is unlikely that the allies would have strong views one way or the other concerning the US pursuing Option III or IV in its relations with Eastern Europe. Whatever we do, the allies would be unlikely to change their own approach. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, August 15, 1977 SUBJECT Export Control of US Technology Growing trade from West to East over the past five years has heightened concern over technology transfer, especially to the Soviet Union. The adequacy and appropriateness of export controls have been increasingly called into question by the responsible Executive Agencies, the Congress and the business community. Some—such as State, Commerce, and business—argue that export controls are too stringent. Oth- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 91, Export Controls: 1977. Confidential. Sent for action. While no drafting information appears on the memorandum, it was forwarded to Brzezinski for signature by Benjamin Huberman on August 4 and retyped on August 15.
