1116 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Outlook Although Assad appears in no immediate danger of being ousted, his dilemma is growing. He cannot allow civil disturbances to go unchecked, but repression risks increased popular resentment of his regime. He may be able to intimidate the general population and deter demonstrations for a time, but Sunni extremist attacks on Alawite government and military officials—violence that predates the recent demonstrations—almost certainly will continue. [handling restriction not declassified] Assad apparently has decided to launch a major campaign to give the appearance of mass public support for the government’s effort to neutralize its domestic opponents. The regime probably hopes that displays of public backing would counter what probably is a growing perception in the cities that mass demonstrations are exclusively the province of the extremists. [handling restriction not declassified] As part of its campaign, the government probably will step up its efforts to “prove” that the extremists are being manipulated by outsiders such as the Egyptians, Israelis, or the US—a theme Assad has already used in a series of speeches this week. Assad is not likely to follow through with his threat to arm peasants and trade unionists to “liquidate reactionary gangs,” although additional militia units may be established. [handling restriction not declassified] The most dangerous near-term threat to Assad comes from his fellow Alawites, who are in the best position to mount a coup and want to preserve their dominance even at the expense of the present leadership. Some Alawite officers are said to be criticizing Assad’s failure to allow Sunnis a greater role in decisionmaking and his inability to come to grips with the deteriorating domestic situation; further missteps could quickly cause opposition to jell in the military. The appearance of serious disciplinary problems in Army units assigned to quell civil disturbances could persuade these officers to make their move. [handling restriction not declassified] Assad may be able to hold onto power for some time, but the chances are increasing that the Alawite elite will conclude that he and his unpopular brother Rifaat must go. The Alawites have no obvious alternative to Assad, although men such as military intelligence head Ali Duba and Special Forces commander Ali Haydar are likely to play a key role in any succession struggle. The Defense Companies and the Special Forces are considered the most loyal troops in Syria, but their support could crumble if the President and his brother were confronted by an Alawite consensus favoring a change of leadership. [handling restriction not declassified]
