1116
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Outlook
Although Assad appears in no immediate danger of being ousted,
his dilemma is growing. He cannot allow civil disturbances to go un-
checked, but repression risks increased popular resentment of his re-
gime. He may be able to intimidate the general population and deter
demonstrations for a time, but Sunni extremist attacks on Alawite gov-
ernment and military officials—violence that predates the recent dem-
onstrations—almost certainly will continue. [handling restriction not
declassified]
Assad apparently has decided to launch a major campaign to give
the appearance of mass public support for the government’s effort to
neutralize its domestic opponents. The regime probably hopes that dis-
plays of public backing would counter what probably is a growing per-
ception in the cities that mass demonstrations are exclusively the prov-
ince of the extremists. [handling restriction not declassified]
As part of its campaign, the government probably will step up its
efforts to “prove” that the extremists are being manipulated by out-
siders such as the Egyptians, Israelis, or the US—a theme Assad has al-
ready used in a series of speeches this week. Assad is not likely to
follow through with his threat to arm peasants and trade unionists to
“liquidate reactionary gangs,” although additional militia units may be
established. [handling restriction not declassified]
The most dangerous near-term threat to Assad comes from his
fellow Alawites, who are in the best position to mount a coup and want
to preserve their dominance even at the expense of the present leader-
ship. Some Alawite officers are said to be criticizing Assad’s failure to
allow Sunnis a greater role in decisionmaking and his inability to come
to grips with the deteriorating domestic situation; further missteps
could quickly cause opposition to jell in the military. The appearance of
serious disciplinary problems in Army units assigned to quell civil dis-
turbances could persuade these officers to make their move. [handling
restriction not declassified]
Assad may be able to hold onto power for some time, but the
chances are increasing that the Alawite elite will conclude that he and
his unpopular brother Rifaat must go. The Alawites have no obvious
alternative to Assad, although men such as military intelligence head
Ali Duba and Special Forces commander Ali Haydar are likely to play a
key role in any succession struggle. The Defense Companies and the
Special Forces are considered the most loyal troops in Syria, but their
support could crumble if the President and his brother were confronted
by an Alawite consensus favoring a change of leadership. [handling re-
striction not declassified]
