1092  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
to see him because his estimates play a role in my suggestions on how 
to play downloading. [13 lines not declassified]
5. In talking to Larry it is sad to see how far from reality we have 
let the downloading issue get. From the point of view of a quite hard-
nosed NIO, if the Sovs do what he thinks they will do he doesn’t think 
there will be much of a breakout risk at all. [2½ lines not declassified]
[4 lines not declassified] This week, we may want to exploit some 
of these ideas—e.g. allow downloading of 750 RVs but require that 
downloading of more than 2 RVs per missile be accomplished not by 
offloading RVs but by deploying a new variant, require that the new 
variant meet the 40 percent rule and not be tested with more than the 
downloaded RV number, no tests of the older variant after a certain 
point, etc. Arnie would have a hard time selling this to Brent, but it 
does correspond to reality. Incidentally, Gershwin was amazed when 
the Sovs went from 1250 to 750, and says he doesn’t see how they can 
deploy their force with only 750. He predicts the Sovs will resist going 
lower.
6. The crew from Geneva is planning to come back on the TWA 
flight from Paris. You may see them there.
7. The plan for Baker and Bess to meet at 3:00 Thursday and 10:00 
Friday raises again the question of whether you should plan to meet 
with Moiseyev Thursday morning. I still recommend that we make no 
proposal for such a meeting, and let the ministers collide at 3:00. If the 
Sovs have something to say and ask for a meeting, we would agree. I 
have told everyone that you would plan to get the US team together 
before 3:00 on Thursday, time to be determined. (2:00 in the afternoon 
might work, but we can decide that later.)
8. Goebel asked for my thoughts on whether Powell should ask to 
see Moiseyev. We talked it over and left that question the same way—
Powell would take no initiative, but would be receptive (and prepared 
to hit him with what we need on START) if Moiseyev asks to see him 
(as is likely).
9. Looking forward to seeing you again. Plan to get a good night’s 
sleep Wednesday night, you may not get much Thursday night.
10. Draft points for Baker/Bess 1-on-1:
 We approach this as a serious and important meeting. The pres-
ident suggested it as a way—the only way—to resolve the remaining 
START issues so we can schedule a summit for the end of July.
 We assume from your agreement to hold this meeting that you 
approach it the same way and have come prepared to complete START.
 We are both taking a risk. Just by setting up this meeting, we have 
created expectations. We knew that would happen, and were prepared
