Delegate took exception to Article 15 of the project on Treaties as
submitted by the President to the Commission. It was as follows: “If one of
the States [parties to a treaty]44 fails wholly or in any respect to fulfill the
obligation which it has contracted, the other can exact the fulfillment or
consider the treaty as abrogated.” The Peruvian Delegation made no
objection to the article as drafted by the President, but, upon the insistence
of the Chilean Delegate, the Commission struck out the article, the
American Delegation expressing the hope that a substitute might be drafted
which would satisfy the opposing views of the Delegates in question. This
hope was realized, for in the last plenary session and as the last act, the
following substitute, drafted by the Peruvian Delegation, was unanimously
adopted: “Obligations contracted by treaty shall be sanctioned in cases of
non-compliance as when diplomatic negotiations have failed, by decision of
an international Court of Justice or by an arbitral tribunal.”
A source of difficulty which has already been mentioned in passing
deserves to be dealt with in some detail. Each of the twenty-one American
Republics was invited by the Resolution of Santiago de Chile, creating the
International Commission of Jurists, to appoint two delegates, no doubt in
the belief that in this way a specialist in each of two branches of
international science would attend and participate in the labors of the
Commission. In the event four or five of the Central American Republics
were not represented, and of the seventeen Republics sending delegates,
eight sent but one delegate each. This made it necessary for the single
delegate to attend the sessions of both Subcommissions and, on this
account, the remaining nine States each having two delegates were
generally represented in both Subcommissions by their two delegates. To
accommodate the eight States, each with one single delegate, the
Subcommissions were obliged to meet at different hours—an arrangement
which hampered the work of the Subcommission on Public International
Law, as, meeting in the afternoons, it was obliged to give way to the
meetings of the Committee of this Subcommission, for the plenary sessions,
as well as for certain social duties. Considering the encroachments thus
effected, the work of the Commission in the field of International Public
Law in agreeing upon a dozen conventions may properly be held to be an
eminently satisfactory achievement. On the other hand, the Subcommission
on Private International Law was enabled to devote on an average, three
