Negotiating Channels 481 184. Handwritten Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Undated I will try to divide this report into several sections: 1) Meeting with Mr. S 2) Future relations with Iran 3) Report on Scenario/Implementation 4) Draft statement 5) Where do we go from here? Meeting with Mr. S: Prior to my meeting, I asked that our French contacts meet with me to discuss how to handle Mr. S. We spent a couple of hours on this subject. Their joint recommendation was that I should regard his desire for such a meeting as an opportunity for Mr. S. to convey directly to the President the thoughts and feelings of the Imam. He said that Mr. S.’s presumption was that Carter did not understand the meaning of their revolution and that his meeting with me was a way to penetrate the “wall of people” responsible for the past 30 years of U.S. policy. Conversely, they suggested to me that I convey back to the Imam thru this man a sense of understanding and a desire to have a better relationship. I showed them the letter addressed to me from the President containing the assurance on the scenario2 and said that this would be very helpful with Bani-Sadr and Mr. S. as it could be used as a written promise to follow the scenario if an early release seemed desirable/ feasible. I met alone with Mr. S. for 3½ hours, during which we had a leisurely dinner. We started off by exchanging pleasantries. I kidded him that his face was better known in the United States than Walter Cronkite. He laughed and responded that while his face was well 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 3/80. Secret. Jordan wrote this report on the plane from Paris to Washington following his meeting with “Mr. S,” Sadegh Ghotbzadeh. The editor transcribed the text from Jordan’s handwritten original. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Jordan and Vance upon Jordan’s return, February 17, from 7:40 until 8:52 p.m. (Carter Library) No other record of the meeting with the President has been found. 2 In a February 15 letter to Jordan, Carter wrote: “If, at any time, the Government of Iran desires to release the American hostages at an earlier date than called for in the mutually agreed plan, the Government of Iran has my personal assurance that the United States will abide by all the terms of that plan.” (Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 2/80)
