24 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement deterrent exploitation. On this chart, the IRBM IOC force build-­up is shown under current directives. As you are aware, the recent decision to produce both the THOR and JUPITER ballistic missiles has resulted in doubling the effective operational force expectancy and prior opera­ tional dates have also been stepped up. The combined THOR–JUPITER operational inventory will total 120 missiles at the end of the initial operational capability force build-­up overseas. These missiles have been designed with particular emphasis in their ground support equip­ ment given to movability from one site location to another and dispers­ ibility from a common support base of operations. Although somewhat different development approaches have been used by the Air Force on the THOR and by the Army on the JUPITER resulting in the develop­ ment program as shown, it should be particularly noted that both mis­ siles bear the same squadron operational dates overseas. The annual production schedule to attain this force build-­up is shown along the bottom line of the chart. The total 272 missile production figure shown accounts for all missiles incurred to cover test flights, training, and exercise firings to support the operational inventory. CHART 11 This chart shows the ATLAS IOC force build-­up. In addition to the two Cooke AFB training complexes, which have inherent opera­ tional capabilities, the newly directed ATLAS program will have four soft squadrons by mid-1961. In addition, consideration to four addi­ tional hard base squadrons are planned to be completed by early 1963. The research and development part of the program remains unchanged since it is progressing as rapidly as possible. CHART 12 The TITAN IOC force build-­up is shown here. Significant sched­ uled development milestones during 1958 will be captive firing of the missile at Martin, Denver, in April 1958, and the first flight of the TITAN from Patrick in September 1958. There is every indication that these dates will be met. Selection of the first TITAN operational site near Denver, Colorado, was approved during January 1958 by the Air Force Ballistic Missile Committee. Plans are moving ahead to start con­ struction in May 1959. The first operational TITAN squadron is sched­ uled for activation in July 1961 with 3 more squadrons to be completed in July 1962. CHART 13 POLARIS. Significant scheduled development milestones are: the first fully guided flight in October 1959, the delivery of the first POLARIS nuclear powered submarine in October 1960 complete with
