346  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
formal inquiry to the Chinese as to whether the imprisoned Americans 
will have access to him. He is awaiting our reaction to this problem. We 
must consider whether a formal inquiry would tend to encourage the 
Chinese to take a negative position. It is a difficult question for we do 
need to know definitely what their position on this critical issue will be. 
O’Neill fears that we are going to have no way of establishing that the 
Americans wish to return and wish to get in touch with him. He feels 
that we are at the mercy of the Chinese Communists on this and that we 
can not prove violation of the Agreed Announcement. He thinks we are 
dependent on Chinese Communist good faith. O’Neill feels that perhaps 
you can clear up these issues with Wang better than he can in Peiping. He 
points out that “you have some bargaining counters at Geneva,” while 
he has none in Peiping. I would like your reaction as to whether we 
should run the risk of having a show down with them at Peiping on the 
granting of access to O’Neill. I have reminded the British that all of the 
Americans except Redmond, Downey and Fecteau are known to have 
applied for exit permits before they were arrested. This establishes that 
they have expressed a desire to return to the U.S. However, it is true that 
this was done long before the Agreed Announcement. They have had no 
opportunity to reaffirm their desire since then.
The pouch is closing. Regards and may fortune favor you.
Sincerely yours,
P.S. In my letter No. 16 of September 30, on page 3, line 13, change 
“by way” to read “by Wang”.
261.	 Telegram 804 from Geneva1
Geneva, October 4, 1955, 11 a.m.
804. From Johnson.
1. Although first para Deptel 824 speaks of “presentation” text 
is drafted in form of letter. Unless otherwise instructed will assume 
Department concurs my view should be oral presentation and will 
make slight changes necessary for this form.
2. Again desire call attention to fact that by basing our approach on 
“accounting for” rather than presence in territory under control PRC as 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–455. Secret; Priority; Limited 
Distribution.
