Chapter 5, May–June 1990 751 fixed MIRVs must be agreed. We sense that we will need to move progressively. The place to begin is mobile MIRVs—­first because they are land-­based, which has special characteristics, and second because of where they are in the program of both sides as compared with other systems. This is not something to be arrived at overnight, but is something that is feasible and practical because of the state of our programs. Karpov: Let me say if we want to reflect the common understanding to reduce the concentration of warheads on strategic nuclear delivery vehicles, we should use the Soviet formula. Whether we shall begin with land-­based ICBMs or submarines is something we ought not to prejudge, that is the subject of the negotiations. Bartholomew: This too raises the question of the validity of having a joint statement on future negotiations. Burt: We feel it is legitimate to raise elimination of heavy ICBMs. Whenever we raise this we always hear back that we cannot go further in this agreement, but this can be addressed in future negotiations. When we bring up a MIRV mobile ban, you say that too is a subject for subsequent negotiations. What we have written is an accurate reflection of our dialog. Karpov: Never in the course of our discussion has the Soviet Union said future negotiations should prejudge the fate of Soviet heavy missiles or eliminate Soviet heavy missiles. We are ready to move toward further limitations. We are ready to discuss elimination of MIRVed mobiles, but not prejudge the outcome. We want to outline the subject matter without prejudging the outcome. We will take a closer look and get back together. Bartholomew: You understand what we are saying. This is a grave difference indeed, we have not done as well as Burt and Nazarkin. Before this meeting I thought we were going to be able to answer positively whether there will be a joint statement on future negotiations. Now there is a serious question as the the value on having a statement. Karpov: If there is no common ground, perhaps we don’t need a statement. We can report to our superiors that since we have been unable to find common ground, we make the recommendation that this approach be adopted. Bartholomew: I cannot recommend adoption of a statement predicated on the changes you have proposed. Is there anything else we can usefully discuss this evening? I note we do have a statement on START. But the START statement is not complete until we have reached agreement resolving the rest of the outstanding issues. I invite you to address the Backfire declaration we have given you.4 4 Not found.
