506 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 188. At the same time the USSR’s post-Stalin leaders, especially Khrushchev, appear flexible and pragmatic in their appraisal of the fac­ tors at play in the world situation and of their impact on Soviet pros­ pects. In particular, they seem to have a healthy respect for the strength of the US as the principal source of opposition to their ambitions and a keen awareness of those gaps which still separate Soviet from US power. Khrushchev himself clearly regards it as one of the primary Soviet objectives to outstrip the US. Indeed the Soviet leaders may tend to assess the strength of the Western powers as greater than it often appears to us in the West. They almost certainly still regard the US as having superior capabilities to wage nuclear war, and they may overes­ timate the unity of the Western coalition. 189. Given this respect for Western power, the Soviet leadership is highly unlikely to believe that the present situation would be altered to Soviet advantage by resort to general war. In fact its own growing appreciation of the destructive potentialities of nuclear weapons and advanced delivery systems, as the USSR itself develops such capabil­ ities, has almost certainly had a major impact on Soviet thinking as to the risks of nuclear war. Doctrinal acknowledgment of a modified outlook toward war occurred at the XXth Party Congress, which aban­ doned the thesis of the inevitability of war between the Communist and capitalist worlds. 190. In our view the Soviet Union, except in the case of an unfore­ seen technological breakthrough which gives high promise of victory without unacceptable losses, will not deliberately initiate general war during the next five years. At the same time the Soviet leaders, despite their suspicions of US intentions, are probably confident that their own growing nuclear capabilities will deter the US from embarking on this course. Consequently they must regard miscalculation as the most likely way in which general war would occur. 191. For the same reasons which inhibit it from deliberately initi­ ating general war the USSR will almost certainly seek to avoid courses of action which in its judgment would involve serious risk of general war. During any international crisis the Soviet calculation of this risk will be of paramount importance. We think that the Soviet leaders estimate that because of Soviet nuclear capabilities the US is becom­ ing increasingly disinclined to engage in an all-­out nuclear exchange. Consequently the Soviet leaders may believe that they can pursue certain aggressive courses of action, extending even to local war, with less risk of general war than the same courses would previously have involved. In general, therefore, we believe that insofar as Soviet courses of action are restrained by fear of the US resorting to general
