1956  765
10. Wang said, outside conference room, moreover, US contin­
uously stepping up military activities in Taiwan area. Recently US 
openly declared it would stage large scale military maneuvers with 
Chiang forces in Taiwan area. Obviously this further act of provocation.
11. Wang said he asked that US make explicit answer as to whether 
it intent of US, after announcement of declaration, to maintain status 
quo of its seizure Taiwan and intervention China’s internal affairs, and 
its interference in China’s liberation Taiwan and coastal islands, mean­
while refusing hold Foreign Ministers conference.
12. Wang said if that is intent of US, then is it not lot of empty words 
to talk about “not prejudicing position and rights” of PRC? Would this 
not be making it impossible to realize desire for peaceful settlement 
disputes between two countries?
13. I replied that it didn’t seem me statement Wang had made 
helped advance us in task we facing in attempt reach agreement on 
declaration on renunciation of force. It seemed me his statement tended 
again lead us down side road of discussing substance our disputes.
14. I said in attempt to see whether or not we could not advance 
understanding between us, I had asked him at last meeting two simple 
questions which I thought would help clarify situation. As I recalled 
it, first question was whether we were in agreement that only peaceful 
means would be used settle our disputes.
15. I said other question was what he thought should happen if in 
violation declaration one side should initiate hostilities.
16. I said he had again referred this morning to his interpretation 
of draft we discussing as requiring him to renounce his position and 
recognize positions which he did not desire recognize. I had tried to 
deal with this question at last meeting, just as plainly as I could. I had 
hoped I made myself clear, but apparently I had not.
17. I said I had tried make clear draft we discussing including self 
defense clause did not require either side give up position with respect 
merits any disputes. What I had been trying do was place self-­defense 
clause in that declaration, to which Wang objected, in its true rela­
tionship to remainder of declaration and show that it meant only this: 
proposition I set forth was that if either side should violate declaration 
and initiate hostilities as means of attempting make its views prevail 
over other, or if either side should be attacked from any other quar­
ter, it would be clear that side attacked would not by declaration have 
renounced its right self defense.
18. I said I had given much thought to this, and had tried think 
of some way in which I could make this perfectly clear. Therefore, it 
not with any intent of getting into substance our disputes, or saying 
things that would lead us down byroads, but with intent of making our
