March–August 1953 593 declassified] cause was a lost one, and if they stood to benefit politically by cooperation with the opposition. 14. With regard to Mechanics of Quasi-legal overthrow: Exploitation of illegal printing of money as grounds for Majlis crisis precipitating [cryptonym not declassified] ouster (IX–B–2). Ambassador Henderson stressed that it would be inadvisable to attack [cryptonym not declassified] on the grounds of illegally printing money and to publicize the decreased backing of the Iranian currency caused thereby, unless [cryptonym not declassified] ODYOKE were prepared to grant considerable aid to the successor government. John H. Waller Chief, NE–4 (Iran) 217. Memorandum Prepared by the Naval Attache´ in Iran (Pollard)1 EN3–11/EF55 Tehran, June 11, 1953. I met Ardeshir at his request at 9:00 p.m. last night as arranged, and cleared through you yesterday. He had just left a meeting of the opposition deputies which included Makki, Baghai, Mir Ashrafi, Mostafa Kashani and others. The opposition is now concentrating on organizing the deputies in order that Kashani be re-elected as “Speaker” of the Majlis. He then stated that at this moment the opposition is guaranteed of 42 votes for Kashani in these elections. I expressed surprise and Ardeshir explained that by law this election must be secret, and that by extensive campaign “methods” the opposition group, now openly led by Zahedi, had persuaded enough deputies to vote for Kashani to make up a total of 42. These he said would be identified by distinguishing marks on their ballots so that it could be determined which deputy, if any, had failed to keep his bargain. This he said must be kept strictly secret in order to 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 80–01701R, Box 3, Folder 7, TPAJAX. Top Secret; Security Information. On the covering sheet to this memorandum is a handwritten note, apparently from Waller to [name not declassified], which reads: “A cable went out to Station complaining that Pollard is crossing wires with us.”
