Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX out one case from each list to illustrate the varied nature of difficulties. Mladenov said categorically that any difficulties must be administrative since the political decision had been taken to let such people go. 6. In this connection, Mladenov made a rather revealing remark about the Marev case which, he said, had required an extraordinary effort because of “existing laws and regulations”. He had had to have personal discussions with the Minister of Justice and the “Attorney General” and since the laws did not allow the case to be resolved expeditiously, “we had to make some alterations” in order that such “private cases” should not impair relations. (I read this to mean that with Mladenov’s help the party overrode the Ministries of Interior and Justice.) 7. Next I referred to what more we might do in the field of visits, in accordance with para 3 (a) ref E, followed by remarks about Basket II as per ref D,9 and remarks about deficiencies in Basket III implementation, notably with regard to publications (despite the cosmetic changes made by the Bulgarians), also as per ref D. Finally I said that with respect to facilitation of travel we are currently carefully considering steps we might take to reciprocally facilitate both private and official travel, as per para 3 (b) ref E.10 8. The positive remarks that Mladenov made in reply were of the kind suitable to the occasion of leave-taking. He thought it was fair to say that “never, since World War II” have relations between Bulgaria and the US been better. (Comment: This is of course not saying much since for ten years they were worse than with any EE country other than Albania, and the Bulgarians began moving toward normalization only about four years ago, probably at the prodding of the Russians.) 9. On CSCE, Mladenov said he welcomed our statement about the utility of bilateral consultations and of our general attitude toward the main Belgrade meeting. In usual manner he stressed Basket I, admitted shortcomings in Basket II (“not everything can be rectified immediately”) but counter-charged with respect to MFN; and with respect to Basket III said: “We are making progress on divided families, but do not think they are the main content of Basket III.” He said Bulgaria is
