198  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
be reached regarding civilians but they would never give up their sov­
ereign rights. He then repeated familiar arguments that: his side had 
made greatest concessions; his side had provided list all Americans; 
we refused list Chinese; his side was giving lenient treatment Amer­
icans but we were obstructing departure any Chinese and they were 
greatly dissatisfied present state of affairs. He said very few Ameri­
cans in China, and Chinese Government had offered easy and simple 
solution their return. However, Chinese had “tens of thousands of 
nationals in the US” and their return depended upon US implemen­
tation of agreement.
17. He concluded by saying we had spent much time on text and 
he would like to know if we could reach agreement on announcement 
today.
18. I replied I was very sorry his statement did not add anything 
to what he had previously said which would enable us to make further 
progress today. I had not suggested anything which would infringe 
upon their sovereignty and it was for them to decide what they would 
do with respect to Americans. I had not said we would not conclude 
understanding until all Americans were released. I had made many 
concessions, first hoping all Americans would be released during 
talks, then that they would be released simultaneously with announce­
ment and now I was asking for interpretation of word “expeditiously” 
in terms of reasonable period of time. I was disappointed it was still 
impossible for him to give me even that statement.
19. I said his statements regarding treatment Chinese in US called 
into question good faith my statements this regard. I was satisfied facts 
not correct but if he would give me information I would immediately 
look into any cases he knew of.
20. Wang said problem now has boiled down to question of defin­
ing “expeditiously” in terms of a period of time. He said Chinese sov­
ereign right did not permit him to say they would release Americans 
at any given time irrespective of their juridical procedure. If they gave 
tomorrow or some other time in future not much different from say­
ing Americans would be released right now. They could only say they 
would give results when reviews completed and with favorable con­
ditions review would be carried out very quickly. This he said was 
greatest extent to which he could go today. He then repeated his state­
ment great dissatisfaction regarding status Chinese nationals in US, 
complained his govt had no complete list and that since opening of 
talks not a single Chinese national had been allowed freely to return 
to China. He had mentioned case of Dr. Tsien but even he not able to 
return yet.
