much to the honor and dignity of Chile and Peru as a high-minded
settlement of this controversy, so as to permit them to stand
before the world as friends unembarrassed by any serious
differences between them.
4. I have studied with the greatest care the various types of
solutions which have been advanced throughout the negotiations,
and I have patiently listened to the views which have been so
freely expressed by the representatives of the contending powers.
Leaving out of consideration the attempt to carry out the
unfulfilled provisions of the Treaty of Ancon, it would appear that
from the nature of the case there are but three ways to deal with
the disputed territory: You can assign it all to one of the
contestants; you can divide it between them on some basis to be
defined; or you can effect some arrangement whereby neither
contestant shall get any of the territory. These three general types
comprise an exclusive classification of the logically possible
ways to dispose of the res. I think it may fairly be said that the
first of them, namely, delivery of the disputed territory in its
entirety to one or the other of the parties, has virtually ceased to
be regarded as a practical solution by anybody who really hopes
for a permanent settlement.
The second method, that of division has also seemed to me to
recede further and further into the background. The parties have
not been able to find any formula or basis, either of straight
division, or of division coupled with a “corridor” feature or a
“free city” device, which is acceptable to both of them. The
prospect of success by following this path is not encouraging.
Apparently no scheme of division, however ingeniously worked
out, has yet been able to overcome the stubborn fact that neither
of the Governments considers that it can afford to make an
adjustment which involves making substantial concessions to the
other. The essential elements of compromise in the true meaning
of the term are lacking. We may as well face the issue squarely,
and recognize that division of this territory between Chile and
Peru on any basis of agreement presents almost insuperable
