Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX instance, would move forward with MFN for Hungary be supportive, neutral or adverse with regard to our CSCE objectives, and vice versa). Eastern Europe The primary defect with the current PRM follow-on draft13 is that it washes out the difference between alternatives. With only several small exceptions it does not seem from the draft to matter whether we pursue Option III (bias toward countries that are either somewhat liberal internally or somewhat independent of the Soviet Union) or Option IV (efforts to expand contacts across the board). It may be that the “flatness” of the options reflects the reality of our limited influence in the region. But the existing draft also contains hints of bureaucratic compromise. There are two other main defects in the current draft: —there is too little richness to the set of policy instruments discussed. This is obviously related to the general criticism. But supposing we wanted to take an initiative in relations with Poland, there certainly is a richer menu of alternatives, if perhaps not an absolutely very rich one, than is conveyed by the response. The response tends to collapse all instruments into three: MFN, and claims settlements and consular agreements where applicable. —the response needs to have a sharper sense of the domestic political context. For instance, returning the Crown is probably a nonstarter; and it almost certainly is at the current moment and in relation to the upcoming Belgrade conference. Similarly, talking about what we might do to develop further our relations with Poland and Romania— a good topic and one for which some possible actions should be listed— ought to be cast against the difficulty we have, at least in the case of Romania, of doing even as much as we have in the past. Suggested issues: Basic Approach —There is consensus that we seek to foster internal liberalism and external independence from Moscow in Eastern Europe. But there is disagreement, perhaps even fundamental, over how. Option III implicitly says that good behavior ought to be rewarded, while Option IV suggests that changes we seek can only occur over the long run with
