Human Rights 437 Central African Empire Chile Ethiopia Nicaragua Paraguay Uruguay The Congressmen allude to “conditions” in the legislation that would “permit flexible administration.” They are presumably referring to the fact that the human rights provisions apply only to governments engaged in “a consistent pattern of gross violations” of human rights and that even as to such governments the amendment permits approval if the loan or project would directly benefit the needy. However, there can be little doubt that the governments of the countries listed above are (or were at the time of the vote) engaged in serious violations of human rights, some in greater degree than others. As for the other “condition” in the legislation—the “needy people” exception—we have already put as much strain on it as it can bear. All of our actions in this area are the result of deliberations by the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. The Group was set up last April pursuant to an NSC directive. To promote better understanding of the lengths to which we have gone to assure that our foreign assistance programs reflect our human rights concerns, we have prepared the attached summary of the Group’s background and operations (Tab 1).3 This summary stresses that the Group’s main purpose is to carry out the applicable statutory provisions and that it has full representation from State’s geographical bureaus as well as current information from our embassies in the countries involved. Our human rights policy is by no means all “sanctions”. Consistent with P.D. 30,4 we are intensifying efforts to direct a growing share of our bilateral economic assistance to governments that show respect for human rights. We are also encouraging the IFI managements to channel their lending to countries with good human rights records and to programs that serve basic human needs. We have urged several of our allies to convey the same message to IFI managements, and we believe some of them are about to do so. (As you know, in response to P.D. 30, an interagency study is underway on the effectiveness of recent U.S. actions in the IFIs, and it will shed further light on the issues dis- 3 Not found attached. Possible reference to a paper entitled “The Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance,” prepared in the Department of State on March 9. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 21, Interagency Group—General/IAG Memo) 4 See Document 119.
