Romania sional government from members of present government and representatives of the insurgents, allowing Afghans to work out their internal problems free of outside influence. Andrei commented at this point that Romania considers it fundamental to get the Soviet Union to withdraw its troops and to guarantee non-interference in Afghanistan by all states, including Islamic countries, while internal decisions are being worked out. This should be done, he added, from the political base existing before the invasion. In this context, Ridgway noted Deputy Foreign Minister Groza’s statement in Washington that Romania would not only oppose the importation of revolution, but the importation of counter-revolution as well. 8. Iran. Ridgway expressed US hopes that Romania could support efforts to free the hostages, despite its known position that economic sanctions are not feasible. The US believes sanctions will have a constructive effect and open other opportunities for discussion of the hostage issue with Iran. All nations have an interest in freeing the hostages and creating safer conditions for their diplomats. She added that the US attempt to rescue the hostages was humanitarian in impetus, not military. Andrei reiterated Romania’s desire to see the hostages freed as soon as possible since it would lessen international tensions. He noted however that economic sanctions could be turned against the US by hostile forces in Iran. 9. European issues and CSCE. Andrei noted that the greatest danger to world peace lies in Europe, and that any war there would be nuclear. Romania wished to strengthen security and reach a balance between the two sides through reductions in armed forces and military budgets. The theater nuclear force deployment decision should be delayed and negotiations started immediately for reduction by both sides of medium-range weapons. Stressing the need for balance, Andrei said the negotiating process should seek ultimately to reduce tension and reestablish detente. This in turn would help the situation in Afghanistan and give impetus to the withdrawal of Soviet troops. It would also create conditions for a successful Madrid CSCE review meeting, which in turn would revitalize the Helsinki spirit and improve the international climate. In this respect Romania believed additional bilateral consultations with the US might be helpful in preparing for the Madrid meeting. Andrei suggested such consultations in Bucharest in July or early August, with perhaps yet another consultation after the summer. Ridgway agreed to take his suggestion back to Washington. On TNF, Ridgway said NATO intended to go through with its decision, pointing to the fact that three offers to the Soviets to negotiate arms reductions had gone unanswered. Since NATO missiles had yet to be produced, the TNF decision had a built-in delay on deployment which could be used to negotiate. Ridgway confirmed the American desire to safeguard
