3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
163
nist parties, but that it offers a Marxist alternative to the Soviet model in
Eastern Europe, and perhaps ultimately within the Soviet Union itself.
Moscow has thus been upset by Eurocommunist support to dissi-
dents in Eastern Europe and the USSR. Particularly annoying to the So-
viets in this regard was an unprecedented visit in late December of an
Italian Communist delegation to dissident Soviet Marxist Roy Med-
vedev in Moscow. The Italians presented Medvedev with an Italian
edition of one of his books and reportedly asked him to write articles
for an Italian party historical journal.
D. Unrest in Eastern Europe
At the same time, CSCE had a catalytic effect on East European dis-
sent, which became a movement cutting across national borders. Dissi-
dents from different East European countries have reportedly coordi-
nated their activities to a limited degree. Last winter some Soviet
leaders were evidently genuinely alarmed that post-Helsinki condi-
tions were creating an unstable situation in Eastern Europe, especially
in Poland, and to a lesser degree in East Germany and Czechoslovakia.
The growth of unrest in Eastern Europe increased chronic Soviet
fears of a spillover into the Soviet Union itself. Soviet authorities have
always been alert to the danger of a political “virus” from Eastern Eu-
rope spreading into the polyglot borderlands of the Soviet Union,
which have historically been susceptible to influences from that
quarter. The fear of such a domino-effect was evidently a factor in the
Soviet decision to invade Czechoslovakia in 1968.6
E. The US Human Rights Initiative
The new US administration’s human rights “campaign,” and espe-
cially the personal involvement of President Carter in public appeals
on behalf of Soviet dissidents, further disturbed Soviet authorities.
Many Soviet officials, already fearful of being put in the dock at Bel-
grade, reportedly regarded the campaign as a deliberate attempt at
subversion by the US. At the same time, US protests about Soviet
repressions temporarily emboldened Soviet dissidents to make more
vigorous protests and to channel their appeals directly to the US
administration.
II. The Soviet Response
It is largely as a response to all these related pressures that the cur-
rent crackdown against dissidents must be seen. It is clear that at least
the initiation of the crackdown, although not its present scope, predates
the change in US administrations. The original factor of greatest impor-
6 See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XVII, Eastern Europe, Documents 80 and 81.
