March 27–December 31, 1979 971 —begin turning the Palestinians from a military to a diplomatic strategy (through which terrorist attacks in Israel might be curbed substantially.) THE PLAN IN A NUTSHELL The centerpiece of the proposed program2 is an umbrella agreement which would provide for the following: —All parties will observe strictly the ceasefire. —No element of the PLO will attack Israel by any means from bases in Lebanon. No element of the PLO will attack the Lebanese militias in southern Lebanon. —The Lebanese militias will not attack Palestinian or Lebanese targets. —Israel will not attack targets in Lebanon. Israel will assure compliance by the Lebanese militias in southern Lebanon with these arrangements. —No party will attack or harass UNIFIL. —Ceasefire violations will be the responsibility of UNIFIL and UN representatives to resolve. Communications to UNIFIL or UN representatives about ceasefire violations will be reported through appropriate means—including radio hotline—by Israel, Lebanon, the Arab deterrent force, the Lebanese militias in southern Lebanon, and the PLO. All parties will respect recommendations made by the UN representatives and UNIFIL to resolve conflict. (We will discuss with the UN and troop contributors how UNIFIL can be strengthened.) Under that umbrella, working through different channels we would seek implementing and complementary agreements in four areas: —Reduction and eventual elimination of Palestinian and Lebanese militia fighters from the UNIFIL area. UNIFIL would be given greater freedom of movement in the area held by the Lebanese militias, while upgrading its surveillance and detection capacities. (We would discuss the possible need for additional manpower.) —Establishing and expanding stage by stage a “zone of peace,” beginning with the city of Tyre. Palestinian and Lebanese leftist fighters and offices would be withdrawn from Tyre, and a Lebanese military and civil presence would be established there. —A de facto arrangement to forestall Israeli-Syrian aerial confrontations. —Further staged withdrawals by Syrian forces from key areas in Beirut, with Lebanese Army units replacing them. OVERALL STRATEGY The detailed program of action outlined here is intended to establish for our own use a concept and the stages through which we would logically move in order to reach our objectives. We would not intend, however, to make all details and aspects of this plan available to any of 2 Attached but not printed is a more detailed scenario for the proposed plan.
