National Security Policy  179
Part I
1. Very many factors influenced, and are reflected, in this revision. 
I have placed the major factors on a single white sheet, which is at your 
place.
(REVIEW FACTORS)
Major Factors Influencing Review of Basic Policy
First. The realization that both sides are capable of delivering mas­
sive nuclear devastation (regardless of which side strikes first) increas­
ingly deters each side from initiating, or taking actions which directly 
risk, general nuclear war.
Second. During this time of nuclear parity and mutual deterrence: 
(a) there is growing doubt in the Free World whether the United States 
will use its massive nuclear capability, except in retaliation to direct 
attack on the United States or its forces, leading to a growth of neutral­
ism and a weakening of Free World alliances; (b) the USSR will be more 
bold—­especially toward less developed and uncommitted nations—­in 
economic penetration, in political action, and perhaps in probing 
through means of limited military aggression.
Third. Weakness or instability in less developed or uncommitted 
nations, and their primary aim for “modernization”, renders them vul­
nerable to expanding Sino-Soviet political and economic penetration.
Fourth. Changes in top Kremlin personnel do not indicate a deteri­
oration or disintegration in the Soviet regime’s policy or determination 
to achieve world domination for Communism.
Fifth. A U.S. massive nuclear retaliatory capability, invulnerable 
and sufficient to deter general nuclear war, and to prevail in such a war 
if it comes.
Sixth. A U.S. flexible and selective capability (including nuclear) 
to deter or suppress limited military aggression; realizing that the 
chances of keeping a conflict limited—­whenever major areas or causes 
are involved—­are at best not promising.
Seventh. Advances in Soviet military technology and scientific skill.
Eighth. The false images presented by Communism to the world 
of U.S. intentions and objectives, and of the USSR as the advocate of 
“peace and disarmament”.
Ninth. The adverse effect of the U.S. economic recession upon a 
healthy, expanding U. S, economy, which is essential to the security of 
the United States and the Free World.
Tenth. The ability of the Soviet and Chinese Communist regimes to 
direct their economic strength in support of internal and external poli­
cies which seek world domination.
