1368
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. Discussion during the two days of trilateral talks2 focused on
procedural questions: How to describe this and coming meetings and
how to define next steps in the negotiations. There had been serious,
substantive bilaterals with both Israelis and Egyptians in the preceding
days,3 concentrating on the draft memorandum of understand-ing
(MOU) but the Ministerial level touched only lightly on these matters.
3. The Egyptians used both our restricted trilateral meetings and
our one “plenary” to make strong statements reiterating their known
positions on Jerusalem, settlements, and the need to draw in the Pales-
tinians. The Israelis responded quietly but firmly on Jerusalem and set-
tlements and were positive in their approach toward attracting the Pal-
estinians. The most important aspect of these discussions was Egyptian
agreement to defer discussion of Jerusalem and the settlements until
the summit and proceed in the meantime with the other issues ad-
dressed in the MOU. The Egyptians also pressed for Israeli action on
two bilateral matters: Egyptians in Israeli jails, and the control of a
Coptic church in Jerusalem now in the hands of Ethiopian Copts. Burg
promised to look into these questions personally. He seemed to be opti-
mistic that more could be done with the issue of prisoner release and
was less sanguine that the religious issue could be solved.
4. The principle debate was whether we were “resuming the au-
tonomy negotiations” or “preparing for the summit” and whether the
existing committee structure would be the vehicle for continuing the
discussions or whether a general committee should be created to pro-
vide follow-up. The Egyptians tried to get priority for characterizing
our continued talks as preparing for the summit through a general
committee, but we joined the Israelis in insisting that “resumption” and
“preparation” are two sides of the same coin and must be given equal
weight, as they were in the September 3 statement which Sadat ac-
cepted at Alexandria. The Egyptian team left rather dissatisfied, though
it is not clear that General Ali shares his subordinates’ strong feelings
that Egypt came off second-best. In fact, he was somewhat ironic in his
comments about all these “lawyers” who encroach on his “simple mili-
tary approach” which would be to get on with the business at hand.
2 The talks took place in Washington.
3 Lewis met with Burg on October 6 to discuss Israeli plans and understandings for
the October 14–15 meetings and fourteen points for confidence building in the hopes of
producing a Memorandum of Understanding and improving, as Lewis characterized it,
the “political and psychological climate among the Palestinians and thus enhanc[ing] the
now rather dreary prospects for Palestinian participation in the autonomy process.” (Tel-
egram 18223 from Tel Aviv, October 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P880140–0297) Atheron met with Boutros Ghali on October 9 to discuss Egyptian
goals for the meetings. (Telegram 22566 from Cairo, October 11; National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–1752)
