880 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 209. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, August 2, 1980 SUBJECT False Alerts (U) My last memorandum on this subject was on July 2.2 In that memorandum I summarized the corrective actions underway to prevent false missile warning displays like those which resulted in alerts of Strategic Air Command bomber crews on June 3 and 6. The purpose of this memorandum is to provide an update on the status of those actions. (U) Subsequent to the June 6 false warning, Aerospace Defense Command (ADCOM) suspended operation of the NORAD Missile Warning Computer System (427M) as its primary means for providing missile warning data and attack assessment to other US and Canadian command centers. While the factors which contributed to the false alerts on June 3 and 6 are being corrected, NORAD is providing such data to its customers via a completely different computer, the Minimum Essential Back-­up (MEBU) computer. (C) I believe there were three major contributors to the false alert events of June 3 and 6: (1) a physical electronic failure in a circuit board of the 427M system, (2) computer programs which lacked sufficient error detection capability to prevent spurious data from being transmitted to NORAD’s customers, and (3) lack of a monitoring system which would permit NORAD personnel—­whose mission it is to provide accurate warning data and attack assessment—­to examine what they were sending to their customers. All three of these discrepancies require correction, but had any one of them been resolved prior to 3 June, the false alerts either would not have occurred or would have been resolved more expeditiously. (S) Analysis of the June 3 and 6 events has all but convinced ADCOM and the independent team of computer experts from the private sector that the failure was associated with a specific micro-­electronic integrated circuit in a particular data communications interface device at NORAD. Nevertheless, the actual physical phenomenon which caused that circuit to produce the spurious signals on June 3 and 6 is still 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 42, Missile Warning Incidents: 11/79–8/80. Secret. Brzezinski sent the memorandum to Carter under cover of an August 6 memorandum. (Ibid.) 2 See Document 202.
