August 8–September 17, 1978
163
partition slogans such as “self-ensured security” in the areas in which
they have overthrown the authority of the State of Lebanon.
5. The two parties of the Falangists and the Chamounites were en-
couraged by Israeli intervention in Lebanon and particularly in
southern Lebanon. You recall in this regard, I am sure, the Israeli inva-
sion of southern Lebanon and the part played by Israel in preventing
the effective restoration of the authority of the State of Lebanon therein
and in barring the entry of a Lebanese Army unit into this area, thereby
violating Security Council Resolutions nos. 425 and 426. In fact you
know best the details of the Israeli intervention.
6. Since the beginning of this year, Israeli intervention has become
more evident: arms and military aid are being sent to the Falangists and
Chamounites, who are urged to proceed with their partition policies
and practices and instigated to commit provocative acts against the
peacekeeping forces, including the Syrian forces. The great provoca-
tion, however, was launched on February 8 of this year, when some
military elements made an unexpected attack on a patrol of the peace-
keeping forces, killing a number of its members. Successive provoca-
tions against the peacekeeping forces followed, and the forces which
are the instrument of the lawful authority in Lebanon had to resort to
self-defense and to sticking to their positions without moving over any
territory in the hope that those who challenge the unity, safety and sta-
bility of Lebanon would ultimately return to the right path.
In fact provoking the peacekeeping forces was not the limit for
them. For they went so far as to commit crimes of murder in order to rid
themselves of the policies of Christian leaders opposed to their own
policies and practices. Such was the case of the murder of the late Toni
Franjieh, a former Lebanese Deputy and Minister and the son of Presi-
dent Suleiman Franjieh, a former President of Lebanon.
7. Launching attacks against the peacekeeping forces aims to put
an end to all manifestations of lawful authority in Lebanon inasmuch
as those forces, in addition to being the only force of the lawful au-
thority in Lebanon acceptable to the overwhelming majority of the Leb-
anese people, constitute the only force capable of imposing law and
order. This explains why the Israelis persist in instigating armed
groups to clash with the peacekeeping forces.
8. By virtue of the nature of their mission, the peacekeeping forces
are responsible for maintaining security and public order in Lebanon.
All acts which they have carried out in Lebanon and those which they
will carry out are motivated by concern for the unity of Lebanon and
the continued existence of the Lebanese State. I am sure, Mr. President,
you agree with me that if a armed group were to violate public order
and threaten the safety and security of citizens in an American city, it
would be the primary duty of the American security forces to hasten to
