Romania
633
the Senators this morning that the US itself is reluctant to give such
guarantees on similar matters that regard it directly. The same is true
with China. Thus things should be resolved without creating additional
artificial problems in order to achieve normalization.
The President said it is our policy to work toward normalization,
and we shall do so.
President Ceausescu asked if he should inform Chairman Hua of
the substance of our talks on these matters. I will certainly inform you
of his views and how the Chinese leaders see future developments.3 I
think, however, it is urgent to resolve these problems, and you are in
a position to bring about their speedy solution.
The President said that we desire to do this. We do not try to use
our relationship with the USSR against China, nor vice-versa. We wish
to be friends with both countries, and this is a course that Romania
has followed so well.
President Ceausescu said that this is a wise course. He said that
continuing the present state of affairs generates a certain degree of
suspicion with the Chinese leaders. Thus more expeditious steps
toward normal relations would demonstrate a willingness to carry out
that policy.
Korea
President Ceausescu then raised the People’s Democratic Republic
of Korea and Korea in general. During my visit to the Far East I will
also visit the PDRK as well as Vietnam, Campuchea, and Laos. Our
relations with North Korea are very good and I personally have a
friendly relationship with President Kim Il-song. He asked me to con-
vey to you some of his thoughts with regard to a resolution of the
Korean problem. They wish to reach a state of improved relations with
the US on the basis of your commitment to withdraw American troops
from South Korea. They believe that initiation of direct talks on that
problem would be most useful. They have given assurances that they
will consider US interests in South Korea, and they envisage that reuni-
3 Andrei met with Ambassador Aggrey at the Foreign Ministry on June 12 to
brief him on Ceausescu’s Asia trip. Andrei asked Aggrey that “account be held in full
confidence and not discussed with other Bucharest diplomats” and “noted with a smile”
that he would meet with the Soviet Ambassador following his presentation to Aggrey.
Aggrey added: “I did not ask whether he would receive same briefing, but I doubt it.”
Aggrey reported that, based on the Romanian account, the visits to China, North Korea,
and Cambodia were successful although the visit to Vietnam and Laos less so. (Telegram
4075 from Bucharest, June 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780250–0932)
