Arms Control and Disarmament 1373 Program to accelerate these applications. This program, which is budg­ eted in FY 1959 at 6.6 million dollars, through work in Commission laboratories and through contracts for work in academic and industrial laboratories, will attempt to discover new uses and to make it possible for industry and science to exploit the already known uses of radio­ isotopes. In addition to its own program in this field, the Commission is working closely with the Quartermaster Corp of the Army in the design and construction of a two megacury Co–­60 irradiator for use by the Quartermaster Corp in its program of large scale pilot irradiation of food at its Food Irradiation Center at Stocton, California. 34. Project PLOWSHARE, which has been in progress at the Univer­ sity of California Radiation Laboratory since 1957, investigates poten­ tial peaceful uses of nuclear explosives. During this year it will pass from the study phase to that of active experimentation. A survey is now underway to verify the feasibility and desirability of the Alaska Harbor Project announced on June 9, 1956. Cancellation or change in location could be forced by insoluble problems of safety, danger to wild life, lack of material, economic benefit, or engineering infeasibility; but to date no problems appear to be insoluble and it seems that the project will be fired in 1960. Other industrial applications of seemingly great promise are under investigation and it seems probable that one or more specific experiments will be made in 1959. Among these applications are: oil recovery from shales or tarsands, mining, production of aquifers for improvement of water supply or flood control, power production, and scientific experimentation in seismology, geology and special chemical reactions. No one of these applications has yet been proven feasible but all appear to justify further experimentation. The production of use­ ful isotopes has also been the subject of theoretical study, laboratory work, and small-­scale field experimentation. This work will continue. The AEC is also taking steps to establish cooperative relationships with industry for the prosecution of some of these experiments. These steps will include requests for legislation where necessary. It appears that the first cooperative venture will be an experiment in petroleum recovery. UNITED STATES FOREIGN PROGRAM, REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 35. EURATOM. The European Atomic Energy Community (EUR­ ATOM) came into being on January 1, 1958, and in February the Pres­ ident approved in principle a joint U.S.-­EURATOM program based upon, the following courses of action: a. Participation by the U.S. on a lean basis in financing the capital costs of nuclear reactors capable of producing approximately 1 million kilowatts of electricity;
