Chapter 4, February–April 1990  511
to be made for Rail Garrison is to send signals in the event of crisis or 
attack in Europe. That possibility is greatly diminished now and the 
most likely scenario would be war by accident.
The President: Isn’t that an argument for SDI?
Senator Nunn: Yes, but not for the current SDI program. (Mentioned 
illustratively the priorities for the current SDI program.)
The President: Have you heard the Brilliant Pebbles briefing? It is 
very impressive.
Senator Nunn: Not yet. I want to.
The President: How about the SS–18?
Senator Nunn: We should get rid of all MIRVed ICBMs, but focus-
ing on mobiles is a good first step. The next arms race ahead of us is the 
mobile MIRV race and that race is where we should concentrate the first 
step. I would like to do it all and get rid of all MIRVs—­but that would 
probably take 10 years. Rail Garrison is basically geared to an escalation 
scenario. That now is much less likely. (I left for about two minutes. I 
believe his first point was the same he made yesterday—­doing without 
a mobile for several years.) The other big argument against the small 
missile is cost. Rail Garrison cost is about $6 billion over the next four 
years. Accelerated SICBMs would be about $2 billion over the same 
four years. So you would save $4 billion over the short term, but the 
SICBM would cost $20 billion more than Rail Garrison over the long 
term. But you could just build the missiles, keep the mobility elements 
in R&D, and reserve judgment about mobility to see if we get John’s 
plan to get rid of all MIRV’s.
Gov Sununu: If they deMIRV, we don’t need mobility, do we?
Senator Nunn: Depends on SLBM accuracy and a number of other 
things, but we don’t have to decide that now.
Gov Sununu: Can you turn this into a Republican missile? It is now 
viewed as a Democratic missile.
Senator Warner: It is not really a Democratic missile (names a num-
ber of Republicans who helped develop or support the concept)—­but it 
does have somewhat that perception.
The President: This is a fascinating conversation, but let me make 
something clear. I have great faith in Cheney. This is a listening session 
for me. I feel a bit uncomfortable about the perception and don’t want 
the to leave the impression I negotiate without him.
Senator Warner: I talked with Wolfowitz after yesterday’s meeting 
just to keep him abreast. I think he would be comfortable with total 
deMIRVing.
The President: How about verification?
Senator Nunn: Silo verification is easy but silo basing is an unsta-
ble deployment mode [2 lines not declassified] I think you could verify
