1226 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement be willing to offer substitutes for them in private negotiations. Most of their milk imports, he said, come from Europe anyway and they are suffering real hardship in the cigarette industry and need relief. 2. Venezuela would like to arrange for permanent consultation with the United States on problems relating to oil imports. They are greatly concerned about the proposed pipeline construction in Canada recommended by the Borden Commission there and would be prepared to offer concessions to Canada if this would cause that country to desist in its plan. They are sure that Venezuelan oil would be cheaper than oil brought from West Canada via pipeline to the eastern area of the country. They would like to have three-­way consultations on the oil problem with the United States and Canada. 3. Venezuela is concerned about the continued presence of Perez Jimenez in the United States. This gives certain elements in his country a chance to criticize the United States unduly and it would help in our relations if he were to move on or if we were to deny him residence here. The Attorney General of Venezuela, the Comptroller General and the Minister of Justice3 are all engaged in investigations of his nefarious activities while chief of state. A report is expected soon. 3 Dr. Andres Aguilar Mawdsley. VE–15. Memorandum of a Conversation1  Caracas, December 14, 1958. PARTICIPANTS Sr. Rómulo Betancourt, President–Elect2 Ambassador Edward J. Sparks Mr. Charles R. Burrows, Minister–Counselor Following the delayed receipt of the Department’s telegram #350 of December 13 (later reencrypted and received here as #352)3 an appoint- 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.31/12–1658. Confidential. Drafted by Burrows, and transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 490 from Caracas, December 16, 1958. 2 Betancourt was the victor in the presidential elections held December 7, 1958. 3 The referenced telegram instructed the Ambassador to express the Department’s congratulations on Betancourt’s election and to explain that an informal visit to the United States by Betancourt was not feasible in the pre-­inaugural period due to time limitations. (731.00/12–1158)
