628
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
202.
Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 12, 1978
SUBJECT
Bilateral Meetings with Romanian Officials Today
At the Vance/Andrei meeting today,2 the following issues were
raised:
1. MFN—Andrei expressed concern about annual renewal of the
Jackson-Vanik waver. Vance said that no change in the Trade Act is
possible this year, but revisions may be possible later.
2. Emigration—Romania’s record on emigration to the US and to
Israel was discussed at considerable length, with Vance emphasizing
the link with MFN. Andrei responded with enthusiasm (the only case
of animation that I saw today) in explaining Romania’s policy. The
major problem was Jewish emigration, and Andrei reaffirmed his coun-
try’s willingness to deal with the issue constructively. The discussion
of emigration took up a third to half of the Vance-Andrei meeting. The
issue was thoroughly discussed and more treatment of it is unnecessary.
A list of outstanding cases of emigration to the US was given Andrei.
3. Export Controls—Andrei expressed concern that licensing agree-
ments require long periods for approval and are frequently turned
down. Vance agreed to expedite the issuing of decisions.
4. Credits—the Romanians expressed appreciation for our willing-
ness to make available larger credits through the Ex-Im Bank, but
expressed interest in concessionary terms. Vance indicated that we
could not grant such credits because of Romania’s advanced level of
development, but he agreed to look into the possibility of such credits.
5. The Rauta Case—Vance met privately with Andrei following the
general meeting. His intention was to raise the Rauta case, and I assume
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 66, Romania: 1/77–5/78. Confidential.
2 The memorandum of conversation was sent to Bucharest on April 18 in telegram
98602. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis
for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980, Lot 92D412,
Box 2, Romania—Ceausescu Visit)
