144 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement recommendations. If they were so supported, the President was confident that we could win Congressional approval for the recommendations. (The President then left the meeting.) The Vice President inquired as to the effect of the elimination of Section 202(4) concerning the separate administration of the Departments of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force by their respective Secretaries. Secretary McElroy replied that the effect of the elimination of this phrase­ ology would be largely psychological in character. This concept of sepa­ rately administered Services was used to support divisiveness on Capitol Hill more often than in the Pentagon itself. Indeed, in general inter-­service rivalry on Capitol Hill was worse than it was in the Pentagon. He believed that this was as important a change as any that the Defense Department was making in its recommended reorganization proposals. The National Security Council: Noted and discussed an oral report on the recommendation by the Secretary of Defense on the subject, as presented by the Secretary of Defense and Mr. Charles A. Coolidge. S. Everett Gleason 40. Record of Legislative Leadership Meeting1 Washington, April 1, 1958 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES Outer Space—Doctors Killian, Purcell and York gave a briefing sim­ ilar to that at Cabinet and along the lines of the recently issued Report, elaborating somewhat on the missile requirements for carrying various payloads, showing that from any particular rocket, the heaviest payload could be had for a satellite mission, whereas the payload was sharply reduced for projects involving the moon, and still further reduced for shooting as far as Mars. The plan for establishing the National Aviation and Space Agency was outlined. Dr. Killian emphasized that peaceful space research would long be dependent on Defense Department missiles, yet it was 1 Source: Outer space; Department of Defense reorganization; nuclear test cessation. Confidential. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
