52 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV postures to assist you in the formulation of policies to guide the Department of Defense in developing its future programs and establishing a peacetime posture. (S) Shaping an overall military strategy requires judgments about how the world is evolving politically, economically and technologically. The other part of PRM–10 (Net Assessment) is addressing this broad setting: the sources, nature and severity of threats; the political and economic health of the West; the degree and forms of competition with the Soviet Union; and the extent of instability in the Third World. (C) Our approach to formulating alternative integrated military strategies (AIMS) is through substrategy building blocks that are interest-­oriented, focusing on what the US wants to achieve as well as the threats to that achievement. Five analytical areas were defined: TAB A: NATO-Warsaw Pact Conflict in Europe TAB B: Non-European Operations During a NATO–WP War in Europe TAB C: East Asia TAB D: Peacekeeping Activities and Potential Local Wars TAB E: US–USSR Homelands Nuclear Conflict2 (C) Military substrategies were chosen to provide a range of alternatives. Each needs to be considered as an individual, potential element in the design of overall US military strategies. The areas were chosen as sufficiently distinguishable to be analytically useful, though obviously they are interdependent. Resultant overlap will be eliminated as integrated strategies and force postures are evolved. For example: Nuclear Forces: A major nuclear exchange between the United States and the Soviet Union is addressed in the context of US–USSR Homelands Nuclear Conflict (TAB E), but strategic and theater nuclear forces are also addressed in the context of linkage to NATO (TAB A), political perceptions in China and Japan (TAB C), and nuclear proliferation in the Third World (TABS C and D). Forces in Peacetime: Requirements for military forces are derived from wartime functions; i.e., what forces are needed to accomplish specific tasks in battle. However, military forces also serve a variety of peacetime functions, such as reassurance of allies and demonstrations of commitment. It is unlikely that forces need to be procured for those purposes that would not serve important wartime purposes. However, the peacetime functions can require some forces being deployed in different postures from those dictated by a pure warfighting perspective. Thus the peacetime functions of military force are analyzed not only in 2 Tabs A–E are attached but not printed.
