Czechoslovakia Recent developments within the party continue to favor Husak and the pragmatists. The December 1978 plenum called for an exchange of party cards, the first since 1970, to take place this year. It stated that in evaluating members, “fulfillment of economic tasks” would be linked with the “assessment of political commitment.” This represents a clear departure from the preoccupation with ideology that prevailed throughout the preceding decade. With Husak supporter Mikulas Beno directing cadre affairs on the Secretariat and Jakes removed from the Central Control and Auditing Commission, the conservatives will be hard put to prevent the exchange from being used to weaken their position in the party. [classification not declassified] Political developments outside the party also favor Husak. By maintaining a relatively high standard of living, he has kept the population tranquil since massive arrests ended student demonstrations in August 1969. The public has adopted a mood of cynical materialism, refusing to involve itself in a political situation it is powerless to change. A hard core of dissidents remains active, causing the government some embarrassment, but the dissenters have so far failed to evoke a significant popular response. The regime has kept the dissidents off balance by encouraging selective emigration while maintaining strict repression at home—an example of the latter being the pending trial of 10 human rights activists arrested in May 1979. [classification not declassified] Husak’s success in limiting the effectiveness of the dissident movement has doubtless contributed to the strength of his position. He is unlikely to expose himself to conservative charges of laxity toward dissent or risk alienating his supporters in Moscow by adopting a more tolerant approach. In the near term the changes now under way could lead to tighter political controls as Husak and the moderates strive to keep the new policies in hand. [classification not declassified] Two possible developments damaging to Husak would be a rise in popular discontent because of worsened economic conditions or a loss of Soviet support. Recent events have drawn increased attention to these possibilities. During a visit to Prague in May 1979, Soviet Premier Aleksey Kosygin criticized Czechoslovak “sluggishness” in planning and implementing cooperative projects. Premier Strougal countered with the complaint that the requirements Moscow was levying for the construction of nuclear power equipment represented a considerable burden to Czechoslovakia’s engineering industry and would reduce its capacity to manufacture products for hard currency sales in the West. Strougal made the same point publicly during the June summit meeting of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA), where a cooperative agreement on the production of nuclear power equipment was signed. Implicit in his remarks was the warning
