International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
585
It appears that new SDR-denominated obligations (bonds) would
be nothing other than illiquid assets which would have to be liquidated
for other assets at the time of settlement—hardly an international asset
used as a medium of exchange between central banks. Such a proce-
dure would not necessarily enhance the reserve role of the SDR. It
would only enhance the SDR as a unit of account in determining the
obligations a debtor (the U.S.) has to its creditors (former holders of
dollars).
If private dollar holders were allowed to use the IMF account to
obtain SDR-denominated securities, there might be a reduction in the
size of the dollar overhang and possibly more exchange rate stability.
In 1974–75, Chase Manhattan Bank offered SDR denominated cer-
tificates of deposits (CDs) to provide international creditors with pro-
tection from further dollar decline. The SDR denominated CDs did not
prove popular because of the low rate of return on the SDR CDs which
Chase felt necessary to offer in order to cover its exchange risk. This ex-
perience suggests that the USG may have to pay an interest premium to
induce foreign dollar holders to exchange their dollar assets for SDR
obligations.
B. Allocation of SDRs by the IMF.
This proposal is to establish an account which would receive dollar
deposits from member countries in proportion to their quotas and in
exchange for a new SDR allocation. The new SDR allocation would be
equal to the “desired” amount of dollars to be absorbed. Furthermore,
the U.S. could sell its SDR allocation for unwanted dollars. The dollars
exchanged for the newly created SDRs would be kept by the IMF in
non-transferable long-term claims against the United States.
This proposal is essentially the mechanism presented last year by
the IMF. The approach presupposes that most IMF countries are
anxious to exchange their dollar holdings for new SDRs. This may not
be the case unless SDRs are no longer regarded as inferior assets.
C. SDR Denominated Claims Issued Through an Account Administered
by the IMF.
This proposal would establish an account which would accept an
unspecified amount of dollars in exchange for SDR denominated
claims on a voluntary basis. The Fund-held dollar assets would, over
the long-run, have to equal or exceed the value of SDR claims to cover
the Fund’s exchange risk. This implies that the interest earned on USG
securities purchased with the dollars deposited in the account would
be higher over time than the interest paid to the holders of SDR de-
nominated claims. This approach would provide a safe haven for “ex-
