Bulgaria 3. The advice the Soviets are giving the Bulgarians—to devote greater attention to agriculture and light industry—is good advice. And it may be recognized as good advice, even though it would not have been so seen in 1961 when it was offered to the Romanians. In the early 60s, we should recall, it was an article of ideological faith that every communist state should go through a process of forced industrialization comparable to that which the USSR went through. When the Soviets then counseled the Romanians not to seek all-round industrial development, they seemed to be saying that Romania should not aspire to the developed-nation status that the Soviets were willing to accord almost all the other states of Eastern Europe. Romania had a good raw materials and energy resources base, which must have made the advice seem all the more ill-intentioned. [classification not declassified] 4. Autarchic economic development has long since been recognized in Eastern Europe as a goal too expensive to be pursued. Bulgaria, with its poor resource base, must appreciate that it is among the least qualified to pursue it. Bulgaria has already attempted a speedy industrialization on the basis of Soviet support and of heavy borrowing in the West. It must now appreciate that there are limits to what the Soviets can, or should, be expected to do in support of Bulgarian industrialization, and it is deeply in hock to the West. In sum, the wellsprings of the Bulgarian drive for industrialization are probably not nearly as strong as those that impelled Romania into a confrontation with the Soviets in the early 1960s. [classification not declassified] 5. We must, finally, face up to the circumstance that it is the Bulgarians, not the Soviets, who are currently the demanders. Does it follow that, because the Soviets will not give the Bulgarians all they want, the Bulgarians will basically modify their policy on alliance with the USSR? Is there no chance that the Soviets will yet make concessions of the sort that have satisfied the Bulgarians before—e.g., the third metallurgical complex? To whom would the Bulgarians turn instead of the Soviets? Have they not done about as much as they can in terms of borrowing and trading with the West? Does it not make more sense that what we are witnessing is a negotiating process in which the Bulgarians are presenting maximum demands and are prepared to settle for considerably less? [classification not declassified] 6. This line of analysis, of course, places me in that group of American analysts “satisfied with the eternal status quo,” and I do not feel comfortable there. But as I survey the balance sheet of possible stimuli for Bulgaria’s standing pat or striking out on a more independent course, the bottom line favors the former, in my judgment. We must also remember, I think, that, as not all the peoples of the Balkans were dissatisfied with Ottoman rule, so it may just be that some now see
