48 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 21. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 10, 1979 SUBJECT Iran (U) My reading of Khomeini’s past behavior suggests that, although he is not a man who “bargains” in the normal sense of the word, he is capable of considering flexibility and even tactical retreat when he perceives that a specific policy is in conflict with his ultimate goals. We have a number of instances of such actions in the past. He opposed the original draft constitution but found that there was widespread support within his own government. So he permitted it to be published with his blessing—and then used the Council of Experts to make the Islamic changes he had wanted all along. He fired the army chief at one point, then reversed himself when he found that the army chief had more support than he had expected. The man was later eased out in a general “reorganization.” He decreed that there would be no more music, but music continues to be played in Iran. He called for all women to wear the chador but then allowed that to lapse when there was a general protest. He launched a major effort to incite the Shia population of Iraq but then pulled back when he was convinced that there was danger of an Iraqi attack. He has not changed his mind about the Shia question, and he has lately raised the temperature again, but he is being more careful. (S) In considering our own strategy in the hostage situation, we should focus all our efforts on convincing Khomeini that continuation of his present policy is damaging to his long-term goals. Those goals I would define as two: universal recognition of the Iranian revolution as a new beginning in Islamic history; and his own retention of absolute power in Iran. (S) Our strategy of mobilizing world opinion against the taking of hostages is aimed directly at the first of those goals, and I believe it has had considerable effect. The fact that Khomeini apparently felt it necessary to deliver a long statement of self-justification after his meeting with the Papal envoy2 (atypical of his style), suggests that the message is beginning to get through. The Papal message, the coura- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 29, Iran 11/1/79–11/14/79. Secret; Outside System. Sent for Information. 2 See footnote 7, Document 19.
