Chapter 2, January–June 1989 71 people hoped this cooperation would continue. Therefore it must continue. Gorbachev said he believed the only productive approach to our relationship was to base it on realities. It appeared this approach was shared by the President, judging by what Soviets had seen in the first months of the American Administration. [Omitted here are discussions not related to START.] The Secretary said it was noteworthy that the Soviets had decided to move toward openness in their political and economic spheres at the same time. It had always been our view that the two went hand-­in-­ hand. In our perspective, one of the reasons why the Chinese were having problems was because they had not prepared the political ground for reform. In Poland perhaps the reverse was true. The Secretary noted that he had told Shevardnadze at dinner the night before2 that one way the Soviets could proceed now with price reform would be to quickly conclude agreements in START and CFE. The rubles saved could go into subsidies to ease the price reform. The Secretary had also pointed out that this would help us with our own budget deficit. Speaking as a politician who had spent the last 3½ years dealing with economic problems, the Secretary said he would be among those who would say that it was better to move early rather than later: this was because early people were better able to assign the consequent problems to previous Administrations. But one thing he had learned from 3½ years at the Treasury Department was that the political leadership of a country was far and away the best judge of what the traffic would bear in terms of economic reform. So therefore he would have to defer to Gorbachev’s judgment. The Secretary noted that the General Secretary had said “stay the course.” That had been our own slogan for President Reagan’s campaign in 1984. We had been criticized for being insufficiently forward-­ looking, but the point was that the President had won reelection. So we understood what Gorbachev was saying and we respected it and we thanked him for sharing his views. Gorbachev said the Soviets were 20 years late on price reform, so two or three years more wouldn’t hurt. He then asked what was the agreed date for the Nuclear and Space Talks. Nuclear and Space Talks The Secretary said that the U.S. was prepared to begin on June 12, 19 or 26. We had agreed to leave open the exact date within the second 10-­ day period in June. 2 No memorandum of conversation was found.
