698
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
260.
Intelligence Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, April 18, 1980
COUNTRY
Iran/Iraq
SUBJECT
Former Iranian Prime Minister Shahpour Bakhtiar‘s comments on his plans to
return to Iran, on his recent visit to Iraq, on his problems with General Gholam
Ali Oveisi‘s plans, and on his support from Hassan Nazih [less than 1 line not
declassified]
SOURCE
[1½ lines not declassified]
Summary: On 15 April 1980, former Iranian Prime Minister Shah-
pour Bakhtiar told a confidant that he now plans to return to Iran
towards the end of May once some deficiencies in his plans have been
corrected, once his staff in Baghdad is better organized and once he
has had an opportunity to hold discussions on cooperation with former
Iranian Oil Company Director Hassan Nazih. During 13–14 April,
Bakhtiar was in Iraq for discussions with Iraqi President Saddam
Husayn. Saddam Husayn agreed to support Bakhtiar, but was unsuc-
cessful in getting Bakhtiar to agree to cooperate with General Gholam
Ali Oveisi. Iraq is supporting Oveisi in his efforts to overthrow Ayatol-
lah Khomeini by military means. Bakhtiar is reluctant to support Oveisi
because of Oveisi’s past associations and because he thinks Oveisi’s
plan will only cause the urban Iranian population to unite behind
Khomeini. Bakhtiar warned Saddam Husayn about providing troops
to Oveisi because it might give the Soviets cause to move into Iran,
but Saddam Husayn discounted this. He also told Bakhtiar, whatever
happens in Iran, Iraq does not want the U.S. to be able to reestablish
its presence there. Bakhtiar also commented on the progress of his
own plans: He said that his propaganda campaign and clashes of his
supporters with Pasdarans are going well, that plans are underway to
sabotage pumping stations on refined products lines, and that he has
enough arms for his supporters, but is having trouble getting them to
Tehran. End summary.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Box 93, Iran, 4/18/80. Secret; Specat; [handling restriction not declassified]; Exclusive. Sent
to the Department of State, JCS/DIA, the White House Situation Room, the NSC Staff,
and the CIA Office of Current Operations.
