316
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
It is my judgment you now need to instruct someone in the Gov-
ernment6 to begin and then follow through regularly, with vigor, on a
continuing monitoring and review process, with periodic reporting to
you and to the Congress.7
6 Carter underlined the phrase “someone in the Government” and drew a bracket
in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
7 In a February 21 memorandum, Carter instructed Strauss “to assume responsi-
bility for ensuring that the Japanese take all reasonable steps to reach the goals contained
in the January 13 Joint Statement.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Country File, Box 40, Japan: 1–5/78)
100.
Memorandum From John Renner of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 31, 1978
SUBJECT
The Dollar and Oil Imports
At the present time, the Administration is trying to deal with the
weakness of the dollar and our oil imports as if they were completely
separate issues. The Treasury Department has used traditional mone-
tary measures in an effort to stabilize the dollar. But they have not been
able to deal with one of the main underlying reasons for the weakness
of the dollar, our enormous oil imports, because this matter falls within
the competence of the Energy Department.
In my judgment it is essential to fashion an integrated approach to
these interrelated issues. This would benefit the development of both
monetary and energy policies. The dollar should begin to strengthen
when money managers become convinced that the United States has
taken and will continue to take hard measures to reduce oil imports.
Relating more explicitly the strength of the dollar to the level of oil im-
ports should make it easier to persuade Congress and the country to
make the sacrifices necessary to reduce consumption of oil and to de-
velop alternative sources of energy.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 8, Balance of Payments: 12/77–2/79. Confidential. Sent for action.
