694 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement the so-­called pipeline. It is realized that as a practical matter such will remain unchanged but there is an amount of perhaps up to $2.5 million which can be removed from present projects and other projects, whether new or old, which will provide some political attraction to the President. 4. In this connection, I intend to inform the President, although it may not be entirely in accordance with the facts, that the Department of State has been helpful in not having a repossession of funds made on the virtually non-­operative Rural Development Program. 5. Respective the technical cooperation program, ICA is anxious for the termination of the agricultural portion which has been under fire by the Minister of Agriculture of Guatemala. We intend, therefore, to re-­examine this program in detail and propose substantial modifications. The major modifications appear at this time to be abrogation of the agreement with the Ministry of Agriculture.5 We will offer at the same time to maintain certain specialized technicians in a strictly advisory capacity when their services may prove useful in furthering the purposes of the two Governments. 6. Upon return to Guatemala, detailed review of the program, their status, finance, etc. will be made and the proposals immediately submitted to ICA/Washington before final action. This final action appears desirable during the week of July 6 to 10 inasmuch as we have word that President Ydígoras is going to Panama on July 11. This will require close timing both in Guatemala and in Washington. If it cannot be done that quickly, it will have to be delayed until about July 22 which, in view of the strong interest which obtains concerning the future of the agricultural program, would appear to be rather long. 7. I have seen Ambassador-Designate Remirez and given him a broad outline of as much of the above as I think he ought to know. He expressed himself as grateful with the assistance and I hope that he will promptly report to President Ydígoras before my return as we need to make this look as good as possible. [text not declassified]. 5 By notes to Guatemalan authorities, July 8, the United States terminated the following agreements, effective August 31, 1959: (1) Agreement for a Cooperative Agriculture Program, January 20, 1955, as amended; and (2) Agreements for Agriculture Development, February 15, 1957, and April 30, 1958, as amended. The notes under reference were enclosed with despatch 14 from Guatemala City, July 9, 1959. (814.00-TA/7-959)
