International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
375
our peoples understand that this is the case, we shall have done much
to restore confidence.
Here is what my advisers and I told Jim about our thinking on the
specific elements of such a cooperative effort:
1. As far as growth is concerned, I believe the OECD Economic
Policy Committee is on the right track in agreeing that the OECD coun-
tries should stimulate their economies in differing degrees, depending
on how far each can go without fueling inflation or encountering bal-
ance of payments problems. I hope that European Community and
OECD studies will help the Summit Preparatory Group to draw con-
clusions regarding the margin for growth2 that is open to each of our
countries.3 Based on this work, the Summit could discuss and an-
nounce appropriate future national policies. Even more important than
quantitative targets will be national resolve to fulfill these policies. If
national growth decisions taken between now and the Summit can be
related to this agreed approach, this will add to our peoples’ sense of
confidence that purposeful action is being taken to fulfill common
purposes.4
2. In regard to energy, U.S. action to limit oil imports is the heart of
the matter. I am determined to achieve progress as soon as possible. I
intend to relate any announcement of this progress to the overall inter-
national approach discussed in this letter. Although the U.S. has the
largest problem, the question of how to conserve and develop energy is
also a concern of other Summit countries. In preparing for the Bonn
Summit, I hope that our representatives can develop concrete ideas
about how to fulfill the general energy commitments we made in 1977
at London—e.g., by carrying forward joint research and development,
increasing investment to enhance energy production and conservation
in the industrial world, and expanding aid to developing countries for
the same purposes.
3. In the monetary field, it is essential to address the underlying
causes of the dollar’s decline: large U.S. oil imports and the disparity
between national growth rates, whose effect has been aggravated by
rising concerns5 about U.S. inflation. I expect soon to announce further
strong anti-inflationary U.S. measures, which can be related to our
2 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, this phrase reads: “margin for action on growth.”
3 In Carter’s letter to Giscard, this sentence reads: “I hope that preparatory studies
will help us to draw conclusions regarding the margin for growth that is open to each of
our countries.”
4 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, an additional sentence was added to the end of this
paragraph: “I look forward to discussing with you in early May the contribution that
both our countries can make to this growth strategy.” Fukuda paid an official visit to
Washington May 1–3.
5 In Carter’s letter to Fukuda, this phrase reads: “rising US concerns.”
