3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
267
tions currently underway between the USSR and the US on a series of
major issues for arresting the arms race appear if simultaneously the
deployment of neutron weapons was forced? Not much would be left
of people’s trust in solving the problem of disarmament, in the success
of ongoing negotiations. Moreover, the negotiations themselves, at
least in some cases, would face the threat of being broken off.
—What mutual trust, what cooperation between the USSR and the
US in solving the great task of freeing peoples from nuclear danger can
there be if the U.S. side puts its stake on new sophisticated weapons
aimed—and this is not being concealed—against the Soviet Union.
—It is no secret that the decision whether to start production and
deployment of neutron weapons depends now above all upon the US
Government, upon you, personally, Mr. President. But this decision is
of the kind that a chain of events is put into motion which in the last
analysis is connected with the risk of devastation of whole countries,
and the loss of millions of people. The responsibility here is exception-
ally great and it is this that prompts me to address you. Since, if the
choice of the United States is in favor of the neutron bomb this will put
the Soviet Union before the necessity to meet the challenge, that is to act
in the same way as we were forced to act when atomic weapons came
into being.
We have simply no right to forgo the security of our people and the
security of our allies.
—But it is still not too late to stop. There exists an alternative to the
dangerous aggravation of the arms race and we propose it. You of
course know that in my public address at the end of the last year I pro-
posed that agreement be reached on the mutual repudiation of produc-
tion of neutron weapons. I now confirm this proposal. We are prepared
to conclude an appropriate agreement with the United States and other
states. We are prepared to enter into negotiations on this matter at
any moment. Such an agreement would respond to the spirit of the
times, to the interests of strengthening peace and detente, to peoples’
aspirations.
—I would like to hope, Mr. President, that you will treat the above
considerations with full attention, and that the Soviet Union and the US
will be able before irreversible steps are taken to reach mutual under-
standing concerning the repudiation of neutron weapons.
—At the same time I am addressing the leaders of a series of other
states—participants of the all-European conference—on this issue.
Sincerely,
L. Brezhnev [End text.]
Vance
