Draft Note From the American Ambassador (Herrick) to the Afghan Minister in France and Belgium (Nadir)3 EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s letter of October 30, 1925 in which you were good enough to indicate your Government’s desire that friendly relations with the Government of the United States might be maintained and that diplomatic and consular relations between the two countries might, within the near future, be established. I have not failed to communicate these facts to my Government transmitting, at the same time, a copy of the draft treaty which you so kindly furnished me and which, so you stated, you desired to serve as the basis of a Treaty of Friendship to be concluded between our two countries. I am happy to be able to inform you that I am now in receipt of a communication from my Government with respect to the suggestion contained in your above mentioned communication. I have been instructed to convey to Your Excellency my Government’s deep appreciation of the friendly sentiments which you have been good enough to express toward the United States and to inform you that my Government has been pleased, furthermore, to note the renewed expression of your Government’s desire to establish diplomatic and consular relations between the two countries. Careful consideration will be afforded the draft treaty which you have presented. I need not assure Your Excellency that my Government recalls with great pleasure the visit to the United States in 1921 of the Afghan Mission headed by His Excellency Mohammed Wali Khan4 on which occasion the President in a communication addressed to His Majesty Amanullah Khan, Emir of Afghanistan, and handed to His Excellency Mohammed Wali Khan, assured His Majesty of his wish that the relations between the United States and Afghanistan might always be of a friendly character and that he would be happy to cooperate with His Majesty to that end. 2 See footnote 1, p. 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 391]. 3 A copy of this note was handed to the Afghan Minister on Feb. 20, 1926.
