International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues these problems, little additional resources or strong leadership has been given to these problems. New long-term initiatives are needed to improve national capabilities for resource management, to monitor the problems and to apply new technology towards solving these interrelated problems. In particular, these problems have not been seen by our own decision-makers and assistance program managers in a unified way. Within State there is no focus for solving these problems. They also have political significance since conflict is likely between countries on the division of scarce water rights. Broad environmental initiatives which the US could take include: —Agreement on developing an international environmental impact statement for major and long-lasting changes in environmental quality with opportunity for review by countries affected. —Upgrading our support for relevant international environmental bodies, including UNEP, NATO/CCMS, OECD, and IMCO. —Major new effort to develop a global environmental assessment system which will report on the quality of the air, water, etc., and assess possible damages. Upgrading, where possible, should be made of existing efforts in this area such as the Global Atmospheric Research Program. —An assessment of the extent, distribution and impact of contaminants in the world’s biological system. —Worldwide evaluation of the marine environment including establishment of new or stricter discharge or release standards, including landbased. Population The problem is well known, we shall go from four billion people now to six billion by 2000, mostly from the Third World. There will be serious food, environmental and social problems. Most of the problem focuses on about 10 to 15 key countries. We are not, however, concentrating our efforts on these countries. Further, AID and perhaps the USG, has not approached this major problem with serious high-level attention. We do not have good leadership. There are a number of initiatives we can take in this field including better integration of health, nutrition and family planning programs, greater use of local community support, development of new low cost family planning techniques acceptable to LDCs and a better development assistance program relevant to population growth factors (see our memo to Deputy Secretary on this topic.)4 4 Presumable reference to Lake’s June 30 memorandum to Christopher, printed as Document 287.
