International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
963
these problems, little additional resources or strong leadership has
been given to these problems. New long-term initiatives are needed to
improve national capabilities for resource management, to monitor the
problems and to apply new technology towards solving these interre-
lated problems. In particular, these problems have not been seen by our
own decision-makers and assistance program managers in a unified
way. Within State there is no focus for solving these problems. They
also have political significance since conflict is likely between countries
on the division of scarce water rights.
Broad environmental initiatives which the US could take include:
—Agreement on developing an international environmental im-
pact statement for major and long-lasting changes in environmental
quality with opportunity for review by countries affected.
—Upgrading our support for relevant international environmental
bodies, including UNEP, NATO/CCMS, OECD, and IMCO.
—Major new effort to develop a global environmental assessment
system which will report on the quality of the air, water, etc., and assess
possible damages. Upgrading, where possible, should be made of ex-
isting efforts in this area such as the Global Atmospheric Research
Program.
—An assessment of the extent, distribution and impact of contami-
nants in the world’s biological system.
—Worldwide evaluation of the marine environment including es-
tablishment of new or stricter discharge or release standards, including
landbased.
Population
The problem is well known, we shall go from four billion people
now to six billion by 2000, mostly from the Third World. There will be
serious food, environmental and social problems. Most of the problem
focuses on about 10 to 15 key countries. We are not, however, concen-
trating our efforts on these countries. Further, AID and perhaps the
USG, has not approached this major problem with serious high-level
attention. We do not have good leadership. There are a number of ini-
tiatives we can take in this field including better integration of health,
nutrition and family planning programs, greater use of local commu-
nity support, development of new low cost family planning techniques
acceptable to LDCs and a better development assistance program rele-
vant to population growth factors (see our memo to Deputy Secretary
on this topic.)4
4 Presumable reference to Lake’s June 30 memorandum to Christopher, printed as
Document 287.
