62 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Czechoslovakia, and the GDR are to remain limited until progress is demonstrated in international or internal policy. Yugoslavia remains a special case deserving particular attention. American interest in Poland was reaffirmed by the President’s visit and the Poles were given further evidence of US concern by the credits for agricultural purchases that were granted and further steps were taken to help them in dealing with their economic problems.7 Among the specific goals that were enumerated was the return of the Crown of St Stephen to Hungary to be followed by the negotiation of a trade agreement granting MFN.8 The decision was made to return the Crown, satisfactory details were worked out for the transfer, and a Presidential delegation accompanied the Crown and relics to Budapest for the ceremony. The effect on the Hungarian population and government has been and will continue to be extremely favorable for the United States. The one criticism that can be leveled is the way in which it was carried out. The leaking of the decision to return the Crown, of course, created problems. The fact that a public announcement did not follow the leaks in the press gave ammunition to domestic opponents of the return and led some to conclude that the decision was being reconsidered when in fact it was only a question of working out a suitable time. Postponing the public announcement also caused some problems with the hill and gave Congressional opponents the opportunity to raise the issue with the courts. At the same time, however, the delay allowed Hungarian-Americans to supply input into the scenario for return and this may have had beneficial domestic political consequences. Initial steps have also been taken to prepare a draft of the trade agreement with Hungary. Returning the Crown has been the focus of attention but progress should be made early next year on the agreement. The Hungarians have already been informed of the assurances they will be required to provide under Jackson-Vanik and this should be settled before negotiations begin. The one country in Eastern Europe which seems to have been neglected is Romania. In the past they were given very favorable consideration, but under the present Administration they appear to have slipped in importance.9 Poland is the first East European country to receive a visit from the new President; the US is returning the Crown to Hungary; Ceausescu’s visit is scheduled after that of Tito. Although Romania’s human rights record is in need of improvement, it is the 7 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph in the margin. 8 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence in the margin. 9 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence in the margin.
