1956 1149 to pay their way if possible, I am fearful that they would use this in every way possible to sabotage the program. I can think of several ways in which they could do this and their imagination is even more fertile than ours. By in effect making it dependent upon Peiping’s agreement to furnish passage money, we give them an opening that we can be sure they will use to the maximum in every way to embarrass us. I therefore wonder whether it would not be worth the difference in cost to us to pay the additional expense to transport them to Hong Kong. With respect to publicity, I think that we should make a public announcement at the time the men are embarked which would contain: (a) a few brief sentences on the belated Peiping interest in these men and their effort to use them as a justification for continuing to hold Americans (b) the Red Cross interviews (c) the action taken to per­ mit their return, names, and any other such pertinent details. I would entirely omit any mention of our invitation to the Indians, Chinese Communist’s refusal to permit the Indians to act, etc. First this would bog down the whole press release in involved explanations, the inevi­ table necessity of trying to explain the Chicom’s attitude, why we have gone ahead in spite of that attitude, etc., etc. I would also think that from the standpoint of both the Indians and Taipei its omission would be best, and would suggest that before putting out the press release we call in the Indians and tell them what we are doing. I would think that it would gain only appreciation from the Indian side. If the Chinese later desire to come out with an expression of their attitude and attempt to explain it, let them do so as no rational person will be able to follow them. I would say nothing to Wang here until the men are actually embarked. This would in all probability mean that I would not be able to say anything to him until after the press release had been issued although I see no great harm in this. On the other hand I would call in the Indians shortly before the issuance of the press release, give them the text, and if not included in the release, the names of the persons being released. With regard to the timing of meetings, I have been proceeding on the assumption that the Department continued to desire that I suggest no interval longer than a week and leave it up to him to push it beyond that time if he desires. Therefore, I agreed to a Tuesday meeting this week rather than push it up longer to Thursday. However, I will bear in mind that you prefer a Thursday meeting, as do I. In thinking about the possibility of a break, it has occurred to me that we have perhaps been oversimplifying the way they may attempt to bring it about. It seems to me that he might well attempt to take the attitude that it is no use having further meetings until I have some­ thing “new and constructive” to present and when I do he will be glad
