Fifth, it, of course, must be understood that the United States will
not be a party to any sanctions of any kind for the enforcement of
a treaty for the limitation of armament nor will it agree that such
treaties to which it may be a party shall come under the
supervision of any international body,—whether the League of
Nations or otherwise. The agreement, so far as we are concerned,
must depend upon the good faith of nations.
Sixth, in any agreement for the limitation of naval armament, the
United States would insist on the ratio provided for in the
Washington Treaty and, so far as land armament is concerned, it
would undoubtedly insist on the right to maintain forces equal to
any other large power.
General considerations. I have thus imperfectly outlined the position of the
United States. On the question of calling a naval conference, as you know,
the President always has been willing to call such a conference as a
continuation of the Washington Conference and I think he feels, as I have
said to you before, that it would be appropriate that such a conference be
called by him in the United States but I apprehend from what I learn from
you and from the press that it is not the intention of the European Powers to
attend any conference in the United States and that the League of Nations
jumped into this matter, inspired to some extent by a desire to get ahead of
the President. The President is not disposed to make the limitation of
armament dependent on whether he calls a conference or whether
somebody else does. He realizes that so far as land armament is concerned,
it should be called in Europe and he is not going to occupy the position that
he will not participate or do anything unless he can call the conference. The
manoeuvres which have been going on in Europe of late about adjournment
and the various conferences between Chamberlain and Briand lead me to
believe that this conference, or any that may be called, is largely a gesture
and that some of the countries have no intention whatever of making an
agreement for disarmament. The Locarno Conference was undoubtedly a
great step in advance even though it may not be the “cure all” that some
now appear to consider it. Nevertheless I am disposed to give it credit for
all it has done and it is a step forward. The nations gathering at Locarno,
especially France, had said so much about security, disarmament and
