United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 17 ETA–5. Memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Secretary of State.1  Washington, March 31, 1958. SUBJECT Coffee Problem High coffee prices have stimulated production in Latin America and in other areas, particularly Africa, with the result that coffee production is rapidly outdistancing consumption. The demand for coffee is relatively inelastic and a price reduction will not stimulate consumption enough to prevent a decline in total income. Recognizing this, the seven principal coffee producing countries of Latin America have been holding supplies off the market in a joint effort to maintain the price in a range of 50 to 60 cents a pound. The Governments of Colombia and Brazil, which produce more than half the world’s coffee, and which depend upon it for 60 and 77% respectively of their foreign exchange, are both in balance of payments difficulties which could become critical if there should be a further decline in coffee prices. The price of Colombian coffee has already fallen about 33% and Brazilian about 10% over the past year. Both governments have also shouldered a heavy fiscal burden in undertaking to finance the supplies of coffee withheld from market. African producers are not party to Latin America’s efforts to maintain prices. There is danger that the marketing agreement will collapse in the near future, and that coffee prices will decline sharply as each country tries to dispose of its own surplus carryover. The long-­term solution to the problem must be a decline in coffee prices sufficient to curb plantings and bring supply back into equilibrium with requirements. It is in the United States interest as well as that of the producing countries, however, to accomplish this objective gradually rather than through a sharp break in coffee prices which would create serious political, economic and social problems in 7 Latin American countries. The Latin American producing countries have been urging the negotiation of an international coffee agreement as a means of stabilizing prices for the past three years. Failing to obtain support from the United States for this approach, they have recently established a World Coffee Organization primarily to stimulate consumption through a trade promotion program but also to study economic trends of the 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 820.2333/3–3158. Confidential. Co-drafted by Assistant Secretary Mann and Jean H. Mulliken of the Office of Inter- American Regional Economic Affairs. Assistant Secretary Rubottom and Legal Adviser Loftus E. Becker concurred in the memorandum.
