National Security Policy  603
submarines, aircraft, and naval weapons. The principal weaknesses 
of the USSR as a naval power will continue to derive from the wide 
separation of its sea frontiers and its inability to control the sea routes 
between these areas, although improvements in inland waterways will 
increase its ability to interchange smaller vessels including submarines. 
The lack of adequate supply lines to its Northern and Far Eastern fleet 
areas and the land-­locked position of its fleets in the Baltic and Black 
Seas are additional handicaps.
V. TRENDS IN SOVIET RELATIONS WITH OTHER 
COMMUNIST STATES
194. The USSR’s relations with other Bloc states continue to be of 
pressing concern to the Soviet leaders. During the past year Moscow 
has moved energetically to repair the damage done to its political con­
trol and ideological authority by developments of the last several years. 
To this end, it sponsored an international Communist conference—­
heralded as the most significant in more than 20 years—broke the three-­
year old rapprochement with Yugoslavia, ordered the execution of Imre 
Nagy, held a dual CEMA and Warsaw Pact meeting in Moscow, and 
began publication of an international Communist periodical designed 
to replace the defunct Cominform journal. The Moscow conference 
of Communist parties in November 1957 produced a codification of 
nine fundamental Marxist-­Leninist “laws” to which all true (Soviet-­
oriented) “socialist” states must adhere. It was the signal for an inten­
sified drive against “revisionism” calculated to inhibit departures from 
the approved norms by member parties, especially those which might 
be infected by the spirit of nationalism.
195. These efforts have been intended to cope with what has become 
one of the fundamental problems in the Communist world: how to 
preserve ideological conformity and political unity. The Communist 
parties in the various states are confronted with quite diverse local con­
ditions in “building socialism;” they are tempted to resort to practical 
expedients which have no counterpart in Soviet experience and require 
ideological justification in terms close to “deviationism.” In addition, as 
parties now possessing state power they are bound to think in terms of 
their own state interests, not always identical with those of the Soviet 
state, and to show some deference to the national sensitivities of their 
peoples. Consequently, there are present within the Communist par­
ties elements and factions which harbor latent or open resentment of 
Moscow’s domination, and they are strengthened by the knowledge 
that within the general population anti-Soviet sentiment continues to 
be vigorous and widespread.
196. The tradition of the Communist movement took little account 
of localist proclivities or the autonomy of national parties; it was
