1979  677
Brown: No, not realistic threats. But if you want to worry about 
threat levels I consider unrealistic, we have other options.
Turner: We see it a bit differently. Because the yields we use for 
these calculations are somewhat higher, when the Soviets fractionate, 
we see that they might put weapons between shelters and get more 
than one-­for-­one.
Brown: In this kind of game, it is inconceivable to me that Soviet 
target planners would not insist on placing a weapon on each shelter. 
No US planner would proceed otherwise.
Turner: I think it’s quite possible they would try for multiple shel-
ter kills. The point is, can we safely rule that out?
Brown: If we go to 3500 foot spacing, I feel very confident that he’d 
have to put a weapon on each shelter to be in the game.
Jones: This is sort of academic, since we’ll use the best data on 
yields and numbers available at the time we start construction.
Turner: I’m challenging the assumptions here. My calculations 
show that, if the Soviets pursue a moderate effort under SALT, they 
will be some 600 ICBM weapons short of an ability to target our 
ICBMs. If their effort is on the high side, then they could have some 
1800 ICBM weapons more than necessary to cover MINUTEMAN and 
M–X. But with SLCM and bomber weapons counted, we’d still have 
a 2-­to-1 advantage in residuals. But these outcomes are highly depen-
dent on SALT II limits affecting RV numbers. Without those limits, he 
can cover our baseline shelter set of 4600 easily and enforce a 1.5-­to-1 
residual weapon advantage. A high effort without SALT could give 
him in excess of 10,000 ICBM weapons. We’ll have to pay a high pre-
mium to assure extension of the SALT II RV limits beyond 1985. By 
1983–85, he could put a lot of pressure on us by starting to test the 
technology for, say, 30 RVs on an SS–18. He could limit the number of 
simulated RV releases to 10, but design a new bus capable of handling 
30 new RVs.
Vance: He’d then be in violation of SALT II.
Brown: We’d certainly consider that a violation. This is a major 
matter, but not new.
Keeny: If he didn’t try to draw us down all the way, then he’d 
have a residual force under Perry’s calculations and a more favorable 
exchange ratio.
Brown: You’re now talking about a limited attack of 5,000–10,000 
RVs. I don’t believe in that.
Perry: The right answer is that he’s better off not starting. If he 
leaves any of our M–X surviving, they are much more effective against 
his force because he is in single silos.
