824
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
food prices and thus contribute powerfully to inflation.” The President
also outlined the Commission’s charge, noting that he remained “confi-
dent that this new venture, which will entail close cooperation between
the private sector and U.S. legislative and executive branches of Gov-
ernment, will produce a notable advance in the war on hunger.” (Public
Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, page 1712)
Commissioners met formally in Washington on November 6. Ac-
cording to a draft decision paper prepared in advance of the meeting,
the Commissioners first had to answer the question as to why the
United States had “failed so far to turn the tide against increasing
hunger in this country and throughout the world.” The decision paper
then laid out the challenges facing the Commission:
“There are no limitations on the range of recommendations for ac-
tion that can be made by the Commission, and we would not want to
prejudge the end-product of our labors before we have begun to work.
“But the problem will be to identify a relatively few points of major
focus—both to orient the work of the Commission to the highest action
priorities and to avoid the familiar sin of producing a long laundry list
of undifferentiated things to do. And for this purpose guidance can
also be found in statements by the President and in the legislative his-
tory of this enterprise.
“For one thing, it is clear that the Commission is expected to make
recommendations on how to go about putting our own house in order
here in the United States. Whether it would be productive for the Com-
mission to make detailed recommendations for structural changes in
governmental organization is a matter for very careful consideration as
the work proceeds. But the Commission is mandated explicitly to cope
with the interrelationships and interactions of domestic purposes, pol-
icies and programs with global goals, obligations, and opportunities.
To perceive the domestic and international aspects of food and hunger
policy as inherently antagonistic would betray the charge placed upon
the Commission—which is to formulate an approach to hunger and
malnutrition which simultaneously supports domestic objectives,
moral concerns, and the considerable task of helping other countries
meet their food and nutrition needs with their own resources and ex-
pertise. This is extremely difficult—conceptually and in terms of both
policy and operations. But it is the heart of the Commission’s task.
“Further, a major item that the President and Congress want the
Commission to undertake is to find ways to engage more deeply and
systematically the great resources of the American private sector to
help turn the tide against hunger—from the business world through
scientific and professional societies to church-related and other organi-
zations inspired by humanistic concerns.
