3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
147
What we cannot be sure of is how much this internal conflict may have
shaped Soviet policy during the interim. Certainly, if Brezhnev was en-
gaged in a struggle, he might have overreacted to current events. His
behavior since the Central Committee meetings does not suggest a
hardening of his foreign policy line.
The outcome seems to be a temporary confusion. Brezhnev is
reaching out to various visitors—Genscher and Giscard—to establish a
better understanding of Jimmy Carter. This is typical because Brezhnev
tends to personalize relations. So, we can expect that this period, which
could last for some time, will be followed by one in which the main fea-
tures of Soviet policy will be more certain and fixed. And as this confu-
sion is cleared up, it is worth remembering that the Soviets do not have
a free hand. They are constrained by long term trends that affect any So-
viet leader, be it Brezhnev or his successor.
First of all, there is the nightmare of Soviet policy: two front hos-
tility.7 If the Soviets misjudged the Administration of Jimmy Carter,
they also misjudged the Administration of Hua Kuo-feng. Their frus-
trations have been surfaced in a series of authoritative and harsh at-
tacks on China. The Soviet note of mid-May was the most ominous
threat since the crisis of 1969. This rather significant turn of events has
received less attention in the West because of our preoccupation with
SALT and other matters.
One is forced to conclude, however, that the Soviets now foresee a
period of rising tensions with China. Thus, unless Brezhnev wants to
justify hostility on two fronts, he is compelled to look for ways to soften
the conflict with the West, including with the United States.
Second, there is the SALT problem and its alternative. Despite
harsh words, the Soviets have in fact moved in their substantive posi-
tion, if only slightly. The lapse of the present agreement is more of a
symbol of failure for Brezhnev than for the United States. And, the con-
sequences of a new round of competition cannot be all that attractive to
Brezhnev. A cruise missile race without an agreement is not in the So-
viet interest. Moreover, the United States is on the upswing of the curve
with B–1, Trident I and II, MK–12A and cruise missiles. The Soviets are
on a plateau filling out the deployment of five years ago.8
And there is the economic problem. While it is always dangerous
to project Soviet restraint because of their economic dilemma, it may be
7 Carter underlined “two front hostility.”
8 Carter placed a parallel line next to the last two sentences of this paragraph.
