Chapter 4, February–April 1990 515 We should consider taking an initiative on unresolved ICBM issues—­the centerpiece of which would be a proposal to ban MIRVed mobile ICBMs—­that could put a Bush imprint on START, boost its political appeal, gain the support of Nunn and other key Congressmen, and persuade the “strategic community” and other opinion leaders that we have a coherent strategic plan for the future. • Such an initiative would not delay the signing of START this year, and the ban on MIRVed mobiles could help us on verification. • Given your upcoming travel, we might want to move before you leave for Namibia.2 That could permit us to raise this before the next Ministerial, not necessarily to get a response but to position us both with the Soviets and Nunn on this issue. End Summary. The Problem: Congressional and Public Concerns Sam Nunn has taken the lead in arguing that START and our mobile ICBM programs are out of sync. He claims that, given budgetary pressures and reduced threat perceptions, funding for rail MX is dead unless we adopt his preferred package: propose a ban on MIRVed mobiles, fund rail MX temporarily to support the proposal, press for a long-­term phase-­ out of all MIRVed ICBMs, and move ahead with Midgetman (perhaps with deployment initially in silos and later on trucks). • If Nunn is right about prospects for rail MX funding, then permitting MIRVed mobiles in START could result in the Soviets fielding two mobile ICBMs to our none. • Apparently, Nunn feels he had an agreement with the Administration that produced his support for the two missiles last year in return for our acceptance of a ban on mobile MIRVs.3 His sense of betrayal could come back to haunt us if we don’t at least raise the mobile MIRV ban with the Soviets. Currently, security specialists with considerable clout on the Hill and with the media have joined Nunn in arguing that START does not do enough to encourage more stable forces, particularly through de-MIRVing of land-­based systems. Added to this “experts’” concern is a growing feeling by the public at large (reflected by editorial writers all over the country) that, considering what is going in the world today, START is overly timid and our program requests represent strategic “business as usual.” The example invariably cited is our desire to deploy two mobile ICBMs.4 2 Baker departed for Windhoek on March 19 to attend Namibian independence ceremonies and meet with Shevardnadze. He flew to Cape Town on March 22 and Kinshasa on March 23, before returning to Washington on March 24. 3 Baker underlined “in return for our acceptance of a ban on mobile MIRVs” and drew a short vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this section. 4 Baker drew two short vertical lines in the left-­hand margin beside this sentence and the final clause of the preceding sentence.
