714 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement NSC Planning Board would take the conclusions of the report into con­ sideration in the course of its review of Basic National Security Policy. Mr. Gray replied that the Planning Board had already considered the matter and would do so further. Mr. Allen Dulles stated his conviction that the Overseas Internal Security Program had proved extremely useful. The real issue underlying the OCB report was that the International Cooperation Administration people did not like to find themselves in the position of providing arms. [text not declassified] Likewise the Department of Defense and our mili­ tary people did not want to get into the business of supplying arms to police forces. Secretary Quarles pointed out that the Defense Department was by no means opposed in principle to providing arms for police purposes but that the Defense Department itself was simply not in a position to do so. The National Security Council: a. Noted and discussed the report on the subject by the Operations Coordinating Board pursuant to NSC Action No. 2012–­b, transmitted by the reference memorandum of April 10, 1959. b. Noted that the NSC Planning Board is taking the OCB report into account in its current review of Basic National Security Policy (NSC 5810/1) S. Everett Gleason 158. Briefing Note for May 13 NSC Meeting1 Washington, undated Priorities for Space Programs On January 22, 1958, the President on the advice of the National Security Council, by NSC Action No. 1846, established the highest pri­ ority for certain ballistic missile and space programs. In March 1959, as a result of developments in various satellite programs over the inter­ vening months, the Secretary of Defense recommended certain changes in satellite priorities. These changes are: 1. That the VANGUARD-­JUPITER C scientific satellite programs be deleted from the priority list. 1 Source: Priorities for space programs. Top Secret. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
