3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
23
It is counterproductive to attempt to negotiate an advantage over
one another. We will try to consult without artifice or unnecessary
delay, but without pressure or undue haste.
I welcome your willingness to intensify efforts to reach agreement
on a comprehensive test ban. I recognize that there are remaining issues
with respect to other countries who continue to have test programs and
the possible use of peaceful nuclear explosions for mining or construc-
tion, but I believe there are satisfactory ways of dealing with these
issues. I intend to ask the Congress to ratify the two existing agree-
ments which have been negotiated between our two governments but I
consider these only steps toward a common objective of a complete ces-
sation of nuclear tests. In the meantime these unratified agreements
will be honored by our government.
In the past, I know that there have been proposals for a demilitari-
zation of the Indian Ocean and that these proposals were not seriously
examined. I have asked my colleagues to look closely at the question of
the Indian Ocean so that we may be prepared to comment in some de-
tail on the possibilities for an agreement which would advance the
cause of world peace. Please let me know specifically what you have in
mind. I assume that in such a proposal adequate attention would have
to be paid to military activities of both sides in the area. This seems to
be a clear case where mutual benefit would require a balanced agree-
ment which leads to a general lessening of military effort in the entire
area.
As you know from my public statements, I intend to proceed vig-
orously in an attempt to reduce the sale or transfer of conventional
arms to the third world and hope that you will join in this effort. It
seems to me that this is a senseless competition and we, as major sup-
pliers, have a particular responsibility to put limits on such transfers.
Obviously other suppliers should be involved in such an effort and we
will broaden the discussion to include them.
I also welcome your desire to proceed more vigorously with the
Vienna negotiations on reducing armed forces and armaments in cen-
tral Europe ultimately to minimum acceptable levels.4 We have been
quite concerned about what seems to be an excessive increase in your
military strength in Eastern Europe. We are currently reviewing our
positions on this matter, while at the same time instructing our delega-
tion to pursue the examination of data that has been submitted by both
sides.
4 See footnote 4, Document 4.
