Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 5. The Hungarians think this model is adaptable to most of their partners, at least for those to the north. In their optimistic moments they believe the Poles may now have opened the way and the Soviets will have to swallow reform in the EE countries, even if it contains heresies against Leninism, because the alternative options are just too costly. The Hungarians will probably try to push their model to their EE friends as they like to think the others live in envy of them and they want recognition that Hungary has indeed been the pace-setter. 6. However, we very much doubt the larger EE countries, to whom Hungary would like to appeal, will take that much notice of her. Hungary is a fine place for a holiday and it’s true the shops are comparatively full, but what strikes the economist is smallness of scale. Moving away from the command economy was less complex, could be undertaken with a leadership that truly enjoys much public support, and even so is incomplete after 12 years. The Hungarian accomplishment has taken place during years of economic growth at home and in the export sector has been supported by solid OECD growth. The years of the 80s will probably not be big growth years and reform, even with 12 years of foundation, may not save the Hungarian economy, much less make it a model for others. 7. The leadership still appears bent on going ahead with planned economic reforms, but the adverse economic environment could affect the speed and manner in which they are implemented. Hungary is attempting to cope with mounting economic difficulties by seeking to increase hard-currency exports, decrease consumer goods purchases from the West, and reduce consumption. A period of zero or negative economic growth with little improvement in the standard of living, could seriously impair the regime’s standing in a society that has derived political stability from the steady growth afforded the consumer sector. Hungary’s outlook is thus clouded by serious economic and political uncertainties. 8. Over the longer term, we agree that the events in Poland cannot but have some impact on Hungary and other countries in the region. This will be particularly true if the Polish liberalization succeeds (especially in the area of free trade union development); but it would also be true in the case of a major reversal. We have had reports that workers in some factories “discussed” the Polish situation, but this activity did not extend to work stoppages or demonstrations. Particularly if the Poles succeed, we believe it possible that Hungarian workers may similarly demand a more democratic trade union structure. We suspect, however, that the workers here will carefully weigh the potential economic and social costs before engaging in any agitation. The memory of 1956 remains strong in Hungary and will continue to act as a brake on worker-initiated activity or reforms not closely concerted with the party and governmental leadership.
