110  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
practical way of effecting return to US of American nationals detained 
his country and was prepared make every reasonable effort meet his 
viewpoint concerning Chinese nationals US. With regard to latter he 
had made certain proposals and I had immediately informed him my 
government had taken most far-­reaching action within its power to 
meet basic question raised by his proposals. That is US Government 
had rescinded all measures heretofore restricting departure some few 
Chinese and there now was no measure preventing any Chinese desir­
ing do so from freely departing. In additional effort meet his viewpoint 
I had told him consideration being given his proposal on third party 
representation.
I continued I had consistently attempted make it clear I expected 
his government would take similar measures regarding Americans 
detained his country. That is take whatever measures necessary permit 
return to US of all who desired return thus equalizing situation two 
groups nationals this regard in respective countries. Said I had tried 
make clear I not attempting dictate what action his government should 
take to bring about this result since this obviously something only his 
government could and should decide. Pointing out this was 7th meet­
ing and 3rd week these talks, I said I did not know of single Ameri­
can civilian previously detained his country who had been able depart 
since beginning of talks. He had only informed me cases all detained 
Americans being reviewed and that he would inform me results those 
cases in which reviews completed if I would meet certain conditions. I 
commented that action taken by US Government with respect Chinese 
nationals in US was without conditions.
I said I found myself puzzled by situation and amount of time it 
was taking to settle problem, particularly in view statement his Prime 
Minister that number American civilians in China small and question 
easily settled. Prime Minister also had said it should be possible reach 
first of all reasonable settlement question return civilians their respec­
tive countries. I had been patiently hoping and expecting his govern­
ment would take action to bring about this result but my hopes thus 
far in vain.
I told Wang I had given much thought to seeking resolution situation 
we faced and had also attempted meet his desires with respect to single 
agreed text. I then read text of draft agreed announcement (Mytel 463). 
I pointed out language in draft identical with respect each country. I 
was not proposing or suggesting anything with respect ­Americans his 
country that I was not prepared to say with respect Chinese in US. It 
seemed to me this agreed announcement fully met needs nationals both 
countries on basis full equality and reciprocity. It was based in large part 
upon proposal he first made August 2 and also contained much from his
