North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 979 (2) Whether LDCs should be given a larger share of IMF quotas and of IMF decision-making, irrespective of their financial contributions to the Fund. (3) Whether SDRs should be issued on automatic basis to LDCs as a mechanism to transfer economic resources. (4) Whether new provisions for flexible exchange rates operate to disadvantage of LDCs. VI. Illicit Payments Consensus for international agreement on illicit payments appears to be developing in UN working group on corrupt practices. No important substantive difference between US the LDCs exists. However, in 1976 and 1977 the G–77 were not ready to schedule diplomatic conference to include agreement on illicit payments. Issues are: (1) Priority and importance of the issue. (2) Timing of a diplomatic conference. (3) Efforts by some members of G–77 to link illicit payments agreement to conclusion of negotiations on a code of conduct. VII. Technology for Development Dialogue on technology thus far has focused on regulation of proprietary technology and conduct of enterprises and governments. Fundamental issues are: (1) Whether a code will be legally binding. (2) Whether propositions of G–77 will sustain flows of relevant technology to LDCs. (3) How LDCs will improve capabilities to receive and effectively apply technology, and move toward self-sustaining technological capability. VIII. Transnational Enterprises and Investment Climate Foreign direct investments are important source of economic resources and technology for LDCs. However, value of this investment to DCs and LDCs has been open to debate. For more than a year UN Commission on Transnational Corporations has sought to elaborate code of conduct as a means to establish international framework within which TNCs should operate. Major issues are: (1) Whether code should apply both to responsibilities of governments as well as TNCs. (2) Whether the code should be binding or voluntary. (3) Whether the code should have a follow-up mechanism, and if so, what kind. (4) Whether the transnational enterprises covered by code should include state-owned and mixed ownership enterprises.
