International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 395 We appreciate the measures you intend to take to curb inflation. Anyway, the value of our exports to the United States will be affected not just by our own restraint but by your capacity to control inflation. As to imports, our goal of a 7 percent growth in GNP should help. Some Japanese economists are pessimistic and doubt that we can attain a 7 percent growth rate. But based on my observations in the last four months, I am quite optimistic. I believe we are on the path to a 7 percent growth rate which is necessary in any case for domestic reasons. If the steps we have already taken are not sufficient, I will then take the necessary measures. This growth rate will increase imports, but there will be a time lag. I have therefore concluded that urgent measures are necessary for the following: —We seek to increase our import of enriched uranium and make advance payment for it. I request the President to consider favorably this proposal. —We have sent the Ikeda purchasing mission to the United States.4 —We intend to stockpile non-ferrous medals. —We intend to stockpile petroleum. —We will purchase such civilian airplanes as the DC–980. But I would repeat my concern that if inflation continues and the dollar continues to be devalued, then we are in a vicious cycle. Specifically, I have two concerns. First, the depreciation of the dollar will have a worldwide negative impact on trade. And second, as to Arab oil prices, although there is no immediate sign of problems given the supply of oil, as the dollar continues to be depreciated, then the Arabs may increase the price of oil, and this would become a worldwide problem. The background is the oil problem. United States consumers use 2½ times as much oil as the Japanese. I know of the Energy Bill. When I visited Congressmen yesterday I asked the Senate for an early conclusion for the Energy Bill for the rest of the world. As to the international monetary situation, the results of the Mexico Conference were satisfactory. As to your suggestion that we cooperate with the World Bank, we will study this on a case-by-case basis. I have proposed that we float World Bank bonds in Japan. As to special economic assistance, we had earlier pledged to double ODEA assistance in five years, but we have changed this target to three years. 4 In keeping with the January agreement reached between Strauss and Japanese officials (see Documents 97 and 99), Yoshizo Ikeda, President of Mitsui & Company, led a mission in March to promote Japanese imports of U.S. goods. (Peter Kihss, “Japanese Offer a Ship to Display U.S. Export Goods in Their Ports,” The New York Times, March 16, 1978, p. D16)
