882
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
thorized for negotiations, while State and ERDA believe that fallback
options will be necessary.
Also, both Defense and ACDA believe that the U.S. should not offer
to provide plutonium for the Japanese breeder, as proposed in the in-
teragency paper. ACDA has calculated that reprocessing of the British-
supplied fuel from the Magnox reactor at Tokai can provide sufficient
plutonium to meet Japanese needs.
Schlesinger supports, but did not choose between, some version of
Options 2 or 3.
Option 4: Seek Japanese agreement to defer running the Tokai plant for a
fixed period of time, offering an incentives package in exchange.
All agencies agree that this option is likely to be non-negotiable.
SUGGESTED U.S. STRATEGY
All agencies are agreed that we should seek agreement on Option
3. They differ over whether we should offer to provide plutonium, and
as to how far we should fallback in this meeting. Our strategy clearly
should be to avoid the political damage that would result if the Japa-
nese prove adamant against Option 3 and the talks reach a deadlock. At
the same time, we want to avoid damaging U.S. non-proliferation ob-
jectives through showing so much flexibility (i.e., interest in Option 1)
that the Japanese return home encouraged to maintain a rigid position.
Therefore, I recommend that the delegation be instructed to nego-
tiate with a view to reaching agreement on Option 3, as modified to bar
an offer of U.S.-supplied plutonium. In addition, if no progress can be
made, and the Japanese propose some version of Option 1, the delega-
tion should be instructed to respond by drawing them out on the details
of their proposal. Our delegation should make it explicit however that
the Japanese should not read into our response any expectation of
eventual U.S. approval of such an option.
YOUR DECISION
1. Our Basic Position
Option 3 (State, ERDA)
OR
Option 3—no plutonium (DoD, ACDA, NSC)
4
4 Carter did not indicate which option he preferred.
