1374  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
indicated when they will be ready to do so. I hope that it will be before 
your next meeting so that we could then shift the attack to Geneva if 
it seemed desirable. We are tentatively thinking that if new efforts at 
both Panmunjom and Geneva bring no results, it might be useful to 
publish a joint State-Defense report on this subject, going into some 
detail as to the criteria for placing names on the list, mentioning our 
various attempts to obtain an accounting from the Communists and 
giving examples to show how defective has been the accounting we 
have received.
Tseng Kuang-­chih, the student from Purdue University who has 
been in the state mental hospital at Logansport, Indiana was deported 
June 13 aboard one of the President liners. Other cases of whom the 
Chinese Communists have or may have knowledge are:
Lin Lan-­ying (memos attached)
Chang Chih-­ye (memo attached)
John Woos (copy of letter attached)
Edwin Pon (copy of letter attached)
We have been informed by Immigration and Naturalization Service 
that Pon is leaving July 7.
We will try to cover in your instructions the various subjects which 
Wang might raise, and suggest appropriate lines of reply. We have sent 
to Geneva various items of background material which we thought 
might be useful to you and are attaching to this letter certain others. 
As a general practice, we send materials as soon as they come to hand 
rather than hold them to enclose with a letter, since letters have become 
too infrequent.
We will be watching with interest to see whether Wang presents 
anything new. We don’t really expect him to, but many remarkable 
things have been happening in the Communist world of late and he 
may surprise us.
It was a great pleasure to see you the other day. You can count on 
us to support to the best of our ability your tedious but skillful endeav­
ors at Geneva.
Sincerely yours,
Ralph N. Clough
Director for Chinese Affairs
Enclosures:
1. Dept. of Defense Press Release re Aircraft Carrier Hornet
2. FBIS Item re “Armistice Meeting Request Backed” dated June 
28, 1957.
