Secondly, Schüller has been authorized formally to state to the Relief Credit Committee in London that as soon as the new federal loan has been floated the Austrian Government desires to take up the question of entering into a general funding arrangement for the entire relief credits which amount to about £25,000,000. All the outstanding relief credit bonds provide that the terms of payment shall be the same in all cases and Austria must therefore make the same arrangement with the United States as is made with the other relief credit states. Schüller says that it is to the advantage of Austria to take up the question of a debt settlement at an early date and not wait until 1942. He has stated this to me before, as I have elsewhere reported. It is obvious that he hopes to eliminate or greatly curtail the payment of interest which is now technically running. Austria anticipates, as I gather, that her situation lays the foundation for the hope that she will receive at least as favorable treatment from the United States as Italy did. It is plain to me that the Austrian Government is especially anxious that the relief credit debt settlement shall not be harnessed up in any way with the new loan. If, as the Chancellor explained to me, the two matters were considered together, the Austrian public would deem the conditions too onerous. They would lump the interest and amortization charges of the new loan and the relief credit settlement together. Schüller goes so far as to say that the new loan would have to be abandoned. There have been apparently some disquieting rumors, traceable to banking circles in London and Vienna, to the effect that our Treasury Department or Congress might stipulate a relief credit settlement before taking favorable action upon the desired release of Austrian assets. Schüller does not want to appear to be forced into making an arrangement which he asserts his government desires to make voluntarily. It is my understanding that Minister Prochnik has not been advised by cable of these developments, though he has recently had some telegraphic instructions about the disposition of alien property. I am therefore taking the precaution of briefly informing the Department of the existing situation by wire. The government here seems to regard it as assured that J. P. Morgan & Company will undertake to float the new issue and that it will be the only firm with which the Austrian Government will directly deal, though a
