Dominican Republic  463
Discussion:
Our investigation of the Galíndez-Murphy case has pointed to the 
involvement of Dominican officials, notably General Arturo Espaillat, 
former Dominican Consul General in New York, and former Cabinet 
member for Security. The investigation has also uncovered other evi-
dence of improper Dominican activities in the United States including 
use of unregistered agents. John Joseph Frank was tried and convicted 
in November 1957 for failure to register as a Dominican agent; Horace 
William Schmall was haled before a Federal Grand Jury in January 
1958 but refused to testify on grounds of possible self-­incrimination; 
Carl Armfelt hastily departed from the Dominican Republic in January 
1958 to avoid service of a subpoena to appear before a Federal Grand 
Jury. The Dominican Government has employed Sydney Baron of 
New York (and through him Morris Ernst and Judge Munson) to con-
duct an independent investigation of the Galíndez case, which per se 
tends to impugn the good faith of the Department of Justice investi-
gation. General Espaillat has insulted our Government by stating to 
our Embassy that Frank was “framed”. These developments have been 
attended by keen public and Congressional interest and as a result 
Trujillo and the Dominican Government have been subject to continual 
public stigma.
Congressman Porter4 has broadened his interest in the Murphy-
Galíndez case to embrace the whole field of United States policy toward 
Latin America, particularly with respect to the “dictatorship countries”. 
Last summer Mr. Porter called for a suspension of technical and mili-
tary cooperation with the “dictatorship countries” and sponsored a Bill 
to effect this change in policy. The Bill was defeated by a wide margin in 
late July but while it was under consideration we felt obliged to refuse 
to sell jet aircraft the Dominican Republic was then on the point of pur-
chasing. Other Dominican requests for military supplies or equipment 
have been handled on an ad hoc basis. Similarly questions concerning 
our technical cooperation program in the Dominican Republic have 
been handled on a case by case basis, as have other questions such as a 
proposed visit by “Ramfis”5 to Washington next June, and a proposed 
visit in February by Admiral Richardson, Chief of the Dominican Navy. 
Thus, although there has been no formal change in policy, elements of 
uncertainty and hesitation have become very pronounced in our rela-
tions. This paper seeks to clarify our policy with regard to specific areas 
of interest.
4 Charles O. Porter (D-Oregon)
5 Rafael L. Trujillo, Jr.
