December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
751
The President, The White House
Dear Mr. President:
This letter confirms that Egypt and Israel have agreed as follows:
The Government of Egypt and Israel recall that they concluded at
Camp David and signed at the White House on September 17, 1978, the
annexed documents entitled ‘A Framework for Peace in the Middle
East Agreed at Camp David’ and ‘Framework for the Conclusion of a
Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel.’
For the purpose of achieving a comprehensive peace settlement in
accordance with the above-mentioned frameworks, Egypt and Israel
will proceed with the implementation of those provisions relating to
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. They have agreed to start negotia-
tions within a month after the exchange of the instruments of ratifica-
tion of the peace treaty. In accordance with the ‘Framework for Peace in
the Middle East,’ the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is invited to join
the negotiations. The delegations of Egypt and Jordan may include Pal-
estinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip or other Palestinians as
mutually agreed. The purpose of the negotiation shall be to agree prior
to the elections on the modalities for establishing the elected self-
governing authority (administrative council), define its powers and re-
sponsibilities, and agree upon other related issues. In the event Jordan
decides not to take part in the negotiations, the negotiations will be
held by Israel and Egypt.
The two governments agree to negotiate continuously and in good
faith to conclude these negotiations at the earliest possible date. They
also agree that the objective of the negotiations is the establishment of
the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza in order to pro-
vide full autonomy to the inhabitants.
Egypt and Israel set for themselves the goal of completing the ne-
gotiations within one year so that elections will be held as expedi-
tiously as possible after agreement has been reached between the
parties. The self-governing authority referred to in the ‘Framework for
Peace in the Middle East’ will be established and inaugurated within
one month after it has been elected, at which time the transitional pe-
riod of five years will begin. The Israeli military government and its ci-
vilian administration will be withdrawn, to be replaced by the self gov-
erning authority, as specified in the ‘Framework for Peace in the
Middle East.’ A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will then take place
and there will be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into
specified security locations.
This letter also confirms our understanding that the United States
Government will participate fully in all stages of negotiations.
