Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX respect. The Ambassador replied that he would certainly look into the possibility further, but reiterated—as he had to the Foreign Minister— that regrettably this was a matter beyond the decision of the State Department and quotas were determined in accordance with available supply, conservation needs, and specific reciprocal tradeoffs with other countries responsible for waters of interest to American fishermen. Gotsev indicated that he realized this fact, but he hoped that nonetheless perhaps something could be done—perhaps reducing slightly the quota reserved for American fishermen. The Ambassador noted that would present a domestic political problem of some size. 14. Gotsev stated that Mladenov had expressed satisfaction with his exchanges with the Ambassador on other (than bilateral) world developments. Specifically, he said that he “got the message” (sic) on (the American view of) the Macedonian issue. Gotsev stressed that Mladenov scarcely ever had such frank discussions with Ambassadors, and never with an American Ambassador. He had high confidence in the Ambassador. In response, the Ambassador replied that he always found interesting and useful such discussions with the Foreign Minister, and this comprehensive recent one in particular. He appreciated the Minister’s other comments, and believed they do indeed have good rapport and mutual understanding. Gotsev said that the Minister was looking forward to talking with the Ambassador after his return. 15. Comment: Foreign Minister Mladenov’s three-hour review of the development of Bulgarian-relations with the Ambassador, followed by the evidently orchestrated informal elucidation by Ambassador Gotsev, is a clear signal and request for an American response. Gotsev said explicitly what a Communist Foreign Minister (and Politburo member) could not say in such a direct and open way. They do not expect far-reaching or immediate American moves on such major issues as MFN, but they do want to know whether the United States is receptive to the Bulgarian interest in enhancing our relations. They indicated (Gotsev explicitly) that one reason for Bulgarian interest is to establish a more independent, though not necessarily less Soviet-aligned, and albeit still modest, Bulgarian role in world affairs. 16. As the Ambassador is returning imminently to Washington, he will give his personal comments and recommendations on the questions posed by the Bulgarians reported above and in the reftel during his consultations. Garthoff
