110 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII cooperation, a small CIA team could handle this in NWFP. Alternatively, Afghan rebel cadres could be brought out of the area and trained in a third country such as Saudi Arabia. From the standpoint of efficiency, the closer the training team can operate to the scene of action, the better. Efficiency would be lowered, but security enhanced, if American staff did not operate in Pakistan. The results of modest but across-theboard support for the insurgents would be hard to estimate. It could greatly improve the insurgents’ military capability, sap the managerial resources of the thinly staffed DRA leadership, and eventually lead to a revolt in the Army which would overthrow the Taraki regime. It also could lead to increased Soviet involvement in Afghanistan, as we believe they will take strong measures to ensure that the communist regime is not displaced. A long drawn-out insurgency would result in great suffering for the people involved, with no guarantee that a satisfactory outcome would be achieved. 6. Coup d’etat. It is possible that the Taraki regime could be brought down the same way it came to power—in a lightning coup d’etat. This would have to be carefully planned and organized, and executed with precision. As in the April 1978 coup, the aim would be to obtain support of key military units and then move quickly to eliminate the DRA leadership. If successful, such a coup would cause minimal bloodshed, and would be over before the Soviets had time to react. A number of Afghans already have been arrested by the regime on charges of coup plotting. At this point we do not know whether there are viable antiregime groups attempting to organize a coup such as described, and it could well be that there are none. The DRA has not flinched from employing draconian means to maintain internal security; regime leaders are well protected by heavily armed guards and the political loyalty of key military commanders has been carefully investigated. While dissidents both inside and outside of Afghanistan may be discussing the theoretical possibility of mounting a coup, little or no spadework may have been done to prepare for this. Anti-regime exiles seem to have only rudimentary contact with guerrillas operating in the border areas, and presumably even poorer communications with potential dissident activists in the capital. Nevertheless it is possible that a creditable anti-regime underground could develop, and CIA could make contact with it, probably via selected anti-regime exiles. In theory we could then provide specialized support including training, advice, nonattributable sniper rifles, explosives, anti-tank weapons, communications equipment, etc. This material then would have to be smuggled into Kabul—again implying the existence of a well organized underground. The political risks to the U.S. would be great, but probably
