March 27–December 31, 1979 1043 through Saudi encouragement of Jordan and the Palestinians, could spell the difference between further delay in the West Bank/Gaza negotiations and Palestinian/Jordanian acceptance of a modest outcome of those negotiations. We have to keep in mind, though, that such a Saudi shift would also arouse fear in Israel because some there would not trust the Saudis and would see such a move as a further tightening of the Arab noose around Israel. Depending on timing, Israelis would also argue that we were “abandoning” Camp David. The autonomy talks would become even more difficult, if not impossible.5 —The difficult side of Bandar’s proposition for us is that it would require U.S. endorsement of a Palestinian entity—albeit in association with Jordan—controlling the West Bank virtually up to the 1967 lines. This has been the U.S. position quietly for a number of years, but to take it openly would provoke widespread opposition in Israel and among Israel’s supporters here. The Labor Party in Israel has never accepted the 1967 lines as secure, and the Likud coalition wants to keep open Israel’s right to assert its claim of sovereignty on the West Bank. Moving in this direction would produce a major crisis of confidence with Israel and a political issue in the U.S. Bandar’s offer to roll back oil prices provides an additional dimension that would be attractive to many in the U.S. if it could be carried out on the Saudi side. Our judgment, however, is that the Saudis do not have the capacity any more to swing the OPEC price levels. Also, an equation of oil for Israeli withdrawal would fuel the domestic charges that we are selling out Israel’s security for oil. How to Follow Up It seems to me at least questionable whether we could move as far as Bandar’s approach suggests in our public posture at this point—[less than 1 line not declassified] Therefore, we might want to see whether there would be some intermediate step whereby we might accept this proposition as where we would agree to come out in 1981 but to see whether there might be some intermediate step whereby the Saudis would quietly urge the Palestinians and Jordanians to support the autonomy negotiations. The intermediate step we have in mind could be to probe the Saudi position by placing the Arab-Israeli issue in a wider context. The Saudi concern is not just to help us deal with the Arab-Israeli conflict, or to help them get off this particular hook with its Arab allies. More important are Saudi concern with its own security and overall position in the region. Since the loss (in Saudi terms) of both Iran and Egypt in a single year, the connection with us has assumed new importance—with new fears and doubts, but also new opportunities if we play it right. The Mecca Mosque takeover may also have sharpened their concern about 5 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “How much can we reveal SA attitude without endorsing it as a US proposal? (Secretly? Publicly?)”
