Options Identified and Treasury said they had worked on it but they were not aware of the status. They said that in the absence of a clear decision by the Europeans on each issue, the letter will call for the allies to “agree and implement” the recommended voluntary steps. They said the letter would be provided within one or two hours for the President’s approval. Dr. Brzezinski briefed the group on the President’s comments on yesterday’s notes.3 Regarding the possibility of a Soviet veto of Chapter VII sanctions, he said we would go ahead in any case. The President indicated that he would prefer going for Article 39 finding at the same time as sanctions. We should not wait too long to proceed. Thursday4 was okay. Any exclusions from the trade embargo (e.g. food, medicine, etc.) should be defined narrowly. (S) Mr. Solomon noted that Iran’s only real vulnerability was on food, but that was probably not feasible to include in the embargo for a number of reasons. Mr. Newsom wondered about mail for the hostages. Mr. Aaron pointed out that it could be provided by diplomatic pouch of a friendly power. (C) The President approved a backgrounder on Wednesday to publicize the types of actions our allies have been willing to take. It was the President’s guess that the allies would be more willing to make their actions public after we had asked for Chapter VII. Mr. Eizenstat noted that the President had mentioned to the leadership breakfast that we were prepared to go to the UN to ask for an embargo to enforce UNSC decisions. There is a good possibility of leaks. (S) State will follow up the decision to move ahead. Don McHenry will begin consultations in New York, a message will be sent to appropriate capitals, and we will consult with the Soviets. All agreed we should protest strongly to the Italians about their intention to permit licensed helicopters to go to Iran in the next five days. At the same time, State and Defense will review the possibility of revoking the licenses.5 (S) The group reviewed briefly the results of the talks with the British.6 It appears they agreed to all the governmental actions we requested (short of a freeze, which they said required new legislation), but they have gone back to London to try and reverse the negative positions of the banks on those items which would involve only official government “guidance.” It is evident from intelligence that we may find it extremely difficult to get the necessary nine votes in the Security Council. Don 3 See Document 102. 4 December 20. 5 Carter underlined the words “revoking the licenses” and wrote in the margin: “Expedite.” He approved the item with a checkmark. 6 See Document 103.
