822 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV the State Department should be kept informed of PRC plans to acquire property. This was reiterated in a diplomatic note of October 26 which stated the necessity to obtain the Department’s approval prior to the acquisition or occupancy of diplomatic, consular, or other property in the United States.9 The Chinese have advised that in the future it will comply with the request. (TS) —NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY COMMITTEE— The publication of NSC/PD–24 rescinded the 1968 NSC United States Communications Security Board (USCSB) directive10 and necessitated the construction of a supporting interagency advisory committee to replace the former USCSB. The National Communications Security Directive, established the National COMSEC Committee (NCSC) to advise and assist the Executive Agent in formulating and implementing policy and was signed by the Secretary of Defense on June 20, 1979.11 This directive delineates, under the Secretary of Defense, the COMSEC responsibilities of the NCSC, the Director, NSA, and department and agency heads. (U) —INFORMATION ASSESSMENT (GOVERNMENT)—A series of information assessments were conducted in 1979. Among others, the National Security Agency (NSA) completed a COMSEC threat report for Federal Reserve and Treasury International Communications with Foreign officials. The study was undertaken by the NSA following a formal request from the Federal Reserve Systems Board of Governors. They evaluated the specific threat to the security of voice and printed (TELEX) communications between either the Federal Reserve or Treasury on one hand and foreign governments or central banks on the other. Treasury has initiated several thorough investigations to assess the value of information processed by the department which could benefit an adversary. Vulnerabilities, thought to be non-­existent, have been identified, and personnel involved have reacted positively. The level of awareness has been raised significantly. As a direct result of one survey concerning the Bureau of Government Financial Operations, Treasury Financial Communications System they are now in the process of encrypting the system with Data Encryption Standard (DES) based equipment. The Special Project Office of NTIA completed five 9 In telegram 282182 to Beijing, October 29, 1979, the Department reported: “By ­Diplomatic Note dated 10/26/79, the Department approved purchase by the PRC Embassy of real estate located at 5315 Connecticut Ave. N.W., Washington, D.C. We also called ‘The Embassy’s attention to the necessity to obtain the Department of State’s approval prior to the acquisition or occupancy of diplomatic, consular or other official property in the United States.’” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790496–0097) 10 The text of the August 28, 1968, National Security Council Communications Security Directive is at the National Security Agency website. 11 Not found.
