Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Paris Herald Tribune June 16 cites German concerns in this regard and was written after Reston had seen the Chancellor.) 3. The main thing on Schmidt’s mind, however, was RFE/RL and the US intention to install new, more powerful transmitters at the site near Munich. He said this was a matter he planned to take up with the President. He regretted that he had not been consulted about the decision on the transmitters and said he had ordered that issuance of the required FRG license for installation of the transmitters be held up pending his personal review. It was possible, he said, that he would not approve the license. 4. Schmidt said he was placed in an uncomfortable position by RFE/RL; the stations were on FRG territory, but he had no control over the content of their broadcasts. While he had not been pressed recently by the Soviets on the subject, it was likely that Brezhnev would raise it when he came to Bonn in the fall. Schmidt said he had told the previous US administration that he expected the stations to be phased out within two or three years, but things seemed to be going in the opposite direction. 5. I told Schmidt that we attached great importance to RFE/RL. The location of the transmitters in Germany was the most effective in terms of reaching the target audiences and I thought it would have most unfortunate implications if the operations of the Radios were limited. I stressed the President’s personal interest in RFE/RL and said I was sure he would wish to consider Schmidt’s views carefully. Schmidt said he understood the mission of the Radios but wondered if it might not be feasible for the broadcasts to be carried out somewhere else than in the FRG. 6. Comment: There have been earlier intimations of Schmidt’s reservations about RFE/RL, but his comments to me are more specific than anything we have had before.4 I seriously doubt if he would go so far as to deny the license for the new transmitters or push for removal of the stations from the FRG, since such actions would expose him to a storm of criticism from the opposition. However, it is clear he is irritated by the lack of consultation concerning the
