8
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
without Daoud’s approval and direction. We cannot expect further
progress in the narcotics field without his personal interest, and contin-
uing surveillance. While Afghanistan is not a priority country in the
context of global affairs, in addition to being one of the world’s poorest
countries it is the single most significant threat to our long term narcot-
ics efforts, and meeting Daoud could in fact move him to take a more
active role in containment of the illicit narcotics of the region. We
would therefore suggest acceptance of a Daoud visit early next year.
The timing of such a visit is important and would be most beneficial
during the early Spring, since late Spring is harvesting season and
Daoud could, in fact, cause the interdiction and destruction of large
amounts of opium on his return to Kabul. Such a meeting would also
be a logical follow-up of the Vance-Abdullah meeting this Fall.
4. By far the most important decision to be made in support of our
efforts is on selection of our next Ambassador to Kabul. In order for
us to be able to follow through on our devised strategy and escalate
anti-narcotics efforts at the earliest possible moment, it is important that
in addition to a firsthand knowledge of Afghanistan and its political
constraints, our next Ambassador should be competent in the narcotics
field and have an existing relationship with the leaders of Afghanistan
at the Ministerial level.
An individual with these qualifications is available. He is not,
however, a career Foreign Service Officer, and consequently a determi-
nation must be made that the appointment to Afghanistan should be
considered by the Ambassadorial Review Commission, which it has
not been up to this point. The Commission has the name of the individ-
ual before it, as well as Congressional recommendations and would
in all likelihood include that name in any list submitted to you. I would
therefore suggest that Afghanistan be considered a country to which
a non-career assignment would be appropriate. With your approval,
such a suggestion will be made to Secretary Vance.3
3 Carter wrote: “OK” and initialed “J” in the right margin next to this sentence.
The Ambassador to Afghanistan, Theodore Eliot, had been in that position since Novem-
ber 1973 and did not leave the post until June 1978, when he was succeeded by Adolph
Dubs, a career Foreign Service officer. The individual referred to by Bourne was Charles
O’Keefe, Deputy Director for International Affairs in the White House Office of Drug
Abuse Policy.
