Comprehensive Test Ban 327 which are safe against misuse, tampering, HE detonation from impact, and plutonium scattering. A mutual cessation of testing would prevent the Soviets from fully exploiting their missile throw-weight advantage through optimum MIRVed warhead development. This probably would not affect current Soviet strategic systems (e.g., SS–17, 18 and 19) but would constrain their expected follow-on ICBM, SLBM and cruise missile systems. [2 lines not declassified] Design capability on both sides would degrade eventually under a mutual cessation of tests. The Soviets might have some advantage in slowing this degrading through provision of domestic political incentives to their scientists and if necessary conscripting their services, and through evasive testing (although, as noted earlier, this would involve a major decision by the Soviet leadership, and slowing this degradation might not offer enough advantage to justify the risk). On the other hand, the US leads the USSR in computer hardware and software to simulate and model new weapons design, but would probably not stockpile new weapon designs without testing. It is difficult to assess the relative impact of a mutual testing cessation on stockpile reliability. This is a very contentious issue and little is known about whether present reliability levels can be maintained under a CTB or, if not, about the strategic significance of any degradation. The Soviets might have an advantage due to [less than 1 line not declassified] their ICBM throw-weight advantage, and perhaps a better ability to marshal laboratory resources in a CTB context. On the other hand, the US might have an advantage due to its better quality control, computer simulation and componentry testing. Because of the relatively rapid introduction of new systems in the US stockpile, it has not been generally necessary to conduct confidence testing in order to assess reliability. [less than 1 line not declassified] There is general agreement that stockpile reliability degradation would be slight over the short term (e.g., up to 5 years) but could become more significant in the longer run (e.g., 10 to 20 years). The degree to which stockpile reliability degradation would be significant to national security would depend on our ability to continue manufacture of old designs and components, and on perceptions of the relationship of stockpile reliability for deterrence and war-fighting capability. Many weapons design experts believe that in the long run (20 years), there would be a nearly complete loss of confidence in the reliability of our stockpile. Others believe, however, that this judgment overstates this loss of confidence since a properly drawn CTB agreement would impose substantially similar constraints on the US and USSR and it may overstate the stockpile reliability problem in that no
