Comprehensive Test Ban
327
which are safe against misuse, tampering, HE detonation from impact,
and plutonium scattering.
A mutual cessation of testing would prevent the Soviets from fully
exploiting their missile throw-weight advantage through optimum
MIRVed warhead development. This probably would not affect cur-
rent Soviet strategic systems (e.g., SS–17, 18 and 19) but would con-
strain their expected follow-on ICBM, SLBM and cruise missile sys-
tems. [2 lines not declassified]
Design capability on both sides would degrade eventually under a
mutual cessation of tests. The Soviets might have some advantage in
slowing this degrading through provision of domestic political incen-
tives to their scientists and if necessary conscripting their services, and
through evasive testing (although, as noted earlier, this would involve
a major decision by the Soviet leadership, and slowing this degradation
might not offer enough advantage to justify the risk). On the other
hand, the US leads the USSR in computer hardware and software to
simulate and model new weapons design, but would probably not
stockpile new weapon designs without testing.
It is difficult to assess the relative impact of a mutual testing cessa-
tion on stockpile reliability. This is a very contentious issue and little is
known about whether present reliability levels can be maintained
under a CTB or, if not, about the strategic significance of any degrada-
tion. The Soviets might have an advantage due to [less than 1 line not de-
classified] their ICBM throw-weight advantage, and perhaps a better
ability to marshal laboratory resources in a CTB context. On the other
hand, the US might have an advantage due to its better quality control,
computer simulation and componentry testing. Because of the rela-
tively rapid introduction of new systems in the US stockpile, it has not
been generally necessary to conduct confidence testing in order to
assess reliability. [less than 1 line not declassified] There is general agree-
ment that stockpile reliability degradation would be slight over the
short term (e.g., up to 5 years) but could become more significant in the
longer run (e.g., 10 to 20 years). The degree to which stockpile reli-
ability degradation would be significant to national security would de-
pend on our ability to continue manufacture of old designs and compo-
nents, and on perceptions of the relationship of stockpile reliability for
deterrence and war-fighting capability.
Many weapons design experts believe that in the long run (20
years), there would be a nearly complete loss of confidence in the reli-
ability of our stockpile. Others believe, however, that this judgment
overstates this loss of confidence since a properly drawn CTB agree-
ment would impose substantially similar constraints on the US and
USSR and it may overstate the stockpile reliability problem in that no
