3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 277 81. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, February 14, 1978 SUBJECT Middle East, Horn, Belgrade CSCE, SALT PARTICIPANTS US USSR The Secretary Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin Marshall D. Shulman Ambassador Dobrynin came in at our request February 14. The discussion covered the following matters: 1. Middle East. The Secretary reported that the Sadat visit2 had been useful and that agreement had been reached to continue the negotiations, with an effort in the first instance to reach agreement on a statement of general principles, and then to bring others into the discussions. In his meeting with Dayan on Thursday,3 the Secretary said, he proposed to review the statement of general principles, the question of Israeli settlements, and the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian issues. On the latter cluster of issues, we would maintain our preference for a Palestinian homeland linked to Jordan, but a number of problems would need to be resolved beforehand, including Palestinian participation in the determination of their own future, and the conditions for an interim arrangement. Although the Israelis had manifested their unhappiness with some of our recent statements, the Secretary said it was evident that these statements were not new, and that the Israelis were prepared to have the US continue to perform a facilitating role. After the meeting with Dayan, he said, Atherton would be leaving for the Middle East, to move as necessary between the capitals to seek acceptance of the declaration of general principles as a first step in the process. The Secretary gave Dobrynin advance notice of an announcement to be made later in the day concerning the US intention to permit the sale of specified aircraft to Israel, Egypt and Saudi Arabia. 2. Horn. The Secretary spoke of the mounting US concern over the course of events, and the need for prompt movement toward a cease- 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 3, CV–Dobrynin, 2/14/78. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Shulman. The meeting took place at the Department of State. 2 Sadat met with Vance on January 20. 3 February 16.
