440
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
128.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 9, 1978
SUBJECT
Negotiating Strategy
In a strategy session at State this morning,2 two views were argued:
—We should basically reject Sadat’s new demands as going be-
yond Camp David. The President should tell him that the Treaty text as
it now stands must be accepted. In other words, we would not try to
pin the Israelis down on any of the West Bank/Gaza issues prior to the
conclusion of the treaty negotiations. It was generally recognized that
this would reduce Israel’s incentives for moving seriously on the West
Bank/Gaza, although we would continue to have some leverage in the
form of aid.
—We should meet Sadat part way in trying to clarify West Bank/
Gaza issues now. If we do not do so, he may be unwilling to sign the
treaty; and it may be harder to move the Israelis later than it is now.
(This last point is not unanimously agreed upon). If we took this ap-
proach, we would essentially try to establish two things with the
Israelis:
1. The side letter on the West Bank/Gaza must include a target
date by which elections will be held.
2. We would prepare and discuss with both sides a draft agenda3
for the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. It would specify talks on how the
elections will be organized; the definition of powers and responsibil-
ities; the powers of the local police; the initial redeployment of Israeli
forces; and the question of reciprocal rights of residence and land ac-
quisition. We would not necessarily expect the Israelis formally to ac-
cept the draft agenda, but it would give Sadat something concrete to
point to as evidence that we, at least, will work seriously for the success
of these negotiations.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 15, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 11/6–13/78. Secret; Outside System. Sent for
information.
2 No other record of this November 9 strategy session has been found.
3 Not found.
