1955 311 forth certain functions which representatives of the UK in the PRC were to undertake with respect to the departure of Americans who desired to return to the US. 3. “The United States Government hoped and expected that this clear commitment by the PRC would be promptly and faithfully imple­ mented and that the talks could then immediately proceed to the dis­ cussion of the other practical matters in accordance with the statement of July 25 issued by the US Government and PRC. Unfortunately, although nearly three weeks have passed since the issuance of the agreed announcement, nineteen Americans still remain imprisoned in the PRC and the PRC has refused to give any indication when they may be able to return. This raises serious question as to how the PRC inter­ prets its commitment to allow these persons to ‘expeditiously exercise their right to return.’ 4. “The United States Government is also concerned because it has not been possible, up to the present time, even to learn whether and how the PRC is implementing its undertaking to arrange for the United Kingdom to assist the return of Americans. It was not until September 23, or 13 days after the issuance of the announcement, the US was informed by the PRC that the UK had been enabled to under­ take its functions in the PRC. Furthermore, despite continued requests, the PRC still declines to confirm whether all jailed Americans have even been informed of the terms of the agreed announcement and whether they will be granted access to the UK representative in the PRC. It is particularly difficult to understand this situation in the light of Mr. Chou En-­lai’s statement just prior the opening of these talks to the effect that it would be easy to resolve the problem of Americans in the PRC. 5. “The fact is that today—­more than 8 weeks since the start of the talks—­only one-­third of the jailed Americans have been released. 6. “The United States Government, for its part, not only reiterated in the agreed announcement its previous assurance that Chinese in the US who desire to return to the PRC are free to do so, but also promptly arranged for the GOI to undertake the functions set forth in the announce­ ment. The PRC has been kept currently informed of all steps being taken by the US Government in this regard. 7. “The US continues to hope that the PRC will, for its part, quickly take steps to implement its commitments so that these talks may promptly move on to the discussion of other practical matters”. Shillock
