accorded to citizens of foreign countries on condition of reciprocity upon a
showing in the particular case that such reciprocity is furnished by Austria.
There are States of the United States in which such rights are extended to
aliens without reference to reciprocity and probably others in which the
rights are restricted or wholly denied.
It is not believed that this Government should consent to add to Article I, of
the Treaty, the paragraphs proposed by Austria obliging the respective
countries to receive their nationals deported from the other country, and
agreeing to accord indigent nationals of the other, the same care and
treatment as is accorded their own nationals.
The Government of the United States has not experienced any difficulty in
having deported aliens received in the countries of which they are nationals.
The difficulties experienced by this Government in deporting aliens grow
out of disputed nationality. It is believed that all governments receive their
nationals who are deported from another country. There have been cases in
which governments refused to receive deportees because they were not
regarded as nationals. The proposed addition to Article I, on this subject,
would not cure this situation, and it is not believed that the proposed
addition would serve any useful purpose so far as the United States is
concerned.
It is not believed that discrimination is practiced to any considerable extent
in the United States in caring for indigent aliens as compared with
nationals. In the United States this matter is given attention by the local
State or Municipal authorities, or by private charitable organizations, and
this Government would find it difficult to agree to include a provision in
regard to it in a treaty.
The Department concurs in your view that difficulties might arise with
respect to the observance of the provisions of the last of the three additional
paragraphs (paragraph C) proposed to Article I, because of the distribution
of jurisdiction over the matters dealt with between the Federal and State
Governments in the United States. For this reason the paragraph is
unacceptable to this Government. The Department agrees also that the
revised form suggested by you is merely declaratory of existing practice.
