contracting parties. They further declare that on the above
understanding their Governments are willing and anxious to
proceed as soon as possible with the carrying out of the measures
contemplated in the Washington treaties and resolutions.”
2. I make this recommendation for following reasons: First, I have believed
for some time that we should combat Bolshevik attack in China in
particular reference to so-called “unjust treaties” by an announcement that
we were ready and willing to discuss treaty revision at earliest moment
practicable. Second, I have considered that we have been and are severely
handicapped by inability to initiate action under Washington Conference
agreements and resolutions owing to French attitude. I believe that if
nothing more eventuates from the effort to have the powers concerned agree
upon proposed statement, such effort will at least bring pressure upon
French Government toward ratification of Washington treaties. I deem this
is in line with Department’s attitude and desire as expressed in its 294,
November 26, 3 [2] p.m.,56 and 293, November 25, 6 p.m.57 Third, a
statement similar to above may be of great assistance to conservative
element in China. As couched I do not believe it can do harm. Should Sun
in cooperation with Feng overthrow Tuan administration after proposed
statement is made we would at least be on record as continuing to entertain
toward a government in China, to whom we could at least accord de facto
recognition, the same policy of cooperation and mutual accommodation as
embodied in the decisions with respect to Chinese affairs adopted by
Washington Conference. We would have a base from which to project
further efforts to defend ourselves against Bolshevik propaganda. If and
when Tuan or some other conservative government would replace Sun
regime we would be in the greatly [sic] superior position than if proposed
statement had not been made.
3. Both British Minister and myself after careful consideration believed it
wise not to include any direct statement to the effect that powers concerned
would not recognize or have truck with any administration which might be
set up in Peking by political leaders hostile to us. This would be two-edged
weapon. Point impliedly covered in proposed statement.
