723.2515/1606: Telegram [Document 222] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) [Paraphrase] WASHINGTON, September 10, 1925—4 p.m. For Pershing: Your telegram of September 6, 4 p.m. Department has just received following telegram from Ambassador Collier: Pershing’s telegram to Edwards on intolerable situation in Tacna and necessity for immediate action by Chilean Government was transmitted Monday to Edwards. Edwards yesterday requested the Embassy to send reply to Pershing, asserting that courtesy required that he reply the same channels employed by Pershing. I consented to send reply merely as medium of communication without my action being regarded as report by me or as implying approval of its contents. Since Pershing’s telegram was received, President Alessandri, Mr. Edwards, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs have come to me to complain that the Peruvians have adopted provocative policy deliberately calculated to create disorder, and that General Pershing shows undue sympathy with them and fails to appreciate Chile’s right to govern the province. There are bitter complaints against the United States for allowing Americans to form part of the Peruvian delegation and electioneer actively for Peru. This is looked upon as inconsistent with impartiality and as creating the impression that the United States favors Peru. Complaints also made that General Pershing upholds Peru in the publication of a newspaper whose articles slander the power that has right of provisional government and also in its sale by methods which insult Chileans. Alessandri and Minister for Foreign Affairs said that Chile has determined to maintain order but not to yield any advantage which is secured to the occupying power by treaty and is admitted by the award. Both stated that Peru was representing herself as weaker nation in order to win Pershing’s sympathies, and was seeking to force the United States to yield to her demands by threats of withdrawal from the plebiscite. Mr. Edwards went so far as to say that Chile would withdraw before she would waive any of her rights, and that this step would be disastrous for Pershing’s prestige.
