Yugoslavia
903
to a rapid expansion of our political, economic, military, cultural and
academic relations over the past two years. Much yet remains to be
accomplished to establish a relationship of mutual trust with the Yugo-
slav military; bureaucratic blundering on both sides and a residue of
suspicion complicate our efforts to broaden the relationship, but
progress has been made and our mutual interests require that more
be done.
17. Chinese-Yugoslav relations: In the year since Hua’s visit to
Yugoslavia and Romania (August, 1978), the drama and expectations
have diminished. What remains is a record of solid accomplishment
in consolidating and expanding Party and state ties; disappointed (but
not abandoned) hopes for increased trade and economic cooperation
based on mutual advantage; abiding but less strident Soviet concern
and displeasure over Yugoslavia’s role in strengthening China’s diplo-
matic presence in the Balkans; and mutual recognition of the impor-
tance, limitations, and usefulness of their relationship.
18. For the US, the expansion of Yugoslav-Chinese ties is a positive
development in that it encourages China’s opening to the world, acts
as a marginal restraint on Soviet behavior in the Balkans, and reinforces
US-Yugoslav relations and perceptions of shared policy interest. Fur-
ther steady expansion of their relations can be expected, but the pace
and scope will be limited by Yugoslav concern about unduly provoking
Moscow, economic realities, and differences in their systems, outlooks,
and ultimate political objectives.
19. NAM Havana Summit: The Yugoslavs, having defined the
critical issues at Havana to be those of “principle,” returned from
Havana claiming victory. The Cubans, on the other hand, played a
different game, ignoring ideological issues and promising flexibility
while hammering away on the substantive issues with telling, radical
effect. Only time will tell who won; whether the condemnation of the
Middle East negotiating process and the issue of Egypt’s suspension
from the NAM will be rendered moot by negotiating progress; whether
Cuban behavior at Havana so irritated the “silent majority” that Castro
will not be able to manipulate the movement over the next three years.
What seems clear, however, is that Yugoslavia emerged from the sum-
mit with diminished influence. Diminished because it chose to fight
only on “principle”, ceding the battlefield to Castro on almost all other
issues. Diminished, because even on those issues where it did fight, it
did not win clear-cut victories, despite the investment of enormous
effort and Tito’s personal prestige. Diminished because Yugoslavia, a
relatively small, relatively developed, white, European, and northern
country has inevitably begun to lose relevance within the NAM. At
some point, Yugoslav leaders may begin to reevaluate their heavy
commitment to the NAM, but certainly not until after Tito’s passing.
