438  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
4. Nuclear weapons security and terrorism could become a big 
issue. The scene in Europe is not comforting, perhaps not in the U.S. 
either.
5. The technology transfer and trade issue as it relates to oil, and 
the USSR is an on-­going issue.
New Initiatives
1. Continuity of Government. We must launch a major review of 
“continuity of government.” The PRC on civil defense agreed that this 
should be done, and the civil defense directive, PD–41, requires the 
capability which at present is non-­existent.5 This is not the easy issue it 
may appear to be. It relates to the C3I studies, LUA, stockpiles, mobi-
lization, military manpower policy, and FEMA re-­organization. Trying 
to work out the terms of reference for analysis boggles the mind. (TS)
2. Military doctrine. I have spelled out the categories for pursuing 
this one. They are: (a) the conceptual revolution; (b) implementation in 
C3I by small steps; (c) flexibility in planning for military operations; (d) 
force structure changes by small steps. You may be inclined to empha-
size the conceptual revolution first. I am inclined to leave it until last, 
moving in the program and operations areas first. Such a sweeping 
doctrinal change is impossible to explain to most audiences and unac-
ceptable to most who understand. (TS)
3. Mobilization. This one could be made an issue if you like or sim-
ply ignored for later. NIFTY NUGGET is generating a wealth of data 
which could be used to make it an initiative. Much can be done in this 
area at very little cost in defense budget outlays. Legislation and orga-
nizational changes would not be costly. (S)
4. A real shocker. The quickest way to drive the defense budget down 
and to increase our military power is to reinstitute the draft, reducing 
private’s pay by 10 percent in the process. The savings would probably 
dwarf the “increment” Harold Brown seeks. (S)
5 The PRC met to consider PRM–32 on civil defense on August 3. See Document 73.
