National Security Policy 1205 get word to him. The President said it might be possible to get through to the President directly without going through intermediaries 80 per cent of the time. Captain Aurand said a direct message to the President would save only two to three seconds. The President said it was not worth initiating some special procedure in order to save that amount of time. General Goodpaster said that any report of such significance as to warrant bringing it to the attention of the President was given to the President without awaiting evaluation and would be accompanied by a statement that it had not been evaluated. The President agreed that any information of great significance coming to the attention of the War Room must be passed on to the President. Mr. Dulles said there was a regular procedure for giving the President important information through intelligence channels. The President said that any warning of any great significance on BMEWS would automatically cause a warn­ ing to be flashed on the White House board. He was referring not to the responsibilities of individuals but to an automatic mechanism. In response to a question from Captain Aurand, Mr. Gray said that the Special Committee would be asked to review the chart in the light of the discussion, including an insertion of language indicating that the announcements called for would be local announcements. Mr. Stans said January 20 or January 21, from the enemy point of view, would be an ideal date for an attack on the U.S. The President said he had asked representatives of the new Administration to get in touch with Captain Aurand and General Goodpaster. Mr. Stans said he was concerned about civil defense activities since no successor to Governor Hoegh had been designated. The President said he shared the concern expressed by Mr. Stans. For instance, he might have to issue sudden orders to the fleet in view of the explosive situation in Laos. However, he had been unable to get the incoming Administration to realize the importance of this area of activity. General Persons said he was urging Mr. Clifford to have the new Administration put offi­ cials in touch with officials of the present Administration in these key fields. The National Security Council: a. Discussed the enclosures to the reference memorandum of December 14, 1960; in the light of an oral presentation by the Chairman, NSC Special Committee on Attack Warning Channels and Procedures for Civilians, and of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (transmitted by the reference memorandum of December 28, 1960). b. Noted the President’s view that, in the event of receipt of infor­ mation which might require the declaration of DEFCON 1, 2, 3 or 4, the President should be immediately advised and consulted if at all feasible, to include specific comment as to whether the information has been evaluated. The President also suggested that consideration be given to preparing in advance a draft of a possible Presidential
