874
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of the United States. However, the United States cannot—and should not—
try to shape the international effort unilaterally.
• Efforts to eliminate hunger can succeed. The substantial progress
achieved within the United States itself, as well as other countries since World
War II, indicates that public awareness, appropriate government programs
and increased income and productivity do reduce poverty and hunger. The
techniques, methods and lessons learned from these examples are often
replicable in other countries.
• U.S. domestic and foreign economic policies, as well as private activ-
ities, sometimes hinder rather than help efforts to overcome world hunger. U.S.
actions with implications for hunger overseas go far beyond the rela-
tively small role that U.S. foreign assistance plays in the overall com-
plex of U.S. economic interactions with the developing world. They in-
clude domestic agricultural policies and consumer practices, trade, and foreign
investment, as well as arms sales to poor countries. While it would be un-
realistic to assume that economic conflicts of interest can be eliminated
entirely from international economic relations, the United States can
take steps to reduce existing conflicts between its national goals and the
needs of hungry people.
• Much progress has been made in reducing the prevalence of
hunger and malnutrition in the United States over the past decade.
However, some segments of the U.S. population, notably Native Americans
and migrant workers, remain vulnerable to malnutrition and related diseases.
Further, there is a clear and immediate need for the establishment of a perma-
nent authority to collect, analyze and disseminate essential information re-
lating to the nutritional status of the American population. Despite Congres-
sional directives to Federal agencies to submit proposals for a
comprehensive system for monitoring the nation’s nutritional status,
little progress has been made to date.
• Federal feeding programs such as the School Lunch; Women, Infants
and Children; and Food Stamp Programs have been very successful in ad-
dressing the problems of hunger and malnutrition in the United States. How-
ever, inflation and fiscal austerity policies threaten the advances that have been
made to treat the symptom of hunger. Despite the successes of Federal
feeding programs, modifications to improve their availability to the
poor, better mechanisms for reaching such groups as the elderly and
rural poor and closer monitoring of local administrative practices could
lead to increased participation by those Americans in need.
• The pervasive existence of chronic undernutrition throughout
the world is still exacerbated by conditions of outright starvation and
food scarcity, often man-made. While improvements have been
achieved in the coordination and operation of relief activities, further
effort is required. However, the major impediment to effective famine and
emergency relief is often the unwillingness of the governments of affected
