National Security Policy 1031 about 5 n.m. under operational conditions. Units already equipped with radio-­inertial guidance probably would not be retrofitted with the all-­inertial system. 9. We estimate that over the next few years, probably not later than during 1963, the operational CEP for a Soviet ICBM system with all-­ inertial guidance could be reduced to about 2 n.m., and that with radio-­ inertial guidance, the operational CEP could be made somewhat better. ICBM accuracy under operational conditions could probably be still further improved to about 1 n.m. in 1965–1970. The element of uncer­ tainty in our estimate of CEPs for future years is very great. 10. Reliability Factors. The strategic significance of an ICBM force is heavily dependent on the reliability of the system under operational conditions, and on the percentage of missiles which can be kept in com­ mission. We have again reviewed the factors which would affect Soviet ICBM reliability and in-­commission rates under various circumstances, taking into account what little intelligence is available, general state of the art, and US analogy. The uncertainties are such that figures can be provided as working assumptions only.5 11. On this basis, we believe it reasonable to assume that in mid-­ 1960, some 60–80 percent of the USSR’s operational ICBM inventory could be in commission. The lower limit of this range approximates the percentage which might be maintained in commission for an indefinite period. The upper limit might be achieved if the Soviets prepared their force for an attack at a specific time. The in-­commission rate would improve as the system matured. Ranges comparable to those given above might approximate 70–85 percent in 1961 and 85–90 percent in 1963. 12. With respect to reliability on launcher and in flight, we assume that in mid-­1960, some 50–60 percent of the ICBMs in commission and on launchers could successfully go through count-­down, leave their launchers at scheduled times or not later than 15–30 minutes thereafter, and detonate in the vicinity of assigned targets. As in the preceding paragraph, the lower limit of this range approximates the reliability which might be maintained indefinitely, while the upper limit might be achieved if the Soviets prepared their force for an attack at a specific time. The percentage of successful missiles might increase to 55–65 per­ cent in 1961 and 65–75 percent in 1963. 13. Follow-­on System. During the next few years, the Soviets will probably have under development a follow-­on ICBM system, although there is no direct evidence that such a development program is now 5 For missiles other than the ICBM, the table of missile reliabilities in NIE 11–5–59 provides the best working assumptions we have been able to derive. [Footnote is in the original.]
