1362
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Deane Hinton said we need a way to deal with Israeli decisions on
this: how can that be written down? We aren’t talking about political
steps: Modai gave the example of adding a single settler leading to a
cut-off of oil from Egypt.
Al Moses suggested separating economic from political factors in
the triggering here.
Deane Hinton said that the agreement needs a little ambiguity. We
need an escape if there is Israeli behavior on oil purchasing that would
lead to self-imposed triggering. It shouldn’t be automatic.
The President said that a verbal assurance from Secretary Duncan
on this point should suffice. The language should stay in. Modai should
be told that the case of a settler, or a breakdown in the autonomy nego-
tiations, wouldn’t be involved. If Israel were to attack Egypt, or try to
take back the Sinai—or something gross—and Egypt stopped sup-
plying oil, then there would be a prohibition. All events can’t be spelled
out in a document.
Ambassador Owen asked about the impact in the Gulf of a 20/60 for-
mula with a 90-day provision for automatic triggering.
Secretary Duncan said that the subtleties of a formula were not that
important. His overriding consideration is that, if there were a trig-
gering in which Israel were getting U.S. oil, then in Saudi Arabia and
other Gulf countries there would be a devastating reaction. It would
have an immediate and dramatic impact.
The President noted that Israel would be permitted to trigger the
agreement (under certain circumstances), and this was said a year ago.
Secretary Duncan said that this was his judgment.
The President said that the agreement with Israel had been publicized.
Secretary Duncan said that Modai is going on a speaking tour of the
United States beginning today. He (Duncan) hopes that Modai will
leave Washington with a good feeling. If we go to the 20/60 formula,
then we should try to hold with “strong presumption.” Goldmann may
be right that we should try to get more room on the spot market crite-
rion, and later leave it out. But he (Duncan) would hate to leave the
spot-market criterion out of the agreement. This is a supply agreement,
though Israel has turned it into a price agreement. This is his intuition.
Ambassador Owen asked about the 90-day provision.
Secretary Duncan said that if the difference lies in whether Modai
walks out of the meeting today feeling bad, then it is good. He
(Duncan) suggests the following tactics: we should move to 20/60, and
hold the line on “strong presumption.” If that does not work, then we
could have the two staffs work out various options, then discuss it
again with Modai when he gets back.
Ambassador Owen asked whether we should introduce the idea of
the 90-day period.
