Arms Control and Disarmament 1353 undertaken without any political commitment, obviously we would be engaged in a course which would inevitably bring us closer to suspen­ sion of tests. The Secretary then drew the Ambassador’s attention to Mr. Khrushchev’s reference to the Arctic as being the shortest route for missiles between the USSR and the USA. He felt this was a foolish slip on the part of the Russians of which we might be able to take advantage. 329. Memorandum of Conversation between John Foster Dulles and Strauss1 Washington, May 16, 1958 Admiral Strauss discussed with me the question of suspension of testing. He indicated that if we thought it politically important it might be possible to announce before the end of the HARDTACK series that future testing would only be done under conditions which would assure no fallout. He gave me in this connection the report of his Gen­ eral Advisory Committee, copy attached. I reported on Lloyd’s desire to extend the period for the testing of the smaller, e.g., less than one megaton, weapons, and my reply to Lloyd that it might be possible to deal first with detection machinery covering the big explosions with a second phase which would be intro­ duced only later dealing with the smaller tests. Admiral Strauss seemed to think this might be possible. I spoke of the composition of the experts who might function if this was agreed on with the Soviet Union. He suggested that there should be experts designated as jointly agreed between AEC, Defense, CIA and Dr. Killian. I said I thought we should have a meeting on this subject in the near future and I would try to set it up for next week. I said we were not clear as to whether the Soviets would accept UK experts or merely wanted U.S. and Soviet experts. Strauss suggested that in the latter case we might keep in touch with the UK and perhaps have the meetings in London. Admiral Strauss spoke very highly of General Norstad’s testimony before the Joint Congressional Committee and suggested I should thank him. Admiral Strauss thought that the amendments could be put 1 Source: Suspension of testing and reducing fallout from tests; includes report of Strauss’ General Advisory Committee. Top Secret; Personal and Private. 5 pp. Eisen­ hower Library, Dulles Papers, General Memoranda of Conversation.
