Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 381 could imagine accomplishing such a bilateral agreement reasonably quickly. 7. Dubinin asked how the sides would get from an 80 percent reduction down to two percent. Bartholomew explained that the U.S. would agree to reduce to two percent in the context of a CW convention. We would then reduce to zero once we were satisfied that all CW-­ capable states had signed the convention. PM/TMP Director Walker added that the previous U.S. position had been that the U.S. would not enter into a convention until all CW-­capable states had signed. The President’s UNGA initiative did not require this and thus should accelerate the convention’s entry into force. Eagleburger 56. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, November 6, 1989, 1710Z 9860. Subject: START Negotiator’s Midround Report 1. Secret—­Entire Text. 2. In this mid-­round START update, I would like to give you my personal assessment of the status of the negotiations, summarize the areas where I think we can make some progress and outline what I believe we need to do to move ahead. 3. After Jackson Hole, the atmospherics continue to be good, both in my meetings with Nazarkin and in the working groups. In general, there has been a good, technical give-­and-­take with few polemics. In fact, last week Nazarkin told me that he is convinced that the Soviets want an agreement more than we do. However, my impression is that Nazarkin is trying to overcome some internal obstacles to be as forthcoming as he can. 4. The Soviet record on substance has been mixed. Some of their responses and proposals have been constructive, such as the restructured mobiles paper and RV inspection. In some cases, they have held steadfastly to old positions, as with ALCMs. At times, there have been apparent disconnects between Nazarkin and some of his delegation, as 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D890968–0079. Secret; Immediate; Exdis.
