International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 701 goal by 4 mbd.2 (If the oil conservation charge is still in dispute, I believe you can get the allies to support it vigorously at the Summit; I asked Lambsdorff to speak up on its behalf at the IEA meeting, with good results. See Tab A.)3 (C) 3. The North-South section focuses on helping LDCs produce more: —energy, and includes an interesting proposal for a new World Bank affiliate to this end; —food, via more emphasis on research, production (irrigation), and food storage. The UK and Japan are still trying to cut back on the food proposals. (C) 4. There are shorter sections on trade, international monetary affairs, and terrorism. The principal problem here is the trade section: Our language on barring bribery and avoiding wasteful competition in export credits won’t sell; we will have to compromise. (C) 5. The Italian delegate asked me to pass on his government’s strong request that a Four-Power Summit Meeting at Venice be avoided. The Italians believe that the press would find out about this meeting and that it would then overshadow the Summit’s constructive results in Italy, where it would be deeply resented—making it very difficult to get Italian parliamentary support for measures regarding Iran and the USSR. They were appalled that a four-power meeting on Italian soil should even be considered, given their role as host country and record of cooperation, to please a country which has shown as little concern for US interests as France.4 (C) 6. A few further comments: —All allied economic discussion focuses on US proposals. If we don’t take the initiative, nothing happens. But the Europeans and Japanese expect us to consult about these proposals—to listen to their concerns. The IEA conference went well because Charles Duncan met most 2 Telegram 137327 to all OECD capitals, Jidda, Abu Dhabi, Doha, Manama, Kuwait, Algiers, Baghdad, Dhahran, Caracas, Jakarta, Tunis, Lagos, Mexico City, Quito, and Libreville, May 24, reported on the May 21–22 IEA Ministerial meeting in Paris. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800255–0512) The May 23 edition of The Washington Post published a story, written by Ronald Koven, entitled “West Rejects U.S. Plan on Oil Imports.” (The Washington Post, May 23, 1980, p. A21) 3 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated article published in an unknown newspaper entitled “19 Allies Back U.S. Oil Tax.” The article, written by Paul Lewis of The New York Times, is based on an article published in the May 23 edition of The New York Times entitled “Europeans Back Carter on Oil Tax.” (The New York Times, May 23, 1980, p. D5) 4 In his May 28 cover memorandum to Carter (see footnote 1 above), Brzezinski noted Giscard’s belief “that only the Four and not the Seven should deal with political issues” at the Venice G–7 Summit. The Carter administration favored political discussions involving all seven Summit countries.
