Haiti 735 Duvalier some of the factors which would be involved in reestablishment of normal, friendly relations between our countries if the Haitians give us satisfaction over this incident. These “factors” are in no sense a quid pro quo, and the Ambassador has no intention of describing them as such. Rather, the explanation of them would be presented as some of the elements of our relations which existed before Talamas’ death and which would exist now if it were not for that unfortunate occurrence. We believe the elements of such restoration are as listed below and, if you agree, the Ambassador will describe these factors to the President if he considers it appropriate in his discussions in Part-au-Prince: 1. The FY 1957 $1 million grant assistance would be made available in accordance with previous arrangements. 2. Recreational visits of U.S. fleet units would be resumed as soon as they could be scheduled. 3. The Ambassador would immediately recommend that high-­ ranking Army and/or Marine Corps officers visit Haiti to discuss training of the Haitian Army and the possible augmentation of U.S. military missions in Haiti. 4. It would be explained that the U.S. Development Loan Fund is receiving applications from interested governments for economic development project meeting the criteria of the Fund. 5. Finance Minister Thebaud would be invited to visit Washington to review the Haitian economic situation and to review cooperative steps which might be taken in this field. This visit would also permit the Finance Minister to discuss problems with the ExImbank, the Development Loan Fund, the IBRD, and the IMF. The visit of Minister Thebaud would also permit discussion of the following matters of mutual concern: (a) Plans for allocation of $2 million grant aid already earmarked for Haiti from FY 1958 Mutual Security program funds. (b) Cooperative steps to stimulate U.S. tourist travel to Haiti. (c) Cooperative steps to stimulate U.S. private investment in Haiti. (d) Review of U.S. technical assistance programs in Haiti to explore areas where additional projects might be desirable. (Availability of the remaining $3 million of the Artibonite loan has not been included since it has been made clear to the Haitians that it is only technical difficulties which have held up the release of these funds.)
