examination shall be set by the directing head of the national health service,
and shall require of the applicant a competent knowledge of medicine and
surgery. Said directing head of the national health service may issue a
license to an applicant who successfully passes the examination, and may
revoke said license upon conviction of malpractice, unprofessional conduct,
offenses involving moral turpitude or infraction of any of the sanitary laws
or regulations of any of the signatory Governments based upon the
provisions of this code.
ART. 53. When duly licensed as aforesaid, said surgeons or medical officers
of vessels may be utilized in aid of inspection as defined in this code.
CHAPTER IX.—THE PAN AMERICAN SANITARY BUREAU
Functions and Duties
ART. 54. The organization, functions and duties of the Pan American
Sanitary Bureau shall include those heretofore determined for the
International Sanitary Bureau by the various International Sanitary and
other Conferences of American Republics, and such additional
administrative functions and duties as may be hereafter determined by Pan
American Sanitary Conferences.
ART. 55. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall be the central coordinating
sanitary agency of the various member Republics of the Pan American
Union, and the general collection and distribution center of sanitary
information to and from said Republic. For this purpose it shall, from time
to time, designate representatives to visit and confer with the sanitary
authorities of the various signatory Governments on public health matters,
and such representatives shall be given all available sanitary information in
the countries visited by them in the course of their official visits and
conferences.
ART. 56. In addition, the Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall perform the
following specific functions: To supply to the sanitary authorities of the
signatory Governments through its publications, or in other appropriate
manner, all available information relative to the actual status of the
communicable diseases of man, new invasions of such diseases, the sanitary
