Venezuela 1255 in Caracas outside the city and so on. He estimates that the things he has in mind might cost 10 million dollars. In order to accomplish these expenditures without increasing the budget he hopes that it may be possible to acquire some of the normal materiel by means other than by direct purchase at full price, as under the Credit Arrangement with the United States for example, If he can arrange this normal acquisition at a lesser price he perhaps will be able to use the money thus saved for these other improvements which he has in mind. The President said that his military officers have told him that other Latin American countries, specifically Colombia and Brazil, are able to make purchases of materiel in the United States on the basis of more or less token payments. He is not familiar with the arrangements these countries may have with the United States but he made clear that he is interested in learning more about those arrangements. He explained that he is not complaining at all and that he realizes the Perez Jimenez Government made much of its alleged ability to pay cash for all of its extravagant purchases. The situation is quite different now and his Government is prepared to admit its problems; he hopes that the United States may be able to help him in some of the solutions. With reference to other governmental programs, he spoke of his plans for public beaches on the Litoral, of a public park in the east of the city and another on the site of the old hipodromo (with baseball fields, basketball courts and other facilities), of moving people from the ranchitos in Caracas back to the countryside and helping them to set up in small scale agricultural endeavors. With specific reference to this last point, President Betancourt said that 3,000 families have already indicated their willingness to move from Caracas back to the country. The Foreign Minister had spoken to President Betancourt about the Jerusalem vs. Tel Aviv conflict for the location if diplomatic missions in Israel. The President showed knowledge of this situation and of the United Nations resolutions on the subject and indicated that Venezuela’s decision will probably be in favor of Tel Aviv. He suggested that the previous decision to locate the Venezuelan Legation in Jerusalem had been made by the former Foreign Minister who had perhaps been influenced in that decision by the fact that he is Jewish. President Betancourt made a strong statement in support of locating the new Inter-American Bank in Caracas. He said that this would be an opportunity to lessen the North Americanization of inter-American institutions and said that he thought it would be an excellent idea from the point of view of the United States as well as Latin America for this bank not to be located in Washington or New York. He said he felt that
