National Security Policy 611 220. Finally, Soviet conduct is marked by an apparently high and genuine confidence. The Soviet leaders evidently believe that, despite the many and serious problems which face them, the movement of events increasingly justifies their long-­held hopes for the ultimate tri­ umph of “world socialism” under Soviet leadership and tutelage. This mood probably reflects satisfaction with Soviet economic and scientific advances, and with the growth of Soviet military power, as well as grat­ ification over the sharpening difficulties for Western interests in certain areas of the world. While we do not conclude that the Soviet leaders are so overconfident that they would be tempted to incautious behavior, this is one of the hazards which might attend any striking new advance of Communist power or reversal for the West. Current Soviet Objectives and Main Lines of Policy 221. How do the Soviet leaders view the outlook over the next several years and what are the immediate objectives which they con­ sider feasible to pursue in moving toward an expansion of Communist power? In broad terms, they probably believe that there is an acceler­ ating trend toward enhancement of the world power position of the Communist Bloc and a corresponding decline in that of the US and its allied states. This is the traditional view which springs from Marxism- Leninism, but which they will see as confirmed recently by their own gains in economic power, their weapons advances, and the sharp polit­ ical disturbances in the non-Communist world. At the same time, they appear to believe that the strength of the Western states continues to be formidable and that it should not be frontally challenged. 222. Consequently, the main strategy of Communist policy contin­ ues to be that of reducing the Western power position by gradualist means and enhancing that of the Bloc. The Soviet leaders probably list their principal objectives over the next few years as follows: (a) reinforc­ ing the unity of the Communist Bloc and pushing rapidly its growth in military and economic power; (b) encouraging political divisions within the non-Communist world, particularly with a view to isolating the US and constricting the deployment of its military power and the extent of its political influence; (c) seizing whatever opportunities may offer for alignment of non-Communist states with the Bloc, and, where expedient, for outright territorial expansion of Communist power. 223. The means which the Soviet leaders intend to employ in pur­ suing these objectives are various. As indicated, they will of course push the actual expansion of their own economic and military power base as rapidly as they can. They see this as the foundation of their policy. But they will also use all the means at their command to make it widely believed that Communist power is great and growing, that in some important respects it already outpaces the West, and that the future belongs to their kind of society and their power system. To project
