1428 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Finally, I note your anxiety about the state of world opinion. I had thought that a statement on the lines originally proposed might seem to be a little precipitate and that there was time for us to proceed in a more deliberate way. This is after all a pretty serious step and it did not seem unreasonable that we should spend a little more time in consid­ ering it. But I do understand, especially in view of what you say in the second paragraph of your message, that you think it important to pro­ ceed more quickly in order to recover the initiative with world opinion; and, as you will have seen from the separate massage which I have sent to Foster, we are prepared to go along with you in this and to make a parallel statement in support of yours. With warm regards, As ever, Harold Macmillan 368. Message From Macmillan to Eisenhower1 London, August 20, 1958 My dear Friend, I promised a second message on the political considerations about the statement which you are thinking of making when the report of the Geneva Conference appears. I fully agree that we must make some public response to that report but I doubt whether it justifies us in going as fast as you propose in the draft statement which Foster gave to Selwyn in New York. It is true that the report will demonstrate the theoretical possibility of controlling a suspension of tests, and we ought to welcome it on that account. But we cannot yet say that we can see our way through the practical difficulties of putting this theoretical system into operation. There is an enormous prize to win. Both you and I have always felt that through the Geneva Meeting we might move towards the estab­ lishment on Soviet territory of some system of international control. Even though that system might be unsatisfactory and inefficient, it would at least have gained us a foothold which we could exploit. If we 1 Source: Urges postponement of statement on cessation of nuclear testing. Top Secret. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan to Eisenhower.
