Flights for other purposes exceed 22,000 miles each day. Over 900 airports,
completed and uncompleted, have been laid out. The demand for aircraft
has greatly increased. The policy already adopted by the Congress is
producing the sound development of this coming industry.
WESTERN HEMISPHERE AIR MAIL
Private enterprise is showing much interest in opening up aviation service
to Mexico and Central and South America. We are particularly solicitous to
have the United States take a leading part in this development. It is
understood that the governments of our sister countries would be willing to
cooperate. Their physical features, the undeveloped state of their
transportation, make an air service especially adaptable to their usage. The
Post Office Department should be granted power to make liberal long-term
contracts for carrying our mail, and authority should be given to the Army
and the Navy to detail aviators and planes to cooperate with private
enterprise in establishing such mail service with the consent of the countries
concerned. A committee of the Cabinet will later present a report on this
subject.
GOOD ROADS
The importance and benefit of good roads is more and more coming to be
appreciated. The National Government has been making liberal
contributions to encourage their construction. The results and benefits have
been very gratifying. National participation, however, should be confined to
trunk-line systems. The national tax on automobiles is now nearly sufficient
to meet this outlay. This tax is very small, and on low-priced cars is not
more than $2 or $3 each year.
While the advantage of having good roads is very large, the desire for
improved highways is not limited to our own country. It should and does
include all the Western Hemisphere. The principal points in Canada are
already accessible. We ought to lend our encouragement in any way we can
for more good roads to all the principal points in this hemisphere south of
the Rio Grande. It has been our practice to supply these countries with
military and naval advisers, when they have requested it, to assist them in
national defense. The arts of peace are even more important to them and to
