1096 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI — Can accept same throw weight value (22.5) for the cap on increase in throw weight of existing missiles. (FYI: We don’t want the cap to be higher than 22.5) Points to make: The new types definition is important because we have one set of rules for existing missiles and another set for new types of missiles. We need a meaningful way to distinguish the two. The exchange of letters between our presidents has brought us close on this. We are prepared to go the rest of the way and settle this. This subject is closely connected with the subject we haven’t talked about yet—downloading. Assuming a resolution there, we can move to close new types: — We can accept a throw weight number substantially lower than at least 30, as in the president’s letter. — And we can agree to use the same number for the cap on the throw weight of existing missiles, something Obukhov raised with Reg in Geneva. — We would need agreement on rigorous ways of measuring both the increase in throw weight and the change in length. That will need to be part of the package. Reg and the others can spell this out in more detail, but that will need to be nailed down. This is a big move on our part, and involves real risks. It will make the treaty harder to verify, and harder to defend. We are only prepared to do this if we are at the end of the negotiations. (In the context of resolution on downloading:) We can close with 22.5 as the throw weight number in the new types definition, and the same number for the throw weight cap on existing types. This solution is contingent on agreement on a rigorous way to measure and compare the throw weights of the new missile and its predecessor, and a rigorous way to measure and compare the length of the new missile and its predecessor. We don’t have an agreement on new types until these are settled; experts need to resolve them. Downloading Soviet position: — Change attribution of the Soviet SS–N–18 from 7 to 3; US can download Minuteman III from 3 to 2 or 1 before entry into force. — In addition both sides could download 2 other existing types by up to 4 RVs each and a maximum of 750 RVs.
