Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
357
not give us that luxury. Moreover, the Soviets tend to respect a broadly
gauged approach. A realistic and non-belligerent toughness draws
from them a respectful response. Eagerness or a narrowly focused ne-
gotiating attitude tends to be exploited.
There are also a number of specific actions and events that need to
be orchestrated to support your overall objectives:
—Africa: We need to intensify our political effort to call attention to
Soviet/Cuban intervention. We should encourage the Yugoslavs and
Algerians who are questioning Cuba’s non-aligned credentials—some-
thing that apparently troubles the Cubans significantly.8 We should
also see, in our proposed private, direct contacts with the Cubans, if we
cannot discourage further adventures in Eritrea and Southern Africa,
holding out the prospects of significant steps in normalization.
—NATO: The Summit Meeting9 will provide an important oppor-
tunity to stress your concern for security issues and to repair whatever
strains may exist as a result of the neutron bomb episode.10 We should
make this a significant event in your Presidency, including major ac-
complishments in terms of both political content and adoption of allied
defense programs. Given the stresses of the last few weeks, we believe
we will be in a strong position to press the Allies to be forthcoming on
the long-term defense program. We should also stress the importance of a
Soviet response to our MBFR initiative which will be tabled next week.11
—Defense Debate: There is strong Hill pressure for an increase in
defense spending above your budget. I believe it is important that we
not simply resist these increases across the board but, rather, indicate
we are prepared to accept some increase and work to shape those in-
creases that will take place. I have in mind, for example, acceleration of
the MX/Trident II missile and a modest Continental Air Defense
package, both aimed at diminishing opposition to SALT.12
—China: We are putting together a strong technology package and
program for the China trip. We should also emphasize some other se-
8 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote “I agree.” In
the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote “Should support Owen on
Cuba troop estimate.”
9 See footnote 2, Document 72.
10 On April 7, the President released a statement indicating that he had decided to
“defer production of weapons with enhanced radiation effects.” The statement under-
scored that the Carter administration would continue to consult with Western European
allies and discuss “appropriate arms control measures” to broach with Soviet officials.
(Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, p. 702) Documentation on ERW is scheduled for publi-
cation in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. V, European Security, 1978–1983.
11 The President underlined “our MBFR initiative” and wrote “what is it?” in the
right-hand margin next to this sentence.
12 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote “good items if
budget increased.”
