March 27–December 31, 1979 1061 are a constant aggravation to us. It is hard to say to the French that Israel works for peace if it builds settlements. He knows that the number of settlers is small. The settlements have symbolic importance for Israel; but on the contrary, they have extreme symbolic importance as well. He has had a long-standing argument with Begin and others about this. Begin has seen public opinion polls for the US, that indicate that the support and esteem for Israel have gone down, because of a few dozen settlers. This (reduction in esteem) is of great concern to him (the President). He doesn’t know how important the settlements are for Israel: for the majority coalition, yes, but in popular opinion he doesn’t know, he is not a good judge. But for him, for the Europeans, and for the moderate Arabs it would be easier to reach the ultimate objective of peace if this obstacle were overcome. Jerusalem is something to be dealt with down the line. The Saudis would protest, but must accept, the Camp David paragraph on Jerusalem, perhaps modified. The Minister should not underestimate Sol Linowitz’s ability. He is superb. He is a highly qualified negotiator and lawyer. He (the President) would guess that Begin and Sol would find it easier to deal with one another than Begin and Strauss. Minister Weizman said he believes this is right. The President said that Sol sees both sides. He works to bypass catch phrases that are difficult. In the next month or so—up to the exchange of ambassadors—Sol will be a student, and can make some progress. Later, his work will pay rich dividends. On this side of the ocean, Sol is more compatible with Cy and with the State Department than Strauss. He wants to tell the Minister this so that there will be no feeling in Israel of a reduction of interest because he put Linowitz in place of Strauss. There is no lessening of commitment or interest, and Eppy will agree with that. He (the President) is available. Minister Weizman said he knew Sol from the time he was in business. The President said that he is a top man. Minister Weizman said that he had lunch with Sol. The President said that Sol is quiet, does not brag, and is willing to give credit to others. Minister Weizman said that Sol is a clever man. The President said that Sol has a way with words. We would never have got the Panama Canal Treaties without him. Minister Weizman said it was good that Sol was not at Camp David, or they would only have been able to be there a week! The President said that Panama took 14 years. In part, this was because his predecessors didn’t bring them to conclusion; they couldn’t find the right words. Sol is a treasure.
