January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1065
327.
Editorial Note
On January 7, 1980, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin ar-
rived in Egypt for a four-day official visit to the country. The center-
piece of the visit was Begin’s summit meeting with Egyptian President
Anwar al-Sadat in the Egyptian city of Aswan, the ninth since Sadat’s
1977 trip to Jerusalem. The two leaders held three substantive conver-
sations spread over two days. At the first, the two leaders agreed to
proceed with the normalization of relations, including the exchange of
ambassadors, the establishment of an air transport link between the
two countries, as well as the opening of telephone lines and postal ser-
vices. The second meeting was concerned with the current state of the
autonomy negotiations, with considerable differences emerging over
the interpretation of the proposed Palestinian self-governing authority
and the future status of Jerusalem. Moreover, no agreement to increase
the pace of negotiations was reached. Sadat and Begin also discussed
the impact of political developments in Iran and Saudi Arabia, as well
as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, upon the Middle East, agreeing
that these developments posed dangers for the region. Although it was
not discussed, the Egyptian Minister of Defense, Kamal Hassan Ali,
had earlier stated in an interview with The Washington Post, that the
United States would be allowed to use Egyptian military facilities on a
“temporary basis to defend any Arab state,” but would not allow any
permanent U.S. bases in his country. (“Egypt Offers Bases for Limited
U.S. Use,” The Washington Post, January 8, 1980, page A14)
Upon his return to Israel, Begin telephoned President Jimmy
Carter to provide the President with his impressions of the summit. Ac-
cording to the President’s Daily Diary, the two leaders spoke from
10:06 a.m. to 10:08 a.m. and from 10:47 a.m. to 10:58 a.m. on January 10.
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials) Although no memorandum of
conversation of this meeting has been found, Carter’s handwritten
notes from this telephone conversation are in the Carter Library, Plains
File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 4/79–
11/81. Begin provided Ambassador to Israel Samuel W. Lewis a more
substantial briefing in a meeting on January 14, in which Begin con-
veyed his disappointment that no agreement on “moving the negotia-
tions ahead” had been made, but stated that he and Sadat had a
“common language” on strategic issues. Lewis provided a summary of
this meeting to the Department of State in telegram 846 from Tel Aviv,
January 14. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P880145–0625) Similarly, Sadat provided the Ambassador to Egypt, Al-
fred L. Atherton, Jr., with his impressions of the Aswan summit in a
meeting between them on January 12. During the course of the
meeting, Sadat stated that he had told Begin that Egypt and Israel
