1592  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Significance of these Sov questions may of course be primarily 
along lines of trying to find out what we are going to do and specifically 
whether early break by US in prospect. But it is difficult to interpret 
questions as not also indicating possible sov receptivity to idea of recess 
for period of Macmillan’s talks and Easter.
Accordingly we feel today that it might be easier than we had 
assumed yesterday to secure Sov agreement to a recess of three weeks 
or so after the next few days.
Since Easter comes on the 29th of month it would seem easy to 
justify a recess until at least a few days after that date.
As a matter of fact if there is any possibility that the UK position 
in Washington talks is such that we find it necessary to continue these 
negotiations for considerable period a recess which lasted for some 
time after the end of Macmillan visit would be highly opportune. In 
that event we would need through consultation and decisions as to 
how we were going to proceed. I feel justified by the Russian questions 
today and by the possible contingency that there might be a decision 
for further negotiations to put more strongly the recommendation for 
an immediate recess with a resumption date which I put forward in my 
yesterday’s message.
Villard
437.	 Telegram Supnu 328 From Geneva1
Geneva, March 10, 1959, 6 p.m.
Supnu 328. Eyes only for Herter from Wadsworth.
Attitude of SovDel continues be most friendly and inclined be con­
fidential. In three separate conversations this afternoon after plenary 
session following points raised and indications made.
1. Tsarapkin approached me and brought up subject of head­
quarters staffing in most friendly and cooperative way, after which he 
inquired concerning US plans for tabling further articles and virtually 
admitted he had no instructions for definite action. Also welcomed idea 
1 Source: Further indications Soviets would agree to a recess. Secret. 2 pp. NARA, 
RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/3–1059.
