Human Rights 305 full and complete report regarding the steps he has taken to carry out the provisions of this section.” Twenty-nine countries are scheduled to receive PL 480, Title I assistance during FY 78. They are listed under Tab 1.3 State, AID and Agriculture are complying with the new statutory requirement set forth above by seeking to include a new provision in the FY 78, PL 480, Title I agreements with certain countries. The new provision, calling for assurances that the food or the proceeds therefrom are used for needy people, is attached under Tab 2.4 (With Herb Hansell’s help, we are preparing a simplified version of the requested assurances.)5 In considering which of the 29 recipient countries ought to be asked to agree to the new provision, we assessed the possibility of only including countries engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights (“gross and consistent violators”). However, of the 29 countries on the overall list, none has thus far been formally determined to be a gross and consistent violator. While some of the countries on the list are arguably in that category, it has been our view that a formal designation to that effect is not a particularly useful policy tool and has many obvious disadvantages. Yet any effort to confine our application of the new statutory provision to gross and consistent violations would almost certainly result in the designation of several of the 29 countries. Accordingly, we concluded it would be a mistake to ask only countries designated gross and consistent violators to agree to the new provision. As another possibility, we considered seeking to include the new language in the agreements with all 29 countries. The claimed benefit of this approach was that it would avoid singling out any countries as human rights violators. However, AID and Agriculture were strongly opposed to this course of action because of the considerable additional 3 A listing of countries, entitled “Countries Scheduled to Receive PL 480, Title I Assistance During FY 78,” is attached but not printed. The countries included Afghanistan, Bangladesh, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Korea, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Tanzania, Tunisia, Zaire, and Zambia. 4 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “New Provision for Inclusion in Certain FY 78, PL 480, Title I Agreements.” The provision required an accounting of self-help measures and the ways in which such measures stood to benefit the needy and committed the recipient government to report on progress concerning implementation of programs and projects. 5 In a November 10 memorandum to Schneider and Silverstone, Michel put forth L’s approach to implementing Section 112, one that “accommodates the major concerns of both D/HA and AID.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 18, Human Rights—PL 480 III) In a handwritten note attached to the memorandum, dated May 29, 1978, Oxman asked Michel: “Jim—Did anything ever come of this?”
