Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 three wars began in Asia, and the only foreign attacks on American soil since 1812 occurred in the Pacific. Another important dimension of America’s Asian character is of particular significance to the Western States—the cultural and ethnic bonds provided by the people who have immigrated here from the Orient. Asian-Americans have contributed to all aspects of American life since the middle of the last century. In the States which you represent, over 2 million people, or about 5½% of the population, claim an Asian heritage. Our host State of Hawaii provides one of the best examples of the influence and role of Asian-Americans in our society. While the fundamental nature of our nation’s involvement in Asia and the Pacific is timeless, we have already entered a new era in the region, and it is time to recognize it. It is an era filled with hope and the promise of stability, prosperity, and the emergence of a genuine Pacific community. But this hope can be realized and the promise fulfilled only if the United States plays a major economic role and fulfills its responsibility to help maintain the strategic balance. Adjusting to Circumstances Our policy objectives are thus clear. To achieve them requires some adjustment to the changed circumstances we now find in Asia. What are some of these changes? What are the new perspectives? The fall of Saigon marked the end of a 30-year period of history that began with the collapse of the European and Japanese colonial empires in Asia between 1944 and 1954. Playing a remarkable new role in world affairs, the United States filled part of the resulting vacuum by supporting heavily many of the new nations of the region, while Communist states were established in China, North Korea, and North Vietnam. In this period, American policy produced some striking successes and many enduring relationships. Our presence allowed many newly independent countries to buy time, time which was often well used. The reconstruction of Japan, the economic miracles in Taiwan and Korea, and the evolution of the members of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) into strong and viable nations are remarkable successes in which we played a major role. But the period also saw our intervention in Indochina, and this triggered the most divisive foreign policy debate the country has ever known, a debate which has left hidden scars and persistent myths among both former “hawks” and former “doves.” But as we debated our proper role in Asia, Asia itself was changing rapidly—and dramatically—and not quite the way many expected it to change. A few years ago, many predicted that, if Vietnam fell, we would be entering a period of declining stability as a voracious Communist monolith rolled over economically weak and politically shaky
