452 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement possibility of a loan for road construction and maintenance. As Allan in his letter of March 3, 1960,6 indicated, on March 2, 1960, the IBRD sent a letter to the Costa Ricans inquiring as to their interest in discussing a loan of from $5–$8 million for the Plan Vial. Another letter was sent about a month ago.7 Thus far, the Costa Ricans have failed to reply to these IBRD requests for an indication of interest in pursuing negotiations on this loan project. We understand that budgetary difficulties have delayed approval of the generation of local funds for the Plan Vial but no official Costa Rican explanation of this delay has been received by the IBRD. Suggestion No. 4. Additional Sugar Purchases: You have already been informed of the Department of Agriculture regulation of July 21, 1960, which resulted in an extraordinary opportunity for Costa Rica to market some 6,267 tons of refined sugar in the United States by September 30, whereas, the previous increased quota opportunity had applied only to raw sugar. This provides a special benefit to Costa Rica which we took pains to convey to the Costa Rican Sugar Board through Ambassador Escalante. Another “bonus” of 234 tons for Costa Rica was just announced on August 1 by Agriculture. Costa Rica was given special consideration in the recent Sugar Act,8 and I am sure you appreciate that additional special treatment to Costa Rica is not justified since Costa Rica has not been a traditional exporter of sugar on any appreciable scale. We shall continue, however, to consider Costa Rica in the context of its role as a marginal supplier. I am sure you will agree that in this letter I have reviewed at length the suggestions contained in your reference letter and despatch. I hope you will agree, also, that on record we have not been lax or remiss in our efforts to offer every reasonable facility to the Costa Ricans in their requests for assistance on the specific points you have raised. Frankly, I am convinced that the Costa Ricans for one reason or another have failed to take full advantage of the facilities for economic assistance offered to them. With best personal regards, Sincerely yours, R. R. Rubottom, Jr. 6 Not found in Department of State files. 7 The IBRD letter under reference was not further identified. 8 Reference is to Public Law 86–592, approved July 6, 1960, which authorized the President to cut the quota of U.S. purchases of sugar from Cuba and to reassign these purchases to domestic and foreign suppliers. (74 Stat. 330) Costa Rica’s final allocation for 1960 after the Cuban cut was 10,469 short tons. (Congressional Quarterly Almanac, 1961, vol. XVII, p. 126)
