Covert and Overt Operations
841
308.
Editorial Note
In early July 1980, the impending death of the Shah and whether
the United States should have an official presence at his funeral, as
well as the kind of statement the United States should issue on his
death, became an issue of discussion between the Department of State
and the National Security Council Staff.
Zbigniew Brzezinski, the President’s Assistant for National Secu-
rity Affairs, wrote President Jimmy Carter a July 2 note advising that
he should be aware of the draft telegram with instructions to U.S.
Ambassador to Egypt Alfred (Roy) Atherton (see footnote 3, Document
303). Brzezinski suggested that the United States not send an official
delegation to the funeral, but that Atherton attend the funeral. Carter
approved these points, writing “ok” beside the first point, and “I agree”
in the right margin beside the second. Carter also approved contingency
draft letters of condolence. (Note from Brzezinski to Carter, July 2;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 33, Iran Update 9/80)
The revised instructions were sent in telegram 175165 to Cairo,
July 3, in which Atherton was instructed to attend an official funeral.
He was also instructed to consult with influential members of the
diplomatic corps in Cairo, especially EC–9 members. If only a few
Chiefs of Mission planned to attend the Shah’s funeral, then Atherton
was to request additional instructions from the Department and inform
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat of U.S. concerns before Sadat made
“definite and possibly elaborate arrangements for funeral and mourn-
ing.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–
2626) The draft of this telegram is described in footnote 3, Document
303.
Carter’s decisions were also conveyed to Henry Precht, Director
of the Office of Iranian Affairs in the Bureau of Near Eastern and South
Asian Affairs and member of the Iran Working Group, through Gary
Sick of the National Security Council Staff. At Sick’s request, Precht
prepared two letters of condolence and a press guidance to be used in
the event of the Shah’s death. Sick approved the condolence letters,
but informed Brzezinski that the press guidance specifically linked
Atherton’s attendance at the funeral to a decision by the diplomatic
corps in Cairo. Sick noted that his own understanding had been that
“Atherton was instructed to attend at the invitation of President Sadat”
without mentioning the diplomatic corps. Brzezinski agreed with Sick.
(Memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski, July 5, condolence letters and
Press Guidance attached; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 31, Iran 6/80–7/80) On another
copy of this same memorandum, David Aaron, the President’s Deputy
