3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
88
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
tary said he would be less than frank if he did not tell Gromyko that
there will be some in Congress who will ask why these treaties should
be signed, in view of the fact that a comprehensive test ban treaty was
being urged by the Administration. The comprehensive test ban could
be strongly supported by the administration and he believed that this
would be an indication of our wish to cooperate with the Soviet Union
and strengthen our bilateral relations.
Gromyko suggested that the Secretary explain to those who do not
understand that these agreements do not run counter or contradict the
other one.
The Secretary said that we will argue that these agreements are
steps on the way to a comprehensive test ban.
Gromyko said it would be good if progress were achieved. He
would also point out that their own instruments (national means) here
in Moscow had so far registered even weak explosions.
The Secretary was sure that our efforts to get ratification would be
aided if both our countries were clearly cooperating toward achieve-
ment of a comprehensive test ban.
Gromyko suggested that we not only cooperate on the technical as-
pects of verifying peaceful nuclear explosions, but also make the coop-
erative work much more intensive than it was now.
The Secretary said he found this idea very interesting. He would
point out, however, that we had grave concerns for allowing exceptions
for peaceful nuclear explosions. The reason for that was that it was al-
most impossible to conduct peaceful explosions without weapons-
related benefits. Therefore, we favored elimination of all nuclear
explosions.
Gromyko asked what exceptions the Secretary had in mind. After
all, there were provisions for verification. He would suggest that those
who shouted the loudest in the US be sent along as observers on PNE
verification assignments.
The Secretary agreed that verification was one of the matters that
needed to be pursued further. However, experts in the area said that
even with verification it would be possible to develop information that
was contrary to a comprehensive test ban. Therefore, he would suggest
that we have our respective experts get together for bilateral discussion
of this subject in the near future.
Gromyko did not believe there would be any insuperable obstacles
in the way of resolving this problem. One should not forget that all
along in the course of discussing these matters on a bilateral basis the
Soviets had proceeded from the premise that there was a significant
difference between weapons testing and PNE. It was for this reason
that they had signed the two treaties. He would suggest to the Secretary
