Afghanistan 61 26. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, July 14, 1978, 0505Z 5670. Subject: Under Secretary Newsom’s Discussions in Kabul. 1. Summary: Under Secretary Newsom called July 13 on President Taraki, Foreign Minister Amin and Deputy Foreign Minister Dost. Afghan leadership emphasized desire for friendly relations with all countries and preoccupation with internal reform and development as hallmark of new government. They stressed intention to preserve Afghan independence and need for economic assistance from major powers. GOA does have differences with Pakistan and Iran over the Durand Line and the Helmand waters but desires peaceful solution and must study issues thoroughly before opening any negotiations. They expressed genuine desire for good relations with U.S. and want U.S. economic assistance to continue. Newsom thoroughly explained factors affecting U.S. ability to continue to provide help and conveyed U.S. desire that close relations continue as well as U.S. support for sovereign and independent Afghanistan. Taraki said GOA will follow policy of genuine non-alignment and will not allow foreign troops in Afghanistan. Puerto Rico, prisoners and narcotics also raised. 2. U.S. views: In all of his calls, Newsom explained that there were many questions in the U.S. about the policies of the new Afghan Government and he was here to obtain GOA views first-hand and to determine whether there would be any barriers to good relations with the U.S. in the future.2 He wished to convey U.S. desire to continue close relations and U.S. support for the sovereignty and independence of Afghanistan. U.S. hopes the GOA will follow a policy of genuine non-alignment, otherwise, there could be difficulties in our relations. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780288–0783. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to Bonn, Islamabad, Jidda, London, Moscow, New Delhi, Paris, and Tehran. 2 Newsom visited Afghanistan as part of a regional trip, July 9–22, undertaken at Vance’s request. The trip included stops in Iran, India, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia. He reported on his trip during a Presidential Review Committee meeting, July 27. Newsom noted that he had explained in meetings with Amin and Taraki that the United States wanted to maintain good relations with Afghanistan, including the maintenance of aid programs, but that the increasingly close ties between the Afghan Khalq Party and the Soviet Union could jeopardize ongoing aid because U.S. legislation prohibited aid to Communist countries. According to notes from the meeting on this problem, the committee members “agreed that there was not a feasible alternative to the course we are following.” (Carter Library, National Security Council Institutional Files, 1977–1981, Box 70, PRC 067, 7/27/78, Newsom’s Trip re: South East Asia Issues) 22 USC 2370 (f) prohibits any assistance to Communist countries.
