Human Rights 485 human rights conditions are changing, where such conditions are a significant impediment in our bilateral relationship, or where reporting has been minimal. Posts should also be asked for their views on what can realistically be expected in the way of human rights improvements. Posts should be encouraged to solicit the views of AID and ICA personnel abroad on human rights conditions. Any additional instructions should go to the field by July 20. —that the Regional Bureaus in consultation with the relevant functional bureaus should provide to HA by August 13 a one or two page summary for selected countries of steps taken and planned for integrating human rights concerns into the development and implementation of our economic, security, cultural and other bilateral and multilateral programs and policies for those countries. The Bureaus may suggest formats they deem most appropriate for these summary programs. 148. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva and the Mission to the United Nations1 Washington, June 23, 1978, 1953Z 160486. For Ambassador Vanden Heuvel from Maynes. Subject: Human Rights—Proposed Strategy Session. Ref: Geneva 08839.2 1. I appreciate your taking the initiative to follow up on the consensus of the IO Chiefs of Mission meeting that we needed to do more to ensure that our multilateral efforts in the human rights field adequately reinforce our bilateral policy efforts. In this light, the Department therefore welcomes your proposal that we make an intensive effort to further integrate our bilateral and multilateral human rights efforts. 2. At the same time, I believe that it will be very difficult to hold the meeting you suggest in Geneva. Throughout the summer, IO has a very carefully balanced series of trips planned as part of our pre-General Assembly consultation effort with other member governments. It would 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 8, Memoranda to Bureaus—1978. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Maynes; cleared by Derian and Lamb; approved by Maynes. Christopher sent a copy of the telegram to Maynes under a June 25 handwritten note, commenting: “Bill—This is a very good way to handle this. Thanks. Chris.” (Ibid.) 2 See Document 146.
