218 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 21. Wang then raised objection to word “now” in para one Chinese section although he said appropriate to keep it in American section. He said people would misunderstand actual situation and think Ameri­ cans could not depart from China before these talks whereas actually over 1500 Americans had left China. 22. I replied impression would be given talks had not accom­ plished anything and situation no different from past. Furthermore, paragraphs would thus be identical. 23. Wang said “now” should remain in American paragraph because in past we prevented Chinese from leaving and now we had removed restrictions, so word appropriate in American section but not in Chinese section. 24. I replied I could not see his distinction because thousands of Chinese had also left US before these talks. Furthermore, we had made concessions in order that both paragraphs could be identical and we had accepted phrase “and will further adopt” which did not really apply to our case, but we agreed to it in deference to his desires. 25. Wang said there was a great distinction between a country which restricted departure and one which did not. He would accept anything which conformed with actual situation, but not otherwise. 26. I replied sorry we were not as close to agreement as I thought we were. Furthermore, any American who desired to leave in past had not been able to do so. 27. Wang said he had not raised question of word “now” at last meeting because we had indicated this change from his draft. 28. I said if he would agree to this draft I felt sure we could reach agreement on text next meeting and release announcement. How­ ever, if his intention now to introduce concept different wording two paragraphs there were many changes to be made and entire question reopened. 29. Wang said most important word is “now,” and they could not agree on its inclusion their paragraph. 30. I replied if we eliminated it, it would make two paragraphs different and also it would indicate we were not announcing something of real substance. 31. Wang said no matter how we explained it, he could not accept the word. He then turned to discussion “in any such case.” 32. I asked again if he objected in principle to idea it conveyed. 33. He said idea completely contained in paragraph and not at all necessary add these words on end. 34. I said we should not leave anything implied that could be clearly stated. It was consistent with rest of paragraph and necessary
