1230  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
He said that it had been assumed from the beginning that Larrazábal 
would win in Caracas but that the younger wing of AD had been per-
mitted to assume the primary responsibility for keeping Larrazábal’s 
plurality in Caracas as low as possible. These younger members of 
AD had obviously failed in their responsibility and as a result had lost 
standing in the party. He said that they spent too much of their time 
talking and writing and not enough in direct contact with the people.
Speaking again of the problems which his administration will face, 
he said that he considers unemployment perhaps the greatest one. He 
spoke also of the educational problem and of the necessity for agrarian 
reform. He by no means seemed overwhelmed by the problems which 
he will face however, saying that the wealth of the country should 
make it easy to face and handle these problems. Venezuela is not like 
Bolivia, Betancourt said. With reference to increasing the income of the 
government Betancourt made specific reference to the income from the 
petroleum industry; he mentioned also in passing Venezuela’s iron ore 
but his emphasis was primarily on petroleum. He made it clear that 
there will be a revision of the arrangement for the sharing of income 
between the petroleum industry and the Venezuelan Government, but 
he said that this revision will be on the basis of bi-­lateral negotiations 
and not by government fiat. Likewise, he said the Government would 
not enter into negotiations on the basis of a prior commitment to any 
fixed ratio (such as 65–35 or anything like that) but would, rather, begin 
the discussions with a completely open mind as to what the final out-
come might be.
At various points during the conversation Betancourt made clear 
his position with reference to the Communists and to Communism in 
general. He recognized the danger and the threat which the Communists 
represent in Venezuela but he showed full confidence that he could 
meet and defeat that threat. He said emphatically the Communists will 
have no part in his Government and he said also that when he says 
no he means no, and when he says yes he means yes - as any of his 
American friends know. With reference to the recognition of the Soviet 
Government he said this is a matter which will receive very careful 
study. He said it is not an easy matter to resolve, particularly when one 
remembers that a number of American nations have relations with the 
Soviet, such as the United States, Mexico, Argentina, Uruguay, etc., but 
that no urgent decision is necessary, and that in any event it will be 
given very careful study before action is taken.
Betancourt emphasized that he is a friend of the United States and 
that he has always been treated well by the Department of State. He 
said he has not always agreed with Department of State policies but he 
has no complaint as to his treatment by the Department. He said that 
one of the decisions with which he disagreed was the decision by the
