January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1137
pointed out to him that there had been some real advances in a number
of important areas which augured well for the future of the negotia-
tions. He had read all of the cables and was, therefore, fully familiar
with what had transpired except for the report of my last meeting with
Sadat the day previous.
The President thought that making use of the Coordinating Com-
mittee6 for dealing with certain issues such as Water might be a good
idea and at first blush felt that the addition of the United States to the
Coordinating Committee would make sense. He agreed that this tactic
might permit us to finesse the difficult problem of trying to work out
details and answer Egyptian concern about trying to negotiate details
for the Palestinians. I also told the President about the approach to
avoiding the problem of transfer of authority by specifically listing the
powers to be exercised and the notion of trying to shoot for getting
Heads of Agreement agreed to by May 26th. He indicated that the term
“Heads of Agreement” was new to him, and I explained it.
I also told him that we had made very little progress on the
problem of the Arabs in East Jerusalem although Begin had seemed to
be attracted by my reference to the absentee ballot to be exercised out-
side of East Jerusalem by the Palestinians who are now in East Jeru-
salem and who, as Jordanian citizens, apparently have the right to vote
in Jordanian elections. As to settlements, I told the President that I had
been unable to get the freeze until May 26 which I had tried to extract
from Begin, but I thought it not impossible he would be willing to do
something about it when he came to Washington. On the Security
Committee I was confident that Begin is ready to agree to that and
probably when he is in Washington. I also told him of Sadat’s sugges-
tion of a Gaza First approach, and the President said he thought Sadat
had long been too optimistic about his ability to get the Gaza Pales-
tinians to cooperate.
I tried to explain to the President why Begin seemed to be so in-
transigent and that his primary concern is the possibility of an inde-
pendent Palestinian State. I pointed out that Begin needs reassurance
on that score and needs to be told that Israel’s security will be pre-
served. I also told the President that Begin feels that the President
thinks that Begin went back on his promise to him about a settlements
freeze following the Camp David talks. I pointed out that there was ob-
rity Committee, was conveyed to Carter and Vance in telegram 8 from USDEL AMVIP
Linowitz Aircraft, March 28. In addition, it was agreed at Alexandria that Egypt would
drop its demand that the SGA receive all of the powers currently accorded to the military
government, and that “certain unassigned areas—such as water,” and “residual powers”
be placed under the aegis of the Continuing Committee. (Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 5, Autonomy Talks: 3/80)
6 Reference is to the Continuing Committee.
