Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX in negotiating it. Finally, after long argument, Israel accepted this principle. The Secretary said that Israeli settlements on the West Bank would be handled in accordance with the letter to be published next week. In essence, Israel has agreed not to create any new settlements while negotiations are underway for a West Bank transitional regime. The question of future settlements will be subject to agreement among the negotiating parties setting up the regime. Fahd said this was good work on President Carter’s part. He read the Saudi government’s Arabic language translation of the appropriate section of the agreement. The Secretary continued there is an Israeli commitment to work out procedures promptly on the persons displaced in 1967. Dayan said that he thought most of the 1967 refugees will return and that a place could be found for them. Fahd said that the important thing is that the Palestinians outside the area be given the choice of returning. The Secretary continued that in addition to the gains he had just mentioned from the Arab point of view, the Camp David agreements offer important strategic advantages. They provide a basis around which moderate forces in the area, with the support of the United States and our friends, can rally and expand the position and influence of moderate Arabs in the area. The Secretary said he thought this of strategic importance. A major motivation in the President’s mind at Camp David was to strengthen moderate forces by means of establishing a peace framework that would break the stalemate which provided an opportunity for radicals to move in. This is a critical moment for the moderates as we look around the area. At this moment, we feel moderate forces in the Arab world are looking to Saudi Arabia and the United States for leadership. We believe and hope Saudi Arabia will play a key role in seizing the opportunity. We can understand that Saudi Arabia will want to consult with its friends in the Arab world. As the Saudis do so President Carter wants to make very clear he remains fully committed to the role of a full partner in seeing this through. Now, with Camp David achieved, we are not going to walk away and cease to pay attention. We are going to see it through. Fahd said that at this time not just governments but individuals in a position to be influential must do what they can with the stalemate broken to achieve a satisfactory solution. While there are others in Israel besides Begin who will take tough positions which are not in Israel’s interest, there are persons of reason and good will who recognize the logic of peace. But the paramount question of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza and outside of it is what will happen after the transitional period. This is what the moderate Palestinians will ask the Saudis.
