1340 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. McCloy said that he was concerned also about reaching a test suspension agreement at the summit. The Soviet Union has made it clear that it will not talk about changing the status quo in Germany or Eastern Europe. And test suspension is a Soviet proposal; it would be better to take our action unilaterally rather than merely to say yes to a Soviet proposal. If the only agreement at a summit meeting is nuclear test suspension and Central Europe problems are not discussed, we will effectively have abrogated our position on German reunification and Eastern Europe, despite our protestations. Mr. Dulles said that he agreed with Mr. McCloy’s concern but our allies do not. Chancellor Adenauer wants disarmament as the sole agenda item for the summit. He will not insist on including German reunification for fear he will be charged with using that as an excuse to evade disarmament. Mr. Lovett said that he was strongly opposed to a summit meeting leading to agreement only on test suspension. If the United States was going to take this step it should be announced now. If some form of agreement is required that should be worked out at a foreign ministers meeting. General Gruenther recalled the difficulties arising from the attitude of the British and French toward nuclear tests and the British and German toward the need for a summit meeting. Mr. Dulles said that his point about German attitudes was to illustrate the popular pressure for disarmament in Germany. He remarked that the United States would insist on raising the question of German reunification even if no Europe ally did. Mr. Lovett and Mr. McCloy said that our agreement to suspend nuclear tests should be announced unilaterally, and thus taking the steam out of the pressure for a summit meeting. Mr. Dulles observed that this would make sense—it would then be absurd to have a summit meeting just to talk about the control posts and similar technical details. General Smith said that a summit meeting was probably unavoidable, but the danger would be greater if it occurred and led only to a test suspension agreement. Mr. Quarles said that he was skeptical that the United States would get any cold war gain from stating willingness to agree to test suspen­ sion on condition of adequate inspection. He thought that the United States faced a basic dilemma. We cannot escape from our responsibility to maintain adequate devastating striking forces in the face of Soviet power—until a fundamental solution is reached embracing inspection and world order. What we should say at a summit meeting is that we will take any step which will make progress toward such a fundamen­ tal solution. Mr. Killian remarked that inspection of a nuclear test sus­ pension would be a step toward such a solution.
