132  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
At the beginning of his remarks, Governor Hoegh referred to the 
simulated attack upon the United States in Operation Alert 1957, and 
indicated the difference between the effect of the use of “clean” nuclear 
weapons and “dirty” nuclear weapons in such an attack, with respect 
both to casualties from blast and thermal effects and casualties from 
radioactive fallout. His chart indicated that the total casualties (dead and 
injured) would have amounted to 51.3 million people if “dirty” nuclear 
weapons had been used by the enemy, and to 30.4 million people if only 
“clean” weapons had been used.
Thereafter, Governor Hoegh summarized the contents of the report 
of the Interdepartmental Committee (NSC 5807), including the terms of 
reference, the recommendations, and the conclusions.
When Governor Hoegh had completed his summary, General 
Cutler briefly commented, first, on the recommendations and the com­
ment of the NSC Planning Board. He pointed out that the majority of 
the Planning Board had endorsed the report by the Interdepartmental 
Committee; but, in addition to the measures to carry out the concept 
of shelter in the report itself, the Planning Board had also called for 
the preparation of three additional studies beyond those contemplated 
in NSC 5807. General Cutler also referred briefly to a fourth proposed 
study suggested by the ODM Planning Board Member, which neither 
the Planning Board nor the Joint Chiefs of Staff had viewed with favor 
at this time. He then pointed out that while the majority of the Planning 
Board had endorsed the measures set forth in NSC 5807, the Treas­ury, 
Defense, and Budget Planning Board Members had confined their rec­
ommendation to the research studies and the public education pro­
grams in NSC 5807, and recommended that the Council defer a decision 
on the remainder of the recommendations in NSC 5807. He noted that 
the Treasury Department, in explanation of this view, had submitted an 
Annex to the Planning Board report, in which it advocated deferring 
measures which would commit the nation to a network of large pub­
lic shelters. He thought it appropriate at this point to call on Secretary 
Anderson for further explanation of the Treasury’s point of view.
Secretary Anderson said that officials of the Treasury Department 
have given very careful thought to the report of the Interdepartmental 
Committee. He agreed with these officials that the decision with respect 
to the proposed measures was as significant a decision in the realm of 
domestic policy as the Government could take. First, he said, he wished 
to commend Governor Hoegh for reducing the broad and general rec­
ommendations of the Gaither Panel with respect to shelter, to something 
which was clear, tangible, and susceptible of being dealt with. The prob­
lem posed by a shelter program, continued Secretary Anderson, was 
not only a grave financial problem or merely a grave financial problem. 
The main problem lay in the fact that we simply do not know enough at 
present to determine whether to go ahead with a large Federal program
