452  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
tankers will probably remain fairly steady after 1960, while the total 
long-­range bomber strength will probably decline slightly.4
b. Further strengthening of Soviet air defenses will occur as a result 
of improved fighter performance, a higher proportion of improved all-­
weather fighters, better radar and communications equipment, and wide­
spread employment of improved surface-­to-­air and air-­to-­air missiles.
c. The Soviet ground forces have been extensively reorganized and 
modernized; further improvements in firepower and mobility are likely 
during 1958–62. Training and doctrine are being adapted for modern 
warfare, nuclear as well as non-­nuclear. We still estimate about 175 line 
divisions, but their actual strengths probably vary from somewhat in 
excess of 70 percent of war strength to as low as 30 percent. Increasing 
attention is being paid to airborne and air-­transportable forces, whose 
capabilities will increase considerably by 1962.
d. The Soviets are engaged in an extensive naval program, espe­
cially in the submarine category. There are recent indications that a 
shift to new designs of submarines may be in progress. Their subma­
rine force is estimated at about 475 at mid-1957, including nearly 300 
submarines of modern design. We estimate that the submarine force 
will approximate 560 submarines by mid-1962. The first submarine 
propulsion reactor could now be available, and by mid-1962 the USSR 
could probably produce about 20 nuclear-­powered submarines. A few 
converted missile-­launching submarines could now be in operation; 
and by mid-1962 the USSR may have a total of 50 in all categories of 
submarines equipped with guided missile armament.
I. INTERNAL POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS
The Victory of Khrushchev and the Party
24. During the past year Khrushchev has succeeded in re-­
establishing the Communist Party’s dominance over other elite groups 
in Soviet society and, within the leadership itself, has established his 
4 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that the USSR would 
regard it as essential to have a more substantial intercontinental attack capability, provid­
ing for greater strategic flexibility and a much larger capability for re-­attack—in short, a 
force which would provide the Soviets a greater chance of success in general war— while 
they are working to acquire an additional nuclear delivery capability with new weapon 
systems, including long-­range missiles. He therefore believes that the 400–600 heavy air­
craft estimated above would all be bombers and that by mid-1961 there will be 300–500 
additional aircraft as tankers in operational units.
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Deputy 
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, believe, on the other hand, that the number of 
heavy bomber/tanker aircraft and the total number of long- range aircraft are both more 
likely to approximate the lower than the higher figures given above. See their footnote on 
page 33. [Footnote is in the original. For reference footnote, see the footnotes following 
paragraph 139.]
