652 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement These meetings will be held in the Cabinet Room. The following four major areas will be considered in these special meetings: (1) Strategic nuclear striking force requirements and capabilities, including the “optimum mix” both of weapons systems and of targets. (References: NSC Actions Nos. 1846, 1994, 2009) (2) Continental defense against aircraft and missiles (excluding antisubmarine warfare). (References: NSC 5802/1; NSC Action No. 2009) (3) Control of the seas, with particular reference to antisubmarine warfare. (References: Report by the Panel on Antisubmarine Warfare of the President’s Science Advisory Committee dated December 1, 1958; Study being prepared for the President by the Comparative Evalua­ tions Group, pursuant to NSC 5815) (4) Tactical forces and requirements for tactical weapons systems. (References: Paragraph 14, NSC 5810/1; NSC Action No. 1934) I must say to you that as to the fourth area, I myself am not satis­ fied with the description of it and it may be that we should talk further about the scope and nature of this part of the overall study. However, I feel that it should be included and it seems to me that the kinds of questions asked with respect to it are appropriate. A useful procedure might be for you to have prepared a concise dis­ cussion paper on each topic which could be circulated in advance on an “Eyes Only” basis, one copy each, to those who will attend the special meetings. Any further reproduction and circulation would be subject to your determination. I should hope you would identify major issues and cast them in a form appropriate for discussion and consideration by the President. It would seem probable that major national security pol­ icy issues identified during these discussions would later be taken to the National Security Council. I am attaching a list of some of the kinds of policy questions which might be considered. I shall be glad to discuss with you further, as nec­ essary, the scope of coverage of the four topics. It would be helpful if you could indicate feasible target dates for each topic. I wish to confirm the withdrawal of the request contained in my memorandum of January 17, 1959, subject, “Presentation to the National Security Council on Aircraft Programs,” inasmuch as its purpose will be served by the plan above set forth. Gordon Gray Special Assistant to the President
