respect. It is true that we have extended to them very generous treatment,
but it is also true that they have agreed to repay us all that we loaned to
them and some interest.
A special conference on the Chinese customs tariff provided for by the
treaty between the nine powers relating to the Chinese customs tariff signed
at Washington on February 6, 1922, was called by the Chinese Government
to meet at Peking on October 26, 1925. We participated in this conference
through fully empowered delegates and, with good will, endeavored to
cooperate with the other participating powers with a view to putting into
effect promises made to China at the Washington conference, and
considering any reasonable proposal that might be made by the Chinese
Government for the revision of the treaties on the subject of China’s tariff.
With these aims in view the American delegation at the outset of the
conference proposed to put into effect the surtaxes provided for by the
Washington treaty and to proceed immediately to the negotiation of a treaty,
which, among other things, was to make provision for the abolition of taxes
collected on goods in transit, remove the tariff restrictions in existing
treaties, and put into effect the national tariff law of China.
Early in April of the present year the central Chinese Government was
ousted from power by opposing warring factions. It became impossible
under the circumstances to continue the negotiations. Finally, on July 3, the
delegates of the foreign powers, including those of the United States, issued
a statement expressing their unanimous and earnest desire to proceed with
the work of the conference at the earliest possible moment when the
delegates of the Chinese Government are in a position to resume
discussions with the foreign delegates of the problems before the
conference. We are prepared to resume the negotiations thus interrupted
whenever a Government representing the Chinese people and acting on
their behalf presents itself. The fact that constant warfare between
contending Chinese factions has rendered it impossible to bring these
negotiations to a successful conclusion is a matter of deep regret.
Throughout these conflicts we have maintained a position of the most
careful neutrality. Our naval vessels in Asiatic waters, pursuant to treaty
rights, have been used only for the protection of American citizens.
