Summary of Print Volume XLV the region (46). The violence was attributed by U.S. officials who accompanied the Vice President to be orchestrated by communist agents. The demonstrations prevented Nixon from carrying out many of his scheduled activities in Venezuela. An analysis of the Vice President’s trip made by the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs on May 15, the day of his return to Washington, concluded that the visit had essentially been a success from the United States’ standpoint, even in Peru and Venezuela. It argued that the confrontations had been directed primarily by communist-­led organizations and that the revulsion that the violence caused among the peoples of the countries visited by the official party would benefit the United States in Latin America (54). On May 22, the Vice President himself reported on his trip to the National Security Council indicating that the dangers of communism in Latin America were greater than at any time before. He was concerned that few of the democratically-­elected political figures with whom he had met properly understood the insidious nature of the threat in their countries. The people themselves, he believed, were more wary of the return of traditional right-­wing dictatorships than of the threat of communist-­led revolution (56). In view of the difficulties experienced by the Vice President’s official party in May, precautions were taken to ensure the safety of the President’s brother, Dr. Milton Eisenhower, during his subsequent goodwill trip to Central America that year. His trip was delayed from June to July 1958 while detailed reports from the Central Intelligence Agency and the appropriate embassies were prepared to assess the likelihood of anti- U.S. demonstrations during the visit (61, 64). The President, the Secretary of State, and the Director of Central Intelligence were all involved in the decision-­making process leading to the successful and peaceful trip of July 12–August 1 (66). In December 1959, Secretary of State Christian Herter and the National Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs urged President Eisenhower to visit South America to underscore U.S. interest in the region (68). On January 6, 1960, the White House announced that the President would visit Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay between February 23 and March 3. The trip was successful. President Eisenhower was greeted warmly and received favorable treatment in the local media (77). The volume turns next to the events surrounding the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics held in August 1959. Tensions in the Caribbean between the new revolutionary government of Cuba and its neighbors had risen in the spring of 1959 and climaxed with the armed incursions into Panama and the Dominican Republic by political dissidents operating from Cuba.
