742 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement hampered in their development by a qualifying phrase of this kind in the policy. I feel that there are ample checks and balances for controlling an unrealistically expanded military program in the present setup of the Council. I also feel that the military part of the program is of great­ est importance.” b. Mr. Burden also expressed himself as follows: “I have also been troubled for a long time by the phrase in the present NSC paragraph that the ‘United States is a recognized leader in this field.’ It does not seem to me that this is a strong enough. If there are only two major powers in the race, what does a “recognized leader” really mean? I would suggest some language along the following lines: ‘The United States should continue actively and with a sense of urgency to pursue programs to develop and exploit outer space as nec­ essary or desirable to insure the attainment of national objectives and the achievement of scientific, military and political purposes. These programs and the national policy should be designed to secure and maintain a national position of supremacy, or at the minimum, equality, in outer space.’” c. Dr. Waterman has suggested that objectives (1) and (3) read as follows: “(1) A broad-­based scientific and technological program for the development and scientific exploitation of space flight and planetary-­ interplanetary exploration;” and “(3) a civil space program designed to develop and promote the peaceful use of outer space;” 3. The point made by Mr. Burden and repeated in the foregoing item 2–­b is so fundamental that it should be discussed at a meeting of the NASC. I suggest therefore, that if this part of the paragraph is approved as now drafted, it be done with the understanding that the NASC will consider this matter at its meeting on June 29 and possibly on June 30. 4. We appreciate the opportunity to make these comments on that portion of the basic national security policy that is of such direct con­ cern to the NASC. /S/ Franklyn W. Phillips Acting Secretary
