3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
638
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
McHenry: The reason for the situation which has taken place grew
out of our desire to know what you genuinely desired. This situation
would not have arisen if we had not been told that you might have
other views.
Vlasova: The only way I can prove this wrong is to tell you again
that I requested to be sent to Moscow.
McHenry: I assume you are making this statement freely and
under no duress.
Vlasova: Isn’t that obvious? Do I look to you to be under duress.
McHenry: Miss Vlasova, is there anything else you wish to do? Is
there anyone you would like to see?
Vlasova: No.
McHenry: Again, let me express my sympathy for the difficulties
that have occurred in the last few days. I hope you understand that this
situation arose not from any malice on our part.
Vlasova: Well, I don’t completely understand why people were
standing near me for three days with handcuffs and arms. It was for
this reason I feared leaving the plane. If there hadn’t been this kind of
scene, I might have been willing to leave the plane. I don’t know your
ways of doing things, but I am not used to this kind of treatment.
McHenry: This would not have occurred if the “situation” to
which you referred hadn’t taken place and if we hadn’t had a reason to
believe that you might want to make other plans. I tried through Am-
bassador Makeyev to reassure you that there would be no threats to
your safety if you had left the plane. Isn’t it clear now that you see our
side that no threats are involved.
Vlasova: (smiling) Yes, that is obvious.
McHenry: I wish you a pleasant trip back to the Soviet Union. I
only regret that I was not able to get tickets to see you perform here in
New York.
Vlasova: Come to Moscow to see the Bolshoi. It is better to see us
dance in the Bolshoi Theater than here.
Comment: It was the judgment of the US participants, including
the Public Health Service physician and Mr. Godunov’s lawyer, that
Miss Vlasova was calm, relaxed, fully in control of what she was
saying, quick in her answers, and in apparent good spirits. There was
no evident reason whatsoever for doubting that she was expressing her
own wishes. The Soviet side gave no outward sign that they feared she
might say, from their standpoint, the wrong thing.
Vance
