1148 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement UR–4. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State1  Washington, May 27, 1958. SUBJECT U.S.-Uruguayun Relations PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Ambassador Lacarte ARA—Mr. Rubottom OSA—Mr. Watrous The Ambassador opened the conversation by referring to Vice President Nixon’s recent visit to Uruguay, and noted that he, the Ambassador, had been there during the visit. He said that he was convinced that the visit had been a “smash success”, and that he felt that it set the stage for increased U.S.-Uruguayan cooperation. He explained that the visit coincided with a period of economic difficulty for Uruguay, about which he had been holding discussions in Washington with U.S. Government officials, and that Mr. Nixon and members of his party had been able to discuss the same problems in Montevideo. He pointed out that the basis of Uruguay’s difficulties was its inability to sell to the U.S. as much as it bought from that country. For example, he said, in 1957 Uruguay bought from the U.S. over four and one half times as much as it was able to sell in the U.S. market. This condition, he added, had produced a balance of payments problem which had now become serious. The Ambassador then outlined the manner in which he said the Russians were attempting to take advantage of this situation. He described the Russian procedure as that of purchasing Uruguayan goods and of increasing Russian demands in return for these purchases. He said that this trend was of course disturbing to Uruguay, which preferred to be oriented toward the U.S. The Ambassador then said he would like to inform the Secretary about the various conversations concerning economic cooperation that, on instructions from his Government, he was undertaking in Washington. The most important item under consideration, he went on, was a forty million dollar balance of payments loan about which 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Uruguay 105.” Confidential. Drafted by Watrous on May [illegible in the original]. Information on the source text indicates that the conversation took place at 11:00 a.m. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
