Haiti  755
in September 1957. Dollar reserves, however, failed to increase to former 
levels and by the beginning of the current fiscal year in October were 
only about $3 million compared with an average of over $9 ­million at 
the same date over the period 1950 through 1955.
Thus Haiti was in a very vulnerable position when the present cof-
fee crop in 1958–59 fell to less than 50 per cent of last year’s as a result 
of adverse climatic conditions in addition to the crop cycle in which 
small crops normally follow large crops. The decline in coffee pro-
duction from about 600,000 bags to between 250,000 and 300,000 bags 
was made even more disastrous by the 20 per cent decline in interna-
tional coffee prices between the crop years. For Haiti, which normally 
relies on coffee for 70 per cent of its export earnings, the consequences 
were critical. In effect a country with a national income of only slightly 
above $250 million for 4 million people was faced with a loss of almost 
$20 million of that income. This would signify a drop in the standard 
of living by 8 per cent in one year. Moreover, the Government’s budget, 
which ordinarily obtains about 25 per cent of its revenues directly from 
coffee export and other taxes, immediately ran heavy deficits which 
violated the terms of Haiti’s Standby Agreement with the IMF and so 
made Haiti ineligible to make any further use of IMF resources.
In January the Government revised its budget and reduced the 
anticipated expenditure level by about 18 per cent for the reminder of 
the fiscal year by cutting salaries by 10 to 20 per cent, by curtailing 
investment projects and operational costs, and by reductions in defense 
expenditure. Even then expenditures are expected to exceed revenue 
by about $6 million and there appears very little chance that this deficit 
can be reduced. The Government has no financial resources at its dis-
posal. So far this fiscal year it has borrowed over $2 million from the 
National Bank, which is already heavily loaded with Government debt, 
and further loans from the Bank will only aggravate the crucial dollar 
payments problem by an inflationary expansion of import demand. As 
Haiti is one of the few countries with a freely convertible currency and 
since the foreign sector is relatively large, it is estimated that any given 
expansion of credit usually creates a proportional 25 per cent demand 
for foreign exchange. To solve that budgetary problem by recourse to 
the National Bank, therefore, is not feasible in view of the inadequate 
level of dollar reserves. In addition, IMF resources would continue to 
be unavailable to Haiti if there was resort to deficit financing.
The balance of payments situation is desperate. At the present time 
Haiti has reserve of less than $1 million, slightly more than one week’s 
imports. With the failure of the coffee crop, the usual seasonal increase 
in reserves is not taking place and there is actually a continued drain. 
Only one week ago, the ICA had to disburse $500,000 of the $2 million 
available from FY 59 Special Assistance funds to assure convertibility
