110 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III and affect the business climate everywhere. In the final analysis economic recovery will be through trade expansion, not contraction. We should adhere to the OECD pledge. And we should secure the earliest possible conclusion of the Tokyo Round of trade negotiations. We need to deal with these problems to put the minds of our people at rest. Jenkins: The MTN developed as a result of the Nixon measures of 1971.5 In 1973 we launched the Tokyo Round officially. In 1975 the actual negotiations began after passage of the US Trade Act. There are now six negotiating groups at work. The EC has made a number of proposals for tariff harmonization on cereals, meats and agricultural products. But the climate has worsened since the Tokyo meeting in 1973. The EC feels that we should fight against the dangers of protectionism. One way to do this is to go for a successful outcome of the MTN. The Summit needs to give the political impetus. We are ready to enter into vigorous negotiations. A successful outcome is more important than the date of the conclusion. We should use the remainder of 1977 to make rapid progress and have the Ministerial after substantial progress has been made. On specifics, the EC has a relatively low, harmonious external tariff. Most of our tariffs range between 3% to 17%—only one is above 25%. This is why we want harmonization to reduce the range of countries’ high and low tariffs. Also 90% of our tariffs are bound under the GATT. Some partners here have a much lower percentage of their tariffs bound, and we would like to see them bind them. Agriculture is an important part of the negotiations, and special considerations apply to it. What we want is an expansion of agricultural trade around a background of stable markets. We have a $5 billion deficit with the US in agricultural trade alone so that our markets are quite open. We believe we can make progress in agriculture in the context of reaching an overall balance at the end of the day. We believe an impetus ford [forward?] is desirable. We are willing to participate vigorously. Carter: What can we do to expedite the MTN? Why is it bogging down? Jenkins: First there was the delay in getting the US Trade Act, and then the change in Administrations caused certain hesitations. Then there is the problem of the deteriorating world economic climate. But it 5 On August 15, 1971, Richard Nixon announced his administration’s New Economic Policy, whose measures included the suspension of the dollar’s gold convertibility and the imposition of a 10 percent surcharge on dutiable imports. For the text of Nixon’s announcement of the New Economic Policy, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Richard Nixon, 1971, pp. 886–891.
