698 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX expressed desire to improve bilateral relations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790537–0054) On December 1, U.S. Ambassador to Romania Rudolf Aggrey met with Andrei at his request to deliver two démarches on the Iranian situation and repeat Washington’s request for immediate, public action. In telegram 8080 from Bucharest, December 1, Aggrey reported his meeting with the Romanian Foreign Minister. Andrei, Aggrey wrote, answered that “it was not true that Romania had not been ‘vigorous’ in this instance.” Although he had no authorization to provide details, Andrei noted, “President Ceausescu was proceeding not just in the sense of Romania’s respect for international law and the Vienna Convention, but in the spirit of the Joint Statement he and President Carter had signed.” The Foreign Minister assured the U.S. Ambassador that he would seek authorization from Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu to brief Aggrey on Romanian activities. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790554–0100) On December 3, Andrei described for Aggrey “in the strictest confidence” the Romanian efforts in Tehran on behalf of the hostages. On Ceausescu’s initiative, Andrei had passed to Ayatollah Khomeini, through Romanian contacts with Arab States and organizations, the Romanian Government’s appeal to release the hostages without any delay. Asked if the Iranians had listened to the Romanian message, Andrei told Aggrey that “it is our understanding that things are moving toward a solution, but we do not know what compromise might be the key and we have no assurances.” (Telegram 8127 from Bucharest, December 3; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840163–2001) The ongoing hostage crisis caused the postponement of Vance’s trip to Bucharest and Belgrade, and Ambassador Aggrey informed Romanian Deputy Foreign Minister Cornel Pacoste on December 4 of the postponement. In telegram 312957 to Bucharest, December 5, Vance instructed Aggrey to seek an appointment with Andrei and find out more information as to the impact the secret Romanian message had in Tehran. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840163–2006) Aggrey reported on his December 10 meeting with Andrei in telegram 8401 from Bucharest, December 11. After informing Andrei of President Carter and the Secretary of State’s appreciation for Romanian efforts on behalf of the hostages, Aggrey, “speaking personally” added that “the fact of the confidential Romanian demarche was not generally known within our government [meant that] Romania’s efforts could not be appreciated by all of the influential people in Washington who were assessing what our friends were doing to help.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840163–1998) Almost two months into the crisis in Iran, the Soviet leadership approved the introduction of Soviet combat troops in Afghanistan. The
