Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 163. Editorial Note In July 1978, the Working Group on Communications of the United Nations Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities received a communication from the Memphis, Tennessee, Committee on Human Rights, the Bridgewater Shelby County NAACP, and Church of Human Development alleging that African-American residents of Memphis and Shelby County had been subject to discrimination by the Memphis police and denied due process. Such an allegation meant that the United States was cited as a “gross and consistent” violator of human rights under ECOSOC 1503 procedures. The National Security Council Global Issues Cluster’s August 30 evening report noted that the Working Group voted unanimously to cite the United States for violations. In the report, National Security Council Staff member Leslie Denend indicated that the United States, the Soviet Union, Colombia, Nigeria, and Pakistan comprised the Working Group membership, adding: “Ambassador Carter, our expert on the group, is the only member who carries such a direct link to his government and who is not able to follow developments in this forum full-time because he is our current Ambassador to Liberia. Once the current situation is resolved, we should give this staffing arrangement a careful review. “State is hard at work preparing our case for the Sub-Commission on September 11. According to Mezvinsky who sat in on these proceedings last year, even if Ambassador Carter reverses his position and makes a strong presentation on behalf of the US, the Sub-Commission is likely to forward the working group recommendation to the full Commission. The problem is that it will be very difficult to turn around a unanimous working group recommendation. (Even Argentina only received a 3–2 vote.) “All the outcomes I envision from this entire process have negative consequences for the President and the policy. Although we have been trying to strengthen the UNHRC process, we should be prepared to step sharply away from it if the Sub-Commission cites the US and moves the case to the full Commission.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Sub-
