526
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
163.
Editorial Note
In July 1978, the Working Group on Communications of the
United Nations Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities received a communication from the Memphis,
Tennessee, Committee on Human Rights, the Bridgewater Shelby
County NAACP, and Church of Human Development alleging that Af-
rican-American residents of Memphis and Shelby County had been
subject to discrimination by the Memphis police and denied due
process. Such an allegation meant that the United States was cited as a
“gross and consistent” violator of human rights under ECOSOC 1503
procedures. The National Security Council Global Issues Cluster’s Au-
gust 30 evening report noted that the Working Group voted unani-
mously to cite the United States for violations. In the report, National
Security Council Staff member Leslie Denend indicated that the United
States, the Soviet Union, Colombia, Nigeria, and Pakistan comprised
the Working Group membership, adding: “Ambassador Carter, our ex-
pert on the group, is the only member who carries such a direct link to
his government and who is not able to follow developments in this
forum full-time because he is our current Ambassador to Liberia. Once
the current situation is resolved, we should give this staffing arrange-
ment a careful review.
“State is hard at work preparing our case for the Sub-Commission
on September 11. According to Mezvinsky who sat in on these pro-
ceedings last year, even if Ambassador Carter reverses his position and
makes a strong presentation on behalf of the US, the Sub-Commission
is likely to forward the working group recommendation to the full
Commission. The problem is that it will be very difficult to turn around
a unanimous working group recommendation. (Even Argentina only
received a 3–2 vote.)
“All the outcomes I envision from this entire process have negative
consequences for the President and the policy. Although we have been
trying to strengthen the UNHRC process, we should be prepared to
step sharply away from it if the Sub-Commission cites the US and
moves the case to the full Commission.” (Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Sub-
ject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 7–8/78)
In telegram 221106 to Geneva, August 30, the Department of State
responded to the complaint, received in the Department on July 26,
terming the citation against the United States as “surprising” and indi-
cating that a formal response to the Working Group, then meeting in
Geneva, would be forthcoming. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780354–1098) In telegram 224200 to Geneva, Sep-
tember 2, the Department indicated that the response would be sent via
