March 1952–February 1953
415
and to expand its economic development program. Nevertheless,
anti-foreign sentiment, particularly against the UK, would remain
strong, and even with substantial oil revenues the government would
still have great difficulty in dispelling the antagonisms aroused be-
tween landlords and peasants and between the “haves” and “have
nots,” which would continue to be a major cause of instability.
Probable Developments if Iran Sells Substantial Quantities of Oil Without
British Concurrence
36. If Iran were to succeed in making a contract for the continuing
sale of substantial quantities of oil to a major Western oil company
without having reached a settlement with the UK, the economic effects
would be substantially the same as those described in paragraph 35
above. Tudeh reaction would almost certainly be violent, and there
might be some opposition from extremist elements in the National
Front. In any event, the government could suppress any disturbances
that might arise and its prestige would be considerably enhanced. Basic
causes of instability would remain, but the government would be in a
stronger position to arrest the trend toward eventual Tudeh control.
Iranian Relations with the US and USSR
37. The Mossadeq regime will probably continue its pressure on
the US to persuade the UK to agree to Iranian terms in the oil dispute
and will be quick to criticize any signs of what it considers US support
for the UK. It will also continue to request financial assistance, arguing
that the withholding of US aid increases the danger of ultimate Tudeh
control.
38. The Mossadeq regime will not wish completely to alienate the
US. Mossadeq almost certainly desires US support as a counter-weight
to the USSR and he appears to desire US economic and military assist-
ance. Nevertheless, as internal tensions mount, there will be an in-
creasing tendency to blame the US, not only for the failure to restore
substantial oil revenues, but also for Iran’s financial and economic diffi-
culties. The US military and Point Four missions in Iran may therefore
find it even more difficult to operate during 1953 than at present.
39. Kashani or other extremist National Front leaders who might
succeed Mossadeq would probably be more opposed than the Mos-
sadeq regime to the exercise of US influence in Iran and would prob-
ably place greater restrictions on US missions in Iran. However, their
recognition of the need of US support to counter Soviet pressure and
their acknowledgment of the value to Iran of Point Four aid would
probably check any inclination they might have either to terminate
Point Four aid or to expel the military missions.
40. Iran’s official relations with the USSR will probably remain
cool and guarded. Although both governments will seek to increase
