Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX the regime’s countermeasures (see below), there was no evidence to suggest that collective political protest—violent or otherwise—was in the offing. Summing up the situation during its most acute phase, an East German writer told a Western journalist: “There isn’t going to be an explosion here. But there is tension now and a feeling that something is going on that has not yet run its course.” The Regime Responds Employing a broad range of tactics, from repressive to conciliatory depending on the nature of the perceived threat, the Honecker regime, beginning in late 1976, attempted with considerable success to dampen the effects of these developments. At one extreme, the expatriation of Biermann and the placing of Havemann under house arrest gave notice of the limits of official tolerance. Dozens of members of the GDR’s cultural elite followed Biermann into exile during 1977. On the other hand, the regime’s stance vis-a-vis the church was far more conciliatory. The West German Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung noted in late 1977 that “relations between the state apparatus and the church have calmed strikingly” and attributed the change to a desire on the part of the regime to “relax tensions.” Somewhere between those two tactics were the selective harassment and denials of applications of prospective emigres who cited the Helsinki Accords as the basis for their requests (family reunification requests continued to be processed at the same rate as in previous years). As a result of the regime’s counter-campaign, the ferment that characterized 1976 was reduced in scope and intensity. A Western journalist noted that the tensions that had gripped East Germany in 1976 “appeared spent” by late 1977, leaving behind an impression of “lethargy and gloom.” There was such continued evidence of unrest as antisocial behavior by youth; a serious clash between youth and police during GDR national day celebrations in East Berlin was the most striking exception to the generally quiet domestic scene in 1977. There was also an apparent deterioration of labor discipline; some workers reportedly demanded a portion of their salaries in hard currency. But the dominant mood of the populace at the beginning of 1978 was one of political apathy and of seeking refuge in material compensation and private family interests. The “Manifesto” Episode Although its direct relationship to GDR domestic stability is moot, the purported opposition “Manifesto” recently published in West Germany sheds some light on the two external factors that most impinge on the GDR’s internal stability—the Soviet Union and West Germany. The document was published in two installments by Der Spiegel in its first two issues of 1978. The magazine reported that the “Mani-
