Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1057
tine and Brazilian problems, which the President has approved, is out-
lined in Ambassador Smith’s July 22 memorandum to Secretary Vance,
a copy of which was sent to you.)8
We have not expressed any preference regarding which institution
or institutions should be used for promoting regional nuclear coopera-
tion, and have indicated that we would be prepared to go along with
any clear preference that may develop among the states of the region.
Some states, particularly Venezuela and Argentina, have favored the
revitalization of IANEC, an OAS subsidiary organ, while others, not-
ably Mexico, support giving OPANAL a role in the peaceful nuclear en-
ergy field. We have been neutral on this question (supporting both a
study of OPANAL’s future role in nuclear cooperation and a two-year,
$400,000 plan of action for IANEC), and for the time being plan to re-
main so in the absence of a clearer Latin American consensus than
exists at present.
2. Treaty of Tlatelolco
Aside from US ratification of Protocol I, remaining requirements
for full entry into force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco are Cuban and Argen-
tine ratification of the Treaty, French adherence to Protocol I, and So-
viet adherence to Protocol II. Although Brazil and Chile have already
ratified, they have so far chosen not to waive the conditions for
bringing the Treaty into force for themselves.9
We have begun to implement a strategy for bringing the Treaty
into full force, and will actively continue our efforts during the next
several weeks. We have not approached Cuba directly, but have en-
couraged key Latin American supporters of the Treaty (e.g., Venezuela,
Colombia, Mexico, Peru) to urge adherence by the holdout states. We
have also asked the USSR to encourage Cuba to join the Treaty. In the
case of Argentina, we have raised the issue directly with the Argentine
leadership, and have also relied on efforts by other Latin American
states. The visit of Latin American leaders to Washington next week
will provide an opportunity to continue these efforts. Moreover, the
proposals we plan to make to Argentina and Brazil in the hope of re-
solving the current disagreements include acceptance by those states of
fullscope IAEA safeguards, which could be accomplished through Tla-
telolco adherence.
With respect to non-hemispheric holdouts, we have already raised
the question of Protocol II with the Soviets at several levels and they
8 Smith’s memorandum is Ibid.
9 An unknown hand underlined “Cuban,” “Argentine ratification,” “French adher-
ence to Protocol I, “Brazil,” “Chile,” and “waive the conditions” in this paragraph and
wrote “specific conditions” in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph.
