740
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
versation with Trudeau asking that the Canadians maintain their grain
exports to the Soviet Union at last year’s level.4 (S)
Noting that the Allied response to our efforts to restrain export
credits to Moscow was very bleak, Secretary Muskie asked if we should
nevertheless press ahead on this issue. Dr. Brzezinski said he thought
that tactically we should continue to pressure the Europeans on credits
even though we knew we would not get their complete cooperation. To
do otherwise would send the wrong message to the Allies. At the same
time, Dr. Brzezinski stressed that we should keep our efforts private
since we did not wish to inflate this matter publicly to a point at which
our lack of success became a public defeat for the President. Secretary
Muskie registered the participants’ agreement that we should continue
to push the Europeans on credits. (S)
Moving on to COCOM, Komer emphasized that this issue had
long-range strategic implications and that we should press the Euro-
peans hard. The JCS agreed. Secretary Muskie thought reduced tech-
nology transfer to the USSR had the greatest potential for giving pain to
the Soviets over time. The group thought that we should do our best
to expand the COCOM list, recognizing that the Europeans would re-
sist. Again, all concurred that this should not be a matter for public
discussion. (S)
On the Olympics, it was agreed that we should send messages this
week to ensure that there is no slippage among those who had already
decided not to go to the Olympics and to try to persuade individual
federations not to attend the Moscow Games. Near the time of the
Moscow Games, we should also emphasize to those who would be at-
tending that we hoped they would insist on reduced ceremonies (no
flags, anthems, etc.) at Moscow. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we try to
think of ways to give more credit to those governments which would
not be going to the Olympics. Secretary Muskie agreed, and thought
perhaps the Senate might do something in this respect, as might the UN
and public groups in the U.S. Aaron wondered whether we might
4 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote: “ok—An offi-
cial cable should also be sent. J.” The President spoke with Trudeau on June 10 from 3:33
until 3:42 p.m., while the President was in Grand Island, Nebraska in order to view tor-
nado damage. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) On June
11, Brzezinski prepared a summary of the telephone conversation for the President. In
the summary, he indicated that the President had “asked that Canada hold its grain ship-
ments to the USSR in 1980–81 to this year’s level, noting that the EC and Australia would
follow the US and Canadian lead. Trudeau said that the Cabinet planned to discuss the
issue on June 16 and that he could probably give you a final answer at Venice, if not be-
fore. On a temporary basis, he would maintain shipments at the 1979–80 level until De-
cember, but he could not make any commitment beyond that.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 38, Memcons: President: 6/80) The
summary is scheduled to be published in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII,
Western Europe. No cable has been found.
