September 1953–December 1954 805 [name not declassified] operational information which in our opinion appears to have a bearing on the future of TPAJAX.2 [name not declassified]3 2 In the left margin next to this sentence is a typed note by Wisner that reads: “‘Okay’ FGW.” 3 Printed from a copy that bears [name not declassified] typed signature and an indication that he signed the original. At the end of the memorandum is a typed note that reads: “This moderate–medium level initial approach was discussed with and approved by the DCI—and [name not declassified] should proceed. FGW 21 October 1953.” Another note reads: “Original returned to [name not declassified] on 21 October 1953 with FGW’s notes in his own handwriting instructing [name not declassified] to proceed with above.” 335. Letter From the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson) to the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Richards)1 Tehran, October 20, 1953. Dear Art: Attached hereto is a memorandum prepared by [name not declassified] which is almost self-explanatory. General Batmanqilich seems to be dominated by his two deputies, Generals Deihimi and Akhavi, who owe allegiance to Dr. Baqai and who owe their present positions to the support of the Shah. General Batmanqilich, in my opinion, means well but he is politically an infant and fears what might happen to him if Baqai and Baqai’s friends should turn against him. I met Batmanqilich on the evening of October 17 at a reception and had a frank talk with him. I told him that [name not declassified] had described to me the conversation which [name not declassified] had had with Baqai, as arranged by Batmanqilich. Batmanqilich said that he was glad that [name not declassified] had seen Baqai. Baqai was probably the greatest man in Iran and it was important that the American Embassy should work with him. I said that Baqai had been arguing publicly for 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/11–5053. Secret; Security Information; Official–Informal.
