First Responses 125 Attachment Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency5 Washington, November 21, 1979 SUBJECT Dangers if the Shah Leaves the US I. We are concerned that an early departure of the Shah from the US would increase the risks faced by the hostages. A. The present tenuous equilibrium in the hostage situation would be broken by the Shah’s departure, especially if it occurs in the emotional religious mourning period over the next four weeks. —Early on, such a move might have been interpreted by the captors and the Khomeini regime as an act of good faith by the US. —Now, it would increase their frustration over their inability to bring the Shah and the US to account for past actions and to prevent future US/pro-Shah involvement in Iranian affairs. B. The captors have been operating in a very well organized manner, but we think they might split over how to react to what they would see as a US effort to circumvent their rightful claims. Individually or as a group, they might over-react. —We believe their public announcements show a significant degree of tension over possible US retaliatory moves against them. —As little as a single frustrated captor’s angry outburst or blow (or a slight provocation by a hostage) might spark a disintegration of the group’s internal control that could lead to abuse of the hostages. C. As the captors see it, the US will have given an absolute no to their demands that the Shah be returned to Iran. D. Some, if not all, will also see his departure as the first step in a new US attempt to overthrow the Iranian revolution. E. At the very least, the Shah’s departure is likely to precipitate trial of the hostages. —Despite a statement on 20 November by a government spokesman that the Revolutionary Court would [not] conduct any trial, it is not certain that the Khomeini regime could easily take control of the hostages from their captors. —Khomeini apparently had some difficulty in arranging the release of the thirteen women and blacks. 5 Secret; Noforn.
