Eastern Europe Region 27 our interest in “polycentrism” and pluralism in the region. Others agreed, although several pointed out that there might be specific reasons for expanding contacts with the GDR. Brzezinski agreed but suggested that the U.S. should look closely at what specific interests were advanced by those contacts. There was specific discussion of Hungary; before consideration can be given to returning the Crown, a judgment about the domestic political cost will be required. Vance noted a general consensus on a policy approach between options (3) and (4) and suggested the need for individual country follow-on studies. In closing, Vance mentioned the need for a review of RFE and RL program content. The Board for International Broadcasting will be encouraged and aided in undertaking such a review. Zbigniew Brzezinski 7. Editorial Note On April 22, 1977, Gregory Treverton of the National Security Council Staff sent a memorandum to Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski regarding the April 14 Policy Review Committee meeting on U.S. policy toward Europe. (See Document 6.) Treverton wrote that the Policy Review Committee meeting was disappointing and more focus on the issues was necessary. He suggested “sharply focused” follow-up studies for four distinct issues: “the U.S. approach to European unity and possible economic competition; European Communist parties; CSCE; and possibly Eastern Europe.” Treverton attached two draft memoranda for Brzezinski. The first, informed President Jimmy Carter that Brzezinski and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance were dissatisfied with the discussion at the April 14 meeting and that both recommended several short follow-up studies to be discussed at a second Policy Review Committee meeting. The second was a draft Presidential Review Memorandum requesting the four follow-up studies be completed by June 15. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 27, PRM–9 [2]). Brzezinski initialed the memorandum to Carter, only to change his mind later and indicate on the Treverton memorandum that he intended to discuss the issue with the President orally. (Ibid.) Brzezinski signed the tasking for follow-up studies related to PRM– 9 on April 22. The tasking requested that the Policy Review Committee “under the chairmanship of the Department of State, continue its review
