694
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
1. The Context: Our Overall Restraint Strategy
The US is pursuing talks in three interdependent forums: US-
European; US–USSR; and, US-recipient. We have met with the Euro-
pean suppliers. They were cautious and skeptical. Their economic
health depends to some extent on their arms industries, and particu-
larly, on arms exports. They consider Soviet cooperation essential. In
our first meeting with the Soviets, we intend to stress the mutual in-
terest we share in arms transfer restraint including: better bilateral rela-
tions, a reduction in the likelihood of US–USSR confrontations, and a
lessening of international tensions. At the UN Special Session on Disar-
mament next spring, we will sound-out recipient country concerns re-
garding arms transfer restraint and present the US case.
2. US Leverage and Soviet Reactions
Because Soviet continued participation is critical to our multilat-
eral efforts, we must succeed in these talks in getting agreement for a
second meeting. We will emphasize the difficulty of sustaining our uni-
lateral restraint for very long if multilateral progress cannot be demon-
strated. There is also the implicit threat of publicly casting the Soviets in
an unfavorable light on an important disarmament issue should they
refuse to continue the talks. We can expect the Soviets to remain cau-
tious and, as they stated, respond to specific US proposals. We are
moderately hopeful that they will at least agree to a second round of
talks.
3. Substance of the US Strategy for These Talks
There was agreement that this first round should be exploratory
and conducted for the most part on an illustrative basis. In reviewing
our restraint policy as well as the guidelines discussed with the Euro-
peans, we would present these as approaches for a discussion of pos-
sible ways to achieve multilateral cooperation. It is important during
this early stage of talks which we believe will be lengthy and complex,
not to raise fears among recipients of a US–USSR condominium.
Regarding the possibility of proposing specific regions of the
world for supplier restraint, we will raise the issue of regions to define
the problem of arms competition, and suggest that different coopera-
tive agreements might well be required in different regions; however,
we will not identify specific regions as candidates for supplier restraint.
Regarding the suggestion of specific weapons systems such as
surface-to-surface missiles (SSMs) and man-portable air defense
systems (MANPADS), we will take the view that outside of NATO and
the major states involved in the East–West confrontation, there are
areas where these types of weapons, because of their destructive power
or susceptibility to terrorist diversion, should not be transferred. We
