January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1209
Ambassador Evron said that we did reach agreement on a text12 here
(in Washington last September), and he thought that took care of the
Egyptian problem.
The President said that that was not the case.
Secretary Vance said that it was not yet the case.
Prime Minister Begin asked whether they (Israel) would be notified.
Secretary Vance agreed.
Prime Minister Begin asked for a reply on their 4-point document.13
The President said he wanted to save some time to meet privately
with Prime Minister Begin.14
Prime Minister Begin asked whether the President wanted to see
him.
The President said yes.
Prime Minister Begin said thank you, sir, it would be a pleasure.
Ambassador Linowitz said (in reference to the second document, at-
tached), that he thinks Prime Minister Begin would agree that it is im-
portant not to change Camp David. The problem is not what the au-
thority is called but what it does. This is what the negotiations are
trying to do. This formula will not help in the negotiations. We should
work now on what the authority should do, not on what it should be
called.
Prime Minister Begin asked him to clarify.
Ambassador Linowitz said that the import of point one is that the
Self-Governing Authority is an administrative council.
Prime Minister Begin said that it is in the book (the Camp David
Accords).
Ambassador Linowitz said that therefore we should say it like it is in
the book. Why give it a different name?
Prime Minister Begin said that there is a simple reason: for the last
ten months, there have been proposals that there be 40 members. This is
an assembly. We need to make clear what it is. What does it mean? We
should not turn in circles. He contends, and Barak—whom the Presi-
dent likes, and who sends the President his regards—in an exchange
with el-Baz in the President’s presence,15 said that when the words
12 See Document 295 and footnotes 2 and 3 thereto.
13 See footnote 5, Document 357.
14 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Begin privately in the
Oval Office from 11:29 a.m. to 11:55 a.m., April 16; the two leaders were joined by Vance
from 11:45 a.m. to 11:55 a.m. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum
of conversation of this meeting has been found.
15 See footnotes 52 and 53, Document 28.
