September 18–December 16, 1978
417
(At this point the Secretary was called to take a phone call from the
President. When he returned, he said the President was in New York
and asked if the Secretary could bring the Prime Minister to Arthur
Krim’s3 office a few blocks away at 1:30PM so that they could shake
hands and greet each other. The Prime Minister said he would be
pleased to do this.)4
Returning to the subject at hand, Begin read a proposed Israeli ver-
sion of the side letter on the West Bank and Gaza (Attachment 1). The
Prime Minister said Israel wants to preserve its adherence to the Camp
David Framework and its proposed letter confirmed that Egypt and Is-
rael will do so. Theoretically, they should wait until Jordan joins the ne-
gotiations, but Israel wanted to proceed. The letter should therefore
make the point that although the Camp David Framework says there
will be three parties to the West Bank/Gaza negotiations, Egypt and Is-
rael will proceed on their own. It is indispensable to include this point
in order to be faithful to the Camp David Framework.
The Secretary said if this was important to Israel, he would in prin-
ciple go along and would try to get Egyptian agreement. His personal
view, however, was that in the interest of getting Hussein to join the ne-
gotiations, it would be better not to mention Jordan.
On the form of the letter, the Secretary suggested there be an iden-
tical note.
The Prime Minister said there could be either two papers with one
signature on each or one paper with two signatures, if the language
was identical. If there were differences, Egypt and Israel could write
different letters.
The Secretary asked if the Framework would be annexed to the
letter. The Prime Minister said no; he had signed the Framework and
did not want to create the impression that he had to again prove his ad-
herence to it. The Secretary said this was important to Egypt and not a
substantive issue; he urged the Prime Minister to agree. Begin said he
would refer this question to his Government.
3 U.S. film studio executive and former chairman of the Democratic Party National
Finance Committee.
4 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter talked with Vance from 10:23
a.m. to 10:26 a.m. on November 2. Carter greeted Begin at the New York residence of
Arthur Krim at 1:32 p.m. before escorting the Prime Minister inside. Carter gave a short
address, met with Vance, and departed the Krim residence at 2 p.m. (Carter Library, Pres-
idential Materials) No memorandum of conversation of the meeting between Carter and
Begin has been found. Atherton reported the substance of the Vance-Begin meeting in
telegram 280995 to Tel Aviv and Cairo, November 4, noting that Carter and Begin “ex-
changed warm personal greetings,” but that there “was no substantive or private conver-
sation” between the two leaders. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P840153–2351)
