Arms Control and Disarmament  1227
than 2.1 million men each. The agreed level of forces for France and the 
United Kingdom, corresponding to this figure, would be 700,000 men 
each. The levels of other essential States would be specified at the same 
time through negotiation with them.
F. Thereafter, and subject to the same conditions, negotiations 
could be undertaken on further limitations to not less than 1.7 million 
men each for the United States and the Soviet Union. The agreed level 
corresponding to this figure for France and the United Kingdom would 
be 650,000 men each. The levels of other essential States would be spec­
ified at the same time through negotiation with them.
G. Upon the conditions cited in D above, these States will also be 
prepared to negotiate on further limitations of armaments. The calcu­
lation of any such armament limitations will be in agreed relation to 
the armed forces determined in paragraphs E and F above and will be 
completed prior to the application of the further limitations in armed 
forces. The parties must be satisfied before such further limitations of 
armaments are undertaken and at all times thereafter that the arma­
ments at the disposal of any party to the convention do not exceed the 
quantities thus allowed in each category.
H. No measures for the reduction and limitation of armed forces 
and armaments beyond those provided for in paragraph A and B 
above will be put into effect until the system of control is appropriately 
expanded and is able to verify such measures.
II. Military Expenditure
In order to assist in verifying compliance with the provisions of 
paragraph I, and looking forward to the reduction of military expen­
ditures, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United 
States agree to make available to the International Control Organiza­
tion information about their military budgets and expenditures for the 
year preceding entry of the convention into force and for each year 
thereafter. The categories of information to be supplied will be agreed 
in advance and annexed to the convention.
III. Nuclear Weapons
Each party assumes an obligation not to use nuclear weapons if 
an armed attack has not placed the party in a situation of individual or 
collective self-­defense.
IV. The Control of Fissionable Material
A. The parties to the convention further undertake:
1. That all future production of fissionable materials will be used at 
home or abroad, under international supervision, exclusively for non-­
weapons purposes, including stockpiling, beginning one month after
