Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
577
feasibility of the alternative rendezvous site6 and 3) some early flow
of support material to Wadi Kena. The latter would reduce the time
required for initial activity. The Chairman added that we ought to
realize that in five or six days we did not have to make a go decision
but we would want to take a next step which is moving the airplanes
actually involved in the operation. This is assuming of course that we
want to go about April 4, which is the point at which the night becomes
so short that we have to contemplate a three-day operation.
The President asked to be told again what the two men would
do. It was explained that two military personnel, [less than 1 line not
declassified] would go in by regular airline to reconnoiter the Foreign
Ministry. They would find out about the security arrangements to see
if they can get in easily, where they might drive their vehicles, check
out where the helicopter might land and so forth. They would be in
Tehran for three days and then come out.
The President asked why the people who are already in there
cannot do this. The DCI said that the men inside do not have the
tactical expertise to perform this mission.
The President asked if there was any objection to the two men
going in and to the Otter operation. The Vice President asked what
were the risks of the Otter operation. [1½ lines not declassified] Three
men would go in to test the ground, drill core samples and so forth
to make sure that the area would be suitable for the landing of C–130s.
If we have problems, the three men will have documents indicating
that they are on their way to Afghanistan. Even if they are found, it
will be difficult to associate them with the situation in the compound.
The greatest danger would come from the Otter not being able to restart
once it had landed.
The Secretary of State said he had no objection to sending in the
two military personnel but he felt very strongly that we should not
proceed with the rescue operation at this point. The President said that
he did not want to undertake a rescue operation unless there was no
choice. He said he would rather wait a month and a half to get the
hostages out than undertake an operation in which the hostages might
be killed.
The Chairman pointed out that one problem was the fact that the
nights were getting shorter which meant past early April it would in
6 In a March 21 paper, “Outline of Operational Concept,” the CIA identified the
Twin Otter mission as “a clandestine air penetration of Iran to locate and determine the
suitability of an MC–130 landing zone for use in place of Na’in Airfield for helicopter
refueling operations.” It identified what would become Desert One. [text not declassified]
(Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job
82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 14, Folder 1)
