Panama 939 jobs. Many of these jobs are passed from father to son, thus perpetuating a practice that was abandoned years ago by United States private industry in Latin America. 6. Widespread Poverty and Unemployment Among Panamanians The memorandum that this is partially due to the fact that the Company and the Armed Services here discharged about 10,000 employees during the last ten to twelve years. It suggests that a study be made to work out the basis for treaty provisions which might bring about an approximation of the tariff advantages which have enabled Puerto Rico to establish so many small industries exporting to the United States and therefore increase employment. [illegible in the original] An early start on an “Operation Boststrap“ might make negotiation of a new treaty with Panama much easier. As you are aware, the United States will require the consent of Panama to abandon its present Canal operation. A study of feasibility of making tarris concessions to Panama is at Tab A.3 7. Increased USIA Propaganda Activities The Department has instructed the Embassy to take steps leading to establishment of a daily radio commentary program to present the United States viewpoint in Panama. USIA is favorably disposed and is awaiting a recommendation from its Public Affairs Officer. The Panama Canal Company directors discussed this matter at their last board meeting and decided there was a need for some medium to get the United States point of view to the Panamanians. While Mr. Roderick is aware of the Department of State’s efforts, you may wish to mention the above details at the meeting if the subject arises. 8. Better Rates for Water Charges to Panama This is a technical problem which the Defense representatives may discuss. It is recommended that States defer to their judgement. 9. United States Loans for a Reasonable Housing Program in Panama The Panama Canal company has drafted a bill which will provide congressional authority to proceed with a housing program. It is believed the proposed bill will be discussed by Defense representatives at the meeting and the President’s approval sought to introduce the skill. Senator Murray (D-Mont) has introduced a bill calling upon the Development Loan Fund to guarantee loans for housing in Panama. The Department has drafted a letter to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee indicating that the housing plan under the direction of the Panama Canal Company is preferable to the Murray proposal (Tab C).4 3 Not found. 4 Not found.
