1977 55 17. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 6, 1977 SUBJECT An Analysis of Your Upcoming Decision on Production of the B–1 This memo identifies the key factors that you should keep in mind as you think about Harold Brown’s paper on the B–1.2 It is based on an investigation of this issue carried out over several months by Victor Utgoff, a member of my staff. While I am not an expert on some of the more technical points raised, I support its conclusion. The Decision As you know, Rockwell International Corporation is tooling up for production of the B–1 at an initial rate of two aircraft per month. This effort is being made under an unusual contract in which the Air Force releases the money to the contractor on a monthly basis pending a final commitment by you to go ahead with production. This contract was written in anticipation of a decision by June 30, and contains a limit on the government’s liability to the contractor if the decision is made before this date. If the decision is not made by then, the government’s liability to the contractor in the event of termination might have to be determined through litigation. While a decision could be put off further, it probably should not be, since the political and economic costs of terminating the program are rapidly increasing. The Alternatives There are four broad alternatives open to you: (1) Terminate the B–1 program completely; (2) Put a moratorium on production for perhaps two years; (3) Build up production slowly to a rate of two aircraft per month; or (4) Go ahead with production, building up to a rate of four aircraft. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 17, B–1 Bomber, President’s File, 5–6/77. Secret; Sensitive. Special Access Required. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the first page of the memorandum: “Susan hold. J.” Reference is to Susan Clough, Carter’s personal secretary. 2 Brown’s draft memorandum to Carter, June 1, is in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 6, B–1: 6/1–10/77.
