International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
87
because there is lack of confidence. This Summit ought to give more
confidence in the ability of our countries to pursue complementary pol-
icies to achieve growth and lower unemployment.
Conditions are more favorable today than at Puerto Rico or Ram-
bouillet. Prime Minister Fukuda had compared today with the 1930s,
but conditions are different. There is greater cooperation in the IMF
and through the use of Summits, and there has been no resort to eco-
nomic warfare. These have prevented us from having the problems of
the 1930s.
The reasons for the structural differences and changed business
cycles in the 1970s are different from the 1930s. Both periods had high
unemployment but the causes are different. We must address the
causes of unemployment.
What are the causes of the structural crisis? There are, in my view,
three:
First, we should not ponder on the issue of inflation versus unem-
ployment. Unemployment followed inflation. Since the 1960s, inflation
has expanded. One reason for this was the way in which the war in
Southeast Asia was financed. The US flooded the world with liquidity.
But inflation has also been homemade. Parliaments and governments
have not resisted inflationary pressures. In addition, there are dispar-
ities in the rate of inflation from country to country. Also related to this,
and because of these disparities, the fixed rate system of Bretton Woods
had to collapse. It was inevitable after the disparities in the rates of in-
flation. We can get back to fixed rates, but not quickly. We all have a
long-range goal, Germany as well as France and others, to get back to
fixed rates, but I do not think this is probable for at least 36 months or
so.
The whole monetary system was, however, a regulating factor
after World War II. With the transition to flexible rates, countries were
no longer forced to obey the rules of Bretton Woods. The new flexible
rates were also a major uncertainty. If you bought or sold on install-
ments, or on six-month payments, your financial risks of trade were
very large. This was especially bad for the smaller firms.
Second, there was the oil crisis and the oil price explosion. This
dramatically changed the terms of trade and caused major balance of
payments problems. It led to a shrinkage of demand and a reduction of
international trade, which came to a low point in 1975, and weakened
confidence in the industrialized countries.
Third, is this overall lack of confidence in the world economic
order, particularly on the part of industries and trade unions.
We must fight unemployment and inflation together. The pros-
pects for OECD country growth in 1977 are not too bad. Growth was
