Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX that, with a few exceptions, there is relatively little that Soviets can do to exert the kind of intolerable pressure to which Romanians must bend. B. Finally, not even the most hard-line Soviet ideologist can claim that Ceausescu is other than an orthodox Communist who is in no way “soft on capitalism,” and that he and his Communist Party are not in total control of all aspects of Romanian life, as Dubcek and his colleagues were not. Kinds of things Ceausescu espouses in his foreign policy “deviations”—disarmament, a more equitable distribution of world resources, Third World causes—are items which Soviets can hardly disavow and in fact do vow. Ceausescu’s genius is in exploiting gap between Soviet rhetoric and actual behavior. C. While this is clearly uncomfortable and annoying to Soviets, it is not yet dangerous enough to them that they have begun—at least as far as we can see—to take steps (plotting assassination or a military invasion, forming a pro-Soviet faction, fomenting unrest among the Hungarian minority or intentionally severely disrupting Romania’s economy) that could lead to Ceausescu’s downfall. The reason for this, we believe, is that Ceausescu has been careful not to confront Soviets on a question they would see as vital to their national security (e.g. leaving the Warsaw Pact). It could be, however, that Ceausescu’s recent further tilt toward China (a country about which the Soviets are paranoid) and his advocacy of no increase in Warsaw Pact defense expenditures have moved him perilously close to areas which the Soviets do see as vital to their national security. D. Also it should not be forgotten that Ceausescu also needs the Soviets, both as ultimate military guarantor for maintaining a Communist system in Romania and as an object to bait in international arena to increase his domestic political position as a Romanian nationalist leader. E. Consequently, we forsee no basic change in this relationship, even given periods of rather intense strain such as the present, barring a gross and unlikely miscalculation by either side. Aggrey
