to the Cantonese, that we are prepared to go so far and no farther, and that a continuation of the present policy of disregarding the treaties (the more vital features of them) will not be tolerated? I do not believe such a step would worsen our relations with the Chinese or in any way increase the danger of a possible resort to force. On the contrary I am convinced that the Cantonese would realize, as they do not now, that while the United States Government is disposed to be most patient and kindly it will not permit unjust and unreasonable encroachments upon the rights of its citizens even in China. In order to assume such an attitude, however, the United States Government must have the support of the American people and to secure this support it would be necessary to let the American public know just what is going on in China. So far the people at home have heard a great deal about the rights of the Chinese and the injustice of the powers but they have not been fully informed respecting violations of essential treaty rights, the absence of any real government in China, the corruption of the judiciary, and the brutality and lawlessness of the Chinese military, not to mention the interference of Russian Bolshevik agents and the open declaration on the part of the Canton regime that it will pursue a policy of friendliness only to those Powers which treat China as equals. The indignities to which American citizens are now being subjected at the hands of the strikers should also be stressed. It is believed that a change in the attitude of the American press would immediately react on the Canton politicians, who are working on the assumption that the American Government does not enjoy popular support in its China policy. So far as I can ascertain the present Canton regime does not desire recognition, or at least will not until it has secured control of Peking or a large part of China. Dr. C. C. Wu87 said only a few days ago that they were not “secessionists” and were not especially interested in the question of recognition at this time. It is clear, however, that the Canton government holds the present Peking regime in the utmost contempt and that communications addressed to Peking with respect to matters in Canton are not only almost useless but irritating to the Cantonese. Might it not be possible, with certain precautions and within certain limits, for the United
