904  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
and to the peace of the hemisphere and authorized appointment of a 
committee to investigate “on the ground” and report. The investigat-
ing committee, composed of representatives from Argentina, Brazil, 
Costa Rica, Paraguay and the United States, departed for Panama on 
April 28.
On April 16 our Embassy in Panama had received an urgent request 
from the Panamanian Government for a quantity of arms, ammunition, 
and other military equipment and supplies valued at approximately 
$100,000. The Department approved the transaction on April 23 and on 
April 27 CINCARIB transferred arms and equipment valued at approx-
imately $75,000 to the Panamanian National Guard.
Two Cuban Army officers sent by the Cuban Government arrived 
in Panama on April 27 to negotiate with the invading group and per-
suaded them to accept a temporary truce.
The truce arrangement, the arrival of the OAS investigating 
committee and the transfer of arms, had a calming effect on the 
Panamanian populace but it has been noted that the Government was 
slow to assume the initiative and seemed loathe to use the resources 
immediately available to it to repel the invaders. The stability of 
the regime has been due entirely to the energetic action of the OAS 
committee.
Under the authority granted it by the OAS Council, the commit-
tee requested member states to furnish surface vessels and aircraft for 
patrol and surveillance operations along the coasts of Panama. Our 
Government responded by furnishing aircraft and two patrol boats 
while it is understood that Guatemala, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Ecuador 
and Colombia are offering aircraft. We are endeavoring to persuade 
the Colombians to provide two destroyers to assist with the patrolling. 
The committee hopes by this means to discourage any further landing 
attempts. Intelligence reports indicate that at least one more vessel with 
armed revolutionaries aboard may have left Cuba on April 28 headed 
toward Panama.
Information received from our Ambassador in Panama this after-
noon indicates all but five of the invading group have surrendered to 
the National Guard. Further details of the surrender are awaited.
The Department is in constant communication with our Embassy 
in Panama and our representative on the OAS committee there3 as well 
as with the OAS Council here.
3 Ambassador John C. Dreier.
