1028 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI to fear from President Carter’s statement,” reiterated Brazil’s and the Federal Republic of Germany’s determination to go forward with the deal, and gave Batista “a vote of confidence.” Pressure from Washington, he said, “will get nowhere.” (Telegram 1414 from Brasilia, February 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770059–0315) 404. Telegram From the Embassy in Brazil to the Department of State1 Brasilia, March 2, 1977, 0345Z 1616. Subject: Discussions on Nuclear Cooperation. 1. In full day of discussions with Foreign Minister Silveira and GOB officials, Deputy Secretary Christopher: —Impressed upon Brazilians, in context of President Carter’s letter to Geisel,2 strength of US opposition to spread of nuclear explosive capabilities and directly-related enrichment and reprocessing technologies. —Presented for joint discussion and consideration alternatives to national enrichment and reprocessing designed to meet energy needs while reducing proliferation dangers. —Stressed that US seeks neither commercial advantage nor abrogation of FRG-Brazil deal by either party, but made clear that sensitive transfers should be deferred pending full examination of alternatives. 2. In response, Silveira emphatically and repeatedly refused to suspend in any way, either privately or publicly, any element of agreement with FRG. Most he would accept—after being pressed hard by 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770071–0248. Secret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. In a March 6 memorandum to Mondale, Christopher said that Silveira “took a hard stand” during their meeting and “reacted with disinterest” to Christopher’s attempts to explore “bilateral and multilateral alternatives to Brazil’s plan to acquire national enrichment and reprocessing facilities.” (National Archives, RG 59, Papers of Warren Christopher, Withdrawn Items, Box 5, Chronological Files, Memoranda to the Secretary, 1977) In his memoirs, Brzezinski recalled that Silveira received Christopher “very coldly,” and “his public reception was even worse. Popular anti-American sentiment was running high, and the trip only served to strengthen President Ernest Geisel’s position on this issue.” The Christopher Mission, Brzezinski wrote, “did not succeed, and it weakened American credibility.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, p. 131) 2 Not found.
