830 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX to Pyongyang, Kim had emphasized his willingness to hold talks with both the United States and South Korea, but not with President Park. President Carter’s reply had said that the U.S. was not in a position to change Park. Therefore it is necessary to give thought to some new approach. In his recent message, Kim had again insisted on the removal of Park. The suggestion for lower-level talks was President Tito’s own initiative and President Carter was the first person to whom he had suggested it. If this is acceptable to the U.S., Tito would begin a dialogue to see what the North Koreans would accept. At present the situation is blocked, and the question is how to unblock it. This is Tito’s suggestion. Kim’s stand is known and his first reaction will no doubt be negative. But there may be some flexibility which the Yugoslavs will seek to explore. Secretary Vance emphasized that we would not take part in any talks without the South Koreans being present. Minic reiterated that the Yugoslavs understood this and noted that the North Koreans wanted direct talks with the U.S. to replace the armistice agreement. This subject was also discussed in detail in Peking, and the Chinese indicated that they would not interfere in the Korean situation. A solution depends entirely on the Koreans, they said. Tito discussed the matter at length with Chairman Hua Kuo-feng and Minic himself with Foreign Minister Huang Hua. He asked whether the U.S. agreed that the situation was blocked. Secretary Vance replied that we would consider the Yugoslav proposal and that we had no difficulties with it, as stated. He expressed his opinion that the South Koreans likewise would go along. The result therefore, depends upon Kim Il-song. Minic said that the Yugoslavs would be very satisfied if Kim recognizes the realities of the situation and the need to break the deadlock. Assistant Secretary Holbrooke said that perhaps the Yugoslavs could pursue the idea with the North Koreans while we consult with the South Koreans. He agreed that the idea was worth pursuing. Science and Technology. Turning to bilateral matters, Secretary Vance thanked Minic for his letter on the question of cooperation in science and technology. He said he had followed up on the funding requirements to continue the program and told Minic that the President had now agreed that we would seek a $7 million appropriation (to cover a five-year period) on a matching basis.4 This appropriation would be 4 In a January 30 letter delivered by the Yugoslav Embassy to the Department of State, Minic suggested that the U.S. Government pay annuitants in Yugoslavia in dollars to free up dinars for the program. (Telegram 48421 to Belgrade, February 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780088–0797) See also footnote 10, Document 251.
