258  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
arsenal. The OSD option will have virtually no effect on the United 
States for the next two decades simply because we have no ICBM refire 
plans and do not plan large numbers of mobile NDMs.
(S) Requiring the destruction of one missile per launcher destroyed 
will negate the advantage to the U.S. of not limiting all NDMs, and 
yet would permit the Soviets to retain all of their refire missiles and to 
build more.
Air Breathing Systems
(S) OSD supports Option 3 with respect to the ALCM counting 
rule, Option 4 with respect to the ALCM range threshold, and Option 
2 with regard to ALCM distinguishability. The United States requires 
substantial discounting of all types of air delivered weapons to effec-
tively target the Soviet military target base, which is harder and more 
numerous than is the U.S. target base. Deep ALCM discounting is also 
necessary because of the massive and unlimited Soviet air defense sys-
tem, that is certain to improve with time.
(S) The range definition is vital in preserving our theater and stra-
tegic options and in hedging against unexpected advances in Soviet 
air defenses. The Soviet 600 km number is highly asymmetric in the 
Soviets’ favor due to geo-­political and force structure differences.
(S) On ALCM distinguishability, OSD is strongly opposed to sacri-
ficing our options for conventional ALCMs to fashion an ineffective but 
cosmetic verification regime for ALCMs. The 600 km range definition 
combined with the distinguishability requirement could ban the U.S. 
Tacit Rainbow conventional ALCM and other future systems.
Mobile ICBMs
(S) OSD supports Option 1, on the issue of whether to fall off our 
proposed ban on mobiles. If we decided to shift our position on ban-
ning mobiles, OSD supports Option 1 with regard to mobile ICBM sub-
limits, whether or not MIRVed mobiles are permitted. If mobiles are 
allowed, and sublimits are discussed, OSD would propose a limit of no 
more than 500–800 warheads nested in the 1,540 limit on heavy ICBM 
warheads. On moveable ICBMs, OSD supports Option 2.
(S) OSD strongly supports retaining our current position with 
regard to banning mobiles. The U.S. should retain that ban unless and 
until we have agreed with the USSR on effective mobile verification 
and achieved a firm Congressional commitment to U.S. mobile deploy-
ment. Both CIA and DIA believe that the currently tabled verification 
regime is inadequate to effectively verify mobiles. Absent agreement 
on an effective verification regime prior to shifting our position toward 
allowing mobiles, U.S. negotiating leverage would be drastically 
reduced and the way opened for large-­scale Soviet cheating. A START
