304 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 90. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, November 25, 1977 SUBJECT PL 480, Title I This memorandum is intended to apprise you of the steps we are taking to comply with the new amendment of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 which became effective on October 1, 1977.2 The amendment provides: “Sec. 112. (a) No agreement may be entered into under this title to finance the sale of agricultural commodities to the government of any country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights, including torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, prolonged detention without charges, or other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty, and the security of person, unless such agreement will directly benefit the needy people in such country. An agreement will not directly benefit the needy people in the country for purposes of the preceding sentence unless either the commodities themselves or the proceeds from their sale will be used for specific projects or programs which the President determines would directly benefit the needy people of that country. The agreement shall be used to benefit the needy people and shall require a report to the President on such use within six months after the commodities are delivered to the recipient country. “(b) To assist in determining whether the requirements of subsection (a) are being met, the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate or the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives may require the President to submit in writing information demonstrating that an agreement will directly benefit the needy people in a country. “(c) . . . “(d) The President shall transmit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President of the Senate, and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate, in the annual presentation materials on planned programming of assistance under this Act, a 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 18, Human Rights—PL 480 II. Confidential. Vance’s initials appear in the lower right-hand corner of the page. A notation in Vance’s handwriting on the first page of the memorandum reads: “See p. 3,” a reference to his handwritten comment noted in footnote 6 below. In a note attached to another copy of the memorandum, Christopher wrote: “Cy, We should discuss this subject today or tomorrow. W.C.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 7, Memoranda to the Secretary—1977) 2 See Document 86 and footnote 2 thereto.
