614
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
The Pres said he prefers to assign an extra 15–20 agents and be sure
to get them out by Friday morning.11 He did not want to find that half
of them had vanished.
ZB noted that we could have tighter surveillance. We could have
individual interviews with each diplomat, informing him of his respon-
sibilities by the FBI or State. The police or FBI could take up positions
in front of the Embassy and homes.
WC said Justice had suggested that a bus pick them up and take
them to the airport. They were concerned about creating an incident.
ZB said each should be informed individually of his responsibilities
and there should be some visual surveillance.
CV said they could increase the number of agents and tighten
surveillance.
WC said we should let them make individual arrangements since
they had to go to banks, etc. This entailed some risk, but they would
be restricted carefully.
HJ said it was hard to be sensitive to their personal needs at this
point.
ZB said to let an agent go with them wherever they needed to go.
WC said it would take a lot of people.
The Pres said it would only be for 3 days.
CV said State would get together with Justice and work it out.
The Pres said we should be humane, but he wanted them out. He
asked if he needed to sign something to order the census of claims.
LC said it would use the same order as before and a new signature
was not required.
The Pres said he was to brief Congress and would read the message
to Bani-Sadr.
CV said to note that it was from the U.S. Government to Bani-Sadr
and that this had been made clear to the Swiss.
ZB agreed that it was important that it be clear that the message
did not come from the President personally. Also that there had been
no message authorized from the President to Khomeini, whether oral
or any other way. People believe such a letter was authorized.
HJ said the PRES should not reveal to Congress his suspicions
about Ghotbzadeh. LC agreed.
The Pres noted that Senator Byrd had gone public after his briefing
last Saturday.12 This was not like him.
11 April 4.
12 March 29. Byrd stated in a news conference that Christopher had briefed him
and other Senators on “new measures against Iran.” (Charles Mohr, “Iran Reports Concil-
iatory Message From Carter, but U.S. Issues Denial,” New York Times, March 30, 1980,
p. 1)
