1980  815
You asked two questions yesterday.2 We have the answer to the 
first: are the two computer systems connected? They are, but the con-
nection apparently did not generate analogous behavior by both. That 
leads to your second question, what triggered the information on the 
warning display? They do not yet know. An answer may be available 
in a few days, but the mysteries in this incident, plus recent previous 
incidents,3 have sufficiently disturbed Defense so that Bill Perry will 
lead a panel of experts on a major system review that goes far beyond 
an answer for this case alone.4 (S)
	
Tab A
	
Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense5
Washington, June 4, 1980
FACT SUMMARY
Early yesterday morning a technical problem in a computer at 
North American Air Defense Command caused some erroneous data 
to be transmitted. As a result some displays at the National Military 
Command Center and Strategic Air Command Headquarters indicated 
multiple missile launches against the United States; however, other 
information available directly from the sensor system failed to confirm 
that any missiles had been launched. As a precaution and in accordance 
with standard procedures, certain Strategic Air Command aircraft and 
Command and Control aircraft were brought to a higher state of readi-
ness. These aircraft were manned and engines started. One Command 
and Control aircraft in the Pacific took off. There was no change in 
overall US defense posture and, after an evaluation, all systems were 
returned to normal.
The cause of the computer discrepancy is under investigation. In 
the meantime arrangements have been made to insure that at all times a 
special secure telephone connection is in effect to provide a parallel line 
of communication from one center to the other, permitting even more 
prompt override, if necessary, of any false computer driven indications 
of an attack.
2 No other record of Carter’s questions was found.
3 See Documents 167 and 171.
4 Brzezinski wrote below the last paragraph: “I have asked for a fuller report for 
you.”
5 Secret.
