1956  1159
side always ready resolve issues and which side not willing do same. 
As pointed out, question embargo is obstacle in relations between two 
countries. Also wanted point out if I would only accept proposal he 
made this morning he satisfied it would certainly contribute to resolu­
tion other problems as well. Agreement in this regard would certainly 
create favorable atmosphere and provide us with favorable basis for 
settlement issues between two countries. Could anyone deny this is 
what both our two peoples desire?
18. I said when we were discussing agreed announcement on civil­
ians, I completely met his point view on third power arrangements in 
US, on removing all barriers to return Chinese students who desired 
return his country, on form of announcement he desired make in this 
regard, and on his desire make no specific statement of exact time 
limit within which Americans permitted return, with understanding 
this would resolve first problem I had raised in these talks, return of 
Americans. Fact that US completely abided by this agreement incontro­
vertibly sustained by fact third power arrangement even after passage 
almost year, has not brought to our attention single case obstruction. 
Yet in spite this, it has not resolved problem of return of Americans. 
As I previously pointed out we seem to be going backwards in this 
regard. With regard announcement on renunciation force, I accepted in 
full all language of his Dec 1 draft, making only minimal amendments 
required to make it really meaningful with regard to our most serious 
dispute. When he said acceptance of proposal with regard trade would 
contribute to solution of other problems between us and provide basis 
for settlement issues it certainly understandable if I asked what con­
crete content such a statement had.
19. Wang said was sure he had already clearly answered in sev­
eral remarks this morning, questions I asked. Agreement on removal 
embargo would demonstrate two of us here really engaged in settling 
questions rather than stalling and were really working to get rid of 
obstacles rather than creating obstacles in our relations. Success in this 
regard would indicate even though we met difficulties on other issues, 
yet we have scored progress in this present problem. For both of us 
solving problems better than not solving.
20. I had nothing more. Wang asked if I agreeable meeting Thursday 
Sept 6. I was.
Gowen
