United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 31 Conference would be held in Ecuador about January, 1960,5 and that the Latin Americans would like to have the Inter-American Bank matter settled well before that meeting. He suggested, therefore, that it would be desirable to have a high-­level conference early in 1959. The Chairman suggested that the Staff prepare a paper that would present various alternatives with respect to the creation and operation of the Institution, together with the problems and issues raised by each, for subsequent consideration by the Council. This was agreed (see Staff Committee Minutes No. 556 and 557, NAC Document No. 2383, and Council Minutes No. 271).6 [Here follows discussion of agenda item 2, “Proposed Increase in IBRD and IMF Resources.”] 5 Reference is to the proposed Eleventh Inter-American Conference, scheduled to convene in Quito. The meeting was postponed several times until March 1961, when it was postponed indefinitely. 6 None of the documents cited here are printed; copies are in Treasury Department Files. ETA–9. Minutes of the 271st Meeting of the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems1  Washington, September 1958. [Here follows discussion of agenda items 1 and 2, dealing respectively with proposed Export-Import Bank credits to Turkey and Argentina.] 3. Inter-American Development Banking Institution The Council then discussed the paper prepared by the Staff Committee outlining alternative approaches to the establishment of an Inter-American Development Banking Institution (NAC Document No. 2383). The Chairman said he expected that the Latin American countries would want to proceed with the planning of the Institution. He suggested that during the absence from Washington of many interested persons for the meetings of the International Monetary Fund 1 Source: Treasury Department Files, NAC Minutes. For National Advisory Council Use Only. The source text is marked “Draft of Minutes.” It is undated and contains no list of participants. A table of contents is not printed.
