544 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 388. Telegram 1329 to Geneva1 Washington, November 29, 1955, 7:34 p.m. 1329. For Johnson. Guidance for December 1 meeting. 1. Implementation. If consonant with situation at time of meet­ ing, impress on Wang there has been no progress this respect since last meeting. No additional Americans released, no more letters received by British Charge from imprisoned Americans. US Government takes serious view of PRC’s unjustifiable delay in implementing its clear commitment under Agreed Announcement. Cite Bradshaw case as evi­ dence personal hardship individuals suffering through PRC’s delay. 2. Renunciation of Force. While Wang’s hard line at last meeting may presage break in talks or resort to publicity, we believe it may also be deliberate pressure tactic to determine whether we will give any on our draft. PRC would seem not to be in strong position either break off talks or go to public at this moment. Believe we should hold firm on our draft for at least one more meeting. Wang’s only criticism our draft has been on ground that it would preclude PRC use of force in Taiwan area, which would be true of any draft we presented. You should follow tactics suggested your 1214 (omitting introduc­ tion revised draft), with strong attack on ultimatum aspects his posi­ tion. Without acceding to his insistence that you negotiate on basis his draft, it might be useful probe vigorously to see whether he has any negotiating latitude with respect to it. Press hard on basic defect his draft which is failure apply renunciation force principle to Taiwan area. Argumentation you used last meeting was excellent and you should continue along this general line. You may wish to point out that Wang has endeavored separate issue in Taiwan area into two parts (paragraphs 46 to 48 your 1215). The first part he claims is a domestic issue which concerns only the Communists and the Nationalists and in which he retains complete freedom to use force in that area. The second part he defines as an international ques­ tion involving issues between the Communists and United States. As to this the Communists are willing to renounce the use of force. By this formulation, the Communists seek to deprive the United States of its right to use force in collective self defense, an inherent right recognized by the Charter, while preserving to the Communists entire freedom to 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–2955. Secret; Limit Distri­ bution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Sebald and in draft by Robertson, Dulles, and Phleger.
