723.2515/1619: Telegram
[Document 226]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, September 21, 1925—4 p.m.
[Received September 22—12:40 a.m.]
From Pershing: Secretary’s telegram of September 18, 6 p.m. The purpose of my letters
and cables has been to give you and the Arbitrator as far as is possible a clear idea of
the extraordinary and astonishing conditions which confront us here. My statements
and conclusions are based wholly on my own observations and those of my delegation.
The Chileans have pursued methods of violence, intimidation, and deportation,
persistently and relentlessly, to the extent that the numbers of the male Peruvians of
voting age have been materially reduced in the provinces. The greater part of those who
remain are so thoroughly cowed that they fear to acknowledge having Peruvian
sentiments. Those who have been forced to leave cannot safely return at this time,
notwithstanding any assurances Chileans might give for their personal protection.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
It is extremely doubtful to my mind whether it will be possible to create even
reasonably fair conditions consistent with the award, but the Arbitrator can rest assured
that I shall spare no effort to that end. I should prefer infinitely to see the plebiscite fail
and the Plebiscitary Commission withdraw rather than to have our Government be a
party to an election conforming to present intentions of the authorities here. So far as
concerns me personally it may be understood that I would not for a moment be a party
to such a scandal.
I am fully convinced now that neither Department nor Arbitrator could have had
anything like a clear conception of situation here when award was written. In light of
my investigations, conditions were then same or worse. I quite appreciate serious
consequences should the Commission fail to complete its mission; but unless attitude
of Chile can be changed and honest assistance substituted for obstruction, then the
Commission must fail.
In endeavor to produce improvement in situation I shall present soon to Commission
certain demands covering prerequisites for free plebiscite which my advisers are
preparing and of which Arbitrator will be informed in advance. Pershing.
