762
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
have used the phrase that they would “participate in determining their
own future”.
Crown Prince Fahd said that was an exceptionally anglo-Saxon
phrase. There is nothing like that in Arabic. (Some discussion ensued
about how to translate the various phrases.)
Dr. Brzezinski wondered how President Carter’s speech5 in Cairo
had been translated. He thought they should use that translation. That
was a very careful choice of words.
Crown Prince Fahd said that the status of Jerusalem had a very spe-
cial significance for this country. Muslims first turned to Jerusalem to
pray until God declared that they should turn to Mecca.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had been asked this specif-
ically in Israel, i.e., to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. There
are also demands for such an action in the United States. Our position
remains unchanged. This issue will be resolved only in the context of a
comprehensive peace settlement.
Mr. Christopher said that we stand by our position not to recognize
any unilateral steps by Israel which claim that whole territory. It is rec-
ognized by us as occupied territory to be dealt with in the context of a
settlement of the West Bank and Gaza.
Crown Prince Fahd said that this had been a very fruitful exchange.
He would like once more to reiterate their determination to be helpful
in lessening the problems. We will be sending out words and emis-
saries to lessen the problems. We urge you to recognize human limits.
We will come to you at once and say, “This is the problem that re-
mains.” We must stay in close contact and look at the whole area. We
are surrounded by more than just nuisances. Try to see the situation
that we are in and never attribute ulterior motives to us. Saudi Arabia
will not dig the U.S. in the ribs or harm relations with Egypt.
[Omitted here is discussion of regional security issues.]
5 The text of Carter’s March 10 address to Egypt’s People’s Assembly is printed in
Public Papers: Carter, 1979, pp. 412–414.
