234 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII source who says that Soviet combat troops are involved in combat operations. Previous reporting from Paktia Province during the October offensive supports the premise that Soviet troops were involved. 4. It is clear that the Soviets are actively, aggressively engaged in suppressing the insurgency; that they will take whatever steps are necessary to do this. While we do not know whether they will be successful, we do know that the insurgents, in the past, have been unable to exploit favorable opportunities their successes have presented to them. 5. We believe the Soviets have undertaken the resupply of Afghan troops by air because they perceive that they are in an emergency situation.2 The road connecting the Soviet port of Termez to Kabul, while occasionally interdicted, is open. The road system from the Soviet border to Herat is open. Therefore, if there were no emergency, the Soviets could augment and resupply forces here by road. We believe the Soviet decision to send troops in by air and to resupply Afghan forces by air is a reflection of their evaluation that the situation is deteriorating. The number of resupply flights to Kabul and Bagram between 29 November and 4 December was 17, of which 13 were AN– 22 flights and 4 were AN–12 flights. (An AN–22 carries 176,000 pounds of cargo or about 400 men when modified and an AN–12 carries 44,000 pounds of cargo.) Subsequent to this, additional AN–22 and AN–12 flights have arrived in Afghanistan. The exact number is unknown at this time. Also, there has been an increase in the TU–154 flights into Kabul. We are witnessing a major Soviet military/civilian airlift into and out of Afghanistan. 6. Chargé’s comment:3 Given the importance of the comments made in this appraisal, I have asked the Defense Attaché, and A/DCM, and POL/ECON section officer Taylor to add their own views to the above report. My own comments follow theirs. A. DATT [less than 1 line not declassified] comment: I share the view that the present insurgency situation in-country gives grounds for Soviet alarm. The Afghan Army has been unable to successfully 2 The Soviet airlift was first reported in [text not declassified] December 7. The report surmised that the airlift “may have been prompted by a major rebel offensive in the valley north of Kabul,” and would “probably be viewed by many as an intervention” and “provide a focus for religious outrage over a perceived Soviet move against brother Muslims, perhaps led by Iran,” or even the Afghan military. The airlift constituted a “serious escalation” in Soviet involvement in Afghanistan and it demonstrated that the situation was more dire than current intelligence reporting suggested. “Most importantly,” the report concluded, the airlift “demonstrates Moscow’s resolve in pursuing its interests in Afghanistan despite the obvious pitfalls and at a time when the Kremlin might consider the U.S. preoccupied with events in Tehran.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, Afghan Situation Folder, Start 14 Sep) 3 The Chargé was Amstutz.
