906 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement by the President, or other person empowered to act in his stead. Such commanders will be called Authorizing Commanders. 2. This authorization by the President is an emergency measure necessitated by recognition of the fact that communications may be disrupted by an attack (as defined in the Enclosure). Each Authorizing Commander must insure that such delegation of authority is not assumed through accident or misinformation. Further, it should be regarded as an authorization effective only until it is possible to com­ municate with the President or other person empowered to act for him. 3. [text not declassified] 4. [text not declassified] a. For the defense of the United States, its Territories, and possessions: In the United States, its Territories and possessions and in interna­ tional waters adjacent thereto as defined in Section “A” against attack by sea—(Special Additional Instructions in Section “A” below). b. For the defense of U.S. forces in foreign territory and in inter­ national waters against Sino-Soviet Bloc attacking forces, subject to applicable agreements or understandings, if any, with the government exercising sovereignty over the country or countries concerned— (Special Additional Instructions in Section “A” below). c. In the event of nuclear attack upon the United States, in retalia­ tion against the enemy identified as responsible for the attack, subject in the case of retaliation from friendly foreign territory to applicable agreements or understandings, if any, with the government exercis­ ing sovereignty over the country or countries concerned—(Special Additional Instructions in Section “B” below). 3. OPERATIONAL LIMITATIONS. Because of the serious interna­ tional implications of the use of nuclear weapons by U.S. military forces, it is essential that particularly strict command control and supervision be exercised, and that the use of nuclear weapons be limited to circum­ stances of grave necessity. [text not declassified]
