Nicaragua  865
their aspirations. Because they have shown themselves so resentful 
of U.S. dealings with GON in minor matters, it is inconceivable to 
Embassy that these groups would not as full resent EXIM loan under 
any conditions approximating those now applying to Nicaraguan sit-
uation. On occasion recent contemplated $12 million bond issue to be 
underwritten by U.S. banks spokesmen this group publicly said new 
government would not honor debt. Such statements would seem good 
indication irresponsibility.
3. Independent Liberal Lacayo Farfans violent reaction to loan 
negotiations set forth Department telegram 383 can be taken as reli-
able indication dedicated opposition Independent Liberal faction. In 
this connection Embassy reasonably certain that lacking issue of loan, 
Lacayo Farfans’ supporters would seize upon any pretext attack U.S. 
if they feel would help their cause against Somoza psychologically. 
Embassy does not regard Lacayo Farfans group responsible as pres-
ently constituted.
4. In Embassy’s opinion balance opposition composed adventur-
ers clearly linked with foreign international schemers and Communists 
and devoid any claim responsibility. Many of this group working with 
classification three above. Their attitudes toward loan will of course be 
completely adverse to U.S.
Despite general impression of considerable opposition to loan cre-
ated by foregoing evaluation Embassy wishes emphasize its conclusion 
that substantial majority Nicaraguan people who have not abandoned 
task of forming nation through constructive effort would welcome loan 
as measure greatly needed bolster economy in difficult circumstances. 
It is this majority which in last analysis will eventually assert itself in 
present difficulties and for benefit of which Embassy strongly recom-
mends loan be granted soon.
These views offered as careful evaluations based on Embassy’s 
intimate knowledge opposition motivations rather than as result cur-
rent inquiries. Embassy convinced that any inquiry to groups above 
mentioned however discreet in present circumstances would be taken 
as opportunity wage anti-­loan campaign in which U.S. would be prom-
inently featured and as result of which country’s future economic pros-
pects would be further aggravated. For this reason Embassy earnestly 
recommends it be excused from requirement making inquiries to ascer-
tain viewpoints.
3 Telegram 38 to Managua, August 3, transmitted the text of a message from Farfans 
to Rubottom in which the former protested the U.S. plan to extend Export-Import Bank 
loans to Nicaragua. (817.10/8–359)
