August 8–September 17, 1978
103
Harold Saunders
Ambassador Dinitz
Amb. Sam Lewis
William Quandt
Subject: Discussion of Israeli proposed textual changes to overall
Framework document.
1200–125078
President Carter
Foreign Minister Weizman
Subject: Sinai Framework
1300–133079
President Carter
Defense Minister Weizman
Subject: Sinai Framework
1630–180080
President Carter
President Sadat
Secretary Vance
Osama el-Baz
tinction between the peace treaties, which were to be concluded between us and the Arab
States, and the issues that were to be discussed with the Arabs in the administered terri-
tories. Vance admitted that was indeed true, but that was in the context of the proposed
Geneva Conference, and since then things had changed.” (Dayan, Breakthrough, p. 175)
78 Carter met with Dayan, not Weizman. In his personal diary, Carter wrote of this
meeting: “I decided to discuss the settlements issue with Dayan, and other matters con-
cerning the general framework. The negotiations are primarily about whether UN 242
applies to all aspects of the discussions in the West Bank. On the West Bank settlements,
he thought we could handle it with no new settlements, but that’s something I would
have to work out with Begin. He said that Begin felt somewhat excluded, and this eve-
ning I should meet with just Begin and Barak, since Weizman had met with Sadat this
morning.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 238) See also Keeping Faith, p. 394.
79 According to the President’s Daily Diary, this meeting took place on September
16 from 1:07 p.m. to 1:30 p.m. in Aspen Lodge, though it adds question marks next to the
recorded times. (Carter Library, Presidential Material) In his memoirs, Carter wrote of
this meeting, which followed his meeting with Dayan: “I then went to see Weizman, to
find out about his meeting with Sadat. As he walked to Aspen with me, he reported that
Sadat would be willing to say in the Sinai document that future negotiations would settle
the issue of the Israeli settlements. I was startled, because this was not at all what Sadat
had just told me. I knew that in general Ezer was an optimist, and that at Camp David,
unfortunately, this attitude had rarely been justified. Weizman said he had also predicted
to Sadat that the Knesset would vote to remove the settlements; Dayan had also told me
the opposite.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, pp. 394–395)
80 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter and Vance met with Sadat and
el-Baz at Aspen Lodge on September 16 from 4:40 p.m. to 7 p.m. (Carter Library, Presi-
dential Materials) In his personal diary, Carter wrote of this meeting: “The meeting was
constructive. I went over my draft on Sinai with him, and also the general framework. I
outlined all the advantages he would derive from a success at Camp David; everything
that he would lose if we failed.” Carter continued: “On the Sinai, we are substantially in
agreement. Sadat was willing to say ‘international waterway’ relating to the Strait of
Tiran. He insisted that full diplomatic relations and open borders would apply only
when the interim withdrawal was complete. He accepted the question of settlers by ex-
pressing the Egyptian and Israeli positions and then to let the Israelis decide—to go
ahead or to fail. Sadat was in a sober and constructive mood.” (Carter, White House Diary,
pp. 239–240)
