698 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement prevented doing so by US Govt my side has obligation give account on each of these. These represent only fraction those Chinese prevented from returning but does show plight of broad masses of Chinese in US. 72. Wang said this morning he had further list of four Chinese in US (names in fol tel) and requested me make investigation and give accounting on these as well as others. Full details had been given in list he handed me. 73. I said, first, in discussing Americans in China, he had spoken of lenient treatment, we had different views as to what was lenient and what was not, and I would not go into that. 74. I said he had also said his govt had not agreed that impris­ oned Americans would be freed at any particular time. I did not think I needed take time review our discussion on this, but both of us well aware of significance of word “expeditiously” in this agreement. We had accepted word in good faith. 75. I said what I had said, and was repeating, was that these ­Americans were not being released expeditiously. No amount of expla­ nation or rationalization could change that fact. 76. I said I had previously gone into question of what he called ­Taiwan entry permits at great length. If his govt going to disregard those explanations, I saw little purpose in repeating them. 77. I said, I had said in past and was again saying that I always willing discuss with him and immediately take up case where there appears evidence my govt might not be fully carrying out terms agreed announcement. I continued to be willing do this. 78. I said, however at same time I could not take or accept respon­ sibility for those among tens thousands Chinese in US who do not write letters. As far as communication by Chinese in US with Indian Embassy concerned, anyone knowing anything about US and its postal system would know it perfectly absurd say that any Chinese afraid drop letter addressed Indian Embassy in mail box. 79. Wang said he had already stated their position towards ­Americans in China and their policy in handling of their cases. He had stated that his govt would continue faithfully to carry out terms agreed announcement. 80. Wang said he also asked US Govt do same in faithfully carrying out agreed announcement and refraining from any actions in violation of it. 81. Wang said situation of Americans in China was quite clear to everybody. And this situation was that their side has assisted these Americans in China. But they still not able get list Chinese in America from our side. They not even been furnished by US Govt with list indi­ cating number Chinese who are in prisons.
