204 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV briefing (for carriers and defense contractors) for review and submit their program of on-­going activities. —3.d. A permanent interagency group under the chairmanship of the Department of State shall be established consisting of representatives of the Executive Office of the President, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Department of Defense, National Security Agency and the Department of Justice/Federal Bureau of Investigation to review and if necessary to deny real estate acquisition through lease or purchase by the USSR and other Communist countries that present a serious potential threat to U.S. telecommunications security. Tasking: The Department of State representative was requested to insure that relevant actions of this group were made known to the subcommittee as necessary. —3.e. [6 lines not declassified] Tasking: [2 lines not declassified] —3.f. Subject to continuous review of available technology and reassessment of the foreign intercept threat the following immediate technical actions shall be undertaken: —The government shall conduct a multi-­faceted R&D program covering both system and user oriented protection approaches funded at about $15 million per year. Tasking: Of utmost concern is to avoid Executive Agent R&D duplication. It was acknowledged that R&D would be pursued within each agents sphere of responsibility. The Chairman stressed that the government R&D programs pull together, therefore, the DOD (NSA) as lead agent with full Commerce support, shall submit an R&D program package to the subcommittee for review. Furthermore, R&D dollars are to be highlighted for the President in future budgetary requests. —Phase I and II of the DUCKPINS cable program shall be completed as soon as possible and no later than in 1978. This program shall be funded at a level of about $4 million per year. Tasking: It is recognized that the DUCKPINS cable program is a continuing program without a cut-­off date even after full implementation. The Manager, NCS shall be prepared to provide program status at least quarterly. —Executive Secure Voice Network (ESVN) systems shall be installed when appropriate high priority requirements can be validated. Tasking: The Manager, NCS shall continue collection and analysis of government-­wide requirements for ESVN. NSA shall continue to assist. The Committee will review and validate fully justified requirements. —4.f. The Subcommittee should choose a future implementation strategy based on cost-­benefit analysis, legal considerations and
