288
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
87.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to
Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, November 10, 1977
Status Report on U.S. Policy on Human Rights
This will bring you up to date on actions which have been taken in
pursuance of our human rights policy, in response to the Deputy Secre-
tary’s memorandum of May 3 requesting me periodically to prepare
such a summary for you.2
Summary
—Personal visits abroad by Department principals have resulted
in high level discussions of our policy with many governments.
—The fundamental human rights documents and policy state-
ments have been sent to all our posts and the unified military
commands.
—Preparation of both classified and unclassified human rights re-
ports is well advanced.
—High level “quiet diplomacy” and public actions regarding secu-
rity assistance and aid programs as well as public diplomatic efforts
may have contributed to significant human rights actions and initia-
tives in countries such as Haiti, Nicaragua, Korea, the Philippines, El
Salvador, and Iran.
—The Inter-Agency Committee on Human Rights has reviewed
and made recommendations on numerous loans both in the framework
of the International Financial Institutions and our own AID programs.
—The Arms Export Control Board, chaired by Mrs. Benson, has in-
corporated human rights considerations into the whole range of its
policy actions with respect to security assistance programs and indi-
vidual arms export proposals.
—HA, with legislative liaison officers in State, Treasury, Export-
Import Bank and the Department of Defense, helped shape current leg-
islation and answer many Congressional inquiries.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 19, Human Rights—Status Reports.
Confidential. Sent through Christopher, who initialed the memorandum. Drafted by
Schneider on November 9. Sent under cover of a November 19 note from Oxman to
Daniel Spiegel indicating that Christopher had received the memorandum that day.
Oxman added that the memorandum was “unduly long;” however, he suggested that
Vance might want to review it in connection with his trip to Argentina, Brazil, and Vene-
zuela, November 20–23. Spiegel returned the memorandum to Oxman, adding to the No-
vember 19 note: “Steve: CV did not review on way to Latin America. How shall we
handle? Do you want to resubmit. Dan.” (Ibid.)
2 See footnote 1, Document 48.
