Foundations of Foreign
Policy, 1974–1980
1.
Editorial Note
Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter declared his candidacy for the
Democratic Presidential nomination on December 12, 1974. In prepara-
tion for Carter’s announcement speech, adviser Stuart Eizenstat and
members of the Governor’s Issues Group provided Carter with specific
themes he needed to emphasize. In a November 1, 1974, memorandum,
Eizenstat surveyed the current mood in a post-Watergate America:
“We are currently a country adrift from our moorings. Our leaders
muddle through from day to day, reacting to crises, with no notion of
where we are headed.
“As we approach our 200th anniversary as a nation, it is time that
our actions be guided by defined goals we wish to achieve in the bal-
ance of the 20th century. These are not pie-in-the-sky hopes but real-
istic, achievable goals. These national goals must be clearly defined so
that our citizens and our decision-makers know where we are headed
and why we are going there.”
Eizenstat stressed that while Carter did not need to define “the
specific goals the nation must set for itself,” he should “display some
notion of the areas in which specific, defined goals are a prerequisite to na-
tional government decision-making.” In addition to five domestic areas,
Eizenstat listed the elimination of domestic and international hunger
and “a foreign policy which is realistic, reasonable, and which reflects
our national goals and ideals and stresses the tempered use of power
abroad.” Referencing Carter’s ability to demonstrate national leader-
ship, Eizenstat noted:
“You have had to make executive decisions—to make a budget
and live within it—to develop new programs and provide the leader-
ship to carry through these programs—to deal with people on a daily
basis, not with Washington lobbyists—while your principal opponents
have never made executive decisions but simply react as legislators to
problems—who can propose the world without regard to account-
ability or efficiency of their proposals. Your experience is closer to that
required as President than theirs. Indeed, their ‘duties’ are such they
can run for President and be Senator at the same time.
1
