Venezuela  1299
VE–44.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State, 
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting 
Secretary of State1

Washington, July 7, 1960.
SUBJECT
Venezuelan Request for American Foreign Ministers Meeting regarding Dominican 
Republic.
Discussion:
The Venezuelan Government has requested the Council of the 
Organization of American States to convoke urgently the Organ of 
Consultation (Meeting of Consultation of American Foreign Ministers) 
under Article 6 of the Rio Treaty to consider acts of intervention and 
aggression of the Dominican Government against the Venezuelan 
Government, culminating in the assassination attempt against President 
Betancourt on June 24,2 and to take measures in defense of Venezuela’s 
sovereignty and for the maintenance of hemispheric peace and security.
The OAS Council received the Venezuelan request at a meeting on 
July 6, and decided to meet on July 8 in order to vote on it. While the 
Dominican representative rejected Venezuela’s charges and opposed 
the convocation of the Organ of Consultation, the sentiment expressed 
in the Council was favorable to Venezuela. Also, the Venezuelan repre-
sentative presented what seemed to be impressive evidence linking the 
plotters in the assassination attempt with Generalissimo Trujillo and 
Dominican officials.
It is therefore recommended that the United States at the July 
8 meeting of the OAS Council support the Venezuelan request for 
the convocation of the Organ of Consultation in this case. It is antic-
ipated that the Council will decide on July 8 to act provisionally as 
Organ of Consultation and will appoint an investigating committee 
to examine the available evidence, fixing at a later meeting the place 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/7–760. Confidential. Drafted by 
Robert J. Redington, Officer in Charge of U.S. – O.A.S. Delegation Matters in the Bureau 
of Inter-American Affairs.
2 That morning, Betancourt and his wife left their residence, entered their limou-
sine, and proceeded down Avenida Los Proceres, passing a parked car in which a bomb 
exploded. The limousine was thrown across the street, killing a military officer sitting 
next to Betancourt, who suffered severe cuts and burns. The Venezuelan police deter-
mined that the assassination attempt was carried out from the Dominican Republic and 
with the active support of Trujillo.
