Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
67
8–18.2 There is agreement that we should continue to pursue a course of
action ultimately leading to as comprehensive a formal agreement as
possible, subject to the original constraints you established in your
original PD3—e.g., dismantling of Soviet ASAT capabilities, emphasis
on verifiability, and an end to Soviet testing. However, the Summary of
Conclusions at Tab A,4 as well as Harold’s memo at Tab C,5 demon-
strate that there is still considerable interagency disagreement over
some of the fundamental issues we intend to initially raise with the So-
viets. There is also some concern among several principals that, despite
over nine months of study, we do not fully understand the implications
of what we intend to propose. The disagreements are summarized
below:
Hostile Acts. Consistent with the results of an earlier SCC meeting,
Cy Vance has told the Soviets that we are interested in an agreement
that attacks on each other’s satellites would be considered “hostile
acts.” However, there is interagency disagreement over whether we
ought to consider only physical attacks as hostile acts, or interference—
a broader term encompassing both physical attacks and electronic war-
fare (EW). ACDA, DOD and JCS favor the former, State the latter. [1½
lines not declassified]
Physical attacks would be easier to verify than interference, [4 lines
not declassified] vulnerability of our fleet. State argues that “interfer-
ence” is a term already in use in other US/Soviet bilateral agreements
(concerning the operation of National Technical Means), and negotia-
tions might prove easier if there is consistency among the various
agreements.
No First-Use Pledge. ACDA, supported by State, suggested that, to
make the talks more meaningful, we ought to propose at Helsinki that
both sides pledge not to be the first to attack a satellite of the other side.
DOD and JCS prefer to await the results of the Helsinki meeting before
deciding whether to propose such a pledge. [3 lines not declassified] Ad-
ditionally, Harold Brown, who is inclined to favor some non-use
pledge in peacetime, has asked for more time to consider whether we
want a “no-first-attack” pledge in wartime.
In addition, we do not currently have a good capability to monitor
some kinds of ASAT attacks on our satellites, but we could—and prob-
ably ought to—substantially improve our monitoring capability over
the next several years by installing on-board attack sensors on all our
important satellites (long-term costs: $250–300 M).
2 See Document 29.
3 See Document 24.
4 See Document 29.
5 Not attached.
