3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1977 75 United States. He was at a loss to understand that. Could this proposal for a symbolic initial reduction of Soviet and US forces really undermine the security of the United States, or that of the Soviet Union? Was this really such a terrible thing? He would also ask whether the Secretary would not agree that actual achievement of progress on the basis of that last Soviet proposal for a token, symbolic, reduction of US and Soviet forces would create favorable conditions for the solution of other questions that needed to be resolved? It would be hard to say to just what extent such progress would facilitate resolution of other questions, but it would undoubtedly work in the direction of creating a climate of detente. This concluded what he wanted to say about the Vienna negotiations. The Secretary thanked Gromyko for his remarks and said that in response he would first say that in our view the present situation did call for serious steps in order to move forward the Vienna negotiations which were unfortunately in a state of stagnation. In order to make progress, in our judgment two key principles would have to be recognized by both sides. The first accurately reflected the real objective of both sides in these negotiations, and that was to achieve parity, equal military manpower in this area. Gromyko had talked of equal reductions. We insist that there be equal results—overall parity—just as in the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. What we sought as an ultimate goal in both negotiations was rough parity. The proposal Gromyko had referred to, providing for equal reductions, would contractualize inequality. Our purpose was to seek an even balance on the basis of agreed data. That in our judgment was a proper basis for seeking agreement in this field. The other key principle was collectivity of manpower limitations. This was an essential condition for any agreement in the Vienna negotiations. We would agree that subceilings were justified for US and Soviet forces, only because the territories of our countries were outside the area covered by the negotiations, and because we were the two most important powers involved in them. On the other hand, to establish subceilings for the forces of the other countries involved would seriously disrupt collective defense arrangements. If the other side was ready to negotiate on the basis of such collectivity, we would regard it as an important step forward. As for the matter of symbolic cuts, we believed this would be a mistake, because it would mislead not only peoples in our two countries, but all peoples. The Secretary would add, however, that we would agree to US and Soviet cuts, but we would need better data for analysis and for arriving at conclusions. Gromyko asked if the Secretary believed that the data already submitted were not sufficient? The Secretary replied that they were not sufficient. We would discuss with our allies whether additional amplification of the data we
