1054
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
supply arrangements, then progress can be made. The U.S. was unsuc-
cessful in getting Argentina to sign the Tlatelolco Treaty. Brazil is not a
party to the NPT. Brazil has signed the Tlatelolco Treaty, but it is not
yet in force. The U.S. signed; it will not introduce nuclear weapons in
Puerto Rico or the Canal Zone. We are pressing the Soviets and the
French to sign.
The Chancellor said that the FRG’s view was that cooperation must
be based upon equal status. He felt an amendment to the NPT would be
difficult to achieve. It was better to work within the IAEA (which he la-
belled, jokingly, “a modern American four-letter word”).
The President said that the concern with non-proliferation had pre-
dated his Administration.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to nuclear nonproliferation.]
418.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, August 16, 1977, 1555Z
11862. USIAEA. Subject: Cuban Influence on Soviet Signing of Tla-
telolco Treaty Protocol.
1. Subject of Treaty of Tlatelolco and Protocols arose in conversa-
tion between Emboff and MFA Disarmament Chief, Roland Timer-
bayev, August 10. Emboff asked if there had been any movement on
the Soviet consideration of Protocol One and Timerbayev replied that it
was still under study. Some weeks ago Timerbayev had expressed
doubt to Emboff that U.S. ratification of Protocol Two would be
without reservation and hinted that possible U.S. reservations on Pro-
tocol Two could affect Soviet action on Protocol One. Asked about
reasons for delay in Soviet action, he mentioned Cuba and when
pressed said that “it is logical to assume” that Soviet-Cuban relations
were an important factor in Soviet decision on ratification. He refused
to be drawn out further. He also claimed that the Soviet Union was
trying to get the Cubans to sign the NPT, and that Moscow expected to
assume the major share of the burden among the nuclear powers in get-
ting Cuba to sign. In the same way, the USSR looked to the U.S. and
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770295–0784.
Confidential. Sent for information to Vienna.
