6. With regard to protection of the Japanese investment in the Mitsui Station
by an arrangement doing away with the monopoly claimed at present by the
Japanese, Colonel Manton Davis assures me that if his company were
enabled to proceed with construction of the system which was contemplated
by its contract, it would be in a position to offer arrangements to the Mitsui
Station for cooperation, enabling that station to handle a larger business and
to make a larger revenue than it could possibly anticipate if such a system
were not effected.
7. I was very informally approached on this subject a week ago by Saburi,
now head of the Commercial Department of the Japanese Foreign Office, at
present on duty as a member of the Japanese delegation at the Tariff
Conference. He intimated to me that he was expected by Baron Shidehara
to find occasion, on the basis of our somewhat intimate friendship, to
discuss this matter with me rather more informally and outspokenly than a
purely official relationship would make possible. He conversed upon the
seriousness with which the Japanese Government regards this matter with
what, to me, seemed to be specifically instructed emphasis. I told him that I
never had been able to understand why his Government attached the vital
importance they did to what after all is a commercial venture in regard to
which our people ask merely a right to do business in China. I added that I
could only surmise that in the eyes of his Government the question had
been magnified into having an artificial importance because it invoked
considerations of amour propre or else of suspicion of our motive. His
answer was that he himself felt that both of these elements entered into the
question; that in Japan there were persons who could not be dissuaded from
believing that our naval authorities had developed the Federal project with a
view to possible war with Japan, although he himself was quite prepared to
believe this was not the case and to agree with my surmise that the Japanese
in the event of such a war would be more likely to profit from such a
station. He was less willing to speak definitely upon the element of amour
propre. He confined himself to remarking that there is a tendency in some
quarters to feel that the United States is seeking to override and to humiliate
Japan. I assured him we only have the most friendly intention to live and let
live; and that we would be only too glad to have the matter worked out in
justice to the interests both of the Japanese and the Americans upon some
basis of cooperation. Saburi suggested as such a basis the consortium; but
