3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
170
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
factor in the arms race, and will lead to political consequences such as a
deterioration of the international situation.”
By mid-March, against the background of the swelling human
rights dispute, the Soviets were airing in greater detail the problems
they foresaw for the upcoming negotiations on SALT with Secretary
Vance, whose late March visit they had announced without fanfare
early in the month. Pravda March 13 observed that the President’s state-
ment of March 9 allowing for deferral of cruise missile limits from the
new agreement was “a certain departure from the previous US stand,”
saw a contradiction in US words about “mutual trust” and the “hulla-
baloo” it had raised on human rights, and interpreted the latter as an
attempt to exert pressure on the Soviet Union and “bargain for conces-
sions,” implicitly on SALT.
Brezhnev’s March 21 trade unions speech threw an early pall of
pessimism over prospects for the Vance meeting. Avoiding substantive
comments on SALT (he referred only to the 1974 agreements, not to
Vladivostok), Brezhnev observed that the new administration’s first
two months in power did not “seem to show a striving to overcome”
the stagnation in relations with the Soviet Union. And in his stark
warning that the USSR would “not tolerate interference in our internal
affairs by anyone and under any pretext—a normal development of re-
lations on such a basis is of course unthinkable,” he expressed the pre-
vailing mood of irritation in Moscow toward the administration.
Watershed in March
Secretary Vance’s trip to Moscow marked something of a water-
shed in US-Soviet relations. Up to that point, the Soviets, despite evi-
dent misgivings and doubts, at least appeared to be acting on the as-
sumption that an agreement before October was in prospect. Their
attitude toward the Carter administration, while soured compared to
January, was still relatively punctilious. And they gave the impression
that while it was up to the US to take the initiative to improve rela-
tions, they themselves would be responsive, or at least not totally
unresponsive.
Gromyko’s unprecedented press conference of March 31 at the
conclusion of the talks with the Secretary revealed a far greater chasm
in the relationship than the Soviets had disclosed publicly up to that
point. Obviously peeved at the White House statement on the talks5
“even before the Secretary returned to Washington,” Gromyko sought
to set aright what he called “distortions” of the Soviet position. Gro-
5 For information regarding Gromyko’s press conference, see footnote 4, Document
27. Carter’s remarks about SALT and the negotiations, March 30, 1977, are in Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 538–544.
