308 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement with friendly foreign countries, and was to be submitted in one sealed copy to the commander concerned. b. State, in consultation with Defense, would review all exist­ ing agreements and understandings with friendly foreign countries affecting the “Implementing Instructions” and take action as deemed appropriate by the Secretary of State to revise any such agreements or understandings which impede U.S. forces in foreign territory in exer­ cising the right to defend themselves. 6. State and Defense have now submitted to the President for approval the draft “Implementing Instructions” amended pursuant to 5–­a above. Comparison of Subject Draft Instructions With Previous Draft 7. After review of the notes taken by General Goodpaster and myself at the June 27 meeting, the amended draft instructions appear to carry out fully the President’s action in 5–­a above. Throughout these instructions, the authority to expend nuclear weapons for defense of U.S. forces in foreign territory against Sino-Soviet Bloc attacking forces is made “subject to applicable agreements or understandings, if any, with the government exercising sovereignty over the country or coun­ tries concerned.” 8. In addition, this quoted wording has also been used in para­ graphs 4–­a–(3) and 4–­c, in place of the wording used in the original “Authorization” and the previous draft instructions. The new word­ ing does not make a significant change in paragraph 4–­c, which orig­ inally read “subject in the case of retaliation from friendly foreign territory to existing and future agreements or understandings with the country or countries concerned.” There does appear, however, to be a significant change in paragraph 4–­a–(3), which originally read “subject to the consent of the country sovereign over the territory involved.” Under the new wording, whether we obtained the consent of the sovereign country would depend upon any applicable agree­ ments or understandings. Comparison of Subject Draft With Original “Authorization” 9. Except as indicated in 8 above, all of the provisions of the original “Authorization” appear to have been appropriately taken into account in the subject draft instructions. However, certain new or supplemen­ tary material has been added as follows: Paragraph 5–c, last sentence, adds a new limitation, which appears to be consistent with existing basic policy. Paragraph 6–a, second sentence, contemplates that commanders of joint task forces and of other commands, “equivalent in stature to the
