Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1073
precisely how the number of warheads on the Soviet SLBM “SS–N–18” 
was reduced. Moreover, even if one side were to decide to mount on its 
missiles previously removed warheads, this would require more time 
and work than the U.S. side would need to equip all its B–1B heavy 
bombers with long-range nuclear cruise missiles. Nevertheless, in the 
framework of the comprehensive agreement reached in Houston we 
agreed that 95 B–1B heavy bombers, each of them capable of carrying 
20 nuclear ALCMs (1900 ALCMs total), currently are not accountable as 
carriers of such missiles.
However, I do not think that we should debate this matter any 
further.
I have a concrete proposal. We would be prepared to update the 
Houston agreement on the right of each side to download the account-
able number of warheads on not more than two types of ballistic mis-
siles, and by not more than five warheads on each type, with a total 
ceiling for downloading of 1250 warheads. We could agree that for the 
purposes of the Treaty, downloading of the accountable number of war-
heads would be allowed for each side on two existing types of ballis-
tic missiles, by not more than four warheads on each type, with total 
downloading not to exceed 750 warheads. In order to ensure this pro-
cedure is irreversible, the warhead platform would have to be changed 
when downloading more than two warheads on a missile.
In the context of such a solution to the problem, we could confirm 
our other step forward, which takes into account the specific manner of 
deployment of U.S. missiles and stipulates that accounting for down-
loading ICBM warheads be by missile bases, and for SLBMs by oceans.
As far as the Soviet “SS–N–18” missiles are concerned, all such mis-
siles in reality have been equipped for a long time with front ends of a 
new design capable of carrying only three warheads each. The previ-
ously designed front ends capable of carrying seven warheads have been 
destroyed. This is why the question dealing with the “SS–N–18” missile 
was discussed separately in Houston, outside the framework of the right 
to be established by the Treaty to download the accountable number of 
warheads on not more than two types of ballistic missiles. The decision 
on the “SS–N–18” missile is an integral part of the Houston package and 
it is only necessary to indicate the existing situation in the Treaty.
At the same time, as an expression of good will and provided 
that our compromise proposal with regard to the downloading of the 
accountable number of ballistic missiles is accepted, I would be ready 
to exercise additional flexibility. We are prepared to agree that the 
United States, before the START Treaty comes into force, could reduce 
the number of warheads on all of its Minuteman-3 ICBMs from three 
to two or one at its discretion. By analogy, just as the warhead plat-
form had been replaced on our “SS–N–18” SLBMs, front end platforms 
would be installed on the aforementioned ICBMs which would allow
