884
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Japanese officials have referred to the President’s April 77 and May 28
press conference remarks citing Japan as one of the countries which
have “a perfect right to go ahead and continue their own reprocessing.”
They aver that the President reaffirmed that position in private discus-
sions at London with Prime Minister Fukuda.9
Japanese spokesmen have proposed that resolution of the Tokai
issue be placed in the context of a broad political understanding in
which Japan would publicly support our nuclear fuel cycle evaluation
program and our position on the security risks inherent in plutonium
production. They also appear ready to support our conclusion that re-
cycling plutonium for light water reactors is neither necessary nor eco-
nomically justified. In return the United States would affirm that it does
not intend to discriminate against Japan and, until such time as a viable
alternative to a plutonium fuel cycle may be established, that it will
grant approvals of transfers of spent fuel for reprocessing elsewhere,
and avoid invoking provisions in the U.S.-Japanese bilateral agreement
in such a way as to jeopardize Japan’s long-term nuclear strategy. Ad-
ditionally the United States would seek to facilitate Japanese access to
assured supplies of low enriched uranium and Japanese interest in be-
coming a supplier of enriched uranium.
United States non-proliferation policies have been articulated in
the President’s public statements, PDM–8 decisions and proposed leg-
islation. Any decision on Tokai must bear in mind not only the high po-
litical importance of that issue to the Japanese, but our own interests as
well. A Tokai decision would be the first, by this Administration, on a
foreign reprocessing facility. Although the facility, and its context, are
somewhat unique, a U.S. decision could set precedents. The manner in
which the U.S. exercises its rights could affect European Community
willingness to renegotiate reprocessing rights they now have under the
U.S.–EURATOM agreement for cooperation.
7 On April 7, Carter told reporters that he recognized that it “would be impossible,
counterproductive, and ill-advised for us to try to prevent other countries that need it
from having the capability to produce electricity from atomic power” and that the “one
difference that has been very sensitive as it relates to, say, Germany, Japan, and others, is
that they fear that our unilateral action in renouncing the reprocessing of spent fuels to
produce plutonium might imply that we prohibit them or criticize them severely because
of their own need for reprocessing. This is not the case. They have a perfect right to go
ahead and continue with their own reprocessing efforts. But we hope they’ll join with us
in eliminating in the future additional countries that might have had this capability
evolve.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, pp. 581–586)
8 On May 2, Carter told European journalists that he favored “the supply of ade-
quate nuclear fuel to nations for power production” but was “heavily committed to the
prevention of the capability of non-nuclear nations from developing explosives, atomic
weapons.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, pp. 760–767)
9 No record of this conversation has been found.
