3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
263
which case the press will consider that to be a subterfuge; (3) or a
working meeting, advertised in advance as consultative and not de-
signed to achieve any accommodation on any issue. That might be the
most desirable and useful at this stage. Dobrynin seemed to agree,
asked how such a meeting could be arranged, and what would be its
circumstances. I responded by indicating either Camp David or
perhaps even a place in Alaska. He said he would pursue this matter
further but also urged me to have the President bring it up with Pono-
marev,2 whom he very much hoped the President would see.
4. Other High-Level Meetings: Dobrynin suggested that either
Vance or I pay a visit to Moscow. Alternatively, Gromyko might come
here to continue the dialogue. This, too, was an issue he thought it
might be useful for the President to discuss with Ponomarev.
2 Boris Ponomarev, chief of the International Department of the CPSU Central
Committee.
75.
Non-Note From the Soviet Leadership to the U.S.
Leadership1
January 24, 1978
Moscow has considered with attention the remarks of the Secre-
tary of State regarding the situation in the Horn of Africa, made in the
conversation with the Soviet Ambassador on January 14.2
The statement by the Secretary to the effect that the US side has no
intention of interfering in the Somali-Ethiopian conflict and that it took
decision not to provide arms, directly or indirectly, to either side in the
conflict, could only be welcomed. However, the very next day after that
conversation an official of the Department of State said publicly some-
thing quite different, namely, that the US “decided to provide Somalia
with defensive weapons”. Naturally, we cannot help asking the ques-
tion: what is the real state of affairs?
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 3, Bessmertnykh–Shulman, 1/24/78. No classification marking. A handwritten nota-
tion in the upper right-hand corner of the document indicates that Bessmertnykh deliv-
ered the non-note during his meeting with Shulman on January 24. A brief summary of
the meeting is ibid.
2 See Document 72.
