Human Rights 431 129. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Schneider)1 Washington, March 24, 1978 SUBJECT Critique of Human Rights Reports by Coalition for a New Foreign and Military Policy, Press Conference, March 22 On March 22, a press conference was held by Congressman Tom Harkin and The Human Rights Working Group of the Coalition for a New Foreign and Military Policy (a group of national church and social action NGOs) to release a critique of the Department of State’s Human Rights Reports to Congress. Substantive criticism was made of the Reports’ depiction of human rights conditions in the following 13 countries: Bangladesh, Bolivia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Indonesia, Iran, Morocco, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Philippines, South Korea, Thailand, Tunisia (see attached).2 At the same time, the Coalition acknowledged “vast improvements” over the Reports issued last year. Congressman Harkin made every effort to balance the Coalition’s and his own criticism with positive comments about the Reports and State Department efforts (see attached statement).3 I am submitting the Critique and Congressman Harkin’s statement to you and would welcome your comments. The Coalition intends to launch a major lobbying effort with Congress to oppose the Administration’s Security Assistance program for Fiscal Year 1979 as it affects these 13 countries. Congressman Harkin in particular endorsed reduction of security assistance to Indonesia and the Philippines. 1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, SHUM—NGO 1979–80 HRWG Washington Coalition. No classification marking. Sent to Walker, Oakley, Luers, Sober, Cutter, Hormats, and Bushnell. Drafted by Roberta Cohen, who sent Schneider a copy under a March 23 typewritten note and indicated that the memorandum was sent out “because of the large numbers of requests for the documentation. Patt Derian okayed a similar memo to Warren Christopher (attached) and Ollie Jones has sent out a memo too (attached).” (Ibid.) The undated memorandum from Derian to Christopher and a March 24 memorandum prepared by Jones are also ibid. 2 Attached but not printed is a March 22 memorandum from Cohen to Derian and Schneider summarizing the criticism and Harkin’s comments. (Ibid.) 3 Not found attached. For additional information regarding the composition of the Coalition for a New Foreign and Military Policy and the March 22 press conference, see John M. Goshko, “Human-Rights Coalition Urges Arms Aid Cutoff,” The Washington Post, March 23, 1978, p. A–11.
