150 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I basic hierarchy. (At a specific level, choices are often necessary—as in the exemption of South Korea on security grounds from aid cutoff on human rights grounds). These broad purposes are: 1. To assure the security of the United States; 2. To enhance peace by reducing international tensions and the probability of war; 3. To promote the prosperity of the United States; 4. To advance global wellbeing by creating an open, cooperative and equitable international economic order; 5. To expand fundamental human rights. The document which follows is designed to promote all of these broad purposes, and it attempts to translate them into more specific goals in the political, economic and defense areas. The basic conceptual frame of reference for the more specific goals is a historical perspective, which sees the United States as having to play a creative role in world affairs, in some ways similar to the role that the United States played following 1945. At that time, the United States in effect shaped a new international system, replacing the one that had collapsed during World War II. That new system then endured and worked reasonably well for the next quarter of a century or so. During much of that time, the basic concept that guided U.S. foreign policy was a combination of Atlanticism (primacy of the US-European link) and containment of the Soviet Union. Faced in the early 70’s with major world changes, the previous Republican Administration then developed a foreign policy focused primarily on a flexible balance of power, and on maneuver. It was also very pessimistic foreign policy, based on the notion that America had no permanent friends nor institutions on which it could rely, and that deeprooted trends were against us. Your policy, as recommended here, is different. It places emphasis not so much on maneuver, but on building new structures—new relationships with friends, with adversaries, with the developing world, even with the whole world—that we hope will have a measure of permanence. It is, therefore, an optimistic policy—we hope to build a better world—not simply survive in a hostile one. It is a policy of constructive global engagement. Its fundamental premise is that the U.S. needs to play today a role as constructive as the one it played after World War II, but in a vastly changed context. The U.S. has to help in the shaping of a new international system that cannot be confined to the developed countries but must involve increasingly the entire international community of more than 150 nation states. Unlike the years 1945–50, this calls not for American dictation
