Chapter 2, January–June 1989 221 We expect several hours of warning of a bomber attack. By contrast, we would have [less than 1 line not declassified] warning of an attack by land-­based missiles, and [less than 1 line not declassified] for an attack by submarine-­launched ballistic missiles. By this logic, it might seem that it would be in our interest to seek even deeper reductions in ballistic missile warheads, either in START or in a follow-­on agreement. There are at least three reasons, however, to question whether we should pursue ever larger cuts in missile warheads. — First, we are taking several unilateral steps to mitigate our vulnerability to surprise attack. In particular, the new mobile missile we plan to deploy (the SICBM, or “Midgetman”) would be able to survive even a surprise attack in substantial numbers. — Second, the capability of airbreathing systems to conduct surprise attacks is likely to grow in the future. [2 lines not declassified] could be well-­suited for some kinds of no-­warning strikes. — Third, our stake in a stable, effective deterrent requires us to have a well-­balanced triad of SLBMs, ICBMs, and bombers. This need stems from our plans to use [2 lines not declassified] and our to hedge against unexpected threats to one or another leg of the triad. Very deep cuts in missiles would both hamper our ability to hedge and directly reduce the effectiveness of our airbreathing forces. Treating bombers and missiles differently also reflects the U.S. desire to reduce forces in which the Soviets have an advantage and to protect those in which we have a clear lead. By deliberately undercounting bomber weapons, we can ensure that we have enough warheads to meet our deterrence requirements. But this undercounting also gives lie to the popular conception that START will reduce current strategic forces by “50 percent” to “6000 weapons.” Weapons carried by penetrating bombers like the B–2 “Stealth” bomber we are developing essentially go uncounted against the START ceiling in the belief that the B–2 represents a distinctive U.S. technological and military edge. The same approach also makes distinctions that are essentially non-­verifiable in order to insulate valuable U.S. nuclear and conventional capabilities from START restrictions. Our approach to heavily undercount bombs and cruise missiles is premised in part on a modernization program that projects 132 B–2 bombers and advanced cruise missiles which can reliably penetrate Soviet air defenses. It is not clear, however, whether the B–2 or the new cruise missiles will be available in the quantities or on the schedule originally assumed when we devised our counting rules. We therefore may want to reconsider those counting rules in light of these uncertainties. Under our approach, the Soviets will face strong incentives to deploy large numbers of bombers and cruise missiles themselves. From some perspectives, their shift in emphasis from ballistic missiles
