1166  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the submarine base at which such missile tenders and storage cranes 
are specified as based.
(b) Each Party shall locate non-deployed mobile launchers of 
ICBMs only at maintenance facilities of ICBM bases for mobile launch-
ers of ICBMs, production facilities for mobile launchers of ICBMs, 
repair facilities for mobile launchers of ICBMs, storage facilities for 
mobile launchers of ICBMs, ICBM loading facilities, training facilities 
for ICBMs, conversion or elimination facilities for mobile launchers of 
ICBMs, test ranges, or space launch facilities. Mobile launchers of pro-
totype ICBMs, however, shall not be located at maintenance facilities 
of ICBM bases for mobile launchers of ICBMs. Non-deployed mobile 
launchers of ICBMs may also be in transit.
(c) Each Party shall locate test launchers only at test ranges, except 
that rail-mobile test launchers may conduct movements for the pur-
pose of testing outside a test range, provided that:
(i) each such movement is completed no later than 30 days after 
it begins;
(ii) each such movement begins and ends at the same test range 
and does not involve movement to any other facility;
(iii) movements of no more than six rail-mobile launchers of 
ICBMs are conducted in each calendar year, and
(iv) no more than one train containing no more than three rail-­
mobile test launchers is located outside test ranges at any one time.
(d) A deployed mobile launcher of ICBMs and its associated mis-
sile that relocates to a test range may, at the discretion of the testing 
Party, either continue to be counted toward the maximum aggregate 
limits provided for in Article II of this Treaty, or be counted as a mobile 
test launcher pursuant to paragraph 2(d) of this Article. If a deployed 
mobile launcher of ICBMs and its associated missile that relocates to 
a test range continues to be counted toward the maximum aggregate 
limits provided for in Article II of this Treaty, the period of time during 
which it continuously remains at a test range shall not exceed 45 days. 
The number of such deployed road-mobile launchers of ICBMs and 
their associated missiles located at a test range at any one time shall not 
exceed three, and the number of such deployed rail-mobile launchers 
of ICBMs and their associated missiles located at a test range at any one 
time shall not exceed three.
(e) Each Party shall locate silo training launchers only at ICBM 
bases for silo launchers of ICBMs and training facilities for ICBMs. The 
number of silo training launchers located at each ICBM base for silo 
launchers of ICBMs shall not exceed one for each type of ICBM speci-
fied for that ICBM base.
(f) Test heavy bombers shall be based only at heavy bomber flight 
test centers and at production facilities for heavy bombers. Training
