1956 791 dispute or prejudice views of either side nor to abandon either’s posi­ tion in any our disputes. I had again made statement along that line to effect declaration does not require any side to prejudice its position or to give up its views in regard our disputes. At last meeting I had also stated that my side already had accepted December 1 draft his side as basis for discussion with only two small amendments. 5. Wang said however the two amendments suggested by me actu­ ally contained the entire demands of my side without any modification, which requires his side to abandon its position and which my side had insisted upon all along since beginning talks. As his side has long ago categorically stated, that was what his side absolutely can never accept. 6. Wang said in first place, my January 12 draft requires his side to recognize U.S. claim to right individual collective self-­defense in Taiwan area. I had stated that U.S. is in Taiwan area purely for self-­defense and that presence of U.S. forces on Taiwan allegedly was in accordance with collective self-­defense arrangements. In other words, intention my side in including self-­defense clause in draft was to require his side to recognize validity of continued U.S. seizure Taiwan and to recognize ­U.S.-­Chiang Kai-­shek treaty. How can this be explained as other than demand that their side abandon its position on our dispute? 7. Wang said secondly, my draft announcement proposed and he would quote “they will not resort to threat or use force in Taiwan area or elsewhere”. That is attempt to confuse international dispute of China and U.S. with a Chinese internal matter. As his side had long pointed out, it was entirely matter China’s internal affair as to whatever means China used to liberate Taiwan, a matter in which U.S. had no right interfere. I had once and again indicated that declaration between us should not involve any third parties, yet every draft announcement put forward my side precisely tried involve internal matter of China and Chiang Kai-­shek clique. How can this be explained as other than demanding his side abandon its position? 8. Wang said his side held that purpose for making declaration could only be one of giving expression to desire both sides for peaceful settlement disputes of China and U.S., as well as to give expression to determination both sides seek means realization this desire. It was pre­ cisely with this purpose that his side’s December 1 draft was presented. It contained no prerequisites nor did it contain any points which might not be acceptable. His side did not intend to make use of declaration to accomplish any ulterior ends which cannot stand public scrutiny. 9. Wang said his side had proposed and will continue to stand for holding Foreign Ministers’ conference between China and U.S. in order to discuss and settle question of easing and eliminating ten­ sion Taiwan area, because this is practical and feasible means for
