974
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The President then suggested that we follow up this meeting, and
he pledged that he would take a more active role and have an analysis
drafted of the points of agreement as well as the points of disagree-
ment. This memo would go to the Bonn Summit with specific recom-
mendations on positions which the industrialized countries should
take at the September UNCTAD meeting.
The President then asked for Prime Minister Manley’s analysis and
those of the others of whether the United States and other industrial-
ized countries should channel their financial contributions through the
multilateral development banks or through other means.
The President said that the United States is trying to sustain its
growth as a way of helping the world economy and the developing
countries. He said that the United States and other industrialized coun-
tries are bringing the leading and more prosperous developing coun-
tries—including OPEC—into more important roles in international in-
stitutions, such as the World Bank. He alluded to the U.S. friendship
with Saudi Arabia and Iran as helpful in this regard. He said that they
now want to participate more actively in these organizations. A second
objective of his economic program is to reduce inflation. He said the
Germans are particularly concerned about this, but that we are making
progress.
With regard to energy, he said that the United States is almost the
largest energy producer as well as consumer in the world. For a long
period, the producer interests in the United States have had the polit-
ical power in Congress. It is therefore difficult to develop an overall en-
ergy policy, but he was hopeful that it would be done.
In summary, the President said that he would try to make a clear
presentation at Bonn and that he would be responsible for not only the
presentation, but ultimately for the implementation of the new posi-
tions. Furthermore, he will make sure that the September UNCTAD
meetings will have our complete participation and constructive leader-
ship. At the same time, however, he asked that the Group of 77 mod-
erate their rhetoric and put the discussions onto a more constructive
plane. He believes that we have finally reached a point where we can
make progress.
In closing, the President reaffirmed his hope that the governments
who are present at this meeting would take a strong role in the multi-
lateral trade negotiations, in the GATT, and in the Non-Aligned Move-
ment because their leadership in some ways is much more effective
than what the United States can do. The President said that he has not
been in office very long, but he has begun to see the problems which
Prime Minister Manley described as very profound. Americans are a
very generous people and they would like to be helpful. As for himself,
