International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 433 dustrial interests. Additionally, you will leave for Bonn a week from now with my having failed to deliver a trade package for the Summit— not you having failed to return with one. I am leaving tomorrow for Geneva and will furnish Henry Owen with last minute details so that he may adequately brief you on the way over. I will go from Geneva and be in Bonn on Friday.6 Mr. President, I discussed with Jim McIntyre again this morning a “hiring freeze”. I hope you will consider imposing one, without notice, and before it begins to be speculated in the press. In my judgment, it will be exceedingly well received in this country and also gives you one more additional anti-inflation move having been made when you arrive at the Summit. 6 July 14. 142. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen)1 Washington, July 7, 1978 SUBJECT Probable Foreign Exchange Market Reaction to the Bonn Summit The market will be most sensitive to what the President says about energy and inflation, Chancellor Schmidt says about German growth, and the Europeans say or decide to do about European monetary arrangements.2 Decisions or statements on North-South issues, the MTN, and general energy policies are not likely to have a significant market impact. Some pre-summit dollar selling has already taken place, in the expectation of minimal success at the Summit, but this movement has 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 111, President’s Europe Trip: 7/78. Confidential. 2 On July 6 and 7, the EC Heads of Government met in Bremen where they considered, among other issues, the establishment of a European Monetary System. Solomon discussed how the EMS might affect the United States in a July 10 memorandum to Owen. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 29, European Monetary Arrangement) See also Document 143.
