170  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
New Initiatives
There is potentially a lot of ground to cover here, if the Deputies are 
prepared. The bureaucracy has not been. The process did not generate 
much in the way of new thinking, but did produce abundant criticism 
of any ideas that were floated. This meeting will be the first serious 
interagency discussion of possible new initiatives. Thus, your objective 
here is to stimulate thought and foster a willingness to develop ideas 
into proposals that work. Do not to expect to reach closure on any spe-
cifics. In the end, this part of the meeting may only serve to perform a 
“due process” function.
You might begin the discussion by noting the importance to the 
President of making an initiative, to demonstrate that START is not 
merely a continuation of the last administration’s negotiation,7 and to 
give substance to the objective of reducing the risk of war and enhanc-
ing stability (with which all agencies have agreed). You should remind 
the Deputies that the papers are not agreed documents, but are intended 
only to stimulate discussion. (Some of the proposals attached to the new 
initiatives paper were not seen by agencies until Thursday.)8 Finally, 
you may wish to note that a potential initiative, banning MIRVed 
Mobiles, which is in the Mobile ICBM paper should be considered in 
this context.9
Briefly, here are the two papers:
— Short Time-­of-Flight (Depressed Trajectories). This discussion paper, 
drafted by the Joint Staff and not reviewed by the PCC, concludes that 
there are significant verification and circumvention problems with any 
arms control approach, but that the disadvantages to the U.S. can be 
minimized by limiting the ban to future types of missiles tested from 
submarine platforms. It suggests pursuing the ban as a confidence-­
building measure outside of START to avoid subjecting it to a more 
rigorous verification standard in START.
Even if such a ban would not make much of a direct contribution 
to security, it may still be worth pursuing, not least because of a wide-
spread perception that it is a good idea. In that event, the task would be 
to discuss a ban that, at worst, did not hurt us.
— New Initiatives. This paper was discussed in the PCC, but agen-
cies did not actively participate, and most of the alternatives are not 
attractive. Three new ideas we have received recently are attached to 
7 Gates drew a short vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside these sentence 
clauses and wrote a checkmark beside it.
8 June 8.
9 Gates drew a short vertical line in the left-­hand margin beside this sentence and 
wrote a checkmark beside it.
