Chapter 5, May–June 1990 769 Bartholomew: Can I ask which branch of the service you are from? Omelitchev: The General Staff, which coordinates the training and readiness of all the services. Bartholomew: Gen. Graves is on our General Staff, but he started as an engineer. Khromov: Is General Graves prepared to say 2 flight tests are sufficient for readiness of missile forces? Graves: I was not in that conversation in Geneva. Khromov: The Soviet side never made such a statement. If I were to add to what Gen. Omelitchev had to say, when operational problems arise specific launches are sometimes called for to ascertain the nature of the problems. Bartholomew: Let us put a bracket around the particular number. We want a limit that would not stop the filling out of the SS–18 Mod 5 and 6, but would not permit the upgrade of the force further with the 7, 8, and 9. Let us hold the number, can we agree on this concept? Karpov: Why should this be applied to heavy ICBMs alone? Why don’t we extend this to all ICBMs, SLBMs, and cruise missiles? Bartholomew: First, because from the basic goal of strategic stability heavy ICBMs are a particular problem. Second, because the upgrading of the SS–18 force that has already occured has partically erased the good stability effect of the 50% cut. Why go further? Karpov: Here we cannot agree. We have different approaches. Bartholomew: You have heavy missiles and we don’t. Karpov: We don’t regard heavy ICBMs as the foremost cause of instability. Taking into account your concerns, we have agreed to reduce by 50%. This has whetted your appetite. Any further limit cannot be considered. Barthlomew: Reduce half now, and half in the next negotiation. Karpov: That is not the deal. Bartholomew: 2 flight tests. The political importance of resolving this problem is not to be measured by those 2 flight tests. Karpov: We are beginning to get heat from deputies in the Supreme Soviet, who believe we have sold out the Soviet Union, particularly the agreement to the 50% cut in heavy ICBMs. Bartholomew: I know the article you are refering to.4 That article compared to what we get here is like an air gun compared to an artillery barrage. Look at the concept I have advanced, and hold for now the number. We are saying OK to reliability testing to maintain confidence, no 4 Not found.
