Chapter 6, June–December 1990 951 Fourth. We consider as definitively agreed the PPCM and the heavy bomber weapons issues, including verification of heavy bombers, as discussed in Houston and Washington. Fifth. In Houston, we accepted a position, extremely difficult to us both militarily and politically, on temporary stationing of heavy bombers beyond national territories. In this connection, the Soviet side expects the same good will with regard to the remaining mobile and fixed ICBMs issues. As we understood your experts, those issues do not pose any insurmountable obstacles for them. Six. I would also like to say a few words on telemetry data to which you devoted so much attention in your letter. In Houston and Washington, we reached a sufficiently simple and clear agreement on this very complex technical issue. Namely, both sides agree to maintain for three years their telemetry data transmission practices existing as of the data of the Treaty’s entry into force. Of course, in so doing, they would not use encryption. The procedures for telemetry data transmission from new types of missiles would be subject to agreement in the Joint Commission on Compliance and Inspections. If, after three years the sides fail to agree on a regime of telemetry transmission, each side will have the right to use the other side’s practices. Other technical aspects relating to telemetry data, including those outlined in your letter, will be discussed at the delegations’ level. In this context, it seems to me that, given the shortage of time, we would do well to try and as much as possible simplify, rather than complicate, the already very cumbersome technical mass of data involved in telemetry. Briefly, we cannot permit that certain purely technical, and not at all of primary importance, aspects of telemetry on which our experts will continue their discussions within the Joint Commission, become an obstacle on the finishing stretch to the START Treaty. So may I express the hope that the clarifications that I have provided remove some of the questions that you have asked to “plough the still fresh ground” of the Houston package, and that they open the way toward finalizing this package in a treaty form. Sincerely, E. A. Shevardnadze3 3 Printed from an unsigned copy.
