National Security Policy  1061
had frozen the design of their missiles earlier in history as well as ear­
lier in the design stage. They had frozen their designs at a time when it 
was thought a very large warhead would be required in order to pro­
duce a large explosion.
Mr. Allen asked when the U.S. first conceived the idea of launch­
ing an earth satellite. Dr. York said the idea of launching a satellite 
was an old one in scientific circles. The RAND Corporation had dis­
cussed what has now come to be called SAMOS as early as the end of 
World War II. However, launching an earth satellite required a large 
rocket so that no one began to think seriously of earth satellites until 
a large rocket began to be developed. There was no point in time at 
which it could be said the idea of an earth satellite was conceived but 
the launching of such a satellite became feasible in 1955 or 1956 when 
large rockets became available. Mr. Allen asked which missiles were 
used for launching satellites. Dr. York replied that THOR and JUPITER 
had been used for this purpose. Unsuccessful attempts had also been 
made to launch a satellite with the ATLAS. Colonel White pointed out 
that the so-­called “talking satellite” had been launched by an ATLAS. 
Dr. York said the “talking satellite” was itself an ATLAS placed in orbit. 
A NASA lunar probe last Thanksgiving using ATLAS as the launch­
ing vehicle failed. An attempt early this year to put up MIDAS with 
an ATLAS also failed. This latter failure was particularly disturbing 
because ATLAS had failed only three times in the last twenty-­three fir­
ings. ATLAS and TITAN were only about half as big as the Russian 
missiles. Our satellite launchers have had only about one-­tenth of the 
thrust of the Russian satellite launchers primarily because we have not 
yet used ATLAS intensively for space work but have used THOR and 
JUPITER instead. Mr. Allen asked whether there was much difference 
between THOR and JUPITER. Dr. York replied that these two missiles 
were practically the same. The President recalled that there had been 
a controversy about which of the two missiles would be retained and 
which would be scrapped. At one time it had been agreed that both 
THOR and JUPITER would be given the highest priority but that the 
Secretary of Defense would decide which to keep and which to discard 
within six months. After the six months period was up, the Secretary of 
Defense said he needed another year to make this decision.
Mr. Gray inquired about the time which elapsed from the initiation 
of a missile program to the operational capability of the missile. He said 
he gathered it was 4½ to 5 years. Dr. York said to be more precise ATLAS 
became operational after 5½ years, TITAN after 5½ years, THOR and 
JUPITER after 3 years, POLARIS after 4½ years and MINUTEMAN after 
4½ years.
The President asked Dr. York to furnish him with a chart similar 
to the one displayed during Dr. York’s briefing and asked whether, in
