Romania 665 B. Formation of a Pro-Soviet Faction We must assume that one continuing goal of Soviet policy here is to identify and encourage Romanians in such key organizations as the Party, military, and security services to adopt pro-Soviet views and prepare for or engage in pro-Soviet activities, albeit clandestinely. Although neither we nor our Romanian sources can identify even incipient pro-Soviet individuals, factions, or cliques does not mean they do not exist: Case of General Serb a few years ago may have involved something of the sort and recent brouhaha in Western and Czechoslovakia media concerning Ambassador Hanak’s activities here suggest option is by no means dead in all scenarios. In a true crisis situation, we would expect such persons to surface, probably joined by the opportunists spawned by any society ready to sell themselves in return for money or power. There is some indication that Soviets would seek to exploit fertile ground among some “pragmatic” Romanians who see no material advantage in terms of rising internal standards of living stemming from Romania’s independent foreign policy and who point to countries like Hungary and even Bulgaria where foreign policy obedience to Soviets has brought a degree of material benefits in return. Still, we believe that anti-Sovietism is so deeply ingrained in Romanian populace and particularly those holding leadership positions that a pro-Soviet group would have little influence and could be sustained in power only at the point of a Soviet gun. C. Internal Subversion Soviets could seek to foment gross dissatisfaction with Ceausescu’s internal policies and its conversion into political action, resulting in internal chaos of type Iran is presently experiencing. Potentially, Romania is particularly vulnerable to economic disruption and to dissidence among the some two million ethnic Hungarians living mostly in Transylvania. Yet to date, while there is considerable complaining about shortages of goods and glacially rising living standards as well as audible grumbling among the Hungarians about perceived secondclass status, there is no indication that this discontent has reached point where it will spill over into overt organized political action, or any real indication that Soviets are seeking to foment such discontent in spite of near-universal Romanian belief to the contrary. Engendering internal chaos or ethnic hatreds is dangerous strategy with unforeseen outcomes, especially in Communist countries with common land borders with Soviet Union, which has its own problems in just these problem areas, and we doubt Soviets would go very far down this road even though Romania could be torn apart on either count. We do not see how a Romania in shambles would serve Soviet interests, except as a prelude to invasion.
