1980  795
—Deployment of some 200 Backfires to Long Range Aviation by 
1989, assuming that Backfire production is limited to 30 per year and 
that output continues to be shared about equally between LRA and 
Soviet Naval Aviation.
—Basing of the new weapon systems to ensure coverage of all 
areas on the Eurasian periphery, with mobile IRBMs divided in about 
equal thirds among the western, eastern, and central USSR and Back-
fires oriented primarily to penetrate European air defenses. There is an 
alternative view that the Backfire has good intercontinental capabili-
ties, and that some portion of the Backfire force would be employed 
against targets in the United States.7
—Some continued deactivations of older MR/IRBM launchers, 
and retirements of older medium bombers. We are uncertain, how-
ever, about whether these aging systems will gradually decline or be 
retained, in part because the Soviets are probably hedging against 
NATO force modernization.
30. We have no present basis for estimating how improvements in 
NATO long-­range theater nuclear forces would affect Soviet peripheral 
attack programs, or what specific arms control proposals the USSR may 
put forward. The Soviets would have the option of expanding their 
peripheral attack forces with a higher level of effort, and could take 
further steps to improve tactical nuclear forces.
D. Counterforce Capabilities and Prelaunch Survivability of Soviet 
­Intercontinental Striking Forces
31. The Soviets expect that intercontinental nuclear conflict would 
most likely arise out of an intense US-Soviet crisis or confrontation, 
probably involving a conventional theater war that had escalated. 
The Soviets generally envisage strategic nuclear operations as com-
plex engagements, rather than as a single all-­out exchange. [3 lines not 
declassified] the Soviets stress employment flexibility and endurance in 
the development of their strategic weapons and supporting elements. A 
longstanding aim of the Soviets is to improve the survivability of their 
command and control system so that it could function even under cir-
cumstances in which it had suffered direct, large-­scale nuclear attacks.
32. Recent Soviet programs for intercontinental attack forces and 
supporting elements include features reflecting the stress on flexibility 
and endurance [6 lines not declassified] Over the years the Soviets have 
acquired capabilities to employ their intercontinental nuclear forces 
in initial, preemptive, or retaliatory strikes, and in recent years they 
have been developing capabilities to launch their forces upon receipt of 
tactical warning that an enemy attack had been launched. We believe 
that the Soviet command and control system could support any of 
7 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency; the Assistant Chief 
of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, 
Department of the Air Force. [Footnote is in the original.]
