September 18–December 16, 1978
377
strengthened by the political processes of the accords; (3) that SAG
thinks that the Camp David accords offer an unusual opportunity for
the Palestinians, one that they cannot afford to reject and SAG does not
want to share in the responsibility of a rejection as they see no feasible
alternative for the Palestinians in the future; (4) that SAG recognized
that Arafat may have political problems in an immediate, public ac-
ceptance and endorsement of the accords; therefore Fahd will under-
stand if he “froths” publicly for a while. However he (Fahd) will insist
that Arafat encourage quietly rank and file Palestinians including West
Bank PLO to join the political process immediately.
The meeting ended with Fahd reviewing the Russian threat and
making a plea for USG to take a firm stand to counter Soviet aggression
in the Gulf. END SUMMARY.
Isa Sabbagh and I met with Crown Prince Fahd at his home in
Jidda on the evening of October 24. Our appointment was for 9:30 pm
and lasted until nearly midnight. Only the three of us were present.
I opened the meeting by giving to Fahd three multi-colored maps
of the area which indicated the progress Russia was making in ex-
tending its influence in the area. He and Isa had discussed some weeks
ago the possibility of such maps to show visually the rapid extension of
Soviet influence in the area. Our USMTM group, headed by General
Cathey, working with our Embassy, had produced three maps which
the Crown Prince seemed to appreciate.
I next told Fahd that I had asked for the meeting even if it had to be
late at night as I was leaving for Washington early the next morning;
that I was terribly worried and concerned about the success of the Mid-
east peace process; that for the process to move forward, President
Carter desperately needed additional Arab support, especially from
Saudi Arabia. I told him that I recalled vividly the meeting I had with
him last April4 just before I returned to the United States for the final
round of the F–15 “battle”. At that time he had sent President Carter a
message of friendship, faith and encouragement, epitomized by the
words of his five year old son Abd al Aziz who said “Daddy Carter, we
love you.”
I said that I knew on this critical occasion President Carter would
truly appreciate any words of encouragement or support which Fahd
could send.
The Crown Prince interrupted at that point. “If you don’t mind,”
he said, “I’d like to tell you about some of my feelings and some of the
things I’ve been doing since I saw you last.”
4 The record of this meeting is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula.
