between the parties in the present circumstances.” As it was plainly impossible that all the requisite conditions should be fixed in detail by the Award, it was necessary that a suitable agency should be constituted. The Arbitrator stated in the Award that it was obvious “that the holding of the plebiscite should be appropriately supervised by competent and impartial authority.” It was for this purpose, and as one of the conditions determined by the Arbitrator under the submission, that the Plebiscitary Commission was established. The construction of its powers and duties should be determined in the light of the end to be achieved, that is, the holding of a fair plebiscite in accordance with the agreement of the parties. It was provided in the Award that the Plebiscitary Commission should have “in general complete control over the plebiscite.” The specification of the particular powers of the Commission in relation to registration and the casting and counting of the vote was not intended by the Arbitrator to detract from, this “complete control” and this control, for which the Award provides, embraces all authority necessary for the determination of the prerequisites of a fair plebiscite. The action of the Commission in determining these prerequisites, and in making its requirements accordingly, is at all times subject to review by the Arbitrator upon proper appeal. But the determinations and requirements of the Commission taken in the exercise of the full authority thus conferred by the Award constitute conditions of the plebiscite with the same force and effect as if prescribed by the Arbitrator directly under the submission, and these conditions are binding upon both parties. From the very moment of its organization, the conditions for the holding of a fair plebiscite in Tacna and Arica became the primary concern of the Plebiscitary Commission. It was and is the duty of the Plebiscitary Commission, in order that appropriate requirements for a fair plebiscite might be made, to take note of the actual situation in the plebiscitary territory and to form its own judgment with respect to appropriate measures.
