December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
589
package an overall proposal for a solution of the remaining issues that
will still meet Sadat’s needs and yet be acceptable to Israel, and (2) what
negotiating format has the best chance of bringing both Sadat and
Begin along. The paper we are preparing for your consideration later
this week will focus on these two issues. As background for your re-
view of our future options, the following summarizes where matters
stand on the three paragraphs in the Treaty and on the oil question
which Atherton discussed during his visit (he did not, as you know, get
into the West Bank/Gaza side letter and ambassadorial-exchange
issues or the aid questions pending with the Israelis and Egyptians).
Article IV—The Egyptians still insist on specifying that a review of
Sinai security arrangements must be undertaken “promptly” when re-
quested by either side and must in any case occur within a specified
number of years. They are willing, however, to use a synonym for
“promptly” (e.g., “without delay”) and to specify a six-year rather than
a five-year review period. The Israelis remain opposed to either con-
cept, however expressed. I still feel this is the least difficult question to
resolve, but both sides clearly want to hold off on any compromise
until they see what they can get on the other outstanding issues.
Article VI (2)—There does not seem to be any way the Israelis can
accept an interpretive note to this paragraph of the Treaty, which the
Egyptians want in order to make clear that the phrase “independently
of any instrument external to this Treaty” does not mean they are
making a separate peace. Both Begin and Dayan acknowledged to Ath-
erton, however, that this issue would have to be dealt with, and Dayan
suggested that this might be done in the context of the West Bank/Gaza
side letter.
Article VI (5)—At the end of Atherton’s trip, as you know, we were
close to agreement with the Israelis on an ad referendum text of a letter
to them responding to questions they raised, as a result of the legal
opinion we offered the Egyptians, dealing with the circumstances
under which Egypt would and would not be justified in joining hostil-
ities against Israel under the Arab mutual security and collective de-
fense pacts. The Egyptians, however, have reacted sharply to the idea
of such a letter. This has raised the question of whether, in the process
of overcoming Israeli objections to the legal opinion, we risk losing the
Egyptians. Khalil suggested to Atherton that a way out of this dilemma
would be to drop from the Treaty package both the legal opinion and
the letter to the Israelis and to seek a brief statement agreed to by both
parties which would make clear that Article VI (5) does not define any
priority of obligations one way or the other between the Egyptian-
Israeli Treaty and other obligations of the parties. Begin did not reject
this alternative approach when it was described to him by Atherton, al-
