National Security Policy 675 intercontinental war, we must achieve, between our continental and our overseas forces, a very high degree of coordination. In fact, the tech­ nical conditions imposed upon us in this situation seem much more stringent than those imposed upon the Soviets if they choose to negate our efforts by careful coordination of their own attack. We can see no technical obstacles to prevent the Soviets from attaining the kind of coordination they would need. Therefore, in fix­ ing our attention in the next chart upon forces in the continental United States, plus Polaris, we feel that we are not presenting an inaccurate description of our whole strategic position. Two different estimates are here shown of the retaliatory force which we might be able to mount after a Soviet attack upon us. In presenting these estimates I must emphasize how many assumptions one must make to arrive at them, and how difficult it is to verify these assump­ tions. For example—­how does one know how fast SAC can take off air­ craft in 1961? We have access to, and have used, the figures they have developed for planning purposes, but there is no possibility of testing these against fact. Similarly, we have had to postulate a rate of arrival for an initial salvo of Soviet missiles. So as not to be guilty of painting too black a picture, we have assumed for this chart a rather ragged initial salvo against SAC—­a full hour’s duration for the attack, with three quar­ ters of the attack arriving in the first half of the hour. The estimates given on the chart then correspond to attacks based on the two curves projecting Soviet capabilities as displayed earlier. That is, the upper curve in this chart assumes that the Soviet missile force builds up with time in the manner of the smaller intelligence esti­ mate and the lower curve assumes an attack based on the larger intelli­ gence estimate. Thus, for example, in mid 1961, an attack by 100 Soviet missiles allows us the upper estimate of retaliation, an attack by 500 missiles, the lower estimate. It will be helpful first to examine the effect upon our strategic air­ craft of a Soviet attack; the important relations are best displayed by looking first at the lower blue curve. Prior to mid 1959, the intelligence estimate allows the Soviets no significant force of missiles. Therefore, during this period the Soviets first blow upon the continental United States would be an attack by aircraft and something like two hours warning would be available to all SAC bases. During 1959 then, the curve of aircraft available follows SAC’s present estimates of the number of aircraft they will have avail­ able in two hours. The rise in the curve reflects SAC’s expectations for improving readiness. By the end of 1959 the intelligence estimate allows the Soviets a significant force of missiles and an attack under these conditions would take its toll of our aircraft. This curve reaches its minimum during 1961, at a time when the Soviets are estimated to
