874 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Arango, except that President Betancourt is somehow interested in the current “understanding” between Trujillo and Castro or might be attempting some sort of understanding himself with Trujillo. Mr. Rubottom stated that in his opinion President Somoza should take great care in the matter of granting asylum to a group of pro-­ Batista exiles, since such a development would undoubtedly have many repercussions unfavorable to Nicaragua. He said he wished it to be clearly understood that, whatever should happen in Cuba, the United States does not want to see another Batista-­type regime in Cuba. [text not declassified] The GON should consider well before taking any action which would favor in any manner the pro-Batista exiles. NI–22. Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge of Nicaraguan Affairs (Godfrey)1  Washington, June 24, 1960. SUBJECT NICARAGUA: Visit of Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa PARTICIPANTS Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua Dr. Julie Cesar Alegria, Minister Counselor, Nicaragua Embassy ARA—Lester D. Mallory, Deputy Assistant Secretary OAP— C. Allan Stewart, Director OAP—Richard A. Godfrey, OIC—Nicaraguan Affairs Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa indicated that a primary purpose of his visit was to express the pleasure and satisfaction of his government over the successful conclusion of the negotiation with the IBRD and the DLF of the loans for the Rio Tuma hydroelectric project. He stated that he was particularly pleased with the favorable terms of the $2.5 million DLF loan, the formal signing of which was scheduled for July 1, 1960. In relation to the DLF loan, the Ambassador stated that he wished to make a courtesy call on Mr. Rubottom next week and that he would be accompanied by the Nicaraguan Minister of Finance, Carlos Rueck. The Ambassador stated he had just received word that there had been another border incursion into Nicaragua from Honduras by the 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63 D 127, “Nicaragua 1960.” Confidential.
