1955  261
198.	 Telegram 740 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 17, 1955, 6 p.m.
740. From Johnson.
1. Do not believe I should send written reply but should handle at 
Tuesday meeting when I will refer to his letter and if he requests give 
him copy my prepared remarks according to standing arrangements 
between us.
2. Indian acceptance (New Delhi’s 542, repeated Geneva 36) removes 
what might have been problem. I suspect that if GOI also receives “invi­
tation” from PRC it has made identical reply to PRC. However, interest­
ing note neither in September 14 meeting nor in letter has Wang made 
reference to any action taken by PRC with respect India. In any event 
main points are US immediately took every possible action implement 
announcement and with respect to portion of principal PRC interest all 
action completed permit GOI function in US while UK apparently still 
not able function in PRC. (In this connection would appreciate most 
recent information available from O’Neill prior Tuesday’s meeting.)
3. Of course, I have not yet informed Wang of action we have also 
taken with respect UK as I did not have that info at last meeting.
4. As parenthetical note with respect use of word “entrust” in 
Wang’s letter Dept will recall discussion this word versus “invite” par­
ticularly para 13 Mytel 661. Believe Wang may have agreed to “invite” 
in English text without fully realizing implications and is now trying 
to recover lost ground. While use of word “entrust” in place of “invite” 
would have been somewhat more advantageous to PRC position do not 
see even this invalidates our position.
5. Suggest my reply to Wang be along following lines:
A. As I informed him Sept 14 USG has formally transmitted agreed 
announcement to GOI and invited it undertake in US functions set 
forth in announcement. GOI has formally replied accepting invitation.
B. USG has also transmitted agreed announcement to UKG and for­
mally requested it undertake in PRC functions set forth announcement.
C. USG has therefore taken all action required of it in order that 
third countries concerned may undertake their functions. What action 
has PRC taken?
Shillock
Note: FE duty office notified 3:07 pm 9/17/55 EMB (CWO)
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–1755. Secret, Priority; Limited 
Distribution.
