3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
109
willing to join with the Soviet Union in this initiative. We would see if
working on the text of an agreement might not change our respective
stand on issues on which we had different views, although our goals
were the same.
Gromyko said we should instruct our representatives to get to
work.
BELGRADE
Gromyko wanted to present a brief formulation of the Soviet posi-
tion with regard to the forthcoming Belgrade Conference.8 The Soviet
Union believed that it was necessary to gather in Belgrade not in order
to quarrel, not to launch all sorts of allegations against each other, not
to present lists of alleged unlawful activities or crimes of one state
against another, or lists of violations of some sort of provisions. It was
necessary to gather in Belgrade in order to demonstrate a positive spirit
of cooperation and detente, to promote implementation of all the obli-
gations of the Final Act of the CSCE, and to table appropriate proposals
toward that goal. This was the Soviet view of the purpose of the Bel-
grade meeting. He would like to hear US views on this score.
The Secretary replied that our view was also that we should not go
there to quarrel, or for purposes of confrontation. We should review
how well the Final Act was being implemented, what was being done
on Baskets I, II and III9 viewed in that light. A limited number of new
proposals might also be considered, but our emphasis should be on
how well the Final Act commitments were being implemented.
Gromyko asked if it would not be good to take all the Baskets out
and burn them before Belgrade so that they not stand in the way. Oth-
erwise, we might run the danger that these Baskets would be the most
popular items. He had taken note of the Secretary’s statement re-
garding the review. Of course, it would be difficult to object to the Sec-
retary’s views, because each participant was free to act as he wished,
but the important thing was how this should be done. A review might
take the form of sharp criticisms of the other side, which then would
not remain in debt, and then this might be followed by the third, fourth,
or fifth and finally thirty-fifth party to the Final Act. Was this really
needed? The Soviet side saw the major purpose of the conference in
carrying out the review in such a way as to consider the future. If con-
structive proposals were made that are in accord with the spirit of the
Final Act, this would impart a constructive character to the conference.
8 See footnote 7, Document 2.
9 Basket I dealt with European security; Basket II, cooperation in economics, sci-
ence, technology and the environment; and Basket III, cooperation in humanitarian af-
fairs. See footnote 5, Document 4.
