464
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
96.
Address by President Carter Before a Joint Session of
Congress1
Washington, September 18, 1978
Camp David Meeting on the Middle East
Vice President Mondale, Speaker O’Neill, distinguished Members of the
United States Congress, Justices of the Supreme Court, other leaders of our
great Nation, ladies and gentlemen:
It’s been more than 2,000 years since there was peace between
Egypt and a free Jewish nation. If our present expectations are realized,
this year we shall see such peace again.
The first thing I would like to do is to give tribute to the two men
who made this impossible dream now become a real possibility, the
two great leaders with whom I have met for the last 2 weeks at Camp
David: first, President Anwar Sadat of Egypt, and the other, of course,
is Prime Minister Menahem Begin of the nation of Israel.
I know that all of you would agree that these are two men of great
personal courage, representing nations of peoples who are deeply
grateful to them for the achievement which they have realized. And I
am personally grateful to them for what they have done.
At Camp David, we sought a peace that is not only of vital impor-
tance to their own two nations but to all the people of the Middle East,
to all the people of the United States, and, indeed, to all the world as
well.
The world prayed for the success of our efforts, and I am glad to
announce to you that these prayers have been answered.
I’ve come to discuss with you tonight what these two leaders have
accomplished and what this means to all of us.
The United States has had no choice but to be deeply concerned
about the Middle East and to try to use our influence and our efforts to
advance the cause of peace. For the last 30 years, through four wars, the
people of this troubled region have paid a terrible price in suffering and
division and hatred and bloodshed. No two nations have suffered more
1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 1533–1537. All brackets are in the
original. The President delivered his address at 8:06 p.m. in the House Chamber at the
Capitol. His address was broadcast live on radio and television. The President, Sadat, and
Begin returned to Washington from Camp David the evening of September 17 and signed
the two agreements. For their remarks at the White House signing ceremony, see ibid.,
pp. 1519–1523. For the texts of the Framework for Peace in the Middle East, the Frame-
work for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel, and accompanying
letters, see Department of State Bulletin, October 1978, pp. 7–11.
