500.A15 a 1/336
[Document 64]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge50
WASHINGTON, June 28, 1927.
MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I enclose you a copy of a letter I have received from Sir
Esme Howard.51 There is I believe a complete answer to the British claim
for the revision of the Washington Treaty at this Conference. None of the
Powers can lay down any new ships until 1931 so that there is no object at
this time in entering into an agreement for the reduction of the size or the
extension of the life of battleships. No ships can be built except for
renewals and the first ones to be built can be laid down in 1931, completed
in 1934. The Washington Treaty provides for a revision in 1931 at which
Conference all the five Powers would be represented. So it seems
inadvisable to revise the Treaty four years before any ships can even be laid
down, especially as two of the Signatories are not present at Geneva. The
plea, therefore, which the British Government is making to the public that
this is a matter of economy is without any merit at this time. Parenthetically,
I should say that the substance of Sir Esme Howard’s letter was given to the
press yesterday but I am bringing it to your attention in accordance with his
request.
Quite likely there is another reason why the British are very anxious to have
an agreement at this time for the prolongation of the life and a reduction in
the size of battleships upon renewals. The United States has no capital ships
exceeding in size 32,600 tons. The British have two new ships—the Rodney
and the Nelson—about completed which are about 35,000 tons, the most
powerful battleships ever built. It would be to Great Britain’s advantage, of
course, that all renewals should not exceed 30,000 tons or 25,000 tons,
whichever is agreed upon, because she already has these two new ships and
the United States would be prohibited from building to match them.
Personally I think we could afford to cut the size of battleships to 30,000
tons, perhaps less provided in building additional ships Great Britain would
agree that we could be compensated by reductions on her part but at present
