Bolivia  157
payments resulting from declining revenues from the export of metals 
and (b) permit useful development projects to be initiated soon.
I hope that it will be possible to realize the President’s expecta-
tions, particularly as we may be confronted with a serious dollar crisis 
at any time in view of the very narrow margin on which we are operat-
ing. But what we know here of DLF’s terms of reference coupled with 
the serious problem of preparing bankable projects under conditions 
prevailing here leads me to confess that I don’t see clearly how we are 
going to make good on what the President believes was promised him 
by the Vice President, Mr. Waugh and yourself on May 6. I hope you 
will keep me closely informed so that I can pass any developments on 
to the President.
I assume from what was said at the time of your visit here that 
there is no chance, in the immediate future at least, to use DLF credits 
to YPFB or to COMIBOL as a means to pump dollars into the Central 
Bank Reserves.
Would it be possible for DLF to advance funds for general devel-
opment purposes on the following basis: The dollars to be placed in the 
Central Bank’s reserves and the resulting bolivianos to be placed in a 
special account either in the name of USOM/Bolivia or of the Central 
Bank to be disbursed as suitable projects are developed and approved? 
In order to develop such projects, we would, in my judgment, need to 
furnish special technical assistance to the Bolivian Government. (Our 
Bolivian friends are thinking along these lines as you will note from the 
account of the May 7 Stabilization Council meeting being forwarded in 
this pouch.)2
I am convinced that an immediate and substantial boost to the 
Central Bank’s reserves here would have economic and political con-
sequences of real importance and would do much to maintain the con-
fidence in Bolivia’s future which the Vice President’s visit did so much 
to strengthen.
There would, of course, be a definite risk in the procedure indi-
cated above. As development projects were initiated, the Central Bank 
reserves would be called upon for the dollar component thereof and, of 
course, the level of reserves might be insufficient particularly if world 
metal markets continue in their present state. However, if the Vice 
President’s generally optimistic view of the prospects of the American 
economy is realized, the risk would be minimized. And the risk could 
be largely eliminated if there were deposited in the Central Bank at 
this time only the equivalent in dollars of the estimated boliviano 
2 No account of the May 7 Stabilization Council meeting was found in Department 
of State files.
