444 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Scowcroft: On chemical weapons the Soviets have not yet come back on our UN initiative. We have a memorandum of understanding ready to sign at the Ministerial that would reduce stocks to 5,000 tons. I don’t think there are any differences here. The President: Can chemical weapons be disposed of in an environmentally safe way? Baker: We can but they can’t. The ball is in their court. Scowcroft: On nuclear testing everything seems on track. Once we agree on PNET and the TTBT, the Soviets will want to go to the next step. Sununu: This is a real issue on the Hill. Cheney: The Hill is split on the issue. The President: Why do the Soviets not need testing and we do? Scowcroft: Let us get you a briefing on that. Baker: Dubinin has provided a letter from Primakov to the Hill leadership discussing CTB. Bob Michel called to tell me about it. Scowcroft: The next steps on CTB—we’ll just see how it goes. Defense and Space is not on the agenda. There was delinkage in Wyoming. They seek agreement that SDI testing by their definition would be grounds for withdrawal. We don’t agree to that. Baker: We ought to just stonewall on that problem. Tell them that we don’t agree with them that this would constitute grounds to walk away. We heard you delink in Wyoming and this is our interpretation of it. It will come up in the meeting. The Vice President: Has there been any discussion of the broad versus the narrow interpretation. Any movement on that? Baker: We should just tell them that we heard them delink in Wyoming. Scowcroft: Complicating the issue is that the Soviets agree Krasnoyarsk is a violation and that they should dismantle it. We’ve agreed earlier, however, not to sign a START Treaty until Krasnoyarsk is destroyed. Should we simply require that they start to dismantle and show good faith in getting agreement on the phasing of a tear-­down? With respect to SLCMs, if they insist we should reiterate our present position in favor of declaring SLCMs and be willing to explain why we won’t accept a binding limit which cannot be verified. We would be prepared to table our declarations. Baker: What about Backfire? Should we drop it from START? It has to be captured somewhere. Lehman: The problem is CFE doesn’t get them all, particularly those in the Far East. Maybe you could somehow package it with SLCMs.
