Yugoslavia 907 276. Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, January 17, 1980 SUBJECT Mini-SCC on Yugoslavia, Friday, January 18, 11:00 a.m. (C) The main purpose of this mini-SCC on Yugoslavia should be to ensure that the USG is well-organized and prepared in case Tito should die in the near future. There are three main papers which should be reviewed: 1. State’s revised contingency plan to be implemented on Tito’s death (Tab A).2 It contains a checklist of important steps to be taken in the immediate aftermath of Tito’s death, a list of the delegation to the funeral, and condolence messages, public statements, etc. I have checked it over and I think it touches all the important bases. You need only review the checklist. (The messages have been cleared with the speechwriters.) 2. A State paper on short-term policy goals (the first two-three months after Tito’s death) and steps we are taking in terms of contingency planning (Tab B).3 You should glance over the parts underlined in red and ask George Vest to briefly summarize the paper and the steps. In addition to the State paper on short-term policy goals:4 —the Department has prepared and updated during the past 10 years a USG Contingency Study which addresses scenarios for internal disintegration and Soviet/WP threats and/or invasion. This study is a useful reference but is too long and unwieldy to be a useful policymaking tool; 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–021, SMC 106, Mini SCC 1/18/80, Yugoslavia. Sent for action. A stamped notation on the first page reads: “DA has seen.” 2 Attached at Tab A is a January 16 memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski which included: a preliminary checklist in the eventuality of Tito’s death, suggested members of the funeral delegation (to be led by the President); draft condolence messages; a draft memorandum to the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Attorney General, and the DCI drawing attention to the danger of anti-Yugoslav terrorism; and a draft letter to Brezhnev cautioning against interference in Yugoslav internal affairs. In a January 25 memorandum to Brzezinski, Brement and Larrabee argued that the letter to Brezhnev be dropped from the Yugoslav contingency plan; Brzezinski agreed. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 69, [Yugoslavia: Tito]: 1–2/80) 3 Vest submitted the paper the following day to the Vance. See Document 277. 4 Aaron wrote in the margin next to the following three points: “What is actionable?”
