Human Rights
597
—Is education free? Up to what level? Is it adequate in rural areas?
What is the level of literacy?
—Is fulfillment of vital human needs hindered by corruption? If
so, what is being done about it?
Section 3:
Respect for civil and political liberties, including:
A. Freedom of speech, press, religion, and assembly
—Are these freedoms guaranteed by law or custom and respected
in practice?
—Is there censorship? What are the subjects of censorship?
—Are the media—especially the press—subject to control? If the
media are government-owned or controlled, are opposition views
aired? Is criticism of the government by others permitted? Have jour-
nalists been intimidated or imprisoned? Newspapers closed?
—May religion be freely practiced? Are any sects or religions sup-
pressed while others are unimpeded? Is there persecution or harass-
ment of any religious groups? Are any religious groups discriminated
against?
—Are there any impediments to assembly? Are certain groups al-
lowed to hold public meetings and not others?
—Are there impediments to the freedom of association? Are par-
ticular groups or individuals denied the right to associate? Interest
groups, workers, politicians? Limitations on purposes of activities?
B. Freedom of movement within the country, foreign travel and
emigration
—Are these freedoms guaranteed by law or custom and respected
in practice?
—Is domestic travel circumscribed or controlled? What is the ra-
tionale for such control?
—Are limits placed on travel abroad? Or the right to return? What
are the reasons for limitations on travel abroad? Do excessive passport
fees limit the right to travel abroad? (See answers to State 161057.)5
C. Freedom to participate in the political process
—What is the character of the political system? Authoritarian, dic-
tatorial, democratic? Multi-party, two-party, single-party? Are any
parties outlawed? Do opposition parties function freely? Have they
access to the media? Can they hold public meetings?
5 In telegram 161057 to all diplomatic and consular posts, June 22, the Department
referred to a study that compared American passport fees to those charged by other na-
tions and requested that posts advise the Department concerning passport fees and expi-
ration dates. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790326–0325)
