Afghanistan 165 no “concrete evidence” that the Soviets had already decided on even a limited intervention, the evidence was, in his view, sufficiently strong to issue an alert memorandum, a vehicle by which the intelligence community intended to warn policymakers in advance of an intervention, rather than a report on a fait accompli. MacEachin based his argument on the fact that the Soviet military posture in Afghanistan “already has gone about as far as it can short of direct action by Soviet combat units,” and that the Soviets viewed some form of intervention, without which the Taraki regime would fall, as the “least bad” option. (Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job 93T01324R, Box 4, Afghanistan) For the alert memorandum, see Document 62. A more historically focused memorandum, drafted August 10 by H.C. Cochran of the CIA’s Strategic Warning Staff, examined the choices the Soviet Union faced in light of Soviet policy toward Afghanistan since tsarist times. Russia’s longstanding interest in exerting control in Afghanistan, coupled with its proximity to Soviet territory, and the socialist revolution in April 1978, made Afghanistan a “special case” in the minds of Soviet leaders, who ranked its priority well above the importance they attached to supporting “liberation movements” elsewhere in the Third World. Together, these factors “would seem to rule out the theoretical option of Soviet withdrawal and cutting of losses,” particularly because the Soviet leadership believed that a successor government to the Taraki regime would inevitably be composed of Muslim “counterrevolutionaries,” allied with Iran and Pakistan and hostile to the Soviet Union. Cochran argued that from Moscow’s vantage point, the situation was both high stakes and lacked any satisfactory low-risk options, presenting “Moscow with one of the most difficult foreign policy decisions since the Cuban missile crisis.” Further, the memorandum observed, the hesitancy the Soviet Union displayed in its Afghan policy over the past several months represented a “delayed recognition that the USSR had seriously miscalculated the strength of the forces opposed to the Taraki regime.” Cochran concluded by noting that the Soviets might still continue to consider all options, but the impending collapse of the Taraki regime—which Cochran calculated would come by the month’s end—would effectively preclude any non-military options the Soviets would consider, no matter the diplomatic and economic consequences. (Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job 93T01324R, Box 4, Afghanistan) The Office of Political Analysis and the Soviet Branch of the Regional Analysis Division each produced memoranda on Soviet options in Afghanistan dated August 17. The OPA memorandum, PA M 79–10378C, noted that despite significant successes mounted thus
