March 27–December 31, 1979 1025 added, since there is nothing that Fahd or the Saudis can do to impede the peace process. Sadat said that it is important that the United States retain the closest possible relations with Fahd and the Saudis in order to prevent them, as he put it, from collaborating with the Iraqis or Libyans in actions against our allies. He mentioned the Japanese and Europeans, but did not spell this out. If we retain such close relations with the Saudis, Sadat said, this will suffice for him. We can all look at the situation again early next year. OTHER MATTERS Middle East Peace Process Sadat felt pleased with the way things are going. He was on cloud nine about the return of St. Catherine6 and his visit there. He said that during his last meeting with Begin, he had told the latter not to fight the Jerusalem issue or self-determination. To his surprise, contrary to Begin’s earlier “hysterical” reaction to any such suggestion, Begin had this time simply said, “The time is not right.” When Sadat had spoken of Begin’s brave deed in giving up the Sinai settlements, Begin had commented, “I will take those settlements to my grave.” Sadat remained optimistic about how things are working out. He had asked Ezer Weizman to repeat his ideas to Begin, but acknowledged that Begin may still be reluctant. Sadat spoke of the desirability of getting the autonomy and Jerusalem questions resolved by the end of January. (His objective is clearly to find a way to make an exchange of ambassadors the following month a little more palatable to the Arab world.) He said that he is pressing the Israelis, but thought that perhaps the time had come for the United States to apply a bit of pressure on Begin on this matter. Since it was not my mission to discuss the peace process and Bob Strauss was scheduled to be there the following day, we let it go at that. Ambassador to the Soviet Union Sadat asked me to tell you that he is sending an ambassador to Moscow. It will be Samih Anwar, the present Egyptian ambassador in London. (Anwar, who is a former minister of state and was once a counselor of the embassy in Moscow, is a very responsible and able man. I have known him for many years and he has always been helpful 6 As a good-will gesture to Sadat, Begin agreed on November 15 to return Mt. Sinai, including St. Catherine, to Egyptian sovereignty, two months ahead of schedule as required under the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty. (Christopher Wren, “Israel Relinquishes Mt. Sinai Region to Egypt Ahead of Schedule,” The New York Times, November 16, 1979, p. A3)
