Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III sonable relationship with these countries at the multilateral level; they are now waiting to see if Carter delivers on what he implied would be a more forthcoming position. The Commodity Issue The only specific North-South issue to be discussed is the US approach to commodities.4 The developing countries see commodities as one of the fundamental issues of the New International Economic Order. In particular, they are pressing for direct government intervention in markets and indirect resource transfer through such means as indexation of commodity prices and LDC-controlled Common Fund to finance buffer stocks for a range of commodities. The Group of 77— supported by the UNCTAD Secretariat—has made the Common Fund a major political objective. The US objective is to redirect the substance of the North-South dialogue into areas that will improve the international economic structure to the benefit of all countries, rather than fundamentally change it—especially because most economists believe that the demands of the developing countries in the commodity area are extreme, and would ultimately redound to the disadvantage of most of them. We have, therefore, rejected direct regulation of commodity markets and stressed instead case-by-case improvement of existing markets, liberalized trade, stabilization of LDC export earnings and more orderly conditions for investment in developing countries. While from an economic point of view this is the soundest approach, we also want to be politically sensitive in this area in order to prevent commodity issues from becoming an obstacle to improved relations with the developing countries—thus we wish to avoid a new confrontation over this issue. There are five separate aspects to the commodity issue: —With respect to how many commodities will the US agree to, and participate in, price stabilization arrangements, including buffer stocks, as well as other measures to improve the functioning of the market. —Should the US support further liberalization of arrangements to ensure the stability of export earnings of developing countries heavily dependent on commodity exports? —Should the US support measures to improve the availability of financing of buffer stocks? —Should the US encourage or guarantee any investment in commodity production in LDCs? —Should any new institutional arrangements for dealing with commodities be proposed?
