remained as war-time legacies. In its present form it should provide sufficient revenue
for the Government.
The excessive surtaxes have been reduced, estate tax rates are restored to more
reasonable figures, with every prospect of withdrawing from the field when the States
have had the opportunity to correct the abuses in their own inheritance tax laws, the gift
tax and publicity section are to be repealed, many miscellaneous taxes are lowered or
abandoned, and the Board of Tax Appeals and the administrative features of the law are
improved and strengthened. I approve of the bill in principle. In so far as income-tax
exemptions are concerned, it seems to me the committee has gone as far as it is safe to
go and somewhat further than I should have gone. Any further extension along these
lines would, in my opinion, impair the integrity of our income-tax system.
I am advised that the bill will be through the House by Christmas. For this prompt
action the country can thank the good sense of the Ways and Means Committee in
framing an economic measure upon economic considerations. If this attitude continues
to be reflected through the Congress, the taxpayer will have his relief by the time his
March 15th installment of income taxes is due. Nonpartisan effort means certain, quick
action. Determination of a revenue law definitely, promptly and solely as a revenue
law, is one of the greatest gifts a legislature can bestow upon its constituents. I
commend the example of the Ways and Means Committee. If followed, it will place
sound legislation upon the books in time to give the taxpayers the full benefit of tax
reduction next year. This means that the bill should reach me prior to March 15.
All these economic results are being sought not to benefit the rich, but to benefit the
people. They are for the purpose of encouraging industry in order that employment
may be plentiful. They seek to make business good in order that wages may be good.
They encourage prosperity in order that poverty may be banished from the home. They
seek to lay the foundation which, through increased production, may give the people a
more bountiful supply of the necessaries of life, afford more leisure for the
improvement of the mind, the appreciation of the arts of music and literature, sculpture
and painting, and the beneficial enjoyment of outdoor sports and recreation, enlarge the
resources which minister to charity and by all these means attempting to strengthen the
spiritual life of the Nation.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
The policy of our foreign relations, casting aside any suggestion of force, rests solely
on the foundation of peace, good will, and good works. We have sought, in our
intercourse with other nations, better understandings through conference and exchange
of views as befits beings endowed with reason. The results have been the gradual
elimination of disputes, the settlement of controversies, and the establishment of a
