1646 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement reductions. The two recent conferences in Geneva have demonstrated anew the extreme importance of preparation prior to such conferences, i.e, the need of acquisition of a clear understanding of the objectives desired and of the actual effects of various measures that might be proposed to attain the objectives. The need for a continuing develop­ ment effort to provide the technical means for support of inspection and controls has also been clearly demonstrated. The most obvious demonstration of this need is, of course, the detection of underground nuclear tests. To achieve the needed understanding it is not sufficient to consider the existing military forces and to devise means for reducing their threat to peace, while preserving the military security of United States. Rather, one has to look into the future and anticipate the effects of changing technology on military forces and operations; one must consider the effects of changing technology on the feasibility and on techniques of the monitoring of military forces, as well as on the usefulness of an early warning of an impending attack; further, one must devise detailed inte­ grated patterns and time tables for agreements (somewhat like weapon systems are designed from component parts), whose objective should be the enhancement of the security of United States in the sense defined above by the national policy. That sense we interpret more broadly than simple enhancement of our military power because though the reduc­ tion of the threat of war may be brought about by an enhancement of our military power, it can certainly be assisted by other factors as well. While the emphasis in the preceding paragraph was on military-­ technical matters, it is essential to recognize that the ultimate objectives of the agreements we seek are political and that political consider­ ations are of the greatest importance in finding mutually acceptable patterns of agreement. Thus it is clear that the preparation for future international conferences must include the study of military, techno­ logical and political factors. It is a task which is best carried out by an inter-­departmental or non-­departmental body rather than a necessarily slanted single department. Agreements which in principle might reduce the threat of war and reduce the armaments race are of several types. Starting with the least ambitious they may be classified as: I. Agreements for partial inspection of armed forces. The partiality of inspection may arise from the geographic limitations of the zones to which inspection is limited or from deliberately incomplete but world-­ wide inspection. The incompleteness itself may be of two kinds. For instance inspection may apply to only one kind of military activities (e.g. nuclear weapons tests) or only one type of inspection mechanism may be agreed to (e.g. the “Open Skies” proposal of the President). The objectives of such agreements may be to provide “strategic” warring
