National Security Policy 13 6. Memorandum for the Record of Meeting1 Washington, January 25, 1958, 9:45 a.m. On January 25, at 9:45 a.m., the President, accompanied by ­General Goodpaster and Mr. Harlow, left the White House to attend a meeting called by Secretary McElroy in the Pentagon Building. The President arrived at 10:00, met for a few minutes privately with Secretary McElroy, and entered the Secretary’s Press Conference room at 10:05, where the following persons were present: Deputy Secretary of Defense Quarles Secretary of the Army Brucker Secretary of the Navy Gates Secretary of the Air Force Douglas JCS Chairman Twining Admiral Burke General Lemnitzer General Pate Admiral Radford (arrived at 10:30) General Bradley Mr. William Foster Mr. Coolidge Mr. Gale General Randall The meeting opened with a briefing given by Colonel Rosson, in behalf of General Twining, on JCS functions, duties and procedures. The presentation continued without interruption for approximately thirty minutes. Thereafter, Secretary McElroy asked for comment, turning first to Admiral Radford. The Admiral said the first problem is the inadequate time the Chiefs have for JCS business, that it has always been insuffi­ cient, and that he hardly knew of a remedy. The Joint Strategic Survey system, he said, has never worked well, the officers assigned to this effort being too low-­ranked; and the committee system has not been too good, the team papers, he found, being better than the committee papers. Secretary McElroy raised the question of increased authority for the Chairman of the JCS, suggesting, as an example, that the Chairman be granted a vote, and also asked about the proposal to create a plan­ ning staff separate from the individual services. Admiral Radford said the Chairman JCS already has great influence and is now in effect the principal military to the Secretary of Defense. 1 Source: JCS organization. Confidential. 7 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on January 30.
