Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX steps that the Bulgarian Government was willing to undertake in the coming months and years. (C) On MFN Messrs. Brement and Larrabee pointed to the fact that there were certain legislative requirements which had to be met in order for Bulgaria to qualify for MFN. In our view, all possibilities had not been exhausted within the existing framework. However, we were prepared to discuss with Bulgaria what requirements would have to be met in order to qualify for MFN. (C) Returning to the question of bilateral relations, Gotzev noted the apparent US lack of interest in improving relations with Bulgaria. In his view the Bulgarians had been forthcoming on issues of concern to the US, but the US seemed to be making a change in its policy conditional on a change in Bulgaria’s relations with the Soviet Union. The US should recognize that these ties were deep and long-standing, and he argued that we should not make a disruption or cessation of these prerequisites for an improvement of US-Bulgarian bilateral relations. Bulgaria was an independent country and US-Bulgarian relations should stand on their own merits. Concluding, he noted that Secretary Vance would be visiting Yugoslavia and Romania in December and expressed the hope that Bulgaria could be included in his travel plans in the near future.7 (C) In response, Messrs. Brement and Larrabee said that the US recognized Bulgaria’s strong ties with the Soviet Union and that we did not make a cessation of these ties a prerequisite for improved relations with the United States. Our main concern was that the Bulgarians pursue a policy which accorded with their own national interests. This did not mean that we expected Bulgaria to break all ties with the Soviet Union. We understood that these ties were deep and long-standing. Nonetheless, we hoped that there could be more common ground on a number of issues between our two countries in the future and that if this occurred, it would have a positive effect on bilateral relations. (C) 7 Vance was scheduled to visit Bucharest and Belgrade in mid-December 1979. The trip was canceled at the last minute, however, due to the developing Iran hostage crisis.
