injured party and Chinese or citizens or subjects of the Powers having no such right are the aggressors. Cases in which consular representatives in Shanghai may be present to watch the proceedings shall be heard in the first instance by the Special Court, and in the second, by the Special Court of Appeal, both of which shall be attached to the said Court of Justice provided, however, that if the plaintiff should be unwilling to submit to the jurisdiction of the said Special Court, but should voluntarily bring the case to an ordinary court or appeal to a superior court, the trial shall be conducted according to the ordinary procedure and the practice of watching the proceedings shall not be applicable. 4. Summons, warrants, orders of detention and search, and of compulsory execution in civil suits shall be served upon or executed against Chinese or nationals of the Powers having no consular jurisdiction in China directly by officers (Huissiers) and judicial policy of the said Court of Justice of the Shanghai International Settlement. But in case, where the persons to be summoned are nationals of the Powers having consular jurisdiction, the Consul of the nation concerned shall be notified beforehand. 5. When a warrant of arrest or an order of detention or search is to be served or executed upon the premises of a national of a Power having consular jurisdiction against his employee living thereon, the consul of the nation concerned shall be notified beforehand. 6. Persons arrested by the Municipal police on charges of having violated criminal laws or police regulations shall within twenty-four hours of their arrest be sent to the court of Justice of the Shanghai International Settlement for trial. The Municipal police shall render full and prompt assistance in such matters as shall be requested of or entrusted to them by the Court of Justice of the Shanghai International Settlement. 7. Foreign lawyers are permitted to appear in the Court of Justice of the Shanghai International Settlement on behalf of foreign nationals in the litigation, but they shall be provided with certificates of approval issued by the Ministry of Justice and shall observe all Chinese laws and regulations in force governing Chinese lawyers.
