was arrived at with regard to the resolution on this subject to be annexed to
the Washington Treaty surtax agreement. On May 25 the British Advisers
proposed several verbal changes which opened the way for new proposals
on the part of the Japanese Advisers for change in substance. A draft,
however, was agreed upon on that date, and meanwhile the American
Advisers had circulated a revised copy of the draft on the subject of the
custody of funds in general. At a meeting on May 26 the British Advisers
introduced a draft and the Japanese made a reservation on the whole of it
and the American Advisers on three articles. The central principle of this
draft was that the existing customs revenues should be divided on the
principle that since 70 per cent was required for the service of existing loans
and indemnities, this portion should be deposited in custodian banks,
including Chinese, and the remaining 30 per cent should be left at the free
disposal of the Chinese Government. The American draft, on the contrary,
provided that the entire net customs revenue should be deposited in
custodian banks and of the portion required for the service of foreign
obligations the distribution should be among foreign custodian banks. No
agreement was reached and at subsequent informal meetings between the
American and British Advisers the latter yielded with reference to the 30–
70 per cent division and accepted the principle of requiring deposit of all
net customs funds in custodian banks, and the American Advisers accepted
the principle of requiring that percentages be fixed for the distribution
among the banks, of the portion to be deposited for the service of the
foreign loans and indemnities. The British also proposed an amendment
which would require naming the banks and specifying the percentages, but
the American Advisers could not accept this amendment. All differences
were finally composed, however, and a complete agreement arrived at
between the American, British and Japanese Advisers on the whole draft
and at a meeting of the foreign Advisers on June 1 the composite draft was
adopted. A meeting had been called for June 3 of the Delegates but at the
request of the Japanese Minister, who was awaiting instructions from his
Home Government, the meeting was postponed. On June 10 the postponed
meeting was held and Sir Ronald Macleay, at the beginning of the meeting,
suggested that, since the draft agreement implementing the Washington
Treaty had been referred to the various Governments concerned, it would be
in order to ask for the replies of the various Delegations. A poll was taken
and the British Delegation said its Government agreed, with the
