1228  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
the International Board of Control described in paragraph VIII has cer­
tified that the installation of an effective inspection system to verify the 
commitment has been completed.
2. That they will co-­operate in the prompt installation and in the 
maintenance of such an inspection system.
3. That for the purpose of accomplishing the above undertakings, 
the five Governments represented on the Sub-­Committee will appoint 
a group of technical experts to meet as soon as possible to design the 
required inspection system, and to submit a progress report for their 
approval within the first ten months after the entry into force of the 
convention.
B. The parties which are producers of fissionable material for 
weapons purposes at the time of cessation of production for weap­
ons purposes undertake to provide, under international supervision, 
for equitable transfers, in successive increments, of fissionable mate­
rials from previous production to non-­weapons purposes, at home or 
abroad, including stockpiling; and, in this connexion
1. To fix the specific ratios of quantities of fissionable materials of 
comparable analysis to be transferred by each of them, and
2. To commence such transfers at agreed dates and in agreed quan­
tities at the fixed ratios following the cut-­off date for production of fis­
sionable materials for weapons purposes.
C. From the date of the cessation of production of fissionable mate­
rial for weapons purposes provided in paragraph IV–A–1:
1. Each party undertakes not to transfer out of its control any 
nuclear weapons, or to accept transfer to it of such weapons, except 
where, under arrangements between transferor and transferee, their 
use will be in conformity with paragraph III.
2. Each party undertakes not otherwise to transfer out of its con­
trol any fissionable material or to accept transfer to it of such material, 
except for non-­weapons purposes.
V. Nuclear Weapons Testing
A. All parties to the convention undertake to refrain from conduct­
ing nuclear test explosions for a period of twelve months from the date 
of entry into force of the convention, provided that agreement has been 
reached on the installation and maintenance of the necessary controls, 
including inspection posts with scientific instruments, located within 
the territories of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United 
States, the area of the Pacific Ocean and at such other places as may be 
necessary, with the consent of the Governments concerned.
B. A group of technical experts appointed by the five Governments 
represented on the Sub-­Committee will meet as soon as possible to 
design the inspection system to verify the suspension of testing.
