1012  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
reported that he had independently made his own study of incapacitat­
ing agents and had come to the same conclusion. The Science Advisory 
Committee had recommended that research and development in the 
field be strenghened. The President said he concurred.
Mr. Stans noted that a year ago he had been told that the US had 
a $300 million inventory in chemical and biological agents. He won­
dered whether this inventory was being reevaluated in the light of recent 
developments. General Lemnitzer thought the inventory referred to by 
Mr. Stans was an inventory carried over from World War II. There had 
been little production of chemical and biological agents since World War 
II. Mr. Stans asked whether he was correct in understanding that there 
would be no substantial stockpiling of chemical and biological agents 
during the research and development period. General Lemnitzer con­
firmed Mr. Stans’ understanding. The President said that since chemical 
and biological agents could be manufactured at a reasonably rapid rate, 
capacity for manufacturing rather than a stockpile would be needed. 
Secretary Gates, referring to public and world opinion on the use of chem­
ical and biological weapons, wondered whether such use should not be 
put in the same category as the use of atomic weapons; that is, use should 
be made subject to decision by the President. Mr. Gray read Paragraph 13 
of NSC 5906/1 indicating that under present policy Presidential decision 
is required for the use of chemical and biological weapons.
The President said one great difficulty occurred to him in connec­
tion with the use of incapacitating agents. While the use of such agents 
was a splendid idea, if we tried to use them in a humane manner, our 
enemy would probably charge us with germ warfare and then would 
proceed in retaliation to use lethal chemical and biological weapons. 
He understood that some of these lethal weapons, particularly nerve 
gas, were quite terrible. Before we used chemical and biological weap­
ons, we would need to have proper defensive equipment. He under­
stood that at the present time US gas masks would not protect against 
all types of lethal agents. Dr. York said present masks protected against 
all agents except those absorbed by the skin. He added that we had no 
protection against bullets and therefore would be in no worse position 
in chemical warfare than we were in now in other forms of warfare. The 
President said chemical and biological weapons had considerably less 
discrimination than a bullet. Dr. York felt that at the very least chemical 
and biological weapons were no worse than atomic weapons.
Dr. Kistiakowsky said that a sharp distinction should be made 
between chemical warfare and biological warfare. Chemical warfare, 
e.g., the use of tear gas, had been accepted throughout the world in 
police actions, but biological warfare had not been so accepted. Mr. 
Dulles strongly agreed with Dr. Kistiakowsky, saying that we ought to 
assimilate our use of incapacitating agents to the use of tear gas. He felt 
we needed some incapacitating agent which we could use respectably.
