132
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
petroleum. The Secretary agreed, but noted such an article will only
give rise to endless claims and counterclaims. Kamel pointed out that
the Egyptian paper does not talk about damage to military installa-
tions. What is being talked about is compensation for damage to ci-
vilian installations. He suggested that the matter be taken up with Pres-
ident Sadat who has strong views on the matter.
The Secretary observed that during the morning tripartite session,
Begin had responded to this article by citing a possible $120 billion-
Israeli-damage claim against Egypt.
Security Arrangements:
Vice President Mondale recalled that Sadat has often said he is
open-minded on security arrangements. He asked about the possibility
of existing security arrangements in the West Bank beyond the five-
year transitional period. Kamel responded that the Egyptian idea is
that after five years, Jordan and Egypt will assume security responsi-
bility. The Palestinians and Israelis, he was convinced, should be able
to coexist. They have many affinities during five years of trying to live
in peace. Both sides will learn to live together. The Vice President and
the Secretary agreed.
Sinai Airfields:
The Secretary then asked how the Sinai airfields issue might be re-
solved? Kamel responded that the Israelis should build airfields of
their own in Israel. The Secretary said that the airfield near Eilat (Et-
zion) could be built elsewhere, but he wondered about the one near
Arish. Kamel observed that Sadat is strongly opposed to having any Is-
raeli airfields in Sinai. He suggested the matter be raised with Sadat.
Compulsory ICJ Jurisdiction:
The Secretary then asked about Article 4 of the Egyptian paper,
having to do with compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. He asked if the Egyp-
tians have any precedents for such compulsory ICJ jurisdiction? Maher
thought there are some precedents and undertook to have the Egyptian
lawyers look into the matter.
Peace Treaties:
The Secretary then asked about Article 6 having to do with peace
treaties to be concluded three months after a framework was signed.
He asked why “treaties” was in the plural? What did the Egyptians
have in mind? Maher responded that the reference is to all of the parties
concerned. Kamel elaborated by saying that the Egyptian paper en-
visages that the Jordanians and the Egyptians will sign peace treaties.
The Secretary thought that something like “promptly” would be
better than specifying a three-month time period. Kamel observed that
