Colombia  363
President Lleras said that he had been disturbed by the apparent 
renunciation of the Rio Treaty3 by Fidel Castro.4 The Secretary said that 
we also had been shocked at this turn. He added that we were not sure 
whether Castro had meant the Rio Treaty or the Caracas Resolution,5 
although the principal was the same. He recalled that the Cuban revolu-
tionary government had announced its intension to carry out country’s 
obligations to such treaties prior to recognition by the United States and 
other countries of the Hemisphere last year.
President Lleras said that he had sent an instruction to all of the 
Colombian Embassies asking the Ambassadors to consult with the 
host governments on the question of the Castro statement regarding 
the Rio Treaty, but there had not been time to hear from the Embassies 
prior to his departure for the United States. He said that it would be 
appropriate to have this question raised in the OAS, thus focusing 
attention on the political and juridical problem represented by an irre-
sponsible Cuba, rather than on her disregard for property rights and 
other similar problems bearing down most heavily on her relations 
with the United States, even though these subjects would have to be 
treated eventually.
The Secretary expressed complete agreement with this approach 
through the OAS.
At this point the group left the President’s Guest House for the 
White house.
3 Reference is to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, opened for sig-
nature at Rio de Janeiro, September 2, 1947, and entered into force for the United States, 
December 3, 1948; for text, see 62 Stat. 1681.
4 Reference is to a statement by Castro in a televised speech in Cuba on April 5.
5 Apparent reference to Resolution 93, “Declaration of Solidarity for the 
Preservation of the Political Integrity on the American States Against the Intervention 
of International Communism,” adopted at the Tenth Inter-American Conference, 
held in Carcas, Venezuela, March 1–28, 1954; for text of the resolution, see Tenth Inter-
American Conference, Caracas, Venezuela, March 1–28, 1954: Report of the Delegation of the 
United States of America with Related Documents (Department of State Publications 5692, 
Washington, 1955), pp. 156–157.
