National Security Policy  1057
253.	 Memorandum of Discussion at the 443d NSC Meeting1
High Point, North Carolina, May 5, 1960
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 443rd Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, May 5, 
1960 (At High Point)
Present at the 443rd Meeting of the NSC were the President of 
the United States, Presiding; the Acting Secretary of State (C. Douglas 
Dillon); the Secretary of Defense; and the Director, Office of Civil and 
Defense Mobilization. Also attending the Meeting and participating in 
the Council actions below was the Director, Bureau of the Budget. Also 
attending the Meeting were the Director, U.S. Information Agency; 
the Director of Central Intelligence; the Assistant to the President; the 
Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs, for 
Science and Technology, and for Security Operations Coordination; the 
White House Staff Secretary; the Naval Aide to the President; Herbert 
York, Department of Defense; Herbert Scoville, Jr. and Colonel John A. 
White, Central Intelligence Agency; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and 
the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the Meeting and the 
main points taken.
********
The Meeting convened in the President’s Conference Room at 
the High Point Relocation Site. Participants in the Meeting (except 
for Governor Hoegh who was already at High Point) were flown to 
the Meeting from Washington as part of OPERATION ALERT 1960. 
Council Members were not provided with advance notice of the change 
in the place of the Meeting but were advised by telephone calls from the 
Office of the Executive Secretary, NSC, beginning at 7:20 a.m. that the 
Meeting would be held outside Washington and that helicopters would 
be available for transportation to the site of the Meeting.
Mr. Gray reported that General Twining had been left in 
Washington, Mr. McCone had a conflicting engagement and was unable 
to attend and Secretary Anderson was ill. Mr. Gray said he understood 
Secretary Gates and Mr. Dillon were so completely taken by surprise 
by the telephone calls this morning they had been unable to obtain 
official transportation to the site of the helicopter take-­off. Mr. Dulles 
1 Source: Operation Alert exercise, and Agenda item 1: History of U.S. and USSR 
Long-­Range Missile Development. Top Secret. 10 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, 
NSC Records.
