National Security Policy 841 for general war would serve also to meet the needs of local war. Now this assumption will no longer be made, and a separate analysis of local war needs will be conducted. Before we turn to subparagraph–b, I want to mention the JCS pro­ posal to add three words to the last sentence on page 2. They would have it read: “Planning for cold war and opposition to local aggression will include . . .” Is there any objection? Are there any other comments on this military logistics base section? In subparagraph–­b, the only substantial change proposed is that of going beyond survival to plan for recovery. Here we have a split, which is shown on page 4. OCDM, State, and Commerce would like to speak of “national survival and recovery,” whereas Budget and Treasury would like to retain the language in the old paper, which uses the phrase “sur­ vival as a nation.” The JCS have made a comment to this effect: Consideration of this split will require a decision as to what pro­ portion of its national resources the United States will allocate to Civil Defense. The present-language difference appears to be largely a ques­ tion of semantics. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are interested in the protec­ tion and recovery of the nation should it be subjected to an attack, and therefore any wording which would indicate a policy of at least mini­ mum protection of the civilian population and the eventual recovery of the country is satisfactory to them. Dr. Saulnier is unable to be here today, but he has sent me the fol­ lowing comment: “I prefer the State-­OCDM-­Commerce language because it makes quite explicit the need for readiness measures essential to recovery, as well as to survival during the attack. We should take the measures that are truly needed to effect recovery from an attack. Actually, recovery would seem to be implied by the word “survival,” so that either alter­ native could be employed, but I would prefer the more explicit form.” In the absence of Mr. McCone, who is overseas, the AEC informs me that it has no comment on this or any other part of the paper. CALL ON: Mr. Patterson Mr. Staats Secretary Herter Mr. Scribner Secretary Mueller General Twining In connection with this question of survival and recovery, you will recall that the President recently asked for an informal study by staff officers in Defense and OCDM on the wartime situation which would probably exist following a nuclear exchange between the U.S. and the USSR. (Action 2110–­c)
