National Security PolicyвҖғ 841
for general war would serve also to meet the needs of local war. Now 
this assumption will no longer be made, and a separate analysis of local 
war needs will be conducted.
Before we turn to subparagraphвҖ“b, I want to mention the JCS proВӯ
posal to add three words to the last sentence on page 2. They would 
have it read: вҖңPlanning for cold war and opposition to local aggression 
will includeВ .В .В .вҖқ Is there any objection?
Are there any other comments on this military logistics base section?
In subparagraphвҖ“Вӯb, the only substantial change proposed is that of 
going beyond survival to plan for recovery. Here we have a split, which is 
shown on page 4. OCDM, State, and Commerce would like to speak of 
вҖңnational survival and recovery,вҖқ whereas Budget and Treasury would 
like to retain the language in the old paper, which uses the phrase вҖңsurВӯ
vival as a nation.вҖқ The JCS have made a comment to this effect:
Consideration of this split will require a decision as to what proВӯ
portion of its national resources the United States will allocate to Civil 
Defense. The present-language difference appears to be largely a quesВӯ
tion of semantics. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are interested in the protecВӯ
tion and recovery of the nation should it be subjected to an attack, and 
therefore any wording which would indicate a policy of at least miniВӯ
mum protection of the civilian population and the eventual recovery of 
the country is satisfactory to them.
Dr. Saulnier is unable to be here today, but he has sent me the folВӯ
lowing comment:
вҖңI prefer the State-ВӯOCDM-ВӯCommerce language because it makes 
quite explicit the need for readiness measures essential to recovery, as 
well as to survival during the attack. We should take the measures that 
are truly needed to effect recovery from an attack. Actually, recovery 
would seem to be implied by the word вҖңsurvival,вҖқ so that either alterВӯ
native could be employed, but I would prefer the more explicit form.вҖқ
In the absence of Mr. McCone, who is overseas, the AEC informs 
me that it has no comment on this or any other part of the paper.
CALL ON: Mr. Patterson
Mr. Staats
Secretary Herter
Mr. Scribner
Secretary Mueller
General Twining
In connection with this question of survival and recovery, you will 
recall that the President recently asked for an informal study by staff 
officers in Defense and OCDM on the wartime situation which would 
probably exist following a nuclear exchange between the U.S. and the 
USSR. (Action 2110вҖ“Вӯc)
