723.2515/1693: Telegram [Document 252] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State [Paraphrase] ARICA, November 26, 1925—10 p.m. [Received November 27—11:55 a.m.75 ] From Pershing: Department’s telegram, November 23, 6 p.m. The situation here has become tense, and Chilean Commissioner has demanded a meeting of the Commission on Saturday to consider his motion for promulgating regulations and fixing dates for the plebiscite. After careful consideration I have prepared a reply to Edwards reviewing entire situation, restating the conditions which have caused delay in framing and promulgating regulations but reiterating my readiness to proceed with work on regulations as rapidly as possible, and expressing belief, but not committing myself absolutely, that they can be reported out of committee in about 30 days and promulgated about middle of January; I pointed out that no delay will be caused in plebiscite provided Government of Chile henceforth cooperates in good faith in carrying out prerequisites resolution and other steps for making fair plebiscite possible. My reply departs from your suggestions on two points only: (1) in restating the conditions which have caused delay—I think restatement essential in order to fix responsibility in event of a break; (2) in calling upon Chilean Government to change orders instructing Chilean officials not to cooperate with the Commission while awaiting promulgation of regulations. Latter point is vital, partly because weakening under present conditions would end usefulness of American delegation but chiefly because if changes in present conditions are to be postponed, result would be not only to postpone plebiscite but to defeat it. Impossible to remake conditions here overnight. A reasonable time must elapse for changes to operate before fair election is thinkable, much less possible. Delay would cause irreparable loss to Commission’s prestige, and would irrevocably deprive electorate of any confidence that fair registration and election could ever be held. Furthermore, there is possibility that Peru may withdraw if Chile is allowed to disregard prerequisites resolution. All my advisers are in agreement with me that in proposed reply we have gone as far as we can go in making concessions to Chile. Because of doubt about my right to postpone meeting under the rule I feel obliged to hold meeting Saturday morning and to read my reply. Pershing. VON TRESCKOW 75 Telegram in two sections.
