560 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 64. The slower natural increase of the labor force during the period of this estimate may also be a limiting factor on the rate of Soviet indus­ trial growth. Population increase and a continuation of past school programs would provide an estimated increase of only about seven million men in the total civilian labor force over the next seven years. The Seven-­Year Plan requires an increase of about 11 million men in the nonagricultural labor force. Moreover, the regime is heavily com­ mitted to reduce hours of work and has reaffirmed such an intention in its Seven-­Year Plan announcement. The goals for gains in productivity reflect the regime’s recognition that the labor supply is now a limitation on the rate of economic expansion. One of the aims of current programs in agriculture is clearly to increase productivity in this area so as to permit the release of workers to industry. Moreover, recent and pro­ spective changes in the educational system are in part designed to free additional young people for employment in industry; these changes might release as many as one million to the nonagricultural labor force over the seven-­year period. Agricultural Prospects 65. In the years 1954–1958 agriculture—­which had remained largely stagnant during Stalin’s last years—­underwent rapid development. This was due both to the programs for cultivating the new lands and planting corn, and to other less spectacular but no less important meas­ ures such as increased farm supplies and greater financial incentives. In the new lands the weather was better than average. No slackening of attention is apparent in the Seven-Year Plan and the relatively high levels of agricultural investments of the last several years are scheduled to continue. However, the growth rate gains in agricultural output of recent years cannot be maintained. Total acreage is expected to increase during the next seven years at a rate only about one-­fourth of the earlier period. Most of the future increase will have to come from increased production per unit of land. This is more difficult to achieve, particu­ larly since the unfavorable effect of indiscriminate acreage expansion will manifest itself. Nevertheless, the existing potential is by no means exhausted, and a number of measures such as soil improvement will be undertaken. 66. Recent organizational changes and better prices in agriculture probably have softened the critical attitude of the peasant toward the regime, as have other earlier measures which were focused upon tax, product procurement, and income conditions in agriculture. State con­ trol over agricultural activity, however, has not been weakened. The central organs continue to determine state procurement goals even though the enterprise manager in Soviet agriculture is likely to exer­ cise more choice over what and how he will produce. Collective farm
