906 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 290. Memorandum From Michael Armacost of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 30, 1977 SUBJECT PL–480, Title I: Shipments to Human Rights “Violators” PL–480, Title I shipments to a number of countries are being held up as a result of monumental confusion in our purposes, exaggerated interpretations of the Congressional intent, and bureaucratic mis-steps by the Christopher Committee. The salient facts in this case are these: —Section 112–A of the legislation governing PL–480 Title I programs specifies that shipments of commodities should not go to countries that are “gross and consistent violators of human rights”, except when the President determines that any commodities going to such countries will be channeled to the needy. —There are 29 recipients of PL–480 Title I shipments. So far as we are aware, none has ever been determined to be a “gross and consistent violator of human rights”.2 Thus we are not legally required to withhold shipments to the intended recipients (evidently Chile has been judged a “gross and consistent violator”, but none of the shipments are planned for Chile anyway). The Christopher Committee has decided that 14 of the 29 recipients have engaged in questionable human rights practices, and the Committee has decided that our PL–480 contracts with these countries be amended to provide for additional reporting on human rights matters.3 Our Ambassadors to these countries have been instructed to seek host government concurrence in such amendments. —This effort has not been crowned with great success. The Indonesian Government bristled at our suggestion and refused. Our Ambassadors in South Korea and Bangladesh have refused thus far to raise it with the host government. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 49, PL 480: 11/77–1/80. Confidential. Sent for action. At the top of the page, Inderfurth wrote: “See last paragraph first for explanation of urgency. Rick.” Brzezinski wrote: “MA, good—OK—talked. 4 countries only [illegible] only. ZB.” Attached to the memorandum is an undated handwritten note by Brzezinski listing the four countries (Guinea, Bangladesh, Korea, and Indonesia) with the comment “all we ask for answers & for information.” 2 Brzezinski highlighted the second sentence of the paragraph. 3 Brzezinski underlined a portion of the word “questionable” in this sentence. Regarding the decision by the Christopher Committee, see Document 289.
