266 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 84. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, July 18, 1952, 1 p.m. 239. 1. Emissary Qavam, in whom I have confidence, came to see me this morning to ask if I could visit Qavam July 19, 10:00 a.m. He said Qavam’s first problem was financial. Qavam would like settle oil problem as soon as possible but he must move with decorum and caution in order not (rpt not) to outrage sensibilities of country. In meantime there are heavy back payments due in governmental salaries and new pay day falls on July 20. Qavam hopes that US will find some way to help tide government over financially until he has had opportunity settle oil problem and otherwise get Iran’s house in financial order. 2. I asked emissary if Qavam thought of possibility obtaining temporary loan from Bank Melli through issuance of limited amount of notes against currency coverage. Emissary said matter was being given consideration but consent of Majlis must first be obtained and it would be impolitic for Qavam’s first approach to Majlis to be request for lowering of currency coverage. In any event at least month would elapse before necessary legislation could be passed and notes made available to government. 3. I told emissary I would be glad discuss matter with Qavam in our talk tomorrow but Qavam should know in advance that I in no (rpt no) position to make commitments about financial aid. This aid involved number factors, some rather complicated. I asked if Qavam was making similar approach to Brit. Emissary replied he thought probably Qavam would send message some kind to Brit. Emb today but it would not (rpt not) be possible to begin serious discussion re oil with Brit. until machinery had been set up and certain amount time consuming preparations made. 4. My informant told me that he was with Qavam last night at time news received that Majlis had taken vote in his favor. He said within ten minutes after results of Majlis vote had been received, Gen. Kupal, Chief Police, called on Qavam and expressed his joy that Majlis had decided in his favor and stated his desire to do everything possible to insure that change in government would lead to no (rpt no) disorders. Few minutes later Mil Governor of Tehran appeared on similar mission. While these two officers were still with Qavam, Ala Min. Court telephoned on behalf of Shah, informing Qavam that decree naming 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.13/7–1852. Secret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 9:24 a.m.
