836
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
255.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to the Under
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Cooper)1
Washington, May 3, 1979
The President’s Commission on World Hunger
You asked for an update on the work of the Commission estab-
lished in September 1978 and charged with developing “recommenda-
tions designed to significantly reduce world hunger and malnutrition
. . . including policy options for improving the capacity of the United
States to reduce the problems of world hunger and malnutrition.” The
Commission is to issue a report containing its recommendations by
July 30 (this may slip to September 1).2 It will spend the following 11
months working toward the implementation of those recommenda-
tions. The 20-member Commission, chaired by Sol Linowitz, brings to-
gether a variety of expertise and interest in the hunger problem.
The Work of the Commission
The Commission has three subcommittees: international hunger
and development, domestic hunger and nutrition, and public partici-
pation. Since November 1978, the subcommittees have sponsored
hearings with expert witnesses on food aid, agribusiness, world food
security and international grains reserves, famine prevention, etc.3 The
public participation subcommittee is responsible for “selling” the Com-
mission recommendations to the public and has met with hunger in-
terest groups around the country to mobilize support.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of International Organization Affairs/
International Development Assistance/Agriculture Division, Subject Files of FAO, US
Mission, International Food Organizations, Lot 88D305, Box 2, World Hunger, Presiden-
tial Commission on. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Peter Kolar (EB/ORF/OFP/FPD)
and cleared by Donald Hart (EB/ORF/OFP).
2 See Document 263.
3 According to an undated status report prepared by the Presidential Commission
on World Hunger, the Public Participation and Communication Subcommittee, com-
posed of Chapin, Denver, Myerson, Nolan, and Stockwell, held hearings in Washington;
Atlanta, Georgia; Denver, Colorado; Dallas, Texas; and Minneapolis, Minnesota
throughout the spring of 1979. The full Commission also held a public hearing in Chi-
cago, Illinois. (Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Sub-
ject File, 1978–1980, Box 16, Status Report on the Commission [1])
