Arms Control and Disarmament  1467
conditions, tests below the threshold of reliable detection. Then, if we 
catch the Soviets testing, we could withdraw our unilateral renunciation.
Dr. Killian said he agreed in general but would raise the question 
of whether we should in fact renounce even unilaterally tests below the 
threshold.
Mr. Gray said that the approach the Secretary had suggested and 
Mr. Quarles had emphasized of making clear the limits of any agreed 
inspection system would have considerable educational value. It would 
point up the idea not generally understood that the system agreed at 
Geneva would not reliably monitor all tests.
Mr. McCone said that for purposes of discussion we might separate 
the problem into two components:
(a) what is the importance of tests below 5 kt and what would we 
give up by unilaterally renouncing all such tests.
(b) what is the importance of our public posture in the propaganda 
aspects of the negotiations.
Leaving aside the second field, he had no doubt as to the import­
ance of tests below 5 kt. So long as U.S. military plans anticipate the 
use of ground forces, small tactical weapons would seem to be required 
and there is in this area a large field not yet explored.
Dr. Killian said he would be reluctant to forego tests below the 
threshold, and in this connection, he read the following sections from a 
staff paper incorporated as ANNEX 3 of the Third Report of the Work­
ing Group.
This problem could be resolved directly by permitting continued 
“safeguarded” testing below 1 kt or 2 kt by all nations. One method 
of “safeguarding” such testing would be to have Commission repre­
sentatives make yield determinations of each test to determine that it 
was in fact below the permitted threshold. If the Commission retained 
the right of inspection which was not limited to a particular minimum 
yield, there would be little incentive to conduct clandestine tests below 
the threshold of the system. The incorporation of this concept in a test 
cessation agreement would have the following advantages:
1. It would close a significant loophole in the proposed system 
which could be exploited much more easily in the USSR than the US.
2. It would maintain the concept of fully “inspected” agreements.
3. It would permit the US to continue small-­yield weapon devel­
opments which are of particular interest to the US for limited war and 
defense applications. The US is now probably in a period of more rapid 
development in this field than the USSR.
4. It would tend to establish a differentiation between small-­yield 
nuclear weapons for tactical purposes as opposed to large-­yield nuclear 
weapons for mass destruction.
5. It would make the overall system more workable by greatly 
reducing the number of inspections required to give an acceptable level 
of confidence in the capabilities of the system below 5 kt.
