1980 801 convey valid and useful impressions about relative US and Soviet strategic nuclear capabilities. In this view, such analysis from the US perspective should be accomplished within the Department of Defense with intelligence as a full partner, and should not be included in a National Intelligence Estimate. Consequently, the holders of this view believe that the analysis of residual forces in this Estimate (as summarized in figures 4 and 5) should be removed. Further, the holders of this view believe that the Intelligence Community should focus its efforts on understanding and, if possible, duplicating Soviet analytical techniques for net assessment.11 48. The Director of Central Intelligence believes that it would be a disservice to national decision-­makers to produce this Estimate without any interpretation of relative US and Soviet strategic nuclear capabilities beyond that shown by static indicators. In his view, the inclusion of quasi-­dynamic analysis, despite its limitations, allows the Estimate to reach more comprehensive conclusions about relative strategic capabilities and deterrent potentials and about perceptions of them. He believes that the quasi-­dynamic analysis is important to those who see the key ingredient of deterrence as the capability of one side to absorb a first strike and retain enough absolute destructive potential to destroy a broad mix of targets on the other side. Soviet and US Residual Potentials 49. Figure 4 displays the results of our analysis of residual potentials under a worst case circumstance for the side attacked—­that is, a surprise attack when forces are on day-­to-­day alert. The SALT-­limited forces of each side are used. In the US force, 200 MX missiles with 4,600 shelters are deployed between 1986 and 1989. The forked lines on these charts indicate our uncertainty about whether the Soviets will deploy a single-RV or a 10-RV missile as their one new ICBM, and show that the trends would not be very different in either case. 50. The charts illustrate that, under SALT II limits, the potentials of residual Soviet forces—­measured either in terms of lethal area potential or in terms of hard-­target potential—­will improve over the next few years regardless of which side struck first. The Soviets will have a sizable advantage in these potentials in the early and middle 1980s, but US force improvements will erode and even reverse the Soviet gains if SALT II limits extend beyond 1985. By 1989, Soviet residual potentials would revert to levels equal to or less than those the Soviets would have today, while US residuals would grow to levels substantially larger than those available to the USSR. The Soviets could alter these adverse trends if they deployed even larger numbers of mobile ICBMs 11 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior Intelligence Officers of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]
