International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
449
Schmidt: The reason for this is that if you have to spend five times
more on energy, industry is not fully employed and thus it does not
need as much raw material, so raw material prices go down.
Trudeau: There is a real transfer of resources to OPEC, but the bal-
ance of adjustments shifts to those who import lots of oil and against
those who export other goods and commodities.
Giscard: This is a tax decided by OPEC. It goes with the transfer of
real resources.
Fukuda: Let me identify measures taken by Japan. The oil shock
dealt us a serious blow. We are heavily dependent on imported oil.
Growth this year was 5.4%. We are aiming for 7% growth, and our
economy is moving full steam ahead to this end. Our balance of pay-
ments had done too well. We have an $11 billion current account
surplus. This is my biggest headache, and we are most seriously con-
cerned about it. For JFY ’78 we have taken an obligation to reduce our
trade surplus by expanding imports, reflating by expanding domestic
demand to achieve 7% growth. This is the crucial test. Many thought it
would be difficult to achieve 7% growth, but for the first quarter we
have had 10% annual growth. We can’t maintain that momentum, but I
am confident that we can achieve 7% for the year. If 7% seems doubtful,
I am ready to take additional measures which may be needed. During
August and September we will be able to see if additional measures are
needed and determine the type of measures which will be necessary.
By the end of September we will table a bill in the Diet.
The effects of our actions already taken will take time. That is why
in the first half of this fiscal year we have a fairly large balance of pay-
ments surplus. To deal with this problem I have embarked on an emer-
gency import scheme, including purchases of enriched uranium and oil
stockpiling. There should be an improvement with respect to our bal-
ance of payments. But expanding imports alone is not sufficient. That is
why I am contemplating adjustments of exports. The volume of exports
in FY ’78 should be the same as in FY ’77. I will see to it that the volume
of exports in ’78 does not exceed that of 1977. If this goal is achieved
and the price of Japanese exports is the same as 1977, the surplus will be
liquidated soon. But the prices keep rising and thus increase the value
of Japanese exports. The single most important factor here is that we at-
tain price stability in Japan and in the international market. For the
same volume of exports, prices are now 20% higher in monetary terms
than in the previous year. That is why even if we hold down the
volume of exports (undesirable as that may be) we still need to hold
down global inflation. For the first time in history I am overriding op-
position in Japan by regulating exports. But our efforts will be defeated
if there is inflation in markets abroad, because if there is, the value of
those exports will go up even if the volume does not. Thus, I am asking
