346  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Data Denial
9. Turning to the subject of telemetry, Burt said the U.S. was will-
ing to hold the experts’ meeting, but that there were also political 
and legal questions to be discussed. According to the philosophy 
of the draft Soviet umbrella agreement on verification and stability 
measures, these were trial verification measures and experiments 
intended to improve the START agreement, to build on the sides’ 
knowledge. In that light, Burt asked whether the Soviet side still saw 
a need to revise Article VI. Nazarkin replied affirmatively, but said he 
understood Burt’s point; the duration should be consistent with the 
duration of the START treaty. The Soviet side did not yet have a for-
mula that would take the U.S. point of view into account; more time 
was required. But the Soviet side was ready to listen to and study any 
specific suggestions the U.S. side might have.
10. Burt said the U.S. side had no specific suggestions at this stage, 
but was faced with something of a dilemma. The U.S. side was satis-
fied with its draft and thought it would be helpful for both sides; it 
would be useful to conclude the agreement prior to completion of the 
START agreement. The U.S. side did not want it to slip away; it would 
be useful to codify what was already agreed. But the U.S. side did not 
want to give up the opportunity to improve or build upon this agree-
ment. So it would be important, as the sides thought about Article VI, 
to keep options open to improve or build upon this agreement. The U.S. 
side was not prepared to have Article VI reflect an agreement to cease 
discussion of this subject, because the U.S. side felt it would be possi-
ble to make further improvements. This was the dilemma—Burt asked 
Nazarkin’s view of how to resolve it.
11. Nazarkin said he saw the psychological problem the U.S. had 
with changing its own text. He had not yet had sufficient time to ana-
lyze it and prepare suggestions. If the sides decided to meet the next 
day—­and his understanding was that this had been agreed—­the Soviet 
side would have more time later in the day to discuss and analyze the 
agreement amongst themselves.
12. (At this point U.S. Legal Advisor Brown arrived; Medas, Brown, 
French, Roslyakov and Neverov left to work on conforming the strate-
gic exercise notification agreement.)
Mobile ICBM Verification
13. Turning to the subject of mobile ICBM verification, Burt noted 
that the U.S. position still called for a ban on mobile ICBMs, but said 
the subject had been discussed recently at the highest levels of the U.S. 
Government. (At this point Nazarkin suggested that the sides begin 
to use an interpreter.) Continuing, Burt said serious consideration had 
been given to lifting the ban on mobile ICBMs. Such a move would
