3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
342
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Reading from a paper, Brezhnev replied that the NATO countries
had recently tabled an updated proposal which was now being care-
fully studied and would be answered in due time. The first impression
of the Soviet side was that this proposal of the Western countries con-
tained some elements which took into account certain considerations of
the socialist states, although it clearly retained the overall nature of a
onesided approach, and still manifested a desire to use the Vienna talks
not so much to lower the overall level of the opposing military forces,
as to change the ratio between them in favor of the Western countries,
to the detriment of the socialist countries. They would certainly con-
tinue to work and do all within their power, within reasonable limits, to
reach an understanding and to reduce military tensions in Europe.
Brezhnev said that all that was left to do now was to convey his best
wishes to President Carter, to express his hope for detente and for im-
provement of the relations between our two countries. This was cer-
tainly feasible and he was certain it would be supported by the people
of the United States.
Brezhnev had his interpreter read the text of a unilateral statement
he proposed to release to the press.11
The Secretary said it sounded all right to him. He would add a few
words, realising that the hour was late. (Brezhnev was beginning vis-
ibly to tire.) The Secretary said we realized the importance the Soviet
Union attached to the question of an exception in the new missile cate-
gory. We have discussed this issue at length and have made some
progress in the direction of a solution to this issue. We had also re-
solved the non-circumvention question, and had thus laid the basis for
agreement on the text of the Joint Statement of Principles. He would
point out that we had come here with serious intent, had made some
progress, and now faced the task of completing work on the remaining
issues.
With reference to SALT, the Secretary wanted to stress that SALT
did not exist in a vacuum. The ratification process in Congress was
bound to be affected by the general political atmosphere and by public
opinion in the United States. These would be affected by Soviet actions.
(Brezhnev appeared to be getting tired and his attention began to
wander.)
The Secretary said he wanted to make another point. In place of an
unrestrained political and military competition, the United States
would prefer and would welcome closer cooperation with the Soviet
Union in dealing with the many global problems that confront man-
11 The joint communique´, released on April 22, dealt primarily with arms limitation
issues. For text of the communique´, see Department of State Bulletin, June 1978, p. 26.
