998 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The State-Defense memorandum provides the technical information you need to make the crucial decisions required, so I would like to address myself to the larger picture. With these decisions, we have the opportunity, and in my view the obligation, to cement a relationship of vital importance to the United States. President Sadat has nowhere else to turn for military assistance. He is in this position by virtue of turning away from the Soviets and moving closer to the United States and Israel—steps of unprecedented benefit to our interests in the Middle East. Our failure to support Sadat militarily at this critical juncture could have disastrous effect on our overall peace effort. (S) It is important to stress that we have taken responsible steps to keep the assistance package at a reasonable level. We received a larger and more expensive list from Sadat,3 but we pared that list by projecting smaller, yet more sophisticated, Egyptian armed forces. Further, we are working with the Egyptians to build up their indigenous arms production base, and, if the moderate Arabs move closer to the peace process, we hope to encourage their resuming contributions to Egypt’s defense. (S) I strongly agree that we need to provide more assistance and preferred financing terms in FY 81, and that this funding should be in addition to the already strapped FY 81 security assistance budget. We do not want an arms delivery gap to occur during the next two critical years, nor do we want to affect adversely vital interests elsewhere as we move to protect the interests at stake here. (S) Finally, I think that sufficient facts are presented here for you to make a decision at this time, rather than to wait until after the budget cycle runs its course next month. Sadat is expecting a reply shortly, and delaying the decision until December could affect the Strauss/Linowitz visit on November 17.4 (S) RECOMMENDATION: That you approve each of the five recommendations in the State- Defense memorandum at Tab A.5 (U) 3 See footnote 4, Document 274. 4 See Document 310 and footnote 2 thereto. 5 Brzezinski added a handwritten postscript to the memorandum, “P.S. I would recommend that you first look at p. 8 of the joint State/DOD memo—and then refer back only if you feel you want more detail.” Carter neither approved nor disapproved the recommendation.
