FOREIGN
RELATIONS
OF THE
UNITED
STATES
Volume XII
AFGHANISTAN
DEPARTMENT
OF
STATE
Washington

Foreign Relations of the
United States, 1977–1980
Volume XII
Afghanistan
Editor
David Zierler
General Editor
Adam M. Howard
United States Government Publishing Office
Washington

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office
Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov

SUBJECT
Specific Recommendations: Afghanistan
1. Our existing intelligence capability in Afghanistan is miniscule
as compared to the like-sized producing region in the “Golden Trian-
gle”.2 The Central Intelligence Agency’s mission in Afghanistan has
been essentially limited to activities regarding the Soviet Union. [7 lines
not declassified]
2. The Afghan Minister-in-Charge of Foreign Affairs, Waheed Ab-
dullah, will be attending the upcoming U.N. General Assembly in New
York. We have suggested that Secretary Vance meet with him to express
our deep concern over Afghanistan’s increased opium production. This
is the next logical step in a series of demarches to Afghanistan, which
have included U.N., as well as U.S. initiatives.
3. Our Ambassador to Kabul has suggested that President Daoud
would like to visit you, and recommended that such a visit could
have impact on our narcotics effort. In Afghanistan, nothing happens
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
2 A reference to the area of Asia, comprising parts of Burma, Laos, and Thailand,
that produces opium.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
without Daoud’s approval and direction. We cannot expect further
progress in the narcotics field without his personal interest, and contin-
uing surveillance. While Afghanistan is not a priority country in the
context of global affairs, in addition to being one of the world’s poorest
countries it is the single most significant threat to our long term narcot-
ics efforts, and meeting Daoud could in fact move him to take a more
active role in containment of the illicit narcotics of the region. We
would therefore suggest acceptance of a Daoud visit early next year.
The timing of such a visit is important and would be most beneficial
during the early Spring, since late Spring is harvesting season and
Daoud could, in fact, cause the interdiction and destruction of large
amounts of opium on his return to Kabul. Such a meeting would also
be a logical follow-up of the Vance-Abdullah meeting this Fall.
4. By far the most important decision to be made in support of our
efforts is on selection of our next Ambassador to Kabul. In order for
us to be able to follow through on our devised strategy and escalate
anti-narcotics efforts at the earliest possible moment, it is important that
in addition to a firsthand knowledge of Afghanistan and its political
constraints, our next Ambassador should be competent in the narcotics
field and have an existing relationship with the leaders of Afghanistan
at the Ministerial level.
An individual with these qualifications is available. He is not,
however, a career Foreign Service Officer, and consequently a determi-
nation must be made that the appointment to Afghanistan should be
considered by the Ambassadorial Review Commission, which it has
not been up to this point. The Commission has the name of the individ-
ual before it, as well as Congressional recommendations and would
in all likelihood include that name in any list submitted to you. I would
therefore suggest that Afghanistan be considered a country to which
a non-career assignment would be appropriate. With your approval,
such a suggestion will be made to Secretary Vance.3
3 Carter wrote: “OK” and initialed “J” in the right margin next to this sentence.
The Ambassador to Afghanistan, Theodore Eliot, had been in that position since Novem-
ber 1973 and did not leave the post until June 1978, when he was succeeded by Adolph
Dubs, a career Foreign Service officer. The individual referred to by Bourne was Charles
O’Keefe, Deputy Director for International Affairs in the White House Office of Drug
Abuse Policy.

Afghanistan
5.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
THE SOVIET PRESENCE IN AFGHANISTAN
AFGHANISTAN COUP
Our initial assessment is that the coup leaders were principally
motivated by a desire to seize power from the Mohammedzai clan/
family, which has dominated Afghanistan for 150 years.2 The leaders,
mostly military officers, appear to be young, leftist and nationalistic.
Some elements of the Afghan Communist party are associated with
coup leaders, and one party member has reportedly been named Minis-
ter of Finance. There are no indications, however, of Soviet complicity
in the coup. The coup seems to have been hurriedly planned and the
Soviets may have been informed about it at the last moment. The
Soviets have traditionally acted with restraint toward Afghanistan.
Although they had probably become somewhat disillusioned with
President Daoud, we do not think they would have tried to take over
this important non-aligned country. Although the Soviets are probably
not displeased with events, they may be cautious about exerting overt
and conspicuous influence in order not to unduly alarm Afghani-
stan’s neighbors.
Whatever the facts, we will have to deal with the probable percep-
tions of the Iranians and Pakistanis, as well as the US press and public,
that the new regime is little more than a Soviet proxy. Pakistan will
be alarmed and its acute sense of insecurity further enhanced if they
believe themselves to be virtually surrounded by Soviet-leaning
regimes—India and Afghanistan. The Shah will see this as confirmation
of his “worst-case scenario”—the encirclement of Iran by the Commu-
nists. The US press and public may portray the situation as a new
“Horn of Africa”. It is worth noting that the Kabul events will attract
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
and cleared by Saunders. Attached but not printed is an April 29 covering memorandum
from Tarnoff to Brzezinski. At the top right of the covering memorandum an unknown
hand wrote: “ZB has seen.”
which relayed the announcement from Radio Afghanistan that “Daoud is gone com-
pletely and forever.” In telegram 3242 from Kabul, sent one hour and 45 minutes later,
the Embassy reported that “the coup appeared to have been triggered by Daoud’s arrest
of the Khalq leadership.” The Embassy was unsure at that juncture whether or not
Daoud had been killed during the fighting. The telegram included the text of a statement
by the Revolutionary Military Force of Afganistan: “The foreign policy is in accordance
with the respect and reservation of the Islamic religion, democratic and individual
independence, and the progressive development of the country.” (National Archives,

Afghanistan
more than ordinary attention in the third world, since a ministerial-
level meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement had been scheduled to
One immediate task is to share our information and our assess-
ments with the Paks and Iranians and try to dissuade any hasty moves
on their part. Our Embassies’ initial assessments are that neither will
move under present conditions. Such moves might set off a chain-
reaction in the area. We will also be closely watching the Afghan/
Soviet border for signs of any Soviet troop movements.
Afghanistan had been making slow but steady economic progress.
Iran and other OPEC countries had promised the Daoud Government
substantial economic assistance and they now may have second
thoughts. Our USAID program runs about $20 million a year and is
concentrated on agricultural, public health and educational programs
in rural areas. In addition, we have about 95 Peace Corps volunteers
in Afghanistan almost all of whom work in Kabul. The only significant
U.S. commercial interest is that Pan American has a 49% share of the
Afghan national airline.
In the next few days we will have to make decisions on the
following matters.
1. Diplomatic Recognition—We usually recognize new regimes if
they control the machinery of government and the countryside and if
they agree to honor international commitments made by the previous
regime. It is still too early to know whether or not the new government
is in full control. If there are public perceptions that the new regime
is Communist, there may be political pressures to withhold recognition.
The Soviets may extend recognition very soon.
2. Safety of Americans—There are about 1,000 Americans in Kabul.
There are no reported American casualties and the foreign community
in Kabul has not been threatened. If heavy fighting resumes, we will
have to consider whether or not to try an evacuation.
3. The Soviet Angle—There have already been speculative press
reports describing this as a “communist coup”. As mentioned above,
we have no evidence of Soviet involvement, although the new leader-
ship may include leftists. However, the public and Congress may per-
ceive this as another Soviet victory and there may be pressures to do
something about it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
9.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
3300. Subject: Daoud’s Last Hours.
1. According to what appears to be a reliable eyewitness (one of
the only two survivors of the horror scene described), President Daoud,
his brother Mohammad Naim, and approximately 29 other persons,
including Daoud’s three sons, their wives and some of his grandchil-
dren, were executed in their house within the palace grounds on the
morning of April 28. (We presume that the wives of Daoud and Naim
were also in the group.) According to this report Daoud was repeatedly
urged to swear loyalty to the National Military Revolutionary Council
(NMRC), but he refused.
2. To exert maximum pressure on Daoud the coup forces made
him and Naim witness the execution of their families by submachine
report did not contain information on exactly when Daoud and his
family had actually fallen into the insurgents’ hands). At 0800, a military
officer arrived and made a last offer to Daoud and Naim, but the
former President still refused. He and his brother were then summarily
executed by submachine gun fire.
3. According to a separate report from a Canadian doctor, Daoud’s
wife, Bilqis (who was also the sister of exiled King Zahir Shah) was
brought into Jamhuriat Hospital during the night of April 27. She
had massive chest and abdominal gunshot wounds, and passed away
shortly after admission. Two of Daoud’s grandchildren are still being
treated in the orthopedic ward for gunshot wounds.
4. The first report contains an additional enigmatic detail: during
the final confrontation with Daoud at 0800, a “diplomatic car,” a phrase
which most Afghans would interpret as “belonging to a foreign
Embassy”, was standing outside the Daoud residence. We have
received several reports—all unverified as yet—of Soviet personnel
being sighted with coup officers.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
tion Priority to CINCPAC for POLAD, Islamabad, Moscow, New Delhi, Rome, and
Tehran. Printed from a copy received in the White House Situation Room on May 1.
Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner of the telegram.

Afghanistan
5. Comment: This version of Daoud’s death tracks with the new
regime’s subsequent formal announcement that the former leader had
to be killed because he would not submit to the authority of the NMRC.
The bloody details, however, will probably never be officially acknowl-
edged. If this story is true—and we have no reason to doubt it consider-
ing the nature of this violent society—we are provided with a vivid
illustration of how venomous was the hatred of the coup leaders against
the “Nadir Shah” Yahya Khel clan of Mohammadzai family. Also, this
is the stubborn way we would have expected Daoud to resist to the end.
Eliot
10.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Departments of State and Defense, the National Security
Agency, and the United States Pacific Command1
3372. CINCPAC for POLAD. Subject: Afghan Communist Leader
Becomes Ruler of Afghanistan.
that pro-Soviet Communist Khalq Party leader Nur Mohammad Taraki
has been named President of the Council of the Democratic Republic
of Afghanistan (DRA) and Prime Minister (the same information was
conveyed officially to the Embassy at 1825 in a circular notice, delivered
by a member of the Foreign Ministry’s Protocol Department). As the
top Afghan Communist becomes head of state and chief of government,
the true political character of the coup leadership is now nakedly
apparent to all.
Northwestern Afghanistan, is a Pushtun. He has been a prominent
Communist leader since 1965. Among the significant positions he has
held are: Director-General of Publications in the Ministry of Press and
Information (1950–51); editor-in-chief of the official Bakhtar news
Secret; Flash. Sent for information Niact Immediate to London, Moscow, Islamabad,
New Delhi, and Tehran (also for the USDAOs in the last three posts).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
agency (1951–52); Press Attaché at the Afghan Embassy in Washington
(1952–53); translator/interpreter for the ICA USOM/A Mission at
Kabul (ca. 1958); translator for the American Embassy at Kabul (1962–
63); became General-Secretary of the Communist Party of Afghanistan
(ca. May 1965); editor of “Khalq” (“Masses”), the far-leftist newspaper
(April–May 1966); General Secretary of the Taraki group of the Commu-
nist Party of Afghanistan (April 1967); chairman of the Central Commit-
tee of the Unified Khalq-Parchamist Party (June 1977).
3. Taraki was married in 1942, but has no children. He has been
described as “a shaven-headed, bulky man of almost commanding
ugliness.” He visited the Soviet Union for medical treatment in 1965
or 1966, travelling extensively in the USSR during his 42-day sojourn.
Taraki speaks Dari and English, in addition to his native Pushtun.
Fuller biographic details will be reported later.2
4. Upon announcing the appointment of Taraki, the Radio Voice
of the new DRA has proclaimed that tomorrow, May Day, will be a
national holiday. Embassy officers have noted the appearance of some
red flags throughout Kabul this afternoon.
5. Comment: Many Afghan and foreign observers at Kabul were
surprised that the Communists have taken over complete power
openly, discarding so early in the game their initial veil of “Islamic
nationalism”. This could represent a serious miscalculation on their
part however. The devout traditionalist majority of this society hardly
seems ready to accept the leadership of what is, relatively speaking, a
minuscule Communist elite. This reaction could also include those
elements of the rebelling armed forces who thought they were fighting
for broader nationalist and progressive goals. Additionally, the regional
security implications will undoubtedly be clear to the Iranian and
Pakistani Governments. With reference to the latter, we note that the
long collaboration between Afghan Communist leaders and Pushtuni-
stan nationalists appears to be continuing into the coup era. The red,
black, and white flag of Pushtunistan still waves today over Pushtunis-
tan Square in downtown Kabul. During coming days we will be able
to provide a more thorough analysis of these events as we see the
new Communist regime become established. The discipline we saw
displayed during the anti-American demonstration before our Embassy
only a few days ago, on April 19, has already translated itself into
2 Not found and not further identified.

Afghanistan
political power. We shall be interested to see what the first Red May
Day in Afghanistan will look like tomorrow.3
Eliot
of Mir Akbar Khaibar, characterized as a “prominent Afghan Communist leader,” trig-
gered an anti-American demonstration in front of the U.S. Embassy. The Embassy noted
that this demonstration “revealed for the first time since the establishment of the Republic
in 1973 the sizable, well-organized nature of the Communist movement in Afghanistan.”
In telegram 3416 from Kabul, May 1, the Embassy described the mood in the city as
D780185–0592, respectively)
11.
Analysis Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research1
Washington, May 2, 1978
1. IMPLICATIONS FOR MOSCOW OF THE AFGHAN COUP
The Soviets almost certainly are ambivalent about the coming to
power of a seemingly pro-Soviet government in Kabul headed by a
known Communist because of the damage it is likely to do to the USSR’s
position in Iran and Pakistan, and possibly in India. Nevertheless, the
Soviets apparently are doing what they can to improve its ability to
remain in power, in hopes of securing greater influence with it.
The Soviets welcome the advent of a leftist government in Kabul,
but they know its Afghan Communist component has very little sup-
port domestically. Their major concern over the short-term is that the
new government’s naming of Communists to top positions will not
only galvanize local opposition but perhaps also invite outside med-
dling. They also recognize that, in any event, there almost certainly
will be severe complications in their own relations with other neighbor-
ing states.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Program
Secret; Noforn.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
There is no hard evidence that the Soviets had foreknowledge of
the coup, but they apparently have been in contact with coup leaders
since shortly after it got under way. An American official in Kabul
observed a meeting between a Soviet Embassy officer and a coup
leader outside the Soviet Embassy last Thursday night, and the Soviets
reportedly were sounding out influential Afghans last Friday on the
advisability of appointing Taraki as Prime Minister. Moscow has not
yet confirmed Kabul Radio’s account of the Sunday meeting between
Taraki and the Soviet Ambassador at which Soviet recognition of the
new government reportedly was conveyed. The TASS replay on May
1 of the “Democratic Republic of Afghanistan’s” May Day pronounce-
ment certainly implies Soviet recognition, however.
Moscow presumably has been in regular contact with Afghan Com-
munists, but the evidence suggests that relations have not been particu-
larly close. Until last June, the party had been split into two factions,
both of which vied for Soviet recognition and both of which had
relations with other Communists and Communist parties in the region.
Suggesting that the Soviets lacked confidence in the prospects of the
newly merged party, Moscow never formally recognized it and report-
edly was instrumental in persuading it to adopt a policy of accommoda-
tion with the Daoud government.
The Afghan Communists presumably will be more inclined than
Daoud has been in the last two years or so to press the Pushtunistan
cause in relations with Pakistan. The Soviets in Kabul have complained
about Daoud’s muting of this issue in recent years presumably because
it lessened his need for Soviet support. They probably would oppose
a revival of the issue by the new regime before it has had a chance to
consolidate its [power?].2
2 The last word of the paper is missing in the original.

Afghanistan
12.
Memorandum for the Record by Thomas Thornton of the
National Security Council Staff1
Washington, May 3, 1978
SUBJECT
SCC Working Group Meeting on Afghanistan
This morning I chaired an SCC Working Group Meeting on Afghan-
istan. In attendance were NIO, David Blee, Rear Admiral Thomas from
ISA, with Commander Zwart, and Peter Lande of State who was acting
as Deputy Assistant Secretary.
I used the agenda attached as a focus for discussion.2
Most of the discussion was operational. The principal substantive
matters that arose were:
—Diplomatic Recognition. Vance apparently wants to go ahead
routinely with diplomatic recognition unless the Iranians urge strongly
otherwise and even then he may rather keep in step with the OECD
countries than with Iran. I said that you would want to have a voice
in this and decide whether the matter needs to go to the President.
Most of us at the meeting thought it would be wise to take fuller
account of Iranian concerns and, if they felt strongly, attempt to slow
down our OECD colleagues.
—Covert Action. There was no great enthusiasm for covert action,
particularly on the part of CIA, which felt that it would be pointless.
Blee’s informal estimate was that the greatest period of weakness would
come in 6 to 12 months because of deteriorating economic conditions.
We discussed this at some length and much against his will I instructed
him to prepare a paper which looks at the possibility of covert actions
in the short term.
—General Attitude. There was a general consensus that this regime
will be bad news for us but that we should not take the initiative in
breaking ties. We decided that personnel should not be withdrawn from
Kabul on an accelerated schedule as proposed by the Ambassador.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1978. Secret; Sensitive. Printed from an unini-
tialed copy. Copies were sent to Brzezinski and Hoskinson. Attached but not printed is
a covering memorandum, May 3, from Thornton to Brzezinski which characterizes the
memorandum as a “run-down” of the meeting Thornton chaired earlier that morning.
2 Attached but not printed.
“the emergency situation” in Afghanistan as justification for his proposal, although he
emphasized that a drawdown of U.S. Government personnel should not be characterized
as an “evacuation” because of the negative connotation the new regime might attach to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The one exception was the Station Chief whose life was considered to
be in danger. The general consensus was that the new government
should commit the first overt action. Our recommendations in this
regard would of course change if we came to the conclusion that
effective short term action could and should be taken against the
regime. We also decided to resist Peace Corps who apparently have
asked for permission now to increase their presence in Afghanistan as
a result of the new situation.
The following assignments were given out:
1. A paper on recognition which could if necessary be sent to the
President.4 If the Iranians are willing to move quickly on recognition
this paper will not be necessary and we will go in step with them.
2. State is to ensure that all concerned agencies have current guid-
ance on our attitude towards the new regime (for instance we want to
avoid conjuring up a red menace). State will also meet with USIA to
ensure that they have proper guidance.
3. State is to undertake more active diplomatic contacts, notably
with the FRG and China.
4. CIA will prepare a paper on prospects for Afghan-Soviet
relations.5 This will be a quick look at the subject to be followed later
probably by a SNIE.
5. CIA will prepare a paper examining the prospects for successful
covert action and the utility of black propaganda.6
4 No paper was found. Instructions regarding de facto recognition of the new Afghan
Government were relayed in telegram 110057 to Kabul on April 29: “In brief, the basic
thrust of the Dept’s present approach is to play down question of recognition as much
as possible with a view to avoidance of seeming to approve or disapprove the new
government. Generally, once the situation has clarified, the new regime is effectively in
control of the machinery of government and of the territory of the state in question, and
other governments have begun to recognize or formally continue diplomatic relations,
we find an appropriate opportunity to advise the new government of our intention to
maintain diplomatic relations. Recognition is not mentioned but may be implied by USG
continuing to deal with new government.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780184–0669) The Embassy presented a note to the Afghan Foreign Ministry
on May 6 stating “the intention of the Government of the United States of America
to maintain diplomatic relations with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan.” In telegram 3601 from Kabul, May 6, the Embassy reported that the
protocol officer of the Afghan Foreign Ministry received the note “with a smile, and
In his first conversation with the new Afghan President, May 6, Eliot informed Taraki
that “we do not extend formal recognition but indicate, as we have done, that we want
to continue normal diplomatic relations.” (Telegram 3619 from Kabul, May 6; National
5 See Document 13.
6 See Document 25.

Afghanistan
6. DOD will ensure that some contact is made with Afghan military
trainees in the United States. We will not be encouraging them to defect
but need to show some interest in their welfare. In some cases their
commanding officers are probably not even aware of the problem.
7. The intelligence community will revise its list of priority intelli-
gence targets in Afghanistan. Particular attention will be given to infor-
mation on possible Coup plotting in the Army. This will be done
through Sam Hoskinson.
8. CIA will prepare a list of indicators that we should look for to
determine the orientation of the regime (e.g. calling in East Germans
to manage security operations).7
The first six items on this list are to be completed by Friday.8 The
remaining two are of lower priority.
Based on the discussions we had I do not see any need for an SCC
meeting in the near term. My main concern is that CIA is so unwilling
to consider covert action that we will not get a fair paper out of them
on this subject.
7 Neither a list of priority targets nor a list of indicators was found.
8 Friday was May 5.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
13.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, May 5, 1978
SUBJECT
The New Afghan Government’s Relations with the USSR
Principal Judgments
1. The Soviets welcome a Communist dominated government in
Afghanistan, but probably will be cautious in attempting to capitalize
on the advent of the new regime because of its internal fragility and
the delicate equilibrium of regional tensions in South Asia.
2. Moscow will work actively to keep the Communists in power in
Kabul and to influence the new government’s decision-making process.
The Soviets probably will offer increased economic and military
assistance.
3. Because the new Afghan Government could face serious domes-
tic threats in the near term, Moscow’s major immediate interest will
be to help the regime consolidate its power. The Soviets in the near term
probably will counsel restraint regarding any adventuristic policies at
home and abroad.
4. Limited Iranian meddling in Afghanistan seems likely, given
the Shah’s perception of a serious threat to Iran from the USSR via
Afghanistan. Although Pakistan shares these worries, it is less likely
to become involved unless the Afghan Government revives the Push-
tunistan dispute over Pakistan’s western provinces.
5. The chances of a direct confrontation between the USSR and
Afghanistan’s anti-Communist neighbors remain low, although they
have increased slightly. Both Tehran and Islamabad will use the pros-
pect of such a confrontation as an argument for increased US military
and political support.
SUBJECT
US Policy Toward Afghanistan
The President has noted a report on Ambassador Eliot’s weekend
conversation with Prime Minister Taraki.2 According to the report,
Taraki said that the climate of bilateral relations will depend on US
willingness to provide economic aid to his government. He said he
will be asking for new aid from both the US and USSR.
In response to the above, the President stated that we should build
a good relationship with the new Government of Afghanistan, but
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
Taraki. He characterized the meeting as friendly and expressed the U.S. desire to help
Afghanistan retain its independence. Taraki emphasized that what had transpired in
late April was a “revolution,” not a “coup,” and that Daoud was killed because he shot
at his attackers, who otherwise would have taken him captive to be court-martialed and
possibly executed. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780193–
1106) Carter may have read a condensed version of the telegram in the May 7 “Current
Reports” compilation disseminated by INR. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelli-
Afghanistan, January–June 1978)

Afghanistan
we should proceed in a cautious manner with respect to economic
assistance.3
Zbigniew Brzezinski
3 Subsequent Embassy reports also noted the challenges of maintaining economic
assistance programs with Afghanistan. For example, in telegram 5982 from Kabul, July
24, the Embassy reported that while the DRA wanted the U.S. aid program “to continue
in all the areas which were involved before the revolution,” this would have to proceed
slowly because the new government “did not have its act together.” The Embassy further
explained that among the new government officials there was a deficit of experience
and reliability required to manage assistance programs, an assessment shared by other
Western powers and international aid organizations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780303–1012)
16.
Letter From Pakistani General Zia to President Carter1
Islamabad, May 9, 1978
Dear Mr. President,
Your interest in the possible implications of the recent coup in
Afghanistan and in my personal assessment of this event, has been
conveyed to me by Ambassador Hummel.2 The correct assessment of
the change of regime in Kabul and of its wider ramifications is, indeed,
essential to enable us to determine our response to it. Your personal
awareness of the importance of the new situation that has arisen and
your keenness to have the right answers, are most welcome.
As soon as the events began to unfold in Kabul, we took the
initiative to consult Ambassador Hummel and have remained in close
touch with him ever since. We have in the course of these consultations
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
7/79. No classification marking.
message to Zia regarding the situation in Afghanistan. The message emphasized that
the United States remained committed to the stability of South Asia and recognized the
centrality of Pakistan toward that end. In telegram 112361 to Islamabad, May 3, Vance
authorized Hummel to deliver the message orally on the basis that a letter from Carter
“might enhance Pakistan’s concerns, as well as raise unrealistic expectations.” (National
respectively)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
also briefed him in detail about these developments and our perception
of their wider repercussions in our own region and beyond. Ambassa-
dor Hummel, no doubt, has communicated to you our views which I
hope have been of some interest.
Neither are the facts of the latest turn of events in Afghanistan
obscure nor is their interpretation a difficult exercise. The leftist coup
in Kabul has replaced a 200-year old monarchic tradition in Afghanistan
with a communist-oriented, if not communist, Government which was
immediately recognised by the Soviet Union and has its full backing.
India joined Bulgaria, the most subservient Soviet satellite of Eastern
Europe, to follow the Soviet lead without any hesitation or delay what-
soever. The collapse of Daoud’s regime with which we were making
good progress towards a settlement of our differences, may have been
welcomed in New Delhi. India is allied to the Soviet Union under the
Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation of 1971 and acts in tandem with
it, at critical moments, despite the illusion of a shift in its policies.3
The facts of how the coup was engineered are not in dispute. Soviet
trained pilots in Soviet supplied MIGs and Soviet trained officers in
Soviet supplied tanks joined together to wipe out President Daoud and
his family, in a swift and bloody operation, closely following the pattern
of events in Addis Ababa not long ago.4 The Afghan Police Force which
was exclusively West German trained, was also eliminated.
The Khalq party which has formed the new Government is com-
posed of leftists known to have been closely associated with the Soviet
Union and the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party over
a period of many years. President Taraki also served for a while in the
Afghan Embassy in Washington where his denunciation of the Afghan
ruling family resulted in his removal from office.5 He is now not only
President of Afghanistan but also the head of the Khalq Party with
which an extremist faction called Parcham merged in October 1977.
3 The Indo-Soviet Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Cooperation was signed in New
Delhi on August 7, 1971.
4 A possible reference to the Ethiopian revolution of 1974, during which Marxist
military leaders brought down Emperor Haile Selassie. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976,
reference is to the assassination of Teferi Bante, Chairman of the Provisional Military
Administrative Council (PMAC), along with five other leaders of PMAC on February
3, 1977. The assassination of Teferi Bante and his associates, all enemies of Mengistu
Haile-Mariam, cemented Mengistu’s role as leader of the Ethiopian revolution.
from Islamabad, May 1, the Embassy reported that Taraki made “anti-monarchist
speeches” during his tenure in Washington and consequently requested asylum in the
United States, which was turned down after “intense pressure” from King Zahir Shah.
Taraki subsequently returned to Kabul where he was arrested. (National Archives, RG

Afghanistan
The leader and founder of the extremist Parcham faction is now the
Vice President and Deputy Prime Minister in President Taraki’s Gov-
ernment. The overwhelming majority of the remaining members of the
Government are all of the same hue.
Paragraph 8 of the ruling Khalq Party’s manifesto issued in October
1977, specifically mentions the Durand Line, the recognised interna-
tional frontier between Pakistan and Afghanistan, as a “colonial imposi-
tion” and pledges support to the so-called “national movement of
the people of Pakhtoonistan” in our territory. In his very first press
conference on May 6, 1978, the new Afghan President raised the matter
of the Durand Line saying, of course, that he wanted a peaceful settle-
ment of this border issue with Pakistan.6
The entire flavour and rhetoric of the new regime in Kabul conform
to classic communist norms. The country itself has been re-named the
“Democratic Republic of Afghanistan” on familiar lines. The regime’s
lip service to Islamic values and non-alignment is transparent enough.
The need for such camouflage to gain time for the regime to consolidate
its position, is evident.
If we go along with these professions in an effort to ensure the
continuity of the dialogue we had initiated with President Daoud, this
does not mean that we are under any illusion or have been lulled into
a false sense of security by the regime’s protestations. We know that
the Afghan barrier has been breached and our country lies directly in
the path of the flood which rolled out of Czarist Russia in the last
century and is now flowing in full force towards the Indian Ocean and
the Persian Gulf.
It is the nature of the response to this situation which is the subject
of controversy among our friends and allies. This is unfortunate because
time is running out. Nothing will stop the Soviet Union from pursuing
its expansionist policies if events encourage it to believe that smaller
countries are expendable in the overall context of America’s global
strategy.
In our estimation the advent of the leftist regime in Kabul is an
event of historic proportions. The change is of a fundamental nature
which will have a profound impact on the balance of power in our
region and beyond. Its consequences for Pakistan are incalculable.
These and related matters are receiving our urgent attention. I am
convinced that these are of deep concern to you also and hope that
you will be able to spare some time to give attention to the measures

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
needed to meet an entirely new situation which has materialised earlier
than we had expected.
We are also in the process of comparing notes with our other
friends. My Adviser on Foreign Affairs is at present in Iran and will
be meeting the Shahanshah. For Iran the situation could be as grave
as it is for us. It may not be empty rhetoric to say that unless timely
action is taken to block the Soviet avalanche, the oil resources of the
Persian Gulf and the Arabian Peninsula may be lost to the West with
consequences that need no elaboration.
I am unable, Mr. President, to say in greater detail what I have to
say in a short letter. It is not possible to convey to you in this communi-
cation the exact nature of the forces that may have been released by
the transformation of the Afghan scene. A fuller elaboration of this
theme which is of vital concern to us and I hope also to you, can better
be undertaken through a personal exchange of views at a mutually
convenient time.
With profound regards,
Yours sincerely,7
M. Zia-ul-Haq
General
7 General Zia added the two closing lines by hand.

Afghanistan
17.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
4018. Subject: Implications for U.S. Policy of Coup in Afghanistan.
1. All the hard evidence that we have about Soviet activities in
Afghanistan since the April 27–28 coup and about past relationships
between the new Afghan leaders and the Soviet Union lead inescapably
to the conclusion that under its new leadership, Afghanistan has fallen
into the Soviet orbit. So far, we have only the words of the new leaders
that they intend to pursue a nonaligned policy. Their growing accept-
ance of Soviet involvement in their political and military infrastructure
does not support their words.
2. Moreover, I remain convinced that having achieved such a long-
standing goal of incorporating Afghanistan into the Soviet sphere of
influence, Moscow will do everything it can to keep it there. And, I
see no internal or external factors at the moment which could thwart
Moscow’s intention.
3. The psychological-political effects of this development are natu-
rally being felt in other places, especially Pakistan, but also in Iran,
China, Saudi Arabia, and elsewhere. I note a common theme in these
other countries that they cannot count on the United States to prevent
further Soviet advances in this part of the world. This despondency
itself contributes to an atmosphere from which the Soviets can benefit,
and which can encourage them to exploit further their bridgehead here.
4. Vital interests of the United States, especially in Iran and the
Persian Gulf region, are involved in this situation. I would think that
our credibility in Peking is also involved.
5. In the light of these considerations, I warmly second the recom-
mendations made by Ambassador Sullivan (ref A).3 I think it is essential
Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Sent for information to Ankara, Islamabad, London, Mos-
cow, New Delhi, Paris, USLO Peking, Tehran, Tokyo, USCINCEUR (also for POLAD),
CINCPAC (also for POLAD), and Jidda.
make a concerted and systematic effort to demonstrate to its allies in the region its
commitment to their integrity and stability, lest the Soviets be further encouraged toward
adventurism beyond Afghanistan. (See footnote 2, above)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
that we undertake a careful review of our policy towards this region,
especially toward the regional CENTO countries, with a view to bolster-
ing their political, psychological, and military positions. I also agree
that we should consult with our European and Japanese allies, and
with the Chinese, on what they, as well as we, can do in these regards.
An early resolution of the nuclear reprocessing dispute with Pakistan
is of fundamental importance.
6. I am certain we can devise ways for shoring up our friends in this
region which will not be incompatible with a strategy of maintaining
a relationship with Afghanistan which will provide the Afghans with
some alternative to reliance on the Soviet Union, should they wish to
have and/or be permitted by the Soviets to have such an alternative.
Eliot
18.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
4980. Subject: Pakistan and the U.S. Following the Kabul Coup.
1. As all of our contacts tell us, from General Zia on down, the
abrupt change of government and orientation in Afghanistan is an
historic event, pregnant with immediate security implications for the
nearby countries of the Middle East and South Asia and with important
ripple effects on the strategic interests of the great powers in this area.
Embassy officers travelling around Pakistan since the coup in Kabul
have found a sense of gloom and trauma prevalent in most of the
Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to Ankara, Dacca, New Delhi, Kabul, London,
Moscow, Paris, Tehran, Kathmandu, and Colombo.
from Islamabad is dated May 3 (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Afghanistan
comments now being offered by Pakistanis of all walks of life, and
indeed, the nation—or at least its opinion molders—appears to be in
a state of shock.3
2. To fully understand the meaning for Pakistanis of the change
in Afghanistan it is important to recall that for most of the history of
this part of the world—at least until the Europeans came by sea some
400 years ago—Afghanistan has been both the military and cultural
route into South Asia. As the British Empire in India took shape, British
policy sought to seal off that route by fostering a classic buffer role for
what was to become Afghanistan. The replacement of the czars by
Bolsheviks and the British Raj by swaraj (self-rule) did not fundamen-
tally change this situation, and Afghanistan remained a buffer in a cold
war context.
3. This is not simply an historical digression. Rather these are
fundamental facts which underly the thinking and the relationships of
the peoples and the states of this region, predating the Dulles and
Ayub Khan eras but incorporated, essentially intact, into our earliest
security relationship with Pakistan. When opinion leaders in this coun-
try now turn to us to express their concerns and anxieties about Paki-
stan’s future in view of the apparent loss of that buffer against Soviet
Central Asia, they have in mind these widely perceived historical reali-
ties and are reacting with gut concern for national survival. Turning
to the U.S. for reassurance at this moment is also something of a
reversion to earlier principles, since it was as an anti-Soviet alliance,
focused on the USSR (and Afghanistan), that the post-war U.S.-Pakistan
relationship was strongest.
4. If it were the uncertainties in the Afghan situation alone in their
minds it would be disturbing enough for many Pakistanis. But the
change in the role of Afghanistan may also have destroyed—for now
at least—whatever slender prospect there was for continued warming
Indo-Pakistan relations, described now by Foreign Advisor Agha Shahi
as “back to square one.” The quick Indian recognition of the new
regime in Kabul—however warranted in Delhi’s eyes and welcome in
Kabul’s—has rather quickly resurrected all the old shibboleths about
the Indo-Soviet relationship (based on their 1971 agreement).4 At the
official level, and even more widely in the country, there is renewed
suspicion about what the wily Hindus are up to this time combined
Affairs Adviser Agha Shahi told Hummel that recent events in Afghanistan threatened
Pakistan and CENTO existentially: “While you wait to see how things develop in Afghani-
stan, we will be gone.” (See footnote 2, above)
see footnote 3, Document 16.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
with a presumption that it bodes ill for Pakistan. Even those Paks
who perceive their own paranoia point out that paranoids can have
real enemies.
5. There is great disappointment among our Pakistani contacts that
the U.S. has not said more in criticism of the bloody events in Kabul
at the end of April. Officially, we have been pressed, bilaterally and
in the CENTO context, for some concrete evidence of what we propose
to do about the change that has come about in Afghanistan to ensure
that the pox let loose there in April does not spread to Iran and Pakistan
in the months and years ahead. While as a practical matter, the Pakistan
Government has publicly adopted a wait-and-see attitude much like
our own and Iran’s, Pakistan’s leaders feel let down that even in private
conversations we have had nothing more to offer than a willingness
to consult and an assessment which Ambassador Sullivan has correctly
termed “thin gruel.”
6. Many Pakistanis want a close and continuing U.S.-Pak relation-
ship of trust, cooperation, and confidence, so our reaction thus far has
been doubly disappointing. Some will, of course, see it as but the latest
U.S. let-down of Pakistan, going back to our support of India in 1962,
our failure to aid Pakistan in 1965 and 1971, and our pressure now to
deny Pakistan the nuclear reprocessing plant it feels it needs. Many
also see it as part of a wider lack of resolve on the part of the U.S.,
and outgrowth of our Watergate, Angola, and Vietnam traumas; U.S.-
Pakistan differences on policy toward the Horn of Africa will also be
cited as evidence of this lack of U.S. resolve. And this comes from
those who are still friendly to our interests here.
7. Those Paks who actually oppose our interests here and who
have long sought to cut Pakistan loose in a sea of non-alignment accom-
modationism may well see an opportunity in the current situation to
demonstrate conclusively that the U.S. is, in fact, an unreliable partner
which has lost its zest for the struggle. They will argue, as [less than 1
line not declassified] notes the Foreign Secretary already has, that Paki-
stan must stop looking to the U.S. (and CENTO) for reassurance, but
rather must accommodate to the rise of Soviet and the decline of Ameri-
can influence in the world.
8. Policy implications: I do not suggest or recommend that we be
streamrollered by events in Afghanistan into taking steps in Pakistan
or in this region to resurrect an earlier era of U.S.-Pak relations. The
world is a different place than it was in the 1950s and early 1960s, and
besides, nostalgia has a way of making that earlier relationship appear
better than it probably was. We have substituted for the earlier objective
of containment of Communism the more realistic formula of promotion
of regional stability. Events in Kabul have undermined that stability,
and so far we seem unable to think of actions to shore it up.

Afghanistan
9. There has been a fundamental change in the South-Asia-Middle
East region, nevertheless, and whether the Soviets prompted the Kabul
coup or are merely the beneficiaries of it, the perception is that the
Soviet Union has scored an important gain in this part of the world.
That should be a matter of concern to us.
10. Our friends, in whose territorial integrity and independence
we have frequently expressed strong interest, and who rightly interpret
that interest, and our previous relationship with them based on our 1958
bilateral as testimony to our concern for their security can legitimately
expect a more visible sign of our concern than they have seen thus
far.5 As I see it, we are now very much in danger of letting our tactical
posture vis-à-vis the new Afghan regime be a substitute for policy
toward the region as a whole. Our friends will not be to blame if they
begin to draw the conclusion that our assurances of the past lack
practical effect.
11. It seems to me that we must find a way of acting in this region
which can serve to reassure our friends in Pakistan, Iran, and even
India, while not unduly disturbing the new relationship we are attempt-
ing to foster with India, or challenging the Soviets frontally to our
disadvantage perhaps, in other forums. And we must somehow per-
suade Iran, and India, and Pakistan that they now have more in com-
mon regarding the new situation in Afghanistan than they have interest
in their continuing mutual suspicions of each others’ motives and
activities.
12. The big hurdle for U.S. policy in this—at least the most obvious
one at the outset—is our nuclear non-proliferation face-down with the
GOP. I do not imply any diminution of the importance of this global
goal of reducing the spread of uncontrolled nuclear technology, any
more that I would suggest we abandon our human rights concerns
here or in Afghanistan or in Iran (or even in India) in the interests of
regional security. What I do suggest, however, is that we not hold our
entire bilateral policy relationship hostage to any single or multiple
strands of our global foreign policies, however important and worthy.
To continue to mortgage our entire relationship with Pakistan to the
non-proliferation question—despite what has happened and may hap-
pen in the wake of the Kabul coup—will be to promote the erosion of
our last remaining instruments of influence and prestige here in Paki-
stan while the GOP—this government or the next one or two or three—
decides it must trim its sails to the new wind blowing from Central Asia.
pursuant to a declaration signed on July 28, 1958, by the Baghdad Pact nations. The
Baghdad Pact was the precursor of CENTO.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
13. If we are going to have influence in this region, it is because
we are relevant to its interests and because we are presumed to share
some of its deepest concerns. Part of our problem with Pakistan, even
before the Kabul coup, has been this perception of relevance. We press
them hard on nuclear non-proliferation, as we must; we express concern
over their human rights record; we expect them to make changes for
the better in their administration of aid projects [garble—and in their]
handling of the economy. At the same time, we deny them access to
new and replacement military equipment in some critical areas, and
we refuse to commit new assistance or to sign agreements for which
funds have already been obligated. If, now, we prolong these largely
self-imposed shut-downs, Pakistan (and its neighbors) will draw their
own conclusions. If, on the other hand, we can be more responsive to
their concerns, we may—in fact—use this period to repair some of the
damage in our relationship while at the same time exercising greater
influence on the GOP to set its own affairs aright.
14. We are waiting, and must no doubt continue to wait for answers
and for events:
—A solution to the reprocessing plant problem;
—the settling of Bhutto’s fate;
—the formation of a civilian government;
—clarification of Afghan intentions.
But let us not postpone all action until all of these and other ques-
tions are settled to our satisfaction. To do so will further undermine,
perhaps fatally, our ability to influence events and achieve our policy
goals. We would like to see a stable, civilian government here, but in
present circumstances there is very little we can do to promote that
result, and we are losing the capability to have meaningful influence
on human rights, narcotics control, and economic development. All of
these are high on our list of goals and objectives, but unless we can
soon find some areas of middle ground between our hopes and the
realities of the situation, it is hard to see how we can make any progress
toward our goals.
Hummel

Afghanistan
19.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
Afghanistan
SUBJECT
Continued Soviet Concern Over new Afghan Regime, [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[2 lines not declassified].
ment of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) was already
suffering from poor administration and confusion amongst its leader-
ship. [less than 1 line not declassified] noted he was particularly distressed
by the new regime’s lack of bureaucratic efficiencies and that each
individual leader is preoccupied with the task of bringing loyal mem-
bers of the party into key governmental positions. The party members
are being appointed more or less randomly and usually lack the neces-
sary skills or background to carry out their assigned responsibilities.
[6 lines not declassified]
2. [less than 1 line not declassified] also expressed concern that the
new regime was experiencing continuing tension between the Parcham
and Khalq factions; he lamented that these old antagonisms should
have been long forgotten.
3. [less than 1 line not declassified] said that Ambassador Puzanov
was finding it somewhat tricky to deal with the new regime. President
Nur Mohammad Taraki had apparently laughed at some of Puzanov’s
advice and had stated that we will take decisions ourselves taking into
consideration the desires and benefits of the Afghan people.
4. The durability of the Afghan regime was also a concern of [less
than 1 line not declassified]. He noted that there could be Western agents
within the ruling Khalq Party and that after revolutions there were
usually subsequent upheavals until a viable regime was finally estab-
lished. [less than 1 line not declassified] observed that a continuing series
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghani-
stan (1978). Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
of revolutions had occurred in Iraq and Bangladesh, and Afghanistan
might not be any different.2
5. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
2 A likely reference to the July 1968 revolution in Iraq, after which the Ba’ath Party
took control of the country, and the assassination of Bangladeshi President Mujibur
Rahman in August 1975. Both cases involved the seizure of power by military officers.
20.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Status of Our Relations With Afghanistan
We have resumed normal diplomatic relations with Afghanistan
and your decision on our overall posture has been communicated to
the relevant agencies.2
In more specific areas, these are the principal actions taken by the
Working Group that we set up under the SCC.
—Covert action is not appropriate at this time; we are, however,
reviewing our intelligence collection priorities and capabilities.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Drafted by Thornton. Aaron initialed the memorandum for Brzezinski. Carter also ini-
tialed, indicating he had seen it. The memorandum is attached as Tab B to a memorandum
from Thornton to Brzezinski, May 11 (not printed), which identifies Brzezinski’s memo-
randum to Carter as a “much shorter version of the same material” of a paper attached
at Tab A to Thornton’s memorandum (and also not printed). That paper, entitled “SCC
Working Group on Afghanistan: Summary of Actions,” noted the following: 1) there
was no possibility at the time of a covert action against the Afghan regime due to lack
of resources and a regional political atmosphere not conducive to such action; 2) there
were no current plans to approach Afghan military trainees in the United States about
moving against the regime [text not declassified]; 3) USAID in Kabul was carrying on its
operations as normal; and 4) it was decided to allow the UN to take the lead in ongoing
efforts to deal with the problem of narcotics in Afghanistan.
2 See Document 12.

Afghanistan
—Aid projects underway are being continued; any new programs
will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis in terms of your guidance.
We hope to avoid a decision, but if pressed State will find that Afghani-
stan is not “under the control of international communism” and hence
remains eligible for aid.
—Military and other trainees will be received routinely. So far indica-
tions are that the Afghans want to keep this channel open.
—We are in appropriate degrees of consultation with all concerned
third countries (including China).
—A follow-on study is being prepared that will provide options for
our posture and actions within the guidance you have given.3
3 Not further identified and not found.
21.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Pakistan1
136041. Paris for Dr. Nye. Subject: Secretary’s Conversation With
Agha Shahi, May 25.
Summary: In bilateral discussions with the Secretary on May 25,
Pakistan’s de facto Foreign Minister Agha Shahi painted a grim picture
of the Soviet/Afghan threat to Pakistan.2 He said pressure is building
in Pakistan for accommodation with the Soviet Union and withdrawal
from CENTO. The Shah is also perturbed and is urging cooperation
among Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and India. Pakistan remains deeply
suspicious of quote Indian designs unquote and feels it now stands
alone. Pakistan needs a security guarantee as well as military and
economic assistance. The Secretary said Shahi had raised very serious
issues and they should get together again, perhaps on June 2 after
Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Coon, cleared in S, and approved by Saunders. Sent for
information Priority to Paris, Kabul, New Delhi, Tehran, Ankara, Moscow, London,
Jidda, and USUN.
2 Vance and Shahi met in New York during the UN Special Session on Disarmament.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
the Secretary had a chance to consult with the President and others.3
End summary.
1. The Secretary met with Pakistan Foreign Affairs Advisor Agha
Shahi in New York on May 25. Shahi was accompanied by Pakistan’s
UN Perm Rep Akhund, Ambassador Yaqub-Khan, Additional Foreign
Secretary Niaz Niak and Minister-Counselor Hayat Mehdi. Also pres-
ent were Counselor Matthew Nimetz, Assistant Secretary Saunders,
and Ambassador Leonard. PAB Country Director Jane Coon was
notetaker.
2. Shahi opened the discussion by noting that there had been an
exchange of views in Islamabad with the U.S. Embassy but he was
disquieted because our perceptions varied so much.4 Pakistan believes
there has been a profound qualitative change in the regional situation;
the USSR is on Pakistan’s borders. Pakistan is following a correct policy
toward the new regime in Kabul but that government has served notice
of its intentions with respect to the Baluch and Pathan problems. In
this connection, Shahi cited the Afghan Foreign Minister’s statement
in Havana calling for settlement of these problems in light of their
quote historic antecedents unquote.5 The new regime says it is non-
aligned and it may choose to consolidate its position first, but then it
will begin subversion against Pakistan.
3. Pakistan has taken a quote independent attitude unquote toward
the Soviets, e.g., the refusal of the overflight permission for Soviet
planes to Ethiopia. Now Pakistan faces the external danger of having
the Soviets use the Afghan regime as a tool against Pakistan. In addition,
there is also the internal danger from leftist elements in Pakistan who
may try to follow the Afghan example. He claimed Pakistan already
had information on subversion by Afghan/KGB agents in Iran and it
may reach as far as Saudi Arabia. If Pakistan’s intelligents see the USSR
as the stronger power in the region he fears for the future of Pakistan.
said, is perturbed and wants to initiate closer cooperation among Iran,
Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and India. Agha Shahi, however, has great
reservations about the Iranian tendency to go over Pakistan’s head to
India and equal difficulty in accepting the U.S. and Iranian perception
that we can loosen Indian ties to the USSR. Indeed, the Delhi-Moscow-
Kabul axis has revived. Pakistan, according to Shahi, is a front line
June 3. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
4 See Document 18.
5 The text of Afghan Foreign Minister Hafizullah’s speech in Havana during the
Ministerial meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement was relayed in telegram 4225 from

Afghanistan
state and needs help. But as far as the Paks can understand, the Shah
is not prepared to give aid. The Saudis have promised but are slow.
5. In this situation, Pakistan stands alone. It may have to make
some gesture to the Soviets such as quitting CENTO. If the people
perceive that Soviets can act adventurously and get away with it,
then there will be increasing pressure for Pakistan to follow an quote
appeasement policy unquote. However, Pakistan has not yet taken
this decision.
6. The Secretary, referring to Shahi’s remarks on Pakistan’s standing
alone, asked what kind of assistance it needed and from whom. Shahi
cited the 1959 bilateral agreement with the U.S. and asserted that the
Soviets were threatening Pakistan by proxy as they did in 1971.6 Paki-
stan thinks there should be a security guarantee. If the Soviets have
an alliance with India, the only remedy lies in quote another super
power supporting its friends and allies unquote. When CENTO was
created, America had the will to act, but today this is questionable. He
noted that Pakistan was not getting military or economic aid and
claimed that all countries with sole exception of the U.S. were willing
to reschedule Pakistan’s debt (sic). He reverted to the Indian threat
and said if the Shah wants to take the leadership, he should enlist Saudi
Arabia and the Persian Gulf countries but Pakistani public opinion will
not allow any approach to India.
7. Finally Agha Shahi remarked that the Pakistanis had heard that
Daoud had wanted to come to the U.S. and that we had turned him
down.7 Quote some people unquote thought this was a clear signal
that Daoud was expendable and that the U.S. was no longer willing
to support Afghanistan as a buffer state. He noted that this was specula-
tion but quote it makes a difference in popular opinion unquote.
8. The Secretary responded that Shahi had raised a number of
serious issues. He would like to consult with the President and his
colleagues because Shahi is entitled to a clear answer. We will be back
in touch and perhaps meet again on June 2 to carry on the discussions.
Vance
commitment to the “preservation of the independence and integrity of Pakistan” and
to taking “appropriate action, including the use of armed forces, as may be mutually
agreed upon . . . in order to assist the Government of Pakistan at its request.” The full
of Soviet “threats” to Pakistan during the Indo-Pakistan War of 1971 may refer to Soviet
support for India during that conflict and for the creation of an independent Bangladesh.
7 See Document 6.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
22.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
4422. Subject: Is the New Afghan Regime Communist?: Evidence
to Date.
1. Summary: Although the top leaders of the Democratic Republic
of Afghanistan (DRA) have Marxist-Leninist backgrounds and their
People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) possesses a typical
Communist structure, members of the revolutionary leadership con-
tinue to claim that they are not Communist and that their government
is democratic, nationalistic, and respectful of Islam. Thus far, their
actions have not significantly belied their words, although these may
be short-term tactics, while the regime consolidates its grip on the
country. On the foreign policy side, the new Afghan Government has
not taken any stance on non-aligned issues appreciably different from
those of the Daoud regime. On the other hand, Afghanistan’s special
relationship with the Soviet Union is very clear.2 Economic agreements
with the USSR are announced almost daily (about 15 so far), while the
only others signed so far have been one each with Czechoslovakia, the
German Democratic Republic, and Yugoslavia. Like its predecessor
regimes since the 1950s, the DRA is clearly dependent on the USSR
for most of its economic and military support. However, Soviet pres-
ence and influence in Afghanistan has appreciably increased since the
coup. On balance, while it is clearly in the Soviet sphere of influence,
there still is not enough evidence available to call Afghanistan a “Com-
munist country” or a satellite of the Soviet Union, although these could
Secret; Priority; Noforn. Sent for information to Islamabad, London, Moscow, New Delhi,
Ankara, Tehran, USLO Peking, CINCPAC (for POLAD), and CINCEUR (for POLAD).
for Afghanistan in the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs as “defensive and reluctant to
discuss nature and orientation of new Afghan Peoples’ Democratic Party. He downplays
Soviets’ links with and support for the new Afghan regime and emphasizes Afghan
view of India as model for Afghanistan to emulate in its development efforts.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Program Files for Soviet-Asia
gram 4559 from Kabul, June 6, the Embassy reported that the Iranian Ambassador to
Afghanistan “sees the Taraki regime as an intermediate regime between that of the
Daoud regime—which destroyed the monarchy—and a full Soviet-backed Communist

Afghanistan
well become the eventual fate of this country.3 Our best strategy appears
to be one of encouraging an independent and truly non-aligned
Afghanistan. End of summary.
[Omitted here is the body of the telegram.]
Eliot
obtained a copy of a document entitled “Constitution of the People’s Democratic Party
of Afghanistan (PDPA),” which clarified the new government’s ideological foundation.
The Embassy noted that “the document, if valid, would leave little doubt that the PDPA
is a Marxist-Leninist body and is pro-Soviet. We believe that the ‘constitution’ is a
genuine Party document, but we are unsure of its date. We are fairly certain the document
predates the coup two months ago, and conceivably it is the PDPA’s founding document
dating from 1965. Whatever the case, it constitutes one further indication that the organi-
zation now wielding political power in this country is a pro-Soviet Communist type
political party.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Program
23.
Letter From President Carter to Pakistani General Zia1
Washington, June 9, 1978
Dear General Zia:
Your letter of May 9 was very helpful in sharpening my under-
standing of Pakistan’s position in South Asia.2 I have also profited
from the valuable insights that Ambassador Hummel has gained from
his talks with you, and that Secretary Vance has added from his meeting
with Mr. Agha Shahi.3
Both you and I view events in Afghanistan with a similar concern
for the effect that they may have on the region’s security. I share your
concern with the political antecedents of the new Afghan leaders, and
am equally disturbed by their past statements concerning the Durand
line. We agree fully that Soviet domination of Afghanistan would be
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
7/79. No classification marking.
2 See Document 16.
3 See Document 21.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
a development of great seriousness for South Asia and the entire free
world. Those of us who share this view must cooperate closely over
the coming weeks and months.
We are under no illusions about the difficulties that may arise.
We must be careful to avoid actions which could seemingly provide
justification for those who seek to worsen the situation and limit the
government’s chances of maintaining independence. When faced by
changes that may indeed be of a historic scope, it is important that we
all act with forethought and determination.
The new Afghan government has declared its intention to remain
non-aligned. Your decision to maintain contact in order to test its
willingness to continue constructive foreign policies is a wise one. I,
too, intend to pursue this course as a first step, and hope we can work
together in trying to hold the Kabul leadership to its promise. Given
these similarities in our approach, I will value continued close contact
so that we can most carefully assess what the next steps should be.
There are a number of other matters on which I feel we can both
profit from a further exchange of views. I know that you too have
been troubled by issues which have arisen between our two countries.
Secretary Vance has explained to Mr. Agha Shahi the real legal and
political hurdles placed in our way by Pakistan’s plans to acquire a
reprocessing plant.4 While recognizing these difficulties, I urge that
we both keep clear in our minds the long-range interests and concerns
which underlie our relationship.
For my part, I share the conviction both of my predecessors and
yours that our relationship is important to each of our nations. With
this lasting perspective in mind, we will be better able to solve the
immediate problems that stand between us, and build upon the funda-
mental consensus that binds us. I am determined to do everything
within my power to continue developing our historic relationship of
cooperation and friendship.
I believe, as you do, that a personal meeting would be helpful.5 It
would be especially fruitful after we assess the exchange of ideas
between Secretary Vance and Mr. Agha Shahi, and after we have some
clearer knowledge of
the attitude of the new
government in
Afghanistan.
In the meantime, I suggest that we keep in touch through Ambassa-
dor Hummel and, as needed, through direct correspondence. Once
4 Documentation on U.S. objections to Pakistan’s plans to build a reprocessing plant
is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
the White House. See Document 326.

Afghanistan
again, I thank you for sharing your thoughts with me; I hope you will
continue to do so on this and other matters.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
24.
Interagency Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency1
NI IIM 78–10015
Washington, July 1978
Afghanistan: Orientation and Policies of the Taraki Government
[Omitted here are the cover page, title page, and a map.]
PRINCIPAL JUDGMENTS
The government of President Taraki that came to power in April
1978 is much more closely oriented toward the USSR than have been
previous regimes in Afghanistan. The new government will attempt
to preserve Afghanistan’s basic independence from Moscow, but it is
not clear that it will be able to control the growth of Soviet influence
in the country.
We have no evidence that the USSR was directly involved in the
coup that brought the new government to power, but Moscow has
strengthened significantly its historically strong position in Afghani-
stan. The Soviets’ near-term aim is to solidify the new government’s
control of the country and the expanded Soviet presence in Afghani-
stan—both steps to ensure against any backsliding in the bilateral
relationship. Over the longer term the Soviets will seek to guide the
new regime in the implementation of domestic and foreign policies
compatible with those of the USSR.
President Taraki’s strength derives from his control of the Marxist-
oriented Peoples’ Democratic Party and the support of critically placed
leftist Army officers. The new government, like its predecessors, has
no widespread popular support, however, and government control is
memorandum reads: “Note: This memorandum was drafted by [less than 1 line not
declassified] of CIA’s National Foreign Assessment Center. It has been coordinated by
working level representatives of the National Foreign Inelligence Board.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
very limited in parts of the country. The new regime faces rebellion from
some Pathan tribes and strong opposition from Islamic conservatives.
The survival of the Taraki government will depend almost entirely
on the military, and its loyalties are uncertain. One or more attempted
countercoups are probable, but it is not clear that any will have organ-
ized the degree of military support necessary for success. The Soviets’
expanded presence in Afghanistan and the establishment in Kabul by
the Soviets of a secure communications facility will provide the USSR
with an increased capability to intervene militarily on short notice if
it should decide to do so in the future to protect a pro-Soviet govern-
ment in Kabul.2 We believe, however, that the USSR will seek to avoid
sending its own troops to Afghanistan.
The domestic policies announced by the new regime, if imple-
mented, would increase substantially the role of government through-
out the society, but they would not turn Afghanistan into a Soviet-
style state. Priorities include the redistribution of land and water rights,
nationalization of industry, and basic reforms in education and health
services.
Afghanistan’s relations with its anti-Communist neighbors, Paki-
stan and Iran, will deteriorate under the Taraki government, but in the
near term probably not to the point of armed conflict. The Afghans and
Soviets will exercise restraint with these states to avoid jeopardizing
the security of the Taraki regime; the Iranians and Pakistanis for the
time being will seek continued correct relations in the hope of limiting
the growth of Soviet influence in the area. Iran and Pakistan will remain
prepared to provide covert assistance to dissident elements in Afghani-
stan, however, if they see a reasonable chance to undermine the Taraki
government or in response to any future Afghan involvement in Iran’s
or Pakistan’s own tribal problems.
US-Afghan relations are likely to remain correct but cool for the
foreseeable future. The Afghans will want to preserve some tie to
Washington as an appearance of balance in their relations with the
USSR, but Soviet influence and the certainty that US assistance will
2 Unconfirmed CIA reports led to this assessment. On June 7, the CIA passed along
source reporting that “the 160 Soviet military advisors who arrived in Afghanistan in
mid-May 1978 have been deployed to Afghan military units throughout the country.”
The report further noted that “the Soviet advisors have considerable authority; no Afghan
commander, department head, or staff officer will take any important action without
first consulting with his assigned Soviet advisor.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War
“the total number of Soviet officers now in Afghanistan is approximately 320.” Further,
“of the approximately 65 general officers serving in the Afghan military before the 27
April 1978 coup, only 9 are still actively serving,” a development that the source surmised
would lead to “increasing dependence on Soviet advisors for military expertise.” (Ibid.)

Afghanistan
remain modest compared with that of the USSR will preclude a closer
relationship.
[Omitted here are the Discussion section and an Annex.]
25.
Editorial Note
By the summer of 1978, U.S. officials began to assess the viability
of various Afghan opponents of the Taraki government and whether
or not the United States should assist their attempts to overthrow the
current regime. The issue arose as a result of telegram 5047 from Kabul,
June 22, in which J. Bruce Amstutz, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim after
the departure of Ambassador Eliot until the arrival at post of Ambassa-
dor Adolph Dubs, sought guidance in responding to a “highly sensitive
matter.” Amstutz reported, “I have been approached by a major anti-
Communist group, led by no less than the number 2 in the Afghan
military, to seek our advice on how best to proceed against the present
pro-Soviet, pro-Communist government. This group is considering a
military counter-coup and believes they can secure power in a matter
of six hours—if it were not for the Soviet presence. They fear the Soviets
will intervene à la Czechoslovakia unless the U.S. (and perhaps Iran
and Pakistan as well) are willing to stand up to the Soviets.” Amstutz
went on to discuss in detail his meeting with Dr. Mir Ali Akbar, Chief
of Jamhuriat Hospital, who claimed to speak for the Chief of Staff of
the Afghan military, an Afghan military officer, and a senior retired
officer, who together directed an unnamed anti-Communist organiza-
tion with significant popular support as well as military manpower and
clandestine “penetration” of the ruling Khalq Party. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File, Country
Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1978)
Amstutz surmised that Akbar, in taking the dangerous step of
approaching the U.S. Embassy, was primarily seeking advice on how
to proceed with a coup clandestinely, so as not to trigger a massive and
rapid Soviet response. The group for which Akbar spoke, in Amstutz’s
estimation, was genuine and “not a Taraki-regime frame-up” and “rep-
resents the only significant non-Communist opposition and alternative
to the Taraki regime.” On the question of the extent to which the United
States should advise and encourage this group, Amstutz offered an
historical lesson: in the early 1960s, Washington rejected Prime Minister
Daoud’s request that the United States become Afghanistan’s major
arms supplier; subsequently, Daoud turned to the Soviets. “I am con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
vinced,” Amstutz wrote, “that had we not spurned him, the Taraki
regime would not be in power today nor would Afghanistan have
fallen within the Soviet sphere of influence.” Amstutz counseled a
middle ground “of providing encouragement and advice to this organi-
zation without getting involved in another Korea.” (Ibid.) The telegram
was attached to a covering memorandum from Peter Tarnoff, Executive
Secretary of the Department of State, to Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant
to the President for National Security Affairs, dated June 22. The memo-
randum informed Brzezinski: “We are consulting with CIA on this
message with a view to formulating recommendations on how the
approach should be handled.” President Carter initialed “C” in the
upper left-hand corner of the memorandum. (Ibid.)
The following day, Amstutz received a response in telegram 160507
to Kabul, instructing him that the issue was being actively considered
and that Amstutz “should take no initiative to contact the anti-Commu-
nist group.” (Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
On June 28, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence Frank Carlucci sent
a memorandum to Deputy Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs David Aaron, spelling out the CIA position on aiding
the anti-Taraki group, which was “that no official encouragement
should be given the coup plotters.” But, Carlucci wrote, “we do recom-
mend that contact be maintained for intelligence collection purposes,
and that the CIA be given responsibility for this.” Carlucci reasoned
that this middle course could help the United States “influence events”
and, while acknowledging that the “Soviets will react very vigorously
to any counter coup; it behooves us to have as much advance know-
ledge as possible in order to better manage U.S.-Soviet relations in the
wake of such an event.” (National Security Council, Carter Administra-
The possible value of maintaining contact with the coup plotters
implicitly acknowledged the poor state of intelligence collection in
Afghanistan at the time. In a May 25 memorandum to Brzezinski,
National Security Council Staff member Thomas Thornton summarized
an attached CIA report entitled “Collection Coverage of Post-Coup
Afghanistan,” stating, “it simply points out that things are pretty tough
in Afghanistan collection-wise.” (Ibid.)
Two weeks later, the CIA produced two detailed evaluations on the
state of Afghan opposition groups, both dated July 14, which Thornton
attached as Tab A and Tab B to a memorandum to Aaron and Brzezin-
ski, also dated July 14. The memorandum at Tab A referenced Am-
stutz’s latest assessment that Taraki retained control both of Kabul and
the Afghan countryside, but that violence posed a threat to the current
government, and the influx of Soviet advisers to Afghanistan (totaling

Afghanistan
approximately 2,000, including the 1,600 advisers stationed there before
the coup) was eroding support within the Afghan military for the Taraki
government. The evaluation also summarized reports from numerous
sources regarding a tribal insurgency in southeast Afghanistan, and
from the CIA Station Chief in Islamabad who had been informed by
Pakistani military intelligence that approximately 2,000 Afghan tribes-
men had crossed into Pakistan in late June as a result of the fighting.
The evaluation counted a total of six occasions in which Afghans
approached U.S. officials claiming to represent groups opposed to the
Taraki government, including one made up of Afghans and Saudis
known as the Afghan Liberation Front. The memorandum concluded
that while intelligence collection in Afghanistan was improving, the
United States might not have advance notice should a counter-coup
develop over the next several weeks, nor could U.S. intelligence ascer-
tain Soviet intentions vis-à-vis threats to the Taraki regime. Thornton
noted that the analysis attached at Tab B “goes over some of the same
ground in more detail,” and concluded, “I guess the question of giving
a helping hand is out of the question and am doubtful that we should
in any event; the result would likely be an invitation for massive Soviet
involvement.” Brzezinski drew a line in the margin next to that sentence
and wrote “yes.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Office File, Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1978)
Only the cover page of Tab B was attached to Thornton’s memorandum.
The full text of the evaluation at Tab B was found in the Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 1,
On July 27, Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner sent
a memorandum to Brzezinski reviewing the decision made by the
Department of State, the National Security Council, and the CIA that
the United States would remain in contact with Afghan counter-coup
operatives, but would not assist their efforts [text not declassified]. The
plan hinged on the “quick elimination” of Taraki, Amin, Qader,
Watanjar, and Sakhi—which would effectively decapitate the leader-
ship of the ruling Afghan Government. Having taken advantage of the
confusion caused by the death of Khalq leaders, the report noted,
“the counter-coup plotters believe they have nothing to fear from the
presence of Soviet advisors and can overcome pro-regime forces within
24–48 hours but are concerned that the USSR will intervene on behalf of
the Taraki regime.” (National Security Council, Carter Administration
On July 30, the Embassy in Afghanistan, now headed by Ambassa-
dor Dubs, added its analysis to this discussion in telegram 6128 from
Kabul. In the telegram, the Embassy emphasized that, although the
reliability and identity of the Afghan opposition groups remained an

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ongoing question, “we cannot exclude the possibility that a coup will
be attempted in the immediate months, if not weeks, ahead if the
opposition groups believe themselves to be adequately prepared or
should their existence become known to the regime and extinction
become a threat.” Dubs also believed that concerns of the opposition
groups regarding possible Soviet intervention were valid: “the Soviets
would come to the assistance of the present regime should there be a
call for help, should they perceive that the countercoup is ‘reactionary,’
and should time permit effective intervention.” From a military infra-
structure perspective, Dubs noted that the Soviets were well prepared
to take such action should they deem it necessary. He further agreed
with the consensus in Washington that the United States should not
encourage the counter-coup plotters, which “would raise unwarranted
expectations among the coup leaders about our ability to influence
events decisively in and area where our options and leverage are,
unfortunately, minimal.” Still, Dubs concluded, a policy of non-interfer-
ence need not prevent the United States from independently deterring
the Soviets from intervention, or condemning intervention should it
occur. (Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Intel-
noted, in telegram 6159 from Kabul, July 30, that while there were
many potential threats to the Taraki regime, from both leftist and
rightist groups, a “paucity of hard information” hampered accurate
assessments about the real viability of the Afghan Government. “Only
the wildest rumors can be disregarded completely,” Dubs commented.
“Matters are clearly simmering and could quickly boil over at any
time.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
The viability of internal threats to the DRA was downplayed by
the CIA later that year, when again rumors of an impending coup
proliferated in Kabul. On December 5, an intelligence information cable
representing the views of the CIA’s “senior officer on the scene,”
reported: “we doubt if there is a workable coup plan in existence,”
and that the “loose talk” of a coup around Kabul was not a secret to
the Afghan Government, which was taking proactive measures by
arresting dissidents and promoting loyalists. Noting that opposition
to the DRA was no more organized than it was in May, and that the
Soviet Union remained committed to supporting the revolution that
ushered in Taraki’s rule, the December 5 cable concluded that “the
longer this government stays in power the stronger it becomes. It is
sinking in its roots.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezin-

Afghanistan
26.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
5670. Subject: Under Secretary Newsom’s Discussions in Kabul.
1. Summary: Under Secretary Newsom called July 13 on President
Taraki, Foreign Minister Amin and Deputy Foreign Minister Dost.
Afghan leadership emphasized desire for friendly relations with all
countries and preoccupation with internal reform and development as
hallmark of new government. They stressed intention to preserve
Afghan independence and need for economic assistance from major
powers. GOA does have differences with Pakistan and Iran over the
Durand Line and the Helmand waters but desires peaceful solution
and must study issues thoroughly before opening any negotiations.
They expressed genuine desire for good relations with U.S. and want
U.S. economic assistance to continue. Newsom thoroughly explained
factors affecting U.S. ability to continue to provide help and conveyed
U.S. desire that close relations continue as well as U.S. support for
sovereign and independent Afghanistan. Taraki said GOA will follow
policy of genuine non-alignment and will not allow foreign troops in
Afghanistan. Puerto Rico, prisoners and narcotics also raised.
2. U.S. views: In all of his calls, Newsom explained that there
were many questions in the U.S. about the policies of the new Afghan
Government and he was here to obtain GOA views first-hand and to
determine whether there would be any barriers to good relations with
the U.S. in the future.2 He wished to convey U.S. desire to continue
close relations and U.S. support for the sovereignty and independence
of Afghanistan. U.S. hopes the GOA will follow a policy of genuine
non-alignment, otherwise, there could be difficulties in our relations.
Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to Bonn, Islamabad, Jidda, London, Moscow,
New Delhi, Paris, and Tehran.
Vance’s request. The trip included stops in Iran, India, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia. He
reported on his trip during a Presidential Review Committee meeting, July 27. Newsom
noted that he had explained in meetings with Amin and Taraki that the United States
wanted to maintain good relations with Afghanistan, including the maintenance of aid
programs, but that the increasingly close ties between the Afghan Khalq Party and the
Soviet Union could jeopardize ongoing aid because U.S. legislation prohibited aid to
Communist countries. According to notes from the meeting on this problem, the commit-
tee members “agreed that there was not a feasible alternative to the course we are
following.” (Carter Library, National Security Council Institutional Files, 1977–1981, Box
any assistance to Communist countries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
3. Regarding economic assistance, Newsom said the U.S. hopes to
continue its long-time help for the development of Afghanistan. He
noted legislative restrictions on aid to countries which are determined
to be Communist and to countries which do not respect human rights
as well as importance to our assistance programs of narcotics control
and projects meeting basic human needs. There would be questions in
Congress about continuing U.S. assistance to Afghanistan and we
would have to be prepared to defend our projects. U.S. provides sup-
port to IFIs which sponsor large infrastructure projects. U.S. willing
to pursue its assistance programs in Afghanistan provided USAID
personnel are treated the same as others in terms of access to govern-
ment, travel and general support. If GOA desires, U.S. is sympathetic
to continuing its assistance in Helmand River Valley and could go
forward with $3.8 million for this project. Newsom said U.S. is willing
to discuss other projects in agriculture, health and education and noted
possibility wheat project in Baghlan Province in northern Afghanistan.
IMET and Fulbright program also mentioned.
4. Major elements of DRA foreign policy: All three GOA leaders
stressed Afghanistan’s independence and its desire for friendly
relations with all states, particularly the Soviet Union and the U.S.
and Afghanistan’s immediate neighbors. Taraki said Afghanistan will
follow policy of genuine non-alignment although this does not mean
GOA will be silent on important international issues nor will it fail to
react to “attack” from any quarter. At same time, Afghanistan has long
history of independence and will not rpt not become subservient to
any country nor allow any nation to interfere in internal affairs of
Afghanistan. No country will be allowed to station troops in Afghani-
stan. Dost and Amin assured Newsom that Afghan revolution was
internal event and that even Soviets were taken by surprise. GOA
would be non-aligned and its long history of independence from
foreign domination was example for other Asian countries. For its
development programs, Afghanistan looks forward to receiving assist-
ance from its friends abroad, especially the Soviet Union and the U.S.
5. Relations with U.S.: Taraki and others expressed genuine interest
in continued friendly relations with U.S. (it was noted that three mem-
bers of DRA Cabinet are Columbia University graduates). On assist-
ance, Taraki repeated preference for commitment of large Soviet-style
lump sum, commitment from which GOA could draw for projects
of its choice. However, he indicated understanding of congressional
appropriation process and asked for list of areas in which U.S. could
assist so that GOA could compare with its requirements under five-
year-plan now being prepared. Taraki said he would instruct his people
to discuss details of aid program with Embassy Kabul. Taraki appeared
uninformed on IMET program and said he would ask Minister of

Afghanistan
National Defense for briefing. He complained that Fulbright program
requires “hundreds” of applicants for only five positions and said
GOA prefers to name the scholarship recipients. Amin welcomed any
possible U.S. assistance and expressed GOA willingness to discuss
details with U.S. technicians. Regarding wheat project in Baghlan Prov-
ince, however, Amin said that project would have to be reviewed in
the light of the new land reform program.
6. Relations with Pakistan and Iran: Newsom expressed U.S. desire
for continued peace in the region. While not wishing to appear as an
intermediary, he noted Iranian concern over GOA attitude toward
Helmand waters agreement3 and Pakistan’s concern over GOA inten-
tions re Durand Line and Pushtunistan problems. He added that U.S.
hopes to resolve problem with GOP over reprocessing plant, and, since
U.S. provides assistance to both countries, we are interested in good
relations between the two.
7. GOA leaders followed line that they want friendship and cooper-
ation with neighbors and seek understanding of their revolution and
technical and economic support for their development plans. Taraki
said Afghanistan would not bother its neighbors (and commented
sarcastically that if he must pray in a mosque or church to get help
for his country he would do so). Amin said U.S. need not worry that
GOA would cause tensions in area. Afghanistan would attack no rpt
no state and would seek to solve problems through negotiation. Since
regime is new, it will take time for GOA to develop its positions
on Helmand waters and Durand Line, latter being historical problem
between Afghanistan and Pakistan. He recognized, however, that prob-
lem does exist between the two countries over Pushtunistan and
Baluchistan issues. This would have to be solved by realistic negotia-
tions but Afghanistan’s domestic priorities for the moment are more
important and it premature for GOA to raise this delicate subject with
GOP at this time. On Helmand waters, GOA also needs time to study
agreement and has asked GOI to observe status quo. Taraki also said
these issues under study. He jokingly said after only two months in
power that he has to study everything before deciding what to do. For
example, he said he had never in his life been in the elegant room in
which our meeting took place and he needed to learn way around it and
then gradually acquaint himself with the issues facing his government.
8. Party-to-party relations: Newsom carefully explained to Amin
that U.S. legislation contains prohibition on aid to Communist coun-
tries. While term Communist not precisely defined, Congress generally
assumes that if a party in power considers itself to be part of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
international Communist movement then that country is Communist.
He noted that Khalq Party had not so considered itself in past but
wanted to point this out as potential problem to U.S. assistance should
PDPA (People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan) establish party-to-
party relations with CPSU in future. Noting history of close Afghan
relations with Soviet Union, Newsom asked Amin whether he expected
party-to-party relations to develop. Amin said GOA will have relations
with all political parties in power all over the world, such as the Demo-
cratic Party in the U.S., on the principle that parties in power should
deal with other parties in power. He could not provide a further clarifi-
cation at this time but stressed that what U.S. should consider is “what
we are doing for our people not what we are.”
9. Domestic priorities: GOA leaders consider their principal tasks
are to serve needs of the common man in an impoverished country
previously exploited by aristocratic rulers. To meet their internal goals
they need peace within Afghanistan and with neighbors and substantial
foreign assistance. GOA is preparing five-year development plan which
it hopes to have ready by first anniversary of revolution. GOA plans
programs which will bring about basic economic and social reform,
and GOA considers land reform to be its first priority. Both Taraki
and Amin were asked whether cooperative or collective farms were
envisaged. Both replied that small farmers would retain their land (up
to two hectares) and would be organized into cooperatives. As first
step in land reform, Taraki said GOA was about to announce program
for graduated abolishment of debts owned by tenured farmers who
had mortgaged their land to moneylenders and usurers.
10. Prisoners: Noting Borel visit, Newsom raised subject of possible
release of imprisoned women and children related to officials of former
government. Taraki bluntly replied that this was Afghanistan’s own
affair and said “why shouldn’t I ask about the prisoners in your coun-
try?” However, Amin said they could not be released yet because their
safety could not be guaranteed; he again indicated that there was
possibility these prisoners could leave Afghanistan. When ICRC repre-
sentative Borel visited Kabul in early July he visited prison but did
not suggest release or departure for abroad. Borel was in Kabul again
but Amin was unfamiliar with his activities.4 As for imprisoned officials
of the Daoud regime, Amin said no decision on their future had yet
been made by the Revolutionary Council.
11. Puerto Rico: Newsom noted to Dost that in 1977 Afghanistan
voted with India, Iran and others in the Committee of 24 to set aside
4 The outcome of Afghan leaders’ July 3 meeting with Dominique Borel, a representa-
tive of the International Red Cross, was reported as unknown in telegram 5452 from

Afghanistan
the Puerto Rican issue and explained the U.S. position.5 He asked that
GOA give sympathetic consideration to continuing its policy on Puerto
Rico. Dost replied that the GOA would study and discuss the U.S.
request.
12. Exchange of new Ambassadors: Newsom expressed apprecia-
tion for the rapid agre´ment and presentation of Ambassador Dubs as
the first new Ambassador since the change of government. Taraki
warmly expressed his appreciation for the quick USG agreement for
the appointment of former Interior Minister Noor to Washington.
13. Message to President Carter: At conclusion of meeting with
Taraki, the President asked that Newsom reassure President Carter
that GOA is a friend of the U.S., wishes to maintain normal political
relations and to receive American assistance to help achieve its domestic
development targets. Newsom told Taraki that he would describe the
GOA position to President Carter as seeking genuine non-alignment,
concentrating on the welfare of its population, and regarding interna-
tional issues from standpoint of Afghanistan’s best interest. Taraki
agreed, but added, we will, however, react to attacks from any quarter,
would not accept any ultimatums and hoped GOA would not rpt not
be “pushed” from its non-aligned course. If Afghanistan were, for
example, attacked by Soviet Union, GOA would seek assistance from
U.S. and any other friends. He had previously noted, however, that
Soviet Union had had good relations with Afghanistan for sixty years
and had not rpt not interfered in Afghan internal affairs. Meeting ended
with Taraki firmly shaking Newsom’s hand in both of his and saying
“our hearts and minds are for good relations between Afghanistan and
the United States.”
Dubs
5 A reference to the UN Special Committee on the Situation With Regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. For U.S. policy regarding the Committee of 24, see Foreign Relations, 1969–

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
27.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
5882. Subj: Soviet Ambassador’s Views on Present Situation in
Afghanistan.
1. During my initial courtesy call on Soviet Ambassador Alexander
M. Puzanov July 16, he provided the following answers and observa-
tions to my questions:
A) Soviet-Afghan relations: Puzanov stated that there had never
been any serious bilateral problems between Kabul and Moscow during
the sixty years since diplomatic relations were established during the
time of King Amanullah and V. I. Lenin. He observed that the Soviets
had enjoyed friendly, productive relations with the royal and Daoudist
regimes which had preceded the current Taraki government, and
expected to continue this positive relationship with the new regime.
B) Soviet military advisors: Puzanov explained that the recent
increase in the number of Soviet military advisors here has been neces-
sary in order to train the Afghans to use armored, air force, and commu-
nications equipment being supplied by the USSR. He claimed that the
rate of increase of advisors is not so high as that which followed
Daoud’s 1973 overthrow of the monarchy.2
C) Soviet economic assistance: Puzanov explained that the forty-
odd Soviet-Afghan economic assistance agreements signed since the
April 27 revolution were already in the pipeline. Although most are
related to the basic assistance commitment made to former President
Mohammad Daoud during his 1975 State visit to the USSR, some date
back to the pre-1973 monarchical era. Puzanov stated that negotiations
for these proposed projects had become stalled during the Daoudist
period for “a number of reasons.”
D) Projected bridge over the Amu Darya (Oxus): Puzanov predicted
that the projected Hariatan Bridge should be ready to convey vehicular
traffic over the river frontier between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union
in “four and one-half years.”
E) The People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA): Puzanov
did not think that Politburo-Secretariat-Central Committee organiza-
Confidential. Sent for information to Ankara, Moscow, New Delhi, USLO Peking, Tehran,
CINCPAC for POLAD, and CINCEUR for POLAD.
2 On the question of the Soviet role during the 1973 revolution, see Foreign Relations,

Afghanistan
tion of the PDPA necessarily related the Afghan party to the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU). He thought that “all parties in the
world” have similar organizational structures. In reply to a question,
Puzanov said there are no party ties between the PDPA and the CPSU.
He explained that, after its 1967 split, the Afghan party had dissolved
into “political groupings” which could not be regarded as parties. Since
the Khalqists and the Parchamists only recently reunited, i.e., in mid-
1977, there has not been sufficient opportunity for the CPSU to react to
this event. The Afghan party had never participated in any international
Communist meetings.
F) Membership of the PDPA Politburo: Puzanov thought that there
are “either nine or eleven members.” During a recent conversation
with Chairman Noor Mohammad Taraki, he got the impression that
the latter had not yet decided what to do about the Politburo positions
which had been occupied by (the diplomatically exiled Parchamist
leaders) Babrak Karmal and Noor Ahmad Noor. It is possible, he conjec-
tured, that these two might retain their Politburo seats.
G) Government decision-making: Although arguing that the gov-
ernmental decisions of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA)
are being made by the Revolutionary Council, which he initially defined
as the country’s “state and legislative organ,” Puzanov acknowledged
that the Central Committee of the PDPA provides overall political
guidance. Puzanov went on to describe the Afghan Cabinet as the
“executive organ” and the Revolutionary Council as the “legislative
element” of the government.
H) Regional security: Puzanov noted with satisfaction that there
were no “border problems” between Iran and Afghanistan. Observing
that Afghanistan requires peace in order to be able to resolve its domes-
tic challenges, he asserted that the USSR endorsed the Afghan regime’s
stated intention to negotiate peacefully Kabul’s major “political differ-
ence” with Pakistan (i.e., the “Pushtunistan” issue). Puzanov welcomed
warmly India’s willingness to expand its political and economic con-
tacts with Afghanistan. He noted benignly that Kabul’s relations with
the People’s Republic of China (PRC) are “normal.”3 Puzanov recalled
that the PRC had offered the Daoudist regime a 60-million-dollar line-
of-credit which had not yet been fully committed. He cited as Chinese
accomplishments here: Irrigation projects in Parwan Province, textile-
making assistance, and a hospital at Kandahar.
I) Afghanistan’s future: Puzanov noted that impoverished Afghani-
stan was now working on a five-year-plan which will require help
3 China recognized the new government in Afghanistan on May 7.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
from as many friendly foreign donors as possible. He was optimistic
that the regime’s goals will be met.
2. Comment: Although Puzanov was obviously dissembling on
some points, such as the influx of Soviet military advisers and the
structure of the PDPA, it was clear that he was trying hard to portray
post-revolutionary Afghanistan as a country in need of outside assist-
ance, as a nation which needs peaceful relations with its neighbors,
and as a non-destabilizing factor in this region.
Dubs
28.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
6649. Subj: Foreign Minister Amin Accuses Pakistan of Providing
Support for Subversion in Afghanistan. Ref: A) State 204821 (Notal),2
E) Kabul 4802.6
Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Sent for information to Ankara, Dacca, Islamabad, Mos-
cow, New Delhi, USLO Peking, Tehran, and CINCPAC for POLAD.
Central Foreign Policy File, D780331–0555.
following a meeting in Islamabad between Newsom and Zia, July 16, in which Zia
“stated that Pakistan needed firm USG support with unmistakable guarantees of territo-
rial integrity that would be credible as a deterrent against Afghan encroachments.” The
telegram instructed the Embassy that it was authorized to advise Zia that the “U.S.
position with respect to Pakistan’s border with Afghanistan remains unchanged from
that set forth in the SEATO Council communiqué of March 8, 1956. The relevant portion
of that communiqué reads as follows: ‘Insofar as these (Soviet) statements referred to
‘Pakhtoonistan’, the members of the Council severally declared that their governments
recognized that the sovereignty of Pakistan extends up to the Durand Line, the interna-
tional boundary between Pakistan and Afghanistan.’” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780328–1136) The telegram, which was also sent to Moscow and
Kabul, stated that it was not necessary to repeat the assurance to Zia either to the Soviet
Union or the DRA.
Central Foreign Policy File, D780322–0413.
Foreign Policy File, D780314–1010.
Foreign Policy File, D780246–1035.

Afghanistan
1. Summary: Afghan Foreign Minister Amin claims that he has
evidence that Pakistan is providing cross-border support for subversive
operations against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA).
End summary.
2. During a call on Foreign Minister Hafizullah Amin on Aug 14
to discuss multilateral issues, I informed him that I had conveyed to
Washington and Islamabad the concern he expressed on July 31 over
the state of Afghan-Pakistani relations (ref D). I told him that Amb
Hummel had discussed this matter with Minister of State Agha Shahi,
who stated that Pakistan was following a definite policy, rigidly
applied, to restrain and naturalize [neutralize?] any elements or individ-
uals who might want to make trouble in Afghanistan (ref C).
3. Amin retorted that Pakistan was “not putting that policy into
practice.” He claimed that Kabul has evidence of Pakistani complicity
in a large number of anti-Afghan cross-border operations to support
subversion against the DRA Govt. Amin explained that his govt was
not making this evidence public at this time because it does not want
to bring out into the open any conflict with Pakistan if it can avoid it,
and, besides, the Afghan Govt had contained such threats. If pushed
too far, however, warned Amin, the Afghans are prepared to publicize
their complaints and take necessary countermeasures.
4. When I asked what part of the Afghan-Pakistani border was
involved in this alleged infiltration, Amin retorted, “all of it—from
China to Iran.” He hurriedly added that Afghanistan was not making
similar charges against Iran, which, he noted, has been controlling its
side of the Afghan-Iranian border “in a friendly fashion.” I observed
that there are many regions along the international boundary over
which neither Islamabad nor Kabul appear to exercise complete control.
Amin responded that his govt could easily allow trouble to exfiltrate
over into Pakistan from its side, but, until now, has ensured that this
has not happened.
5. When I described the recent Pakistani return of the Afghan MIG–
17 as a cooperative, friendly gesture of good will, Amin acknowledged
that Islamabad had indeed handled that affair well, and commented,
“we appreciated it.” However, this single act did not, in his mind,
outweigh the Pakistani machinations of which he complained earlier.
6. While on the topic of Afghan-Pakistani relations, I reminded
Amin that, as Amb Eliot had informed him earlier, the USG “recognizes
the existing boundary between Afghanistan and Pakistan as the legiti-
mate international border” (ref E). This, I explained, was implicit in
our initial recognition of Pakistan in 1947. Without making any specific
reference to the information conveyed in ref B, I alerted Amin to the
possibility that he might see this USG position reaffirmed publicly.
Amin made no comment. I also once more suggested that the best way

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
of discussing concerns which he expressed was through discussions
with the Pakistanis.
7. Comment: Amin is continuing to use us to convey Afghanistan’s
tough line to Pakistan while his govt apparently avoids any direct
confrontation with Pakistani officials at Kabul or Islamabad. Perhaps
this is to establish Afghanistan’s case with us, should Kabul eventually
elect to undertake some countermeasures. In spite of everything the
Pakistani Govt might be trying to do, anti-DRA operations are probably
still being supported through the traditionally porous frontier. Such
activities as exist may well be undertaken by Afghan dissident elements
who might, from time to time, seek sanctuary in Pakistani territory.
The Afghans presumably want to hold Islamabad accountable and
force the Pakistanis to increase their control efforts.
Dubs
29.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Afghanistan
As you are probably aware, things in Afghanistan are deteriorating
rapidly: the regime is devouring its children with amazing speed; its
base of support is narrowing; Soviet influence is probably growing;
and there appears to be quite a bit of spontaneous opposition outside
of Kabul (not enough, presumably, to topple the regime). We don’t
know what kind of coup plotting is going on; previous attempts ended
in disaster, but certainly some Afghans must be giving thought to it.
There is a serious possibility of Soviet intervention in case things
unravel too badly. Toon’s view, reflected in the recent INR assessment,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1978. Secret. Sent for action. Initialed by Blackwill
in the upper right corner. At the top of the first page, an unknown hand, likely Thornton’s,
wrote: “No meeting necessary per DA.” The reference is to David Aaron.

Afghanistan
seems too sanguine.2 I think the Soviets are likely to assert their position
in Afghanistan forcefully if they see a counter-coup coming; they would
be too fearful that a reactionary take-over would be anti-Soviet and
put a regime friendly to the US right on their borders. Given the
composition of the population on their side of the border, this is an
especially distressing thought.
State, with NSC clearance, has done some modest contingency
planning in terms of demarches to be made, etc., should the Soviets
intervene. Nobody has been able to come up with ideas on what we
should or could actually do in that contingency. Short of that, we can
move cautiously to capitalize on the one bright spot in the picture—
India’s recognition that the Kabul regime means trouble for them too.
(A separate memo is enroute on this.)3
Another issue also arises: how long can we, in good conscience,
continue AID programs on the assumption that Afghanistan is not a
Communist-controlled state? I hope that we can continue to do so
since, if there is to be a break, I would like Kabul to bear the blame.
If I were asked about this under oath, however, I would be very
uncomfortable.
I have no recommendation that you do anything at the present
time. Mainly, I want to make sure that you are keeping this unfortunate
situation in mind.
You could, however, decide that you want to have an inter-agency
meeting (mini-SCC?) to consider two points:4
—How close are we to a situation where Taraki’s control breaks
down and the Soviets intervene? Are there any more imaginative ways
of responding than we have come up with so far? (The responses will
almost inevitably be negative since State and CIA claim to have been
giving serious thought to this.)
—How close are we to a situation in which we have to accept the
fact that Taraki is beyond redemption and for one reason or another
we should begin to pull back? (This, however, would be a dangerous
2 Not further identified and not found. No cables from Moscow were found convey-
ing the Ambassador’s “sanguine” view regarding the possibility of Soviet intervention
in Afghanistan.
3 Not further identified.
4 Inderfurth drew a line under “mini-SCC” and wrote in the margin: “good idea.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
question to ask; we could find ourselves morally and probably legally
bound to stop our AID programs.)5
5 Two handwritten comments appear at the end of the memorandum. Blackwill
wrote: “Question is the forms Soviet intervention might take—are we talking regular
units crossing into Af.? Direct combat air support? Those are hard. But there’s more
available if it’s heavy supply/advisors. I personally doubt intervention by regular units
and don’t think Soviets would feel that they could not work out an acceptable position
without it.” Under Blackwill’s comment, Gates wrote: “I agree. The Soviets have been
extraordinarily cautious for three decades about use of their troops outside the USSR.
Outside the Soviet ‘bloc’ they have not used regular units to intervene in the internal
affairs of another country since the late 40s. Afghanistan isn’t worth that much to them.
But expect every means of intervention short of combat units if they see this friendly
regime in real trouble. RG.”
30.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
9262. Subject: Assessment of Evolving GOP Attitudes/Policy
Toward Afghanistan. Ref: (A) State 240411 (Notal), (B) Kabul 7370,
1. Pakistan’s attitudes, and consequently its policies toward the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) are in the process of subtle
revision. The state of shock and alarm which we found (and reported)
during the spring, in the immediate aftermath of the Kabul coup,3 is
giving way to a more measured assessment and concern over the long-
term threat. Indeed, it would have been difficult to sustain the fever
pitch of May and June in the absence of direct Afghan (or Pakistani)
provocation.
Secret; Limdis. Sent for information to Ankara, Colombo, Dacca, Jidda, Kabul, Karachi,
London, Moscow, New Delhi, USLO Peking, and Tehran.
3 See Document 18.

Afghanistan
2. We do not suggest there has been any lessening of anxiety about
the future course of relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan among
policy-makers and opinion molders on this side of the Durand Line.
Most Pakistanis we meet expect the future of the relationship to be
one of tension, even struggle. Concern over more recent events in Iran
has done little to lessen the long-term Pakistani sense of foreboding
about the Russian threat to this part of the world and the evident (to
them) weakening of Western resolve to meet it. But no immediate crisis
has come, and events suggest more of the same.
3. The evolution of Pakistani attitudes is perhaps best illustrated
by General Zia-ul-Haq’s decision to stop off briefly in Kabul earlier
this month enroute to Tehran to meet personally with DRA’s Taraki.4
As best we can determine, this was a typically spontaneous Zia move.
Accepting that there would be little gain on substance, the General
appears to have over-ruled [garble—his?] MFA advisers in order to
have a chance to take the personal measure of the new Afghan leader-
ship as well as perhaps get for himself a little breathing room in the
relationship. On both fronts, he appears to have been successful. He
came away from the visit—according to a senior member of his personal
entourage—with a new appreciation for Taraki’s abilities and the
regime’s toughminded deputy, Foreign Minister Amin; and he is
exploiting the exchange of peaceful homilies to take a bit of the edge
off the tensions in the state-to-state relationship.
4. We know, from the Foreign Secretary, for instance, that the visit
reinforced Pakistan’s conclusions about the Communist character of
the regime; we know also, however, that the Paks came away believing
that Taraki and company have their hands full at present with the
difficult job of sorting out their own leadership problems and of estab-
lishing their writ inside the country. GOP officials thus do not now
anticipate an early crisis in their relations with the DRA.
5. This also suits General Zia’s political imperatives. Pakistan also
has domestic preoccupations in the short term, foremost among them
a resolution of the Bhutto situation.5 The new President must also cope
with the pressures of a re-awakened political system, the byproduct
of his gradual relaxation of martial law restrictions on press, assembly,
4 The meeting between Zia and Taraki was reported in telegram 7312 from Kabul,
September 12, which characterized the meeting as a friendly first encounter between
the two leaders that did not delve into pressing bilateral problems. (National Archives,
5 A reference to the fate of former Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto,
who was overthrown in a military coup by Zia on July 5, 1977. He was sentenced to
policy regarding Bhutto’s ouster and execution is scheduled for publication in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
and political activity, his formation of a political government, and
his fostering thereby of a political opposition (refair). Pent-up pressures
are slowly being released, among them concerns over the erosion thus
far of the 1973 Constitution and concerns also about resurgent regional-
ism. The verities of martial law are slowing giving way to the uncertain-
ties of a less ordered political process which may be the harbinger of
promised elections. These concerns—plus a difficult economic situa-
tion—must engage his full attention over the next few months, making
more than ever welcome the prospect of at least a pause in Pak-
Afghan relations.
6. There are, of course, potential pitfalls which could undo the
current desires on both sides for a period of tranquility. One of these
is the refugee situation; we have commented (septel) on reports of a
recent rise in the number of refugees coming across, especially in areas
not tribal.6 Continuation of such a flow, or a marked increase, could
strain Pakistan resources and patience and become a matter of public
concern despite GOP efforts for now to downplay the issue. This is an
area of the world where memories of large refugee flows are painful
and have been volatile. Continuing unrest on the Afghan side could
encourage tribal brethren on the Pakistan side—especially in tribal
areas where GOP control is less than perfect—to join in, creating the
specter of border clashes and bringing the confrontation to more imme-
diate crisis proportions.
7. For the moment, however, we see the GOP willing to join in the
apparent desire to avoid an early crisis which they sense among the
Afghans and to do whatever is in their power to minimize frictions
and to restrain their forces and the tribals in the border areas from
undertaking actions which could move the confrontation to the front
burner.
Constable
number of Afghan refugees in Pakistan was growing, but that Pakistan was reluctant
to publicize the situation so as not to further disrupt relations with Afghanistan. (National

Afghanistan
31.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
23479. Subject: Soviet Policy and Attitude Toward Afghanistan.
Ref: State 240411 (Notal).2
Begin summary: Soviet policy toward Afghanistan continues to be
directed toward drawing Afghanistan into ever-increasing dependence
on the USSR. Brezhnev’s September 22 Baku statement that Moscow
intends “to develop and deepen” Afghan-Soviet ties suggests a hope
for more formal links at some future stage.3 While Moscow is assisting
the Taraki regime in consolidating and widening its power base, we
doubt that Soviet support for Taraki personally is irrevocable.4 That
support could be switched to others if dissatisfaction and opposition
to his leadership should mount in the future. End summary.
1. While the Soviets no doubt have the evolving situation in Afghan-
istan under constant review, we see no evidence that Soviet policies
toward the DRA are in the process of revision. These policies continue
to fall broadly into two categories: (A) assisting the pro-Soviet Afghan
regime to consolidate the “revolution” and to eliminate its opponents;
and (B) drawing Afghanistan into closer dependence on the Soviet
Union in economic, military, administrative, and other areas while
maneuvering to reduce Western and Chinese presence and influence
in Afghanistan. As expressed by Brezhnev in his September 22 Baku
statement, the Soviet Union—like the DRA—intends to “widen and
deepen” Soviet-Afghan relations.
Confidential; Limdis. Sent for information to Ankara, Bonn, Dacca, Islamabad, Jidda,
Kabul, Leningrad, London, New Delhi, Paris, USLO Peking, Rome, Tehran, and
USNATO.
3 Brezhnev’s speech, which touched on a number of issues, was summarized in
telegram 243631 to Moscow, September 25. Regarding Afghanistan, the telegram noted
that Brezhnev’s decision to single out the country “can probably be taken as an expression
of support for the new Afghan regime, which is beset by problems on several fronts.”
picked up “unconfirmed rumors” from a Pakistani Embassy Minister in Moscow who
was in contact with a “Soviet Afghan specialist.” The Minister relayed that Taraki was
unable to foster a “true” Afghan revolution and that it was “inevitable” the Parcham
faction, rivals to the ruling Khalq Party, would “return to power.” Conversely, the
Embassy also reported that, according to an Indian Embassy official, the Soviets consid-
ered Taraki “as best situated to guide the Afghan ‘revolution’ between the extreme Left
and Right poles in Afghan politics.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780346–1069)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
2. The sensitivities of regional powers, particularly India, concern-
ing Soviet involvement in Afghanistan, the constant drumbeat of PRC
charges that the Soviet Union is attempting to spread its hegemony in
the world, and the potential for instability in Afghanistan will influence
some degree of caution in Soviet decision-making on tactics. The Soviets
would prefer to see the Taraki regime’s support base broadening rather
than (as seems to be the case) narrowing, and would not like to become
over-committed as the only benefactor and protector of a leadership
whose domestic political situation is worsening and not improving.
3. Nevertheless, barring a real turn for the worse in the Taraki
regime’s domestic political position, the widening and deepening proc-
ess in Soviet-Afghan relations will continue apace. It will presumably
include exchanges of high-level delegations and an expansion of trade
and aid, perhaps leading eventually to an umbrella agreement with
CEMA similar to those concluded with Finland and Iraq.5 At some
future stage, it is also conceivable that the DRA may sign a “declaration
of principles,” followed by a peace and friendship treaty. This pattern
was followed with Angola, for example.6 (We note, however, that the
Afghan desk officer in the Soviet Foreign Ministry carefully avoided
responding to questions from EmbOff last month on possible considera-
tion of a Soviet-Afghan peace and friendship treaty. He observed
merely that the 1921 Soviet-Afghan Friendship Treaty and 1931 Neu-
trality and Non-Aggression Treaty provided an ongoing foundation
for Soviet-Afghan relations.) Meanwhile, we expect that the Soviet
presence and advice in Afghanistan will also be directed toward institu-
tionalizing and progressively strengthening the DRA and PDPA’s
organs of administration and control in Afghanistan.
4. As Brezhnev did in his Baku speech, the Soviets will also seek
to assure other regional powers, particularly India, that the growing
Soviet involvement in Afghanistan will be beneficial rather than harm-
ful to regional peace and security. At the same time the Soviets will
overtly and covertly play up threats from external “reaction” (the U.S.,
China, Muslim interests based in Pakistan and Iran) in order further
to buttress Soviet-Afghan ties. Soviet diplomacy toward Afghanistan’s
South Asian neighbors will encompass:
—stressing to the Indians the common aspects of New Delhi’s and
Moscow’s policies toward Afghanistan;
5 The USSR created the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance in 1949, originally
to oversee economic activities in Eastern Europe.
6 Angola signed a Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union in
October 1976.

Afghanistan
—exploiting Pakistani and Iranian fears by urging them to accom-
modate to the new realities in the region and to forge closer relations
with the USSR;
—insisting to all three that Soviet-Afghan relations pose no threat
to their own interests or to regional peace and security (a point Brezh-
nev also emphasized in his Baku speech).
5. Under present circumstances, we believe that the Soviets consider
that a rekindling of the Pushtunistan issue could be potentially unhelp-
ful and possibly dangerous to the DRA’s most important mission—
consolidating and broadening its domestic power base.
6. Our Soviet contacts have been very close-mouthed on Moscow’s
attitude toward the domestic performance of the Taraki regime, includ-
ing the purge of Parcham leaders and the pace of socio-economic
programs in Afghanistan. As previously reported, some of our Soviet
sources and Soviet press articles have implied that Taraki’s “cocktail
socialism” (perhaps like Allende’s reforms) lack decisiveness and drive,
and that Taraki should not have purged Parcham leaders. In general,
it appears from here that currently the Soviets intend to stick with
Taraki “for better or for worse” as the best bet to preserve and widen
the over-all course of the Afghan “revolution.” This situation could
change if opposition to his regime reached serious proportions and
his personal position became increasingly tenuous. In such event, we
believe that Moscow would not hesitate to abandon Taraki and to look
for other leadership options.
7. If the Afghan “revolution” survives the consolidation period,
the Soviets will probably then move more boldly to make the direction
of Afghan-Soviet relations irreversible. Over the long run, if Afghani-
stan should move onto the “Socialist path,” Moscow will conceive
of Afghanistan increasingly as a state entitled to Soviet protection,
consistent with the Soviet Union’s self-proclaimed duty to use its power
in the common defense of “Socialist gains.”
Garrison

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
32.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, December 1978
[Omitted here are a title page, cover page, map, and list entitled
“The Afghan Cabinet Announced on 1 May 1978.”]
The Afghan Revolution After Six Months
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
President Taraki has consolidated his position in the People’s Dem-
ocratic Party of Afghanistan and in the government. Foreign Minister
Amin has emerged as the second most important person in the country.
Working through Amin, Taraki is attempting to control the military
through the small minority of completely loyal officers. They may be
in a position to keep him better informed than any of his predecessors
about coup plotting.
Control of the military remains the key to Taraki’s survival. His
government, like its predecessors, is weak, and his sudden overthrow
by a small group of military officers cannot be completely discounted.
There is nothing to indicate that distrust of his government on
religious grounds has abated. Tribal rebellions are spreading, and
should antigovernment activity increase significantly, the willingness
of the military to carry out the government’s orders could be seri-
ously affected.
In foreign policy and their public statements the Afghan leaders
have moved closer to the Moscow line. They have, however, done little
to implement domestic programs that could be labeled Communist,
presumably to avoid risking adverse popular reaction but also in part
because they lack the resources to do so.
The degree, if any, to which Taraki is independent of the USSR
has not so far been tested by significant differences between Moscow
and Kabul. Taraki may believe he needs Soviet backing to survive and
the Soviet role in Afghanistan continues to increase.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
After Six Months (An Intelligence Assessment). Top Secret; [codeword and handling restric-
tion not declassified]. According to a typed statement on the cover page, “the author of
this paper is [name not declassified] South Asia Division, Office of Regional and Politi-
cal Analysis.”

Afghanistan
Taraki has not been able to allay Iran’s and Pakistan’s deep suspi-
cions of his and Moscow’s intentions, and poor relations with both are
likely to continue.2 [classification marking not declassified]
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
2 Highlights of the remainder of the report include CIA’s assessment that Taraki’s
major achievement since taking power “may have been to survive;” that “there is no
good evidence of a rift” between Amin and Taraki; “the degree to which Taraki has
maintained his independence from Moscow is unclear, perhaps even to Taraki and the
Soviets;” and “religious and tribal groups in Pakistan are aiding Afghan rebels, and
Afghan dissidents are allowed to operate fairly openly in Pakistan, but at this time the
Pakistani Government does not appear to be encouraging this activity.”
33.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
9599. Subject: Afghan-Soviet Relations on the Eve of Taraki’s Trip
to Moscow.
1. Summary: Noor Mohammad Taraki, Afghanistan’s President
and Prime Minister, departed Kabul on December 4 to visit the Soviet
Union. In many ways it is fitting that Taraki’s first trip outside Afghani-
stan since the April 27 revolution should be to Moscow. The pro-Soviet
views of the Afghan leadership have become increasingly apparent
recently, a development which may stem from deep ideological convic-
tions, as well as this regime’s genuine and increasing need for Soviet
support in several fields. Aside from the symbolic and public relations
aspects of the trip—which are significant in their own right, the Afghan
delegation will probably raise a number of issues, which, if Moscow
is reasonably forthcoming, could solidify the already close bilateral
relationship, especially the link between the People’s Democratic Party
of Afghanistan (PDPA) and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
(CPSU). The capstone of the visit could be the signing of a new bilateral
Confidential. This telegram repeated, for the Department’s information, the telegram of
the same number sent December 5 to Moscow, and for information to Ankara, Islamabad,
London, New Delhi, Peking, Tehran, and CINCPAC for POLAD. A copy of this telegram
was also found in the Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in
Afghanistan (1978).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
treaty—a step which would, from the DRA’s vantage point, represent
a complete break with past Afghan regimes and would codify the two
countries’ special relationship.2 We have no firm evidence, however,
that this subject has been under active consideration by either party.
The Afghans are also expected to ask the USSR for food and increased
economic assistance. We anticipate that Moscow will not want their
guests to go away empty-handed, and that the visit will, therefore,
produce some concrete results which would help to identify the future
direction of this rapidly developing relationship. End of summary.
2. Departure of the Afghan party: Taraki was accompanied by the
following Cabinet officers (names are in the order listed in the official
media): Hafizullah Amin, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister;
Dr. Shah Wali, Minister of Public Health and Acting Minister of Plan-
ning; Dr. Saleh Mohammad Ziri, Minister of Agriculture and Land
Reform; Professor Mahmud Sooma, Minister of Higher Education;
Mohammad Mansoor Hashimi, Minister of Water and Power; Eng.
Mohammad Ismail Danesh, Minister of Mines and Industries; and
Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoi, Minister of Communications. With the
exception of the last three men, all members of the travelling party are
members of the PDPA Politburo. The “pecking order” of the top officials
bidding farewell to the Taraki party was: Dastagir Panjshiri, Minister
of Public Works; Abdul Karim Misaq, Minister of Finance; Major
Mohammad Awlam Watanjar, Minister of Interior; Abdul Hakem Shar-
aie Jauzjani, Minister of Justice and Attorney-General; Mohammad
Hassen Bareq-Shafiee, Minister of Culture and Information; Abdul
Qudus Ghorbandi, Minister of Commerce; and Dr. Abdul Rashid Jalili,
Minister of Education. Panjshiri and Misaq are known members of the
Politburo. When the Ambassador asked one protocol official who has
been left in charge, the reply was “Watanjar.” The Chief of Protocol
later told the Ambassador that the Revolutionary Council was in charge
of Afghanistan collectively—and that any urgent important problems
would be forwarded to Moscow for decisions. (We find this version
more credible; Watanjar appears to lack sufficient presence or intelli-
gence for the “charge” role.) In trying to set up top-level appointments
2 The Soviet-Afghan Friendship Treaty, signed by Brezhnev and Taraki in Moscow,
noted that the treaty covered “cooperation in the military, political, economic, scientific,
and cultural fields” and committed both countries to “open-ended” consultations on
A Voice of America report, December 7, quoted Brezhnev’s speech at a Kremlin dinner
for Taraki on the significance of the treaty: “The traditional good relations between our
two countries have assumed, I would say, a qualitatively new character.” (National
Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–47, Afghanistan: 8 May

Afghanistan
for visiting USAID official Wheeler, the Embassy’s protocol officer has
been told that the Afghan party will return to Kabul on December 7.
3. The Afghan view of the Soviet connection: The pro-Moscow mind
set of Taraki and his closest advisors, particularly his two principal
lieutenants, Foreign Minister Hafizullah Amin and Acting Planning
Minister Dr. Shah Wali, has been well documented since the April 27
revolution, both through domestic pronouncements and by high-level
speeches before international fora. In the initial post-revolutionary
period, however, the leadership generally tried to camouflage its pro-
Soviet views with explanations that the USSR and Afghanistan have
had good and friendly relations for decades, and that the new regime
in Kabul was merely carrying on in the same tradition. The Khalqi
leaders publicly denied that their PDPA was “Communist,” “Socialist,”
or “Marxist-Leninist,” although they admitted its Marxist-Leninist
character in private fora.
4. In recent weeks, however, a deeper pro-Soviet attitude has
emerged from the PDPA closet; the Afghan leadership has made no
effort to disguise its belief that Kabul’s relationship with Moscow is
of overriding importance, not only in the foreign policy field, but
also probably domestically as well. Amin’s November 7 speech, which
portrayed Afghanistan’s Saur revolution of April 27 as an historical
extension of the “great October revolution” (Kabul 9145) was typical
of the obsequious degree to which Taraki and his colleagues are willing
to reveal their political convictions.3 In this connection, Taraki himself
took the unprecedented and well-publicized step of attending (with
virtually the entire Afghan Cabinet) the November 7 Soviet National
Day reception, a far cry from the regime’s standard practice of sending
one minister to the similar celebrations of other countries. Most
recently, Taraki, in his lengthy speech to the plenum of the Party’s
Central Committee echoed the Soviet line of international issues, rang-
ing from the inevitable victory of socialism over imperialism to support
for Vietnam in its struggle against intrigue by its neighbors.4 The pres-
ence of the Afghan Minister for Higher Education in the Taraki party
might indicate a desire to involve the Soviets more intensively in the
tertiary education field to ensure ideological purity and harmony in a
critical area which has heretofore been an arena for extensive American
participation and influence.
as “obsequious and effusive.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
November 27 speech. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
5. Reasons for the DRA’s pro-Soviet attitudes: The primary well
from which the strong leftist views of this regime’s leaders spring is
their long-held beliefs in the tenets of Marxism-Leninism, and a proba-
bly more recently acquired conviction that the world correlation of
forces and events is evolving in such a way that the ultimate victory
of Marxism-Leninism cannot be denied. Although the Afghan leader-
ship’s grasp of many of the arcane principles of this doctrine has come
under polite fire by a number of visiting Third World officials (e.g.,
Indian Foreign Minister Vajpayee), in our assessment Taraki and his
colleagues are sincere in their devotion to this ideology and in their
belief that Marxism-Leninism contains the ultimate answers on how
to modernize Afghanistan’s feudal society. They also display full trust
and confidence in the Soviet Union as their sole support and defense
at this vulnerable stage of consolidation. There is no indication that they
see any unacceptable risks to their independence in this relationship.
Indeed, an ideologue like Amin would probably describe Outer Mongo-
lia as an “independent” state. The Khalqi perception of Afghan inde-
pendence is different from the classical stance taken by other Afghans.
6. Afghan security needs: Simultaneously, there is a practical side
to Taraki’s and Amin’s view of politics, and this element of the equation
may account, to a greater extent, for the recent pro-Soviet developments
noted above, and may also determine the primary significance of Tar-
aki’s trip to Moscow. Although the accession of a leftist regime in
Kabul has undoubtedly served a number of important Soviet foreign
policy and ideological interests, one could make a strong argument
that, at this stage of the game at least, the Afghan leadership needs
the Soviets more than the latter needs Kabul’s possible contributions.
The security of the Taraki regime has not yet been fully established,
despite the Afghan leader’s confident remarks in his November 27
address to his party colleagues. Active opposition, especially in the
eastern tribal areas, appears to be inadequate to overcome the military
force and ruthless determination of the Khalqi regime. Nevertheless,
it refuses to go away or be stamped out. Rightly or wrongly, it is widely
perceived here that Moscow has undertaken a bottom-line commitment
(some believe to the extent that it would provide para-military forces
if necessary) to the survival of a leftist regime in Kabul, a perception
that probably serves to intimidate somewhat any potential domestic
opporition—or any Pakistani inclination to contribute to this subver-
sion. Thus, in the crucial security field the possibility that the Taraki
regime might at some point be able to exercise the “Soviet option” is
from Kabul’s point of view an indispensable factor in Kabul’s bilateral
relationship with Moscow—and, for that matter, with Islamabad, as
well.
7. Regional politics: On the broader foreign policy front, Moscow’s
presence in the wings is probably a comforting one for the DRA leader-

Afghanistan
ship, especially as it formulates its policies toward Pakistan and Iran.
There is a trade-off here, however, as the Afghans conceivably could
find themselves not completely free agents should Moscow, for its own
purposes, decide to exercise a restraining hand over possible irredentist
Afghan tendencies vis-à-vis the Pushtun and Baluch regions of Paki-
stan, or any Afghan inclination to reheat the Helmand waters dispute
with Iran. Nevertheless, the Afghans could well use a commitment
from Moscow that the USSR would extricate Afghan chestnuts in the
event Taraki might overplay his hand and provoke a strong Pakistani
reaction of some sort. Many observers here believe that such a commit-
ment has already been given, even if only tacitly. From the Soviet
viewpoint, the Afghan potential for making trouble for Iran and Paki-
stan in Baluchistan remains an important card in Moscow’s hand.
Moscow might, therefore, consider some statement of support for
Afghan concern for its “Pushtun and Baluch brethren.”
8. Economic needs: Also of immediate concern to the Afghan lead-
ership is the extent to which Moscow would be willing to underwrite
Afghanistan’s economic development should Kabul’s stand on interna-
tional issues and its approach to bilateral programs provoke a reduction
of Western or Arab-Iranian assistance. The presence of several “eco-
nomic” ministers in the Taraki party signals a long Afghan shopping
list. Although no non-Communist country has as yet significantly cut
its operations here, radical or rigid Afghan policies could create a
situation in which Moscow and its Socialist colleagues would be the
only donor countries willing to invest economic resources in Afghani-
stan, a possibility which could well have provoked the Afghan leader-
ship’s recent pro-Soviet displays. A Soviet diplomat in Kabul recently
told an Indian diplomat that the Socialist Bloc is prepared and able to
shoulder the entire development burden in Afghanistan should the
West elect to quit the field (Kabul 8970).5 Taraki’s delegation might
also ask the Soviets to support Afghanistan’s food needs during the
current testing period when oppositionists are successfully withholding
key commodities, such as flour, from the market. Although Moscow
may be unwilling to satisfy each Afghan request to the letter, Taraki
and his colleagues will probably not come away empty-handed. It is
possible that the Soviets might utilize this occasion to announce another
large credit for Afghan development. We presume that the Soviets are
fully cognizant of the crucial supporting role they play here, and that
they will want to reassure, to an extent consistent with their own
assessment of the relationship, the Afghan leadership that Taraki and
his colleagues can count on Moscow’s backing on several fronts.
Central Foreign Policy File, D780461–0225)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
9. Increased Afghan-Soviet ties: The Afghans will also possibly
seek the establishment of some sort of “official” tie between the CPSU
and Kabul’s ruling PDPA. Taraki strongly alluded to this possible
development in his November 27 speech to the PDPA Central Commit-
tee plenum when he said that during the Soviet [visit] the Afghans
would “study and take decisions on the relations between the parties
of the two countries” (septel).6 Taraki will also probably seek some
sort of Soviet public endorsement of the DRA’s policies to date,
undoubtedly including some nice words regarding the Afghan leader-
ship’s performance. General Soviet expressions of support for the
regime’s domestic policies and reform measures are probably the mini-
mum the Afghans expect to emerge from the trip.
10. The potentially critical Soviet role in guaranteeing this regime’s
security will unquestionably be high on the agenda of these talks, but
we anticipate that the substance of these discussions will be closely
held and that the issue may not arise in public statements or reports.
Both parties may be content with the current magnitude of Soviet
presence in Afghanistan (best estimates are that approximately 600
Soviet military advisors are serving here, while about 2,000 Soviet
civilians are employed throughout the government’s bureaucracy), and
that further augmentations are unnecessary to deal with the present
level of Afghan needs.
11. Finally, the visit conceivably could produce a new bilateral
treaty of some sort to replace the current 1931 Treaty of Neutrality and
Mutual Non-Aggression which was most recently extended for ten
years at the time of Nikolai Podgorny’s visit here in December of 1975.7
Although both sides, especially the Soviets, could probably live with
the legal status quo governing their relationship, the Khalqis may raise
the subject because, in their minds, the 1931 treaty could represent a
“relic” of the past, it does not commit Moscow to protect Afghanistan’s
security in the event of aggression by some “foreign power,” and a
new accord would constitute a dramatic symbol of the “new relation-
ship” which the Afghan leadership is so eager to flaunt. The timing of
this visit may find the Soviets in a treaty-signing mood, although for
a number of reasons (e.g., reluctance to endorse too fully this particular
leadership, concern about alarming unduly the other countries of South
Asia—especially India, and a general hesitance to modify legal relation-
Podgorny’s December 9–10 trip to Afghanistan, the main purpose of which was to renew
0163)

Afghanistan
ships unnecessarily) the issue, if in fact it is raised by the Afghans,
may be quickly squelched.
12. Conclusions: Taraki’s first visit abroad as the leader of a revolu-
tionary Afghan regime could produce results which would have far-
reaching impact on this government’s ultimate survival and ability to
deliver on many of its reforms and promises. The trip undoubtedly
will be utilized to symbolize the new “special relationship” between
the two countries, a relationship which has already gone well beyond
the close ties developed under previous Afghan regimes. How far the
Soviet leadership will go in meeting the genuine needs of Taraki and
his colleagues remains to be seen, but we anticipate that Moscow will
probably choose to err on the generous side, since this regime, and
the type of revolution it represents, serves a number of Moscow’s
ideological and security interests.
Dubs
34.
Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence (Carlucci) to the President’s Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, January 26, 1979
SUBJECT
Covert Action Options Paper on Afghanistan
1. Forwarded herewith (Tab A) is a first cut of a covert action
options paper on Afghanistan, which outlines alternative programs of
varying costs and risks.
2. The Chief, Near East and South Asia Division, who has been
advised of the National Security Council’s interest in Afghanistan, is
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
memorandum from Inderfurth to Brzezinski and Aaron, February 1, which forwarded
Carlucci’s memorandum and attachments. Inderfurth asserted that the CIA paper’s call
to expose Afghanistan’s problems and its status as a Soviet pawn would be “counterpro-
ductive” because it contradicted another part of the paper that noted the negative psycho-
logical impact of Soviet influence on the region. Bringing more attention to the situation,
he argued, would only exacerbate the problem. In response, Henze wrote at the bottom
of Inderfurth’s memorandum: “Well you have to generate some waves to make progress.”
Brzezinski wrote at the top of Carlucci’s memorandum: “Let planning proceed. ZB.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
currently in the field, conferring with concerned station chiefs regard-
ing their capabilities to implement the programs described in the
attachment. We intend to draft a formal proposal for submission to
the Special Coordination Committee when he returns on 12 February.
On the other hand, if a paper is desired more urgently, we can solicit
his views by cable and submit our proposal within the next few days.2
3. You may have already noted State 014844 (Tab B), which reports
a request by the Afghan National Liberation Front for U.S. support of
its activities against the Afghan regime:3 and Kabul 0528 (Tab C), which
warns that overt contact with Afghan dissidents would be harmful
and recommends that CIA therefore handle such relationships. We are
working with State on this.4
All portions of this document are SECRET.
Frank C. Carlucci5
“OK” and initialed “ZB” in the left margin.
3 Tab B is attached but not printed. In a memorandum to Brzezinski, January 22,
Henze responded to Brzezinski’s January 19 request for comment on telegram 14844 to
Kabul, January 19. Both the request and the telegram are attached to Henze’s memoran-
dum. In the telegram, the Department stated that former Afghan Ambassador to the
United States Karim met with Saunders on behalf of the Afghan National Liberation
Front, during which Karim requested U.S. support for the Front’s activities against the
DRA. Karim also asked if the United States would consider receiving former Afghan
General Abdul Wali. Henze described the political situation in Afghanistan as “very
fluid” and urged that maintaining contact with groups opposed to the Taraki government
was in the interest of the United States. On the question of how the United States might
assist such opposition, Henze noted both difficulties and opportunities: “Without some
adjustments in the procedures for reporting this sort of thing to just about everybody
in Congress, I doubt whether we could mount a program of any size or duration that
could have an impact. CIA’s NE division chief, Alan Wolfe [text not declassified] knows
Afghanistan well—the least we could do would be to charge CIA with learning as much
as possible about opposition attitudes—I am intrigued by the Islamic aspect of all of
this—it could prove to be Achilles heel for the Soviets, for I am coming across increasing
evidence of a real Islamic underground in the USSR and resurgence of Islamic cultural/
political identity beyond what we have already known.” (National Security Council,
Telegram 14844 is also in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Embassy assessed that “we stand to lose more than we might gain by receiving Abdul
Wali in the U.S.” The gesture would “inevitably be read by the Taraki regime as U.S.
Government support for the Afghan National Liberation Front (ANLF).” (National
5 Carlucci signed “Frank” above his typed signature.

Afghanistan
Tab A
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency6
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Some Covert Action Options in Afghanistan
Background:
On 27 April 1978 leftist military forces staged a successful coup in
Afghanistan, replacing the government of President Daoud with a
Soviet-oriented “Democratic Republic”. Prime Minister Taraki and
other government leaders all are members of the “People’s Democratic
Party of Afghanistan”, which is Soviet-style communist party in a
Stalinist mode. The new regime has placed a high priority on consoli-
dating its control of government organizations and the armed forces,
and has had considerable success in this. It has been greatly aided
by an influx of Soviet advisors who have been placed in almost all
departments of the government and throughout the armed forces. The
situation in the countryside is different. Afghan governments tradition-
ally have had little control in the rural, tribal areas; this government
is no exception. Its problems stem particularly from its pro-Soviet,
communist orientation, which offends many deeply religious, conserv-
ative Afghans. Afghans tend to be nationalistic, and many are conscious
of, and resent, the growing dominance of the USSR in their affairs.
A tribal rebellion has been underway for several months in Afghan-
istan’s eastern provinces, and the government is finding it increasingly
difficult to maintain public order in other outlying areas of the country.
Outside Afghanistan, emigre dissidents claim to have several thousand
trained fighters, including a few hundred former military officers, in
and around Peshawar and the Pakistan frontier. The principal Afghan
rebel group in this area is the Afghan National Liberation Front (ANLF),
although there also are other significant groups which rival the ANLF.
Thus far the Government of Pakistan (GOP) has turned a blind eye to
this Afghan dissident activity. The rebels are reported to be receiving
support from individual Afghans living abroad, and also from Saudi
Arabian sources (The latter is not confirmed nor whether the alleged
support comes from private or official sources.).
6 Secret.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Assumption:
Afghanistan’s importance lies in the destabilizing effect its commu-
nist government could have on the region—particularly on Pakistan.
Further afield, the Afghan situation is having an adverse psychological
impact on many Third World countries. It tends to bolster the thesis
that the Soviet way is the wave of the future, and that the U.S. will make
no effort to stem Soviet encroachments in the Middle East. Therefore,
it is in the U.S. interest to have the Taraki Government fall and be
replaced by a non-communist regime. Currently the USG is seeking to
influence Afghan policies by conventional diplomatic means, including
the continuation of AID programs. Our ability to exercise economic
and political leverage is limited, and efforts to date have been largely
successful. Conversely, given its geographic proximity, existing close
economic and military relationships, and common political philosophy,
the USSR has been able to move quickly to consolidate and strengthen
its already considerable influence.7 Nevertheless, an anti-communist
coup d’etat is still possible, and the Soviets would probably feel obliged
to accept such an event without resorting to military intervention,
assuming it was carried out quickly and decisively. On the other hand,
a gradually accelerated insurgency would carry a greater risk of coun-
termeasures, both overt and covert.
Our intelligence indicates the insurgency is going to continue, no
matter what position the U.S. adopts in respect to it. We cannot at this
time predict how it will develop, nor whether it will succeed. But we
do see it hurting the Taraki Government and, in particular, having a
divisive impact on the armed forces. The soldiers, mainly rural draftees,
are being required to use their weapons against their fellows from
the countryside. The officer corps, although purged of suspected anti-
Taraki elements, could well become increasingly embarrassed and
angry at being obliged to impose an unpopular regime on their own
people. A possible scenario: the continuing insurgency would lead
eventually to the active disaffection of a sufficient number of officers
into blaming the country’s problems on Taraki, who would forcefully
overthrow his regime. Finally, there is the fatigue factor. The Taraki
Government is narrowly based and thinly staffed. A sustained insur-
gency would undoubtedly drain scarce managerial and leadership
resources the government can ill afford. While it is possible that the
government will fall very quickly (viz, in a lightning coup), it seems
more likely that Taraki will be overthrown as a result of his continuing
inability to deal with the insurgency. We also believe that the Afghan
7 Henze drew a line from the word “close” and wrote in the top margin:
“unsuccessful!”

Afghanistan
rebels will need some outside assistance if they are to sustain the
insurgency at its present level. The USG could increase the prospects
of the Taraki regime being overthrown through a variety of covert
action techniques, ranging from propaganda support to clandestine
arms supply. The risks to the U.S. would be largely dependent upon
the type of techniques adopted.
Covert Action Options:
(1) Generate a worldwide media campaign publicizing the regime’s
problems, exposing Taraki and his colleagues as pawns of the Soviet
Union. Condemn Taraki for attempting to force an atheistic philosophy
on a sincerely religious population, and for violating their basic human
rights. Such a campaign would be virtually risk free, but probably
would have little impact within Afghanistan itself. It would, however,
establish the groundwork for additional CA proposals, including influ-
encing Saudi Arabian and other prospective donors of aid to the
rebel cause.
(2) Expand the above program to include radio broadcasts in Dari
beamed into Afghanistan from neighboring countries. This would
almost certainly require the cooperation of the Governments of Pakistan
and/or Iran, either of which might be difficult to secure. In the past
the GOP has beamed propaganda into Afghanistan from a radio station
in Quetta. If relations between the two countries deteriorate, the GOP
might resume such broadcasts. [less than 1 line not declassified] shortwave
broadcasts also reach Afghanistan, and we could explore the possibility
of putting our message on this medium.
(3) Encourage and assist Afghan rebel groups with representation
outside of Afghanistan to oppose the regime. CIA officers currently
are in contact with a small number of Afghan exiles who at this time
are being exploited only for intelligence collection purposes. Other
potential exile leaders have been identified and could be approached
in due course. One of these is an Afghan, long resident in the U.S.,
who already is believed by emigre leaders to have some form of secret
U.S. support. Some of these individuals could be used as conduits of
funds and material support to rebel groups operating from the Pe-
shawar area. We also might establish connections with a member of
the ruling family of Chitral, the Pakistan princely state which lies just
across the border from Nuristan where most of the guerrilla activity
is taking place. This could give us the possibility of utilizing the natural
smuggling routes through Chitral to support the rebels directly, thus
bypassing the emigres. Saudi Arabians, who may have some connec-
tions with the dissidents, might be asked to front for us in supporting
the insurgency. Any proposed material assistance to dissidents would
have to be carefully weighed from the policy standpoint. Aside from

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
spending funds for intelligence collection, and supplying material aid
on humanitarian grounds (viz, medical supplies), selection of this
covert action option would indicate a clear-cut U.S. Government deci-
sion to attempt to overturn the current Afghan Government.
Risk vs. Gain:
An intensified propaganda program against the Afghan regime,
particularly one which involved radio broadcasting, would come to
Afghan and Soviet attention. It might be blamed on the USG, or CIA
in particular, although it would technically remain nonattributable.
However, in view of the current volume of Soviet propaganda against
the U.S., particularly with regard to neighboring Iran, we doubt that
Soviet reaction to such a program would adversely affect U.S. interests
in the area. It would increase the hostility of the government towards
Americans in Afghanistan, but this is not a vital consideration. A suc-
cessful propaganda program would make the world more aware of
the nature of the Afghan regime, but it probably would do little to
weaken it. On the contrary, it might induce the government to tighten its
grip and become even more dependent upon the Soviets. Propaganda
of the type envisioned could provide marginal encouragement to the
insurgents, but overall would have little effect on them.
Although thus far we have refrained from doing so, we have the
capability to explore with Afghan exiles the possibility of joint action
against the regime. If, however, there is no intention to follow through,
it would be inadvisable to embark on such a course of action. Raising
the expectation of these exiles and then refraining from taking any
action, would do more harm than good.
GOP support, or at least quiet acquiescence, would be almost essen-
tial for the success of any program designed to assist the Peshawar-
based rebels. Although we could smuggle small quantities of material
to them unilaterally, tacit GOP agreement would be required if larger
quantities are involved. We have one unconfirmed report that Saudi
sources are sending equipment to the rebels via Karachi, and that the
GOP has turned a blind eye to this. If true, this suggests that should
we become involved in a supply program, we might consider working
with the Saudis in view of the influence they can bring to bear on
the GOP.
There are several competing factions among the rebels. Some are
royalist, some are Islamic fundamentalist and some are both. If we
elect to support the dissidence, considerable care will be needed to
ensure that our aid gets to the proper place; that it is not squandered
on political infighting. We believe this is a manageable problem,
because we should be able to keep fairly close track of activity in the
dissident movement through a number of separate, compartmented
sources.

Afghanistan
35.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 1, 1979
SUBJECT
Afghanistan—Possible Covert Action (S)
We took up the subject of covert action in Afghanistan at the
meeting with Saunders yesterday (CIA was present).2 Bill Griffith’s
memo to you (log #700–XX) has also just come to me and I will cover
both at once. First, Bill’s memo. (S)3
The Griffith Memo
I agree with most of what Bill says. His analysis is correct except
for the claim that the Pakistanis are supporting the Afghan rebels. CIA
says that they have no information to confirm this. I would not exclude
the possibility (and certainly the Paks are keeping a weather eye on
the situation) but just because some of the dissidents claim they have
support is not evidence that they actually have it. (S)
As far as the recommendations go, I have some reservations about
how active we should be in supporting the insurgents (see below) but
am otherwise on board with the caveat that we should not get into an
extensive arms supply relationship with the Pakistanis because of
Indian considerations. And, there is of course the general question as
to how we supplement what we do in terms of meeting short term
Saudi and Pakistani problems (arms supply) with other measures that
go to the issue of their potential instability. In the Pakistani case, this
is first of all promoting a modus vivendi with India and secondly
economic assistance. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
sent to Griffith.
2 No record of this meeting was found.
3 Griffith’s memorandum to Brzezinski, January 31, was entitled “The Arc of Instabil-
ity: What is to be Done?” The “arc” referred to three crisis points which created a
geographic arc: Yemen, Iran, and Afghanistan. Griffith identified the policy problem as
two-pronged: 1) instability in this arc threatened U.S. access to petroleum sources in the
Arabian Peninsula; and 2) regional allies would have diminished expectations about
what the United States could do to restore stability. With regard to Afghanistan, Griffith
counseled that the United States should engage in consultations with Pakistan and Saudi
Arabia (and to a lesser extent, India) [text not declassified] and that the United States
should endorse arming rebels in Afghanistan and, if necessary, increase arms shipments
to Saudi Arabia and Pakistan toward that endorsement. (Carter Library, National Security

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Covert Action in Afghanistan
The discussion with Saunders and CIA was inconclusive but raised
important questions. The current insurgency (and even any likely
extension of it) will not directly threaten the Kabul regime. The Khalq
represents, to be sure, only one ethnic element in Afghanistan, but it
is by far the most significant. If, however, there is enough blood-letting,
it is conceivable that the Army could tire of taking the losses and move
to oust the Taraki regime. However, the Khalq has moved quickly to
get political control over the Army. It is not sure that the Army even
now has the capability of mounting a counter coup and whatever ability
they have will be steadily eroded as the Army is further politicized. (S)
Another argument for supporting the insurgency is that it will
keep the Afghans preoccupied on their side of the border and hence
less able to stir up trouble on the Pakistani side. A further argument
is this: as the regime gets more embroiled, it will turn more to the
Soviets for help. Some argue that this is against our interests since we
would like to see the Afghans be more independent of the Soviets. If
you believe as I do, however, that this is a vain hope, then there might
be some advantage in getting the Soviets deeply involved. As long as
our hand was not evident, this would work to our favor by scaring
the Indians, Iraqis, etc. (S)
Lastly, there is a humanitarian issue. Would we be stimulating a
lot of killing to no good end? Pathans are said to think that getting killed
while fighting the central government is not all that bad, especially if
the central government is godless.4 I have never been able to determine
the views of a Pathan who had been killed as to whether he thought
it was worthwhile; that would, I guess, depend on whether the Koran
makes good on all of its promises. It bothers me, however, especially
if there is no significant gain made. (S)
The issue is, then, whether much will be gained. Most of those
present thought that the answer would be no. There will be a lot of
fighting, the government will be distracted, the Soviets will get more
involved, but overall the odds are against it having much effect on the
strategic outcome. If that is the case, and given the problems we might
have “consulting” with Congress on this, the consensus was to keep
hands off. (S)
What we should do, however, is make sure that we keep channels
open to the insurgents and keep the matter under review. Also, there
is no need for us to discourage the Pakistanis or the Saudis from
keeping their hand in to the extent they see desirable. On that there
was general agreement. (S)
4 Pathan is another word for Pashtun, the major ethnic group of Afghanistan.

Afghanistan
36.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
1098. Subj: Death of Ambassador Dubs.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Here follows our account of the kidnapping and death of Ambas-
sador Dubs. This should be read in conjunction with the sitreps.2
by the Ambassador’s chauffeur, Gul Mohammad, that the Ambassador
had been kidnapped by armed persons, one of whom was wearing
a uniform. When the Ambassador’s car had approached the traffic
intersection near USICA, a man who appeared to be a uniformed traffic
policeman halted the car. He pointed a pistol at the driver and ordered
him to open the car’s electric door locks. Four armed men then entered
the Ambassador’s vehicle and ordered the driver to drive to the Kabul
Hotel. They entered the hotel with the Ambassador as a prisoner after
ordering the driver to return to the Embassy and inform the Embassy
about what had happened.
4. The DCM immediately phoned Foreign Ministry Chief of Proto-
col and the RSO telephoned police commandant Sayed Daoud Taroon
for information and assistance. Both Mandozai and Taroon appeared
surprised, and this appeared to be the first word they had received of
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Soviet Union Re: Death of Dubs. Confidential; Niact Immediate. Sent for information
Immediate to Islamabad.
2 Only situation report number 1, prepared in the Operations Center of the Depart-
ment of State, February 14, was found. (Carter Library, Donated Historical Material,
Mondale Papers, Box 42, Foreign Countries—Afghanistan, 1979) A full report, entitled
“The Kidnapping and Death of Ambassador Adolph Dubs, February 14, 1979, Kabul,
Afghanistan,” prepared by the Special Assignments Staff, Office of Security, Department
of State, was found in the Department of State, M/CT—Office for Combatting Terrorism,
facing Dubs prior to his death; accounting for the actions taken by the United States
during the standoff with the terrorists; actions of Soviet officials in Afghanistan before
and during the standoff; demands made by terrorists and their possible identity; and
requests made by the Embassy to the Afghan Government in the wake of Dubs’s death.
Key conclusions of the report include: the Department of State had no prior indication
of any threat facing Dubs; the DRA excluded U.S. officials from all decisionmaking
during the standoff; the Soviet Union denied any role in assisting the Afghan officials
during the standoff; both the terrorists’ demands and identity were not fully known at the
time of writing; and that the DRA had been wholly uncooperative with U.S. authorities’
attempts to gain a fuller picture of the events surrounding Dubs’s death.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
the incident. Taroon insisted that the Ambassador’s driver repeat the
story to him over the telephone. (At this time, it was not yet clear to
the Embassy whether the Ambassador had been taken by Afghan offi-
cials or someone else.) Mandozai called back almost immediately and
informed DCM that he had informed Foreign Minister Amin, that this
was not the work of the government, and that they were in touch with
the police.
5. Events at the hotel: Some EmbOffs immediately went to the
Kabul Hotel, arriving at approximately 0900. At the same time, the
first police arrived, pushing through the people in the lobby toward a
small room off the hotel desk. The EmbOffs heard loud scuffling and
angry noises in the room.
6. At about 0915 Political Counselor Flatin established contact with
a plainclothes police officer, who appeared to be in charge of the
operation. He was a former Air Force officer known by Americans to
be one of Taroon’s closest aides. We do not know his name.
7. At about 0920, the first Soviet police advisor, a tall, balding man,
with a black overcoat, arrived on the scene and immediately went into
consultations with the Afghan officials.
8. At about 0930, at the request of the American side at the hotel,
there was a small conference among the Americans, the Afghan police,
and the Soviet advisor. All then available information about the incident
was exchanged at that time. We were told that the kidnappers had
refused to answer the room telephone and were refusing to respond
to any attempts to communicate with them. The American officers
stressed their concern for the safety of the Ambassador, and were
assured by the Afghan and Soviet participants that they shared this
concern. Following this meeting the American officers began to find
it more difficult to deal directly with the Soviet advisors and therefore
began to negotiate directly with the senior Afghan police officials at
the scene.
9. At 0950, under the instructions of DCM Amstutz, Political Coun-
selor Flatin repeated the strong concern of the USG for the safety of
Ambassador Dubs to both the Afghan police and Soviet advisors (at
this time another two Soviet plainclothesmen had arrived on the scene,
carrying with them several green canvas bags) and requested that no
precipitous action be launched. They were told that in the American
view this would greatly endanger the Ambassador. The Americans
requested that the Afghans wait for the advice which the Embassy had
already requested from Washington. The Afghans and Soviets clearly
acknowledged and understood this U.S. request and indicated that
they agreed with the wisdom of following a patient course of action,
but they declined to make any commitments. About this time, the
Embassy’s ambulance and medical staff arrived at the hotel and were
permitted to position themselves in the lobby.

Afghanistan
10. At about 1015 Sergei Bakhturin, the Soviet Embassy security
officer, arrived on the scene. He assured the Americans of a strong
Soviet interest in the Ambassador’s safety.3 At the same time, Taroon’s
aide also assured us that all possible precautions were being taken to
prevent any harm from coming to the Ambassador, and he promised
that he would personally defend the Ambassador with his own life. It
was at this time that we gained additional details about the entry into
the hotel. The Afghan police said that the kidnappers had moved
Ambassador Dubs through a crowded lobby and up the stairs to the
second floor (second top) to room 117. One of the three kidnappers
had returned to the lobby to ask the desk for the key to the room. Not
recognizing him as a hotel guest, the hotel people were suspicious and
sent a hotel employee up to the room with him. At the door to the
room, he ordered the employee at gunpoint to unlock the door. The
other kidnappers entered the room with the Ambassador and the third
returned downstairs with the employee and at gunpoint ordered the
hotel desk personnel not to allow anyone to go upstairs or to enter the
hotel. It is not clear to us how he subsequently was overcome. From
the nature of the 0900 police rush on the office near the desk where
the terrorist presumably was, it is possible that he was disarmed and
subdued at that time.
11. At 1115 a Ministry of Interior official asked RSO Boles if we
had a security plan for this type of situation. Boles replied that to this
point we had left the situation in charge of the Afghan police and the
Soviet advisors, but that we felt that taking precipitous action would
between Toon and Gromyko regarding Dubs’s death. Gromyko expressed his regret,
pledged Soviet cooperation, and identified the perpetrators as agents of a “right extremist
reactionary provocative group.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D.
Communications with Soviet Union Re: Death of Dubs) A memorandum from Bowdler
to Christopher, February 14, relayed INR’s conclusion that “the Soviets share responsibil-
ity with the Afghans in precipitating the assault on the kidnappers which produced the
death of Ambassador Dubs.” INR based its conclusion on two analyses of Soviet behavior
during the incident: 1) “failure to adequately inform official Americans on the scene of
the terrorist terms (conditions and deadline) and about the Afghan plans to assault the
room where Dubs was being held;” and 2) “disregard of repeated U.S. pleas for patience
and restraint.” (Ibid.) In telegram 38921 to Kabul, February 15, the Department stated
that Vance called Dobrynin to inform him that “highly reliable” eyewitness reports
indicated “Soviet advisers were intimately involved in carrying out the ill-advised assault
which resulted in Ambassador Dubs’s death,” and that “this incident may well cause
serious damage to our relations.” (Ibid.; printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
Gromyko’s categorical refusal to accept blame for Dubs’s death. (National Archives, RG
“every effort” was made by Afghan security authorities to save Dubs’s life. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
greatly endanger the Ambassador’s life. Boles then outlined the Ameri-
can strategy of waiting in such cases. Boles then told the police that
we had our medical staff ready for all emergencies and were prepared
to move the Ambassador to the dispensary, if necessary. Boles was
then assured that the police would provide an escort.
12. At about 1115 a.m. Mr. James E. Taylor, Political Officer, and
Embassy employee, Jalal Talibee, arrived at the Ministry of Interior.
They asked to see police commandant Sayed Daoud Taroon and were
asked to wait in Taroon’s outer office by his secretary, for a few minutes.
Earlier in the morning, Taroon has met Admin Officer Bernie Woertz
and a local and had said that an American officer was welcome to sit
in Taroon’s office and act as a contact point for the USG. What Woertz
and his local picked up by way of info was transmitted by sitrep no. 5.
13. At 1120, Afghan police were observed moving ladders against
the outside of the hotel in such a way that the kidnappers could see
the action. Troops with what appeared to be commando badges also
arrived at that time. By this time, the entire hotel and neighboring
streets and buildings were filled with police and other security forces.
At 1125, RSO Boles notified the Embassy that it appeared that a police
action against room 117 may be pending immediately. At the Embassy’s
request, American officers at the hotel once again asked the Afghan
police for patience, advising that time is usually on the side of the
authorities. The Americans then saw several commandos enter the
hotel lobby, cock their weapons, and rush upstairs.
14. At 1128, the Embassy told American officers at the hotel that
DCM Amstutz was trying to get in touch with police commandant
Taroon. This information was passed to the Afghan police at the hotel
and they were asked not to do anything drastic until these negotiations
took place.
15. At 1130 Bakhturin told American officers that the men in the
room demanded the return of the man whom the police had caught
in the lobby. He said that this request had been conveyed to Hafizullah
Amin. The terrorists said that after their comrade had been returned
to them, they would be willing to talk further with the police. An
Afghan police official told us that security forces had talked to Ambas-
sador Dubs, but did not know what his condition was. He reportedly
confirmed in English that he was all right. They also reported that a
policeman across the street had viewed him through a window and
he appeared to be all right. Bakhturin indicated that he thought it
would be at least an hour before anything could be done.
16. Also around 1130, Bakhturin asked Flatin what languages the
Ambassador knew besides English. He was told the Ambassador’s best
foreign language was Russian. Bakhturin did not appear satisfied with
this, and asked what other languages he knew. When told German,
Bakhturin asked if Flatin knew German, and was told yes.

Afghanistan
17. At 1140, a police security officer asked Flatin to accompany
him upstairs. On the second floor, Flatin met Azizi, a plainclothes
police official that he had by chance once met in Badghis Province in
1977. (This police official, who speaks perfect English, had at that time
told Flatin that he served one and a half years as a special police
bodyguard for Ambassador Newmann when he was under a PLO
terrorist threat in Kabul in the 1960s. He gave the impression of being
a secret police official at that time.) Azizi, who also spoke apparently
perfect Russian with the Soviet advisors, asked Flatin if he could do a
favor for the police. He asked whether he would mind talking to the
Ambassador in German so that the kidnappers would not understand.
The police seemed to think that the kidnappers knew English.) Flatin
asked whether this would endanger the Ambassador in any way, and
was assured that the police had already made arrangements with the
terrorists. (They were talking with the terrorist named “Najib” through
the keyhole.)
18. The police asked Flatin to ask the Ambassador what type of
weapons the terrorists had. Speaking through the door, Flatin identified
himself in German and asked the Ambassador how he was. The Ambas-
sador replied that he was all right. His voice sounded strained, but
strong. Flatin, upon the repeated requests of the police, then asked the
Ambassador what types of weapons his kidnappers had. The Ambassa-
dor began to reply, but after saying the word “revolvers”, he was
silenced by the people in the room, who by that time were probably
aware that a language other than one they understood was being used.
The police requested the captors to permit the conversation to continue,
explaining that the Ambassador should be permitted to speak to his
own Embassy officials. The kidnappers retort was, “We are in charge
here and it isn’t necessary.”
19. Flatin was then asked to tell the Ambassador that ten minutes
from that moment he was to try to go to the bathroom or drop to the
floor. Flatin requested an immediate conference elsewhere with the
police. Flatin commented that such an instruction to the Ambassador
obviously meant that the police were poised to strike, and, as the police
already knew, the Americans had officially requested a delay. Flatin
explained that DCM Amstutz was trying to discuss the situation at the
very moment with police commandant Taroon, and requested that
nothing be done until the American Embassy had had a chance to
discuss onward tactics further with the police. Meanwhile, Amstutz
talked again twice with Deputy Foreign Minister Dost, and attempted
desperately to reach Foreign Minister Amin by phone (and dispatched
Woertz to try to enter Palace.)
20. The Afghan police officer, who at this stage had apparently
taken over charge of the operation, a youthful and tough-looking plain-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
clothes man, became very upset over this request for a delay, and
insisted that he was under orders to strike immediately. Flatin then
talked with Bakhturin who had in the meantime come upstairs, and
stressed our strong American interest in the delay. Bakhturin said that
he agreed time was also a good idea. He then talked with the senior
Soviet police advisor. The situation then became temporarily calm on
the second floor. It was at this point that Bakhturin revealed that the
Afghan police were working under time deadlines which had been
imposed by the kidnappers. The original noontime deadline had
already passed, and the police now thought they had an extension
until 1300.
21. About this time, firemen with picks and axes arrived on the
scene and joined the police. Then at this time, a photograph of the
Ambassador was displayed to all members of the security strike forces.
One of the commandos then asked, “Is that the terrorist?” He was told
that it was the Ambassador whom he was to avoid shooting.
22. Events at the Interior Ministry: At 1145, at the Interior Ministry,
Mr. Taylor again asked the secretary to remind commandant Taroon
that he was waiting to see him. Mr. Taylor told the secretary, a police
captain, that it was important that the U.S. Embassy representative see
Taroon in order to know what the Afghan Government was intending
to do. The secretary came from Taroon’s office and Mr. Taylor was
told to continue waiting.
23. For some reason the strike plans were apparently again relaxed
and the American officers were able to again consult the Embassy.
At an earlier stage in the morning’s operation the Americans had
recommended that the police bring the third terrorist, as demanded,
to his colleagues in order to elicit further demands from them. The
police decided to bring the third man up to the room but this gesture
was not sufficient; the terrorists wanted the return of his weapon too.
24. At 1207 the Afghan police requested that the American medical
personnel and stretcher be brought upstairs and placed in readiness
near the corridor of room 117.
25. Immediately thereafter the third terrorist was brought up the
stairs hooded. It was clear to EmbOffs that a strike was being prepared.
The Embassy was informed and again DCM urgently requested that
EmbOffs seek further delays. The EmbOffs repeated their earlier advice
to the Embassy that nothing could evidently be done with the police
officials at the scene, as they were repeatedly arguing that they were
already under orders from high officials elsewhere. At one time the
Americans were told they were under orders of the “Prime Minister”
himself. This was in response to the Embassy officer’s statement that
Mr. Amstutz was still trying to reach Mr. Taroon.
26. At this stage, the Soviet Embassy security officer and three
Soviet police advisors were all present, but hanging back, trying to

Afghanistan
look only like “advisors”, and allowing the Afghan police to be in
charge. Flatin talked to the man who appeared to be a senior Soviet
advisor and asked whether he spoke English. He did not, but he did
speak a little German. Flatin tried to secure his understanding of the
urgent need for a delay. He replied this was an Afghan police matter.
27. At about 1215 p.m. Mr. Taylor called the Embassy to inform that
he still had not been allowed to see Taroon despite several reminders
to Taroon that he was waiting and that it was extremely important to
the USG to know what the Afghan Government was intending to do.
28. Back at the hotel: At 1217 additional security forces rushed
upstairs and took ready positions near room 117.
29. At approximately 1230 a military officer in the lobby who
seemed to be in charge of the operation gave instructions to Taroon’s
assistant who returned upstairs. At 1235 Taroon’s aide came downstairs
again and went into the room with the officer-in-charge who seemed
to be talking on the radio.
30. At 1230 p.m. still not having been allowed to see Taroon, Mr.
Taylor again called the DCM to ask if he should remain in Taroon’s
waiting room. The DCM advised Mr. Taylor to wait at the Ministry
for 30 more minutes but that Mr. Taylor was to insist that the following
message be passed to Taroon: “Above all else, the USG did not want
any action taken by the Afghan Government which would endanger
the welfare of Ambassador Dubs.” That message was given to Taroon’s
secretary, who claimed that he had passed it to Taroon.
31. Events again at the hotel: At the hotel, at 1237, Taroon’s aide
went outside the hotel but returned one minute later. The officer-in-
charge returned to the side room where there was a radio, after which
two plainclothes gunmen went upstairs.
32. At about 1245 p.m. Mr. Taylor called the Embassy from the
Interior Ministry, again saying that, in spite of repeated requests, he
had still not been allowed to see Taroon, and was advised by the
DCM that the foregoing message should be stressed again and that
the Embassy had information that the Afghan authorities were contem-
plating action within the next two minutes. Mr. Taylor reiterated the
U.S. position to Taroon’s secretary and stressed that that policy had
been specifically by Secretary Vance. Mr. Taylor also emphasized that
information available to the Embassy indicated that some kind of force-
ful action was imminent and that absolutely nothing should be done
that would endanger the welfare of the Ambassador. The secretary
entered Taroon’s office and upon emerging at 1250 said the message
had been given to the police commandant. The secretary added that
“not all information should be made available, everything is under
control, and Taroon is busy with the operation at the hotel.” He claimed

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
that “all is designed” to “secure the life of the Ambassador and the
terrorists.”
33. At about 1245 it was clear to EmbOffs in the corridor outside
room 117 that the police had received their orders. Top police officials
and other armed men joined the crowd outside the room. One specially
armed and armored policeman lay prone on the floor before the door,
pointing his weapon at the door, while others stood behind him and
to his side also pointing their weapons at the door. The Soviet advisors
then stepped forward into operation roles. One Soviet advisor helped
to arm an Afghan policeman with what appeared to be special wea-
ponry. Two other Soviet police advisors and Bakhturin went out to
the balcony. The tall, senior Soviet advisor then made hand signals
from the balcony, presumably positioning the snipers across the street.
34. Before 1250, the police had all non-participants take positions
of safety. At exactly 1250 very heavy gunfire broke out in the corridor,
in the room, and from across the street. Both single-shot and automatic
weapons were heard (several American officers were nearby). The main
bursts of firing continued for approximately 40 seconds. The police
snipers across the street continued to fire until two Soviet advisors
gave hand signals to cut it off. Following that, there were at least three
more bursts from inside the room, and then silence.
35. The police then asked the Americans to come immediately with
the stretcher. The entryway into the hotel room was a seven foot long
hall whose air was filled with dense cordite smoke. When the American
party entered the room, they found the Ambassador seated to the right
side of the entryway next to a wardrobe. His head was slumped to the
right side and he had sustained several bullet wounds, one of which
appeared to be a single small calibre shot above the right eye. A heavy
calibre round had struck him in the heart area. A third round had hit
him in the left wrist. The American party placed the Ambassador on
the stretcher. The Embassy doctor’s initial diagnosis in the room was
that the Ambassador was dead.
36. At 1253 the party rushed the Ambassador down to a waiting
American ambulance which took the Ambassador’s body to the Ameri-
can dispensary. Mr. Flatin remained behind as the two terrorists were
removed. The first terrorist was dragged out into the hallway through
cascades of water (the radiator pipes in the room had been shot out).
The police slapped his head around with a gun butt, but he appeared
as probably dead. The second man was still, and possibly dead. The
third terrorist, who had been held back in the immediate area of shoot-
ing was then badly roughed up by the police. A hood was put back
on his head and he was dragged down to the lobby. By about 1258 all
three terrorists had been removed from the hotel. The one who had
been first captured was definitely alive at that time and on his feet. A

Afghanistan
second terrorist was taken from the hotel either unconscious or dead.
The third terrorist was on a stretcher very bloody and apparently dead.
37. Police officers then came out of the room with the Ambassador’s
sports coat and tie. Flatin asked for possession. The nearest police
official was prepared to permit this but the tall Soviet police advisor
came up and convinced him to rescind his permission, explaining
the items were necessary for police examination. (The Ambassador’s
possessions were later returned to the Embassy.)
38. Events back at the Interior Ministry: At about 1255, Mr. Taylor
phoned the Embassy to report that the Afghan police were obviously
on the verge of some overt action. Mr. Taylor talked to Mr. Turco who
said that whatever the DRA was planning had just happened. At that
point, while Mr. Taylor was on the phone with Mr. Turco a Russian
civilian emerged from Taroon’s office and left the waiting room. This
man had not entered through the waiting room while Taylor was there
so he must have been with Taroon during the entire period Taylor was
at the Ministry. About three minutes later, another official entered the
waiting room and said to the secretary that he had heard shooting and
the secretary informed all of the police stations to search their areas
for the source of the shooting.
39. At about 1305 hours Taroon and his bodyguard came out of
the commandant’s office and Taroon said that it was all over “and that
the Ambassador was injured and in the hospital.” Taroon quickly left
the room and went down to the main exit of the building. Mr. Taylor
rushed after him down the step and asked for five seconds of his
time to explain what Mr. Taylor thought of Taroon’s behavior and his
handling of the whole affair. Taroon replied he was “too busy” and
didn’t have time to talk with Mr. Taylor.
40. Taroon with his machine gun drove off in his Mercedes. It
was obvious that Taroon refused to have any American representative
aware of what the Afghan police were preparing to do. He also deliber-
ately disregarded the American position for delay which was repeat-
edly made known to him a number of times, and disregarded his
telephone promise to the DCM not to take action without consulting
us, and that after the incident he did not want to hear any questions
or statements from the American representative. It was equally clear
that a civilian Soviet advisor was intimately involved with the Afghan
police preparations in Taroon’s office.
41. Back at the hotel, Flatin subsequently discussed the incident
with the police plainclothesman in charge of the operation, and asked
why the action had been launched so precipitously. The police official
said he was under higher orders and claimed that the Afghan police
did not start the shooting. He explained that the terrorists had told the
police that the ultimatum time had elapsed and that they did not want

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to wait any further. The police then pleaded for a further delay, but
upon hearing a shot within the room, opened fire and rushed the room
in an attempt to save the Ambassador. When told that the American
Ambassador was dead the police officer expressed his sympathy.
42. Some American officers then went back to room 117. They
looked for signs of shooting in the room. No bullet holes were observed
in the corridor door to the room, which looked as though it had been
struck near its lock by a heavy object. The glass door at the end of the
hallway leading directly into the room was shattered. The wall against
which the Ambassador’s body was found had at least five bullet holes
at an elevation of approximately five feet higher and on the wall oppo-
site the window were a number of bullet holes above the door frame,
presumably from the snipers across the street. No bullet holes were
observed in that part of the wall immediately behind the Ambassador’s
body’s location or in the wardrobe cabinet next to this spot. The police
then asked Embassy officers to leave before they could finish their
inspection of the room.
43. According to Dr. Rotz, our RMO, Ambassador Dubs officially
died at 1305 hours. Our report on this follows septel.4
Amstutz
autopsy report on Dubs. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no
film number])

Afghanistan
37.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 26, 1979
SUBJECT
Afghanistan
REFERENCE
The state of our knowledge of Afghanistan and of Afghan groups
abroad opposed to the present regime is so fragmentary that it is
impossible to develop “a coherent and systematic plan.” Remedying
this deficiency must be the first step. Beyond this, we need a more
coherent framework within which to plan. Covert action only makes
sense within the framework of a broader set of policy goals toward
which covert action contributes. I am not sure we have these in respect
to Afghanistan. Do we simply want to harass the present regime and
prevent its consolidation? Do we want to replace it with something
else? What? What kind of resources in what amounts are we willing
to commit to supporting a regime more to our liking? Dissidents with
whom we would have to work to do anything about Afghanistan will
want to know this. So will the Pakistanis or anybody else we might
want to work through. (TS)
Recent statements of the President and the Vice President leave
me with the impression that they are unwilling to support serious
intervention in Afghanistan or any similar situation.3 CIA’s capacity
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special,
2 Not attached. The memorandum from Brzezinski to Henze stated: “Please outline
for me a coherent and systematic plan for Afghanistan. Should we help any insurgents?
What would be required? With whom would we have to work? How likely are the
Pakistanis to be effectively helpful? What will be the chances of success, and how would
success be defined?” (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files,
3 An apparent reference to Carter’s public reaction to the death of Dubs. The Presi-
dent, who attended a ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base, February 18, marking the
arrival of Dubs’s remains to the United States, characterized Dubs’s killing as “senseless
noted that Carter “stopped short of repeating criticism of the Soviet Union by name for
its role in advising Afghan forces to storm the kidnappers’ stronghold.” (John MacLean,
“With ‘Sadness, Outrage,’ Carter Eulogizes Dubs,” Chicago Tribune, February 19, 1979,
p. 2) On February 20, Carter gave a speech on foreign affairs at the Georgia Institute of
Technology upon receiving an honorary degree. Prefacing his condemnation of Dubs’s
killing, Carter made an apparent reference to Vietnam: “The United States cannot control
events within other nations. A few years ago, we tried this and failed.” (Public Papers:
Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 301) No statements by Mondale were found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to plan and implement covert action in a challenging environment such
as Afghanistan, where U.S. influence is widely perceived as declining,
is extremely limited. In the face of declared lack of desire for such
action from highest authority, one cannot expect more than a half-
hearted planning effort from CIA. This is unlikely to result in plans in
which one can have much confidence. CIA’s recent covert action effort
in Iran was totally illusory. (TS)
CIA/DDO’s NESA Division Chief, Alan Wolfe [less than 1 line not
declassified] recently visited the area and assessed the situation first-
hand. His conclusions are going to be reflected in the paper CIA is
preparing for consideration at the SCC meeting scheduled for this
to bring Wolfe along for this phase of the discussion so that you can
get the direct benefit of his knowledge and thinking. (S)5
was found, although there was an SCC meeting that covered Afghanistan on March 6,
which was possibly a reschedule of a meeting originally planned for March 2. See
footnote 5, Document 38.
5 Brzezinski did not indicate his approval or disapproval on the memorandum.

Afghanistan
38.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
for Members of the Special Coordination Committee1
Washington, February 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Covert Action Options for Afghanistan
Attached is a paper outlining Covert Action (CA) options in
Afghanistan. It is circulated in order to obtain your views for the
forthcoming Special Coordination Committee (SCC) meeting regarding
the appropriateness of the options described. It is our present intention
to draft a formal CA proposal for SCC consideration and a Presidential
Finding based on your reactions.
However, if our CA program is to include support to a possible
insurgency, the acquisition of additional operational intelligence on
the various rebel groups will be necessary before a proposal can be
submitted.
On the other hand, if the decision is made simply to publicize the
Soviet role in Afghanistan through our international network of media
assets, agents of influence and liaison contacts, the General Finding
authorizing us to “expose and counter Soviet interference in other
countries’ affairs” already provides us with policy sufficiency.
The options presented vary in degree of risk and cost, but are not
mutually exclusive. For example, a program of support to an insur-
gency would also include some or all of the less risky options, such
as a worldwide propaganda campaign on both Soviet involvement in
Afghanistan and the abuses of the Taraki regime.
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
No drafting information appears on the memorandum. Attached but not printed is an
undated covering memorandum from Inderfurth to Brzezinski, which characterizes the
attached CIA paper as “not a set of concrete proposals,” but rather an offering of options
ranging from propaganda “through sponsorship of large-scale insurgency to bring about
a change in government in power in Kabul.” Inderfurth noted the paper’s “principal
deficiency” was that “it gives only a vague impression of CIA’s capabilities,” which
meant that the CIA was unprepared to implement some of the options laid out in
the paper. Inderfurth recommended that Brzezinski “step up operational intelligence
collection as an essential first-step toward planning more concrete programs.” Also
attached but not printed is Brzezinski’s February 21 memorandum to Henze. See Docu-
ment 37.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency2
Washington, undated
COVERT ACTION OPTIONS AGAINST AFGHANISTAN
INTRODUCTION:
The communist regime of Nur Mohammad Taraki and Hafizullah
Amin appears to have established itself in effective control in Kabul.3
It possesses the essential mechanisms of central government and, if
left to its own devices, should eventually be able to lay to rest the tribal
insurrections it continues to face, principally in the eastern border area
of Nuristan. No central Afghan government has ever been in total,
absolute control of all parts of the country, and the center traditionally
faces periodic tests of its authority from parochial interests in the more
remote provincial areas. In this respect the Nuristan insurrection fol-
lows a familiar pattern, but it is taking place on an order of magnitude
considerably in excess of what recent Afghan regimes have faced, and
with a professed ideological content not usual to such events.
The Afghan army, its leadership already debilitated by arrests and
purges, is disadvantaged in Nuristan by terrain which singularly favors
guerrilla activity. The admittedly limited intelligence available on the
insurrection suggests that regular forces have not fared well and that
word-of-mouth awareness of Nuristani success may be stimulating
recalcitrant tribal elements in other areas to assume equally belligerent
postures towards Kabul’s control. The latter point is largely speculative
however; little reliable intelligence now exists. To the extent that current
army leadership is embarrassed by its performance in this matter,
turning on the political leadership which ordered the confrontation, is
one possible course open to it. While tribal insurrection cannot directly
bring down the central government, its continued success could spur
politically uncommitted army officers to such an effort. The insurrec-
tionists are poorly armed and lack money, medical facilities and ammu-
nition; nor do they now appear to be receiving more than token assist-
ance from external sources. Left to its own devices, the insurrection
2 Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. No drafting information appears on
the paper.
3 Inderfurth underlined the sentence and wrote: “ZB, see addendum. Rick” in the
margin, a reference to the field appraisal from the Chief of Station in Kabul.

Afghanistan
will probably peter out. Actively stimulated, it conceivably could spark
the reaction suggested above. Unilateral and bilateral mechanisms
appear to exist to provide this support; each has singular advantages
or disadvantages attached.
PURPOSE:
Covert Action (CA) could be undertaken against the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) with objectives ranging from harass-
ment to the actual overthrow of the present communist government.
The principal purpose would be to demonstrate to the Soviets and the
Third World that the U.S. is not willing quietly to acquiesce in the
absorption of another country into the Soviet orbit. The main risk in
undertaking such a CA program would come from the Soviet Union.
In the event of a lightning, and successful, coup d’etat in Kabul, it
is unlikely that the Soviets would intervene militarily. A gradually
intensified insurgency could lead to escalating Soviet military counter-
measures. While the Soviets would be unlikely to introduce line troops
into Afghanistan, they could easily provide virtually limitless supplies
of military equipment, military “advisors,” pilots, etc.
UNILATERAL VS. MULTILATERAL CA:
Limited CA activities can be undertaken unilaterally. For example,
we can intensify our propaganda campaign and supply funds to insur-
gent groups without collaborating with other countries. Unilateral CA
has security advantages, but would be far less effective than programs
undertaken jointly. Because of geographical considerations, the cooper-
ation—or at least tacit endorsement—of the Government of Pakistan
(GOP) would be almost mandatory if we were to provide significant
material support to the insurgents. Such cooperation is by no means
assured; the GOP would be likely to demand a high price in return
for its cooperation—viz. greatly increased military and economic assist-
ance. This would involve us in supporting the political status quo in
Pakistan. The GOP would run the risk of its actions boomeranging,
leading to serious instability in Pakistan. The Afghans have the capabil-
ity of stirring up Pakistan tribals—particularly in Baluchistan. Some
insurgent leaders have good connections with Saudi Arabia, and there
have been reports that aid from that country already has been sent to
exile leaders in the Peshawar area. In view of the influence that Saudi
Arabia has had on Pakistan, the Saudis could usefully front for us with
the GOP and serve as a conduit for aid to the insurgents, probably via
exile elements. Other countries might play lesser roles. [less than 1 line
not declassified] are willing to cooperate in an anti-DRA propaganda

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
campaign, and [less than 1 line not declassified] are willing to provide
some intelligence. The head of [1 line not declassified] said his organiza-
tion would be willing to provide training for the dissidents, although
it is doubtful he was speaking for [less than 1 line not declassified] Govern-
ment when he made this comment.
CA OPTIONS—PRO’S AND CON’S:
1. Propaganda—Outside Afghanistan. We could generate a world-
wide media campaign publicizing the DRA’s problems, exposing Tar-
aki and his colleagues as pawns of the Soviet Union. We could condemn
Taraki for attempting to force an atheistic philosophy on the religious
population and for violating civil rights. Such a campaign could be
conducted unilaterally or with the cooperation of friendly governments
such as [less than 1 line not declassified]. It would be virtually risk free,
but probably would have little impact within Afghanistan itself. It
would, however, establish the groundwork for additional CA activities,
including influencing Saudi Arabian and other prospective donors of
aid to the rebel cause.
2. Propaganda—Inside Afghanistan. Propaganda material could be
distributed inside Afghanistan. Afghans have a tradition of employing
“night letters”—clandestinely produced leaflets—to register protest.
CIA could produce such material for non-attributable distribution in
Kabul and elsewhere in Afghanistan, but this obviously would entail
considerable risk for those involved. We cannot predict in advance the
success of an internal propaganda campaign or the overall effect it
would have on the regime. It probably would have the greatest impact
if it were undertaken in conjunction with a broader program of support
for the insurgents.
3. Propaganda—Radio. Radio broadcasts in Dari and Pushtu in the
standard broadcast band beamed into Afghanistan from neighboring
countries would require the cooperation of the Governments of Paki-
stan and/or Iran.4 In the past the GOP has transmitted propaganda
into Afghanistan from a radio station in Quetta. If relations between
the two countries deteriorate, the GOP might resume such broadcasts.
Some existing shortwave broadcasts, [less than 1 line not declassified],
also reach Afghanistan, and we could explore the possibility of putting
our message on this medium. Again, cooperation of a third country
would be essential. An airborne radio station also is possible, but
this too would have to be supported from a nearby country. Satellite
broadcasts theoretically could be arranged, but only at great expense
4 Inderfurth circled “/or Iran” and drew a line to the bottom of the page, where
he wrote: “I doubt the Ayatollah (or Bazargan for that matter) would go along with
this. Maybe later.”

Afghanistan
and not in the near term. If the radio propaganda option is being
seriously considered, a technical study would be required to determine
the best way to reach the Afghan radio audience. Assuming the broad-
casts are fairly widely heard, they could have a significant impact. If
the broadcasts originated from a neighboring country such as Pakistan,
this would be considered a serious hostile act and the DRA could be
expected to take countermeasures.
4. Insurgency Support—Non-Lethal. The easiest way to support the
insurgents is to furnish them with money on a unilateral basis. We
have identified a number of Afghan exile leaders through whom such
funds could be channelled, although our ability to monitor how the
money actually is spent would be limited. A possibility also exists to
establish direct contact in Pakistan with Nuristan leaders, via discreet,
unilateral Pakistani intermediaries. If we wanted to remove ourselves
a step from such transactions, we might be able to get Saudi Arabia
to front for us, but this would further reduce the element of control.
Small amounts of non-lethal material such as medical supplies, rations
and low-grade communications equipment, might be furnished unilat-
erally through Pakistan territory, although obviously this could be
done more easily with GOP cooperation, or possibly by having the
Saudis broker the deal with the GOP. U.S. assistance to the insurgents,
whether in the form of money or non-lethal supplies or both, could be
expected to encourage the anti-regime movement, but its ultimate effect
would be difficult to predict. If significant quantities of aid were
involved, this could not be kept secret. The USG probably would be
accused of supporting the rebels by the Soviets and the Afghan press,
whether or not concrete proof was available. Nevertheless, plausible
denial could be maintained, or the USG might even admit to supplying
“humanitarian aid” to the exiles. Pakistan’s attitude would be critical.
The GOP could be seriously embarrassed if it developed that an increas-
ingly creditable insurgency movement was operating from its North-
west Frontier Province (NWFP) and might take steps to restrict activi-
ties of the insurgents.
5. Insurgency Support—Lethal. Funds could be provided to the insur-
gents to purchase lethal military equipment, as in the non-lethal insur-
gency support option outlined above. Likewise, the Saudis could be
asked to front for us on this. Small amounts of lethal equipment prob-
ably could be introduced clandestinely, but GOP cooperation would
be required if significant amounts were involved. Equipment which
could upgrade the insurgents’ combat capabilities might include small
arms, sniper equipment, light to medium crew-served weapons, uncon-
ventional demolitions, and anti-aircraft weapons such as the Soviet
SA–7 missiles. Training also would be required, and with full GOP

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
cooperation, a small CIA team could handle this in NWFP. Alterna-
tively, Afghan rebel cadres could be brought out of the area and trained
in a third country such as Saudi Arabia. From the standpoint of effi-
ciency, the closer the training team can operate to the scene of action, the
better. Efficiency would be lowered, but security enhanced, if American
staff did not operate in Pakistan. The results of modest but across-the-
board support for the insurgents would be hard to estimate. It could
greatly improve the insurgents’ military capability, sap the managerial
resources of the thinly staffed DRA leadership, and eventually lead to
a revolt in the Army which would overthrow the Taraki regime. It
also could lead to increased Soviet involvement in Afghanistan, as we
believe they will take strong measures to ensure that the communist
regime is not displaced. A long drawn-out insurgency would result
in great suffering for the people involved, with no guarantee that a
satisfactory outcome would be achieved.
6. Coup d’etat. It is possible that the Taraki regime could be brought
down the same way it came to power—in a lightning coup d’etat. This
would have to be carefully planned and organized, and executed with
precision. As in the April 1978 coup, the aim would be to obtain support
of key military units and then move quickly to eliminate the DRA
leadership. If successful, such a coup would cause minimal bloodshed,
and would be over before the Soviets had time to react. A number of
Afghans already have been arrested by the regime on charges of coup
plotting. At this point we do not know whether there are viable anti-
regime groups attempting to organize a coup such as described, and
it could well be that there are none. The DRA has not flinched from
employing draconian means to maintain internal security; regime lead-
ers are well protected by heavily armed guards and the political loyalty
of key military commanders has been carefully investigated. While
dissidents both inside and outside of Afghanistan may be discussing
the theoretical possibility of mounting a coup, little or no spadework
may have been done to prepare for this. Anti-regime exiles seem to
have only rudimentary contact with guerrillas operating in the border
areas, and presumably even poorer communications with potential
dissident activists in the capital. Nevertheless it is possible that a credit-
able anti-regime underground could develop, and CIA could make
contact with it, probably via selected anti-regime exiles. In theory we
could then provide specialized support including training, advice, non-
attributable sniper rifles, explosives, anti-tank weapons, communica-
tions equipment, etc. This material then would have to be smuggled
into Kabul—again implying the existence of a well organized under-
ground. The political risks to the U.S. would be great, but probably

Afghanistan
not much greater than if we decided to provide quantities of lethal
equipment and training for the insurgency as described above.5
5 The summary of conclusions of the SCC’s March 6 meeting was sent under cover
of a March 19 memorandum from Dodson to Mondale, Vance, Brown, Jones, and Turner.
It noted that the final portion of the meeting was devoted to the CIA paper: “There was
a general feeling that internal and external media activity should proceed but that
possibilities and channels for support of dissidents and insurgents should be studied at
greater depth. The Attorney General suggested CIA prepare much more specific decision
proposals than it had submitted to date so that clear yes-or-no answers could be given
by the committee. CIA representatives stressed that gathering additional feasibility infor-
mation will necessitate contacts with regime opponents who may not be entirely forth-
coming about providing information on their capabilities and plans until they feel assured
that their requests for assistance have a serious chance of being responded to.” (National
Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 8 May
printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula,
Document 187.
39.
Special Analysis Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, March 23, 1979
[paper number not declassified]
AFGHANISTAN: A Regime in Trouble
The insurgencies faced by President Taraki’s government since his leftist
faction seized power almost a year ago have now grown into serious threats
to the survival of the Soviet-backed regime. The USSR is clearly concerned,
and if conditions worsen in Afghanistan the Soviets could face an awkward
dilemma. ([classification marking not declassified])
The most damaging recent development has been the spread of
fighting to the previously quiet north and west. The causes of the revolt
that broke out in Herat last week and smaller outbreaks elsewhere are
still unclear, but Islamic opposition to the “godless” government may
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Pre-Invasion Reporting. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. Prepared by [text not declassified] and [text not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
have been the most important factor.2 In his first months in office, Taraki
appeared to be dealing successfully with the religious communities by
avoiding policies offensive to them. When criticism of the government
became more open last fall—perhaps encouraged by events in Iran and
by exiled religious leaders in Pakistan—Taraki cracked down.3 The
arrest in January and February of a number of clerics apparently exacer-
bated the situation. ([classification marking not declassified])
Even if the armed forces succeed in suppressing the current rebel-
lions, insurgencies inspired by the Islamic opposition will almost cer-
tainly recur, placing further strains on the loyalty of the Muslim sol-
diers. Rebellion in the tribal areas along the Pakistani border broke out
almost as soon as Taraki came to power. The tribes cannot campaign
effectively outside their home areas but are holding their own in the
mountains. Probably more than half of the Army’s combat units are
now in tribal areas, and morale is declining because of casualties, tribal
loyalties, and the dim prospects for victory. ([classification marking not
declassified])
So far—despite the defection of a large part of the Army garrison
in Herat and reports of daily desertions in the tribal areas—the bulk
of the military remains loyal to the government. Widespread arrests
and dismissals have prevented any successful move against Taraki by
disgruntled officers. At the same time, however, the purges clearly
reveal the continuing decline in the number of officers the government
is willing to trust and, along with the similar removal of suspected
opponents in the bureaucracy, have forced the government to rely
more and more on inexperienced party members. The few capable
senior officials—for example Foreign Minister Amin—seem to have
more to do than they can handle. ([classification marking not declassified])
The economic situation is deteriorating. Poor weather has sharply
reduced agricultural production, foodgrain import requirements have
increased, and Kabul is shopping in world markets for early delivery
of at least 400,000 tons of wheat. The government estimates that the
shortfall in wheat production this year will be between 700,000 to
800,000 tons. Foreign exchange reserves are sufficient to pay for wheat
imports, but Kabul still faces problems in arranging for delivery. The
Afghans have asked Pakistan to expedite wheat shipments through
the port of Karachi, but Islamabad has not yet responded. ([classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified])
2 The uprising in Herat began on March 15 by civilian insurgents, who were joined
by resident Afghan Army troops who had mutinied. The revolt ended on March 20
when Afghan Army troops loyal to the Taraki regime entered the city.
3 A reference to the Iranian revolution and the collapse of the Shah’s government
in February 1979.

Afghanistan
Afghanistan’s relations with its non-Communist neighbors are
becoming more difficult. Although the Pakistani Government is not
now giving support to tribal dissidents, it is reportedly making little
effort to limit the activities of Afghan exiles in Pakistan and may decide
at some point to provide material aid. The new Iranian Government
apparently is continuing the Shah’s non-interventionist policy, but anti-
Afghan statements by Iranian leaders and verbal attacks on Iran from
Afghanistan have increased tension. The increasingly Islamic character
of the insurgency in Afghanistan could lead to a change in Iranian
policy. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Soviet money, arms, and advisers have been an important factor
in keeping the Taraki government afloat, and the implicit threat of a
Soviet reaction has been a major deterrent against Iranian and Pakistani
meddling in Afghanistan.4 As his troubles increase, Taraki will need
even greater Soviet assistance, and it is even possible that at some point
only open Soviet military intervention could save him. ([classification
marking not declassified])
The Soviet Role
The USSR’s dispatch of a high-level delegation to Afghanistan and
its planned airlift point to Moscow’s willingness to help Taraki meet
the challenge. As many as 48 Soviet transport aircraft may be involved
in the planned delivery of combat helicopters, which suggests to us
the Soviets may also be delivering radar, communications, and other
support equipment. The Soviets will probably also initially provide
ground crews and pilots. The Soviets may already have delivered
additional infantry combat vehicles. Even more noteworthy is Mos-
cow’s willingness to jeopardize its relations with the new government
in Iran by charging it with complicity in the Afghan unrest. ([classifica-
tion marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
Soviet military advisers in Afghanistan have been helping govern-
ment forces quell the insurgencies in eastern Afghanistan for several
months. There is now an unconfirmed report that Soviet advisers
assigned to the Afghan Air Force took part in bombing rebel-held
positions in Herat last week. The Soviets reportedly flew bombing
4 An intelligence information cable prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency,
March 26, reported on information shared by [text not declassified], who alleged that
Brezhnev sent Taraki a letter committing Soviet support to Afghanistan with 10 divisions
and 500 aircraft near the Afghan border. According to the cable: “Whether the above
information is accurate, it is the commonly held perception of Khalq officers that the
Soviet Union is prepared to assist Afghanistan. The leadership of the Democratic Republic
of Afghanistan may wish to disseminate the substance of this message to its officers
to instill a sense of confidence that Afghanistan is backed by a powerful neighbor.”
(Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Soviets in Afghanistan—General
Part #2)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
missions for North Yemen in the 1960s and for Iraq against the Kurds
in the 1970s. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction
not declassified])
The Soviet military advisory mission in Afghanistan has more than
doubled since the coup last April. It now numbers between 600 and
1,000, but there is still considerable room for further expansion. The
Afghans, for example, probably will be unable to handle their logistics
problems if the situation worsens, and Soviet military personnel might
be dispatched to facilitate the movement of men and materiel to the
various combat zones. ([classification marking not declassified])
Moscow will face a dilemma if—despite expanded assistance—the
situation deteriorates to the point where only massive Soviet military
intervention could save the Afghan Marxists. This could happen if the
Islamic insurgency spreads to other urban areas of Afghanistan and if
the military withdraws its support from Taraki. Moscow’s decision to
publish two authoritative warnings in less than a week about outside
interference in Afghanistan is indicative of Soviet concern about a
possible replay in Afghanistan of recent developments in Iran. This is
also reflected in the current Soviet propaganda effort to portray the
current government as respectful of Islam and mindful of the teachings
of the Koran. ([classification marking not declassified])
The Soviets would be most reluctant to introduce large numbers
of ground forces into Afghanistan to keep in power an Afghan Govern-
ment that had lost the support of virtually all segments of the popula-
tion. Not only would the Soviets find themselves in an awkward morass
in Afghanistan, but their actions could seriously damage their relations
with India, Iran, and—to a lesser degree—Pakistan. As a more likely
option, the Soviets probably could seek to re-establish ties with those
members of the Afghan opposition with whom Moscow has dealt
profitably in the past.5 ([classification marking not declassified])
5 In a likely reaction to this paper, Brzezinski sent a memorandum to Vance, March
28, indicating that in response to Soviet support and possible participation in the Afghan
Government’s efforts to destroy the insurgency, “the President stated that we should
notify Iran, Pakistan, and India of this and publicize Soviet involvement.” (Department
of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Intelligence Liaison Files, TIN 980643000019,
April 5, described the activities undertaken by the Department of State per Carter’s
instructions. These measures included sending cables with talking points to the Embassies
in Tehran and Jidda, a proposed letter to Indian Prime Minister Desai, and a message
for Ambassador Hummel to communicate to Pakistani officials. Additionally, Tarnoff
reported that the Department issued a statement “denying sharply” Soviet accusations
of U.S. meddling in Afghanistan. (National Security Council, Carter Administration
public statement attacking the Soviet allegations of U.S. interference in Afghanistan was
issued on April 2. (Don Oberdorder, “U.S. Blasts ‘Baseless’ Soviet Charges,” Washington

Afghanistan
40.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, March 27, 1979
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
Afghanistan/Saudi Arabia
SUBJECT
Saudi Arabian Aid to the Afghanistan National Liberation Front and Possible
Saudi Approach to United States Government With Regard to Aid to the
Liberation Front (DOI: March 1979)
SOURCE
[2 lines not declassified]
1. Senior members of the Saudi Government are very much
impressed with the recent military successes of Afghanistan rebel units.
They believe that these units have accomplished major victories in spite
of a lack of weapons, money and logistical support. They are also
impressed by what they believe to be the firm steps taken by the
various rebel organizations to unify their efforts under the Afghanistan
National Liberation Front (ANLF).
2. Although the Saudis are in sympathetic contact with various
members of the ANLF, they continue to withhold any real financial
support to the ANLF. Crown Prince Fahd bin ’Abd al-’Aziz has made
it clear to Pakistani President Zia-ul-Huq that Saudi Arabia will provide
no significant aid to the ANLF unless Zia agrees to the aid. At the
moment, Saudi and Pakistan Governments are in continuous contact
on this issue. In mid-March Zia informed Crown Prince Fahd that he
believed that any kind of Pakistani aid to the ANLF would cause him
problems with the Soviet Union, which, at the moment, he perceives
to be almost insurmountable. Because of their promise not to aid the
ANLF without Zia’s approval, senior members of the Saudi Govern-
ment are considering making a discreet approach to the United States
Government (USG) with regard to providing support to the ANLF.
3. ACQ: [1 line not declassified].
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Sup-
(3150520079–3150678979). Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
41.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, March 27, 1979
AFGHANISTAN-USSR-PAKISTAN-IRAN: Situation report
According to intercepted Afghan Army messages, the insurgency in north-
western Afghanistan has spread to Badghisat Province, and the provincial
governor has fled. The government appears to be sending troops to head off
an insurgent attack from Badghisat on Meymaneh, the capital of neighboring
Faryab Province.
The Soviets may be airlifting additional military equipment to Afghani-
stan. According to [2 lines not declassified] in Kabul, two Soviet heavy trans-
port aircraft landed at Bagram Airfield on Saturday carrying an unspecified
amount of arms and ammunition as well as some SA–7 missiles. We had a
number of reports last week indicating stepped-up Soviet military deliveries.
Relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan, meanwhile, are con-
tinuing to deteriorate. On Sunday the Pakistani Government released
a statement accusing the Afghans of shelling a refugee camp in Paki-
stan; the statement implied that Pakistan might retaliate if there were
any more such incidents. Privately, the Pakistanis have hinted to Kabul
that landlocked Afghanistan’s ability to import key goods—such as
wheat—through the port of Karachi could be cut off.2
Iran’s relations with Kabul are also continuing to worsen. An [1
line not declassified] indicates that at least some Iranian gendarmerie units
along the border have been placed on alert. Iran closed the border last week.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Only. Carter initialed the cover page in the upper right corner.
2 In the left margin, Mondale wrote: “Zbig—Why aren’t we pressing this issue?
USSR internal interference & fighting Islam. WM.” Sunday was March 25.

Afghanistan
42.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
3713. Subject: Soviet Démarche on Alleged GOP Assistance to
Afghan Dissidents: GOP Requests U.S. Clarification of 1959 Bilateral.
1. (S) Entire text. FGI throughout.
2. Summary: On March 28 GOP Advisor on Foreign Affairs Agha
Shahi passed to me substance of a strongly worded Soviet démarche
which was made by the Soviet Ambassador to President Zia ul-Haq
March 26. In the démarche, the Soviets accuse the GOP of “connivance”
in the activities of the Afghan dissidents against the Kabul regime, and
say that they “cannot remain indifferent” to armed attacks on a country
with which they are allied by treaty.
3. Shahi also read me Zia’s reply, in which the President strongly
denied the Soviet accusation, and challenged Moscow to make the
Kabul government show more restraint so that the refugees—who were
fleeing “repression”—would no longer be a problem. Zia also told the
Soviet Ambassador that Afghan hostility toward Pakistan would not
be tolerated, and that the next DRA plane to violate Pak airspace
“would be shot down.”
4. Shahi said that the GOP takes the Soviet démarche “very seri-
ously” and asked that we “clarify fully” the USG position on our 1959
bilateral agreement.2 End summary.
5. Agha Shahi called me to the MFA mid-day March 28 to “inform”
the USG about a Soviet démarche delivered by Soviet Ambassador
Azimov to President Zia on March 26. Shahi read carefully from the
démarche, which began by referring to the Soviet role in “trying to
promote the normalization of Pak-Afghan relations,” and to President
Zia’s recent statements that the GOP wants neighborly relations with
all states.
6. The Soviet note then went on to say that “groups hostile to the
Democratic Government of Afghanistan (DRA) had settled in Paki-
stan,” and that “armed gangs of saboteurs and terrorists were penetrat-
ing into Afghanistan.” The Soviet note described these groups as “coun-
ter-revolutionaries,” who “freely roamed up and down the Pak-Afghan
border,” and were on the attack because of their opposition to “the
reforms” now being carried out in Afghanistan by the DRA. The note
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
accuses the GOP of “connivance” in this anti-DRA activity, and says
such action could lead to “severe aggravation in Pak-Afghan relations.”
7. The note goes on to say that the “Soviet Union cannot remain
indifferent to such developments,” especially when “aimed at a country
with which the Soviet Union has a treaty of friendship which it values.”
Moscow “will not allow” Afghanistan to “become the object of attack
no matter what the source.”
8. The Soviet note concludes by saying that the USSR is delivering
this message “in a frank and friendly manner,” and that Moscow would
“not like to believe that the use of Pakistani territory” for dissident
activity “goes on with your knowledge.” The note says that the GOP
should consider the démarche with “all seriousness which this ques-
tion deserves.”
9. Shahi then read from what I presume is a written summary of
President Zia’s reply to Ambassador Azimov. According to Shahi, Zia
told the Soviet Ambassador that:
—he “strongly rejected” the Soviet accusation about the GOP’s
alleged connivance with anti-DRA dissidents; and that,
—the GOP has “scrupulously remained tied” to its policy of “non-
intervention,” and has “done everything possible to keep the refugees
from engaging in anti-DRA activities.”
10. Zia told Azimov that to try to keep the Afghan refugees under
control, the GOP has established two refugee camps—one at Warsak
and the other at Tarbela—and that Azimov could visit either of them
at any time to satisfy himself that no guerrilla training or other military
activity is taking place. Zia said that there are now 35,000 Afghan
refugees in Pakistan and that they are arriving at the rate of 5,000 per
month. The GOP, according to Zia, has been doing the best it can to
keep the groups under control, and has warned Pakistani politicians
not to make statements that will incite refugee activity, or be construed
as anti-Afghan. Zia said that the GOP has ordered the refugee groups
to cease holding press conferences, and that the GOP has provided
“no arms, no training, and no financial support, other than humanitar-
ian aid” to the refugees.
11. The President told the Soviet Ambassador that the real root of
the refugee problem is in the “repression carried out against the Afghan
population by the DRA”. Zia told Azimov that Moscow should
“impress upon Kabul” the need to avoid creating “the conditions that
cause the exodus.” According to Zia, Islamabad would be willing to
cooperate with Kabul in preventing the entry of refugees. (When I
queried Shahi about this later, he said that Zia meant that, if the Afghans
close their border, the Paks would cooperate. Shahi did not think this
a “very realistic proposition” because the border is so porous.)

Afghanistan
12. On a government-to-government level, Zia said, he would con-
tinue to take “all the steps within his power” to see that “no hostile
acts against the DRA originated in Pakistan.” He said, however, that
the Taraki government in Kabul is becoming increasingly aggressive,
and cited as examples the recent shelling of two villages in Pakistan,
and the “three dozen” violations of Pakistani airspace by DRA planes.
One violation occurred less than six weeks ago, when a DRA plane
penetrated “thirty miles” into Pakistan. Zia said that he had “so far”
ordered his forces not to shoot, and that he has contented himself with
protests to Kabul, but he said that the next DRA aircraft to violate Pak
airspace “would be shot down.”
13. Zia concluded by noting that he was affronted to be accused
of complicity in the “half-hearted attempts by the Afghan dissidents”
to overthrow the Kabul regime, and that, if the “GOP was really hostile
to the DRA” it could make “life difficult” for the Taraki government.
Zia decried the “substantial campaign of false allegations against the
GOP” carried on by the Soviet media. The Soviet démarche, Zia said,
“is stronger and more explicit” than anything the GOP has heard from
the DRA, and that Moscow’s invocation of the USSR–DRA treaty will
“only encourage Afghanistan to persist in its hostile attitude”
toward Pakistan.
14. Shahi said that the GOP believes this démarche came from the
“highest levels in Moscow” and that it “perhaps” reflects Soviet Premier
Kosygin’s personal views. Shahi said that the GOP sees Kosygin’s hand
behind the recent Pravda and Izvestia articles, and that the GOP has a
report that Kosygin told Indian FonMin Vajpayee in Delhi that “Paki-
stan is behind all of the dissident activity in Afghanistan.”
15. Shahi told me that the GOP is taking the Soviet démarche “very
seriously” and is not treating it as an “empty threat or bluff.” Shahi
reasons that Moscow is “nursing its anger” over the GOP’s decision
to ban Soviet overflights to Vietnam, and Pakistan’s subsequent refusal
to succumb to Soviet pressure at the risk of harming its relations with
China. Shahi noted that Moscow has suffered a “setback” in the Sino-
Vietnam conflict and “could be expected” to seek an opportunity to
“reestablish its credibility as a superpower.”
16. The Advisor said that the GOP labors with a set of contradictions
in the matter. The “brutal oppression” of Afghans has caused “real
unhappiness” in Pakistan and elsewhere. In fact, Shahi said, when he
was in Tehran the Ayatollah Khomeini “asked me to convey a message
to the DRA” about its repression of “religious people.” Shahi said that
he told Khomeini that such a message might “drive the DRA to even
more repression,” but the GOP delivered Khomeini’s message to the
Afghan Ambassador in Islamabad anyway. Shahi said he also made a
direct appeal to Afghan FonMin Amin to stop oppressing Muslims.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Shahi said that, as expected, the appeals have “incensed the Afghans,”
who are having a hard time maintaining control over the country,
and now—with both Iran and Pakistan having risked Soviet wrath—
Moscow has stepped into the breach.
17. Shahi said that it is in this context that the GOP “seeks a
clarification” of USG policy in relation to the 1959 bilateral. Shahi said
that both DepSec Christopher and Assistant Secretary Saunders have
told the Paks that the bilateral remains in force, although Shahi said
that the DepSec had said that the treaty is “twenty years old and
needs a new scope of definition.”3 I told Shahi that the bilateral indeed
remains in force, and that any “new definitions” mentioned by the
DepSec were in the nature of expanding economic assistance to Pakistan
(not covered in the bilateral), as a reflection of our desire to be more
help to the GOP. I also reminded Shahi of my call on FonSec Shahnawaz,
in which I presented the Department Spokesman’s comments that we
would regard external involvement in Afghanistan’s internal problems
as a serious matter with the potential of heightening tensions and
destabilizing the situation in the entire region.
18. Shahi said that a clarification was very important to the GOP
at this time because “if we have to deal with this threat alone we will
take one policy,” but “if we feel the U.S. is behind us we can be
courteous but firm” in a response to pressure from Moscow and the
DRA. Shahi said the military situation is “not academic” because Saudi
Arabia has asked Pakistan for military manpower, and, while the GOP
can provide training and maintenance personnel now, “if they want
more” to counter Soviet moves in the Yemen”, then the GOP will have
to gauge carefully its own military situation.
19. When I asked Shahi what concrete Soviet action the GOP fears,
he said that there is a real concern that “KGB agents” will begin to
work in Baluchistan, and this, combined with the “incitement of eth-
nics” already happening in Iran under Soviet tutelage, could make
Pakistan a “target of opportunity for the Soviets.” Baluchistan is an
even more likely target, Shahi maintained, because Baluch leaders—
“such as Bizenjo”—are already “pro-Soviet.”
20. Shahi agreed that one reason for the Soviet démarche may be
that things are getting out of hand in Afghanistan, and he suggested
that Moscow may be preparing Communist and other international
opinion
for
an
intervention
along
the
lines
of
“Hungary
or
Czechoslovakia.”
3 Christopher met with Zia on March 1 in Islamabad. The Embassy reported on
Central Foreign Policy File, D790095–0655)

Afghanistan
21. I told Shahi that I understood the GOP’s concerns and appreci-
ated the seriousness of their request for clarification. I said that I would
report our conversation fully to Washington.
22. The Advisor said that he would see the Chinese Ambassador
evening of March 28 to deliver the same message and that Pak Ambassa-
dors in Beijing, Washington, and Moscow have already cabled full
reports. Amb. Yaqub has been instructed to reiterate Zia’s response to
Kosygin, whom Yaqub had already asked to see.
23. I am sending recommendations on an appropriate response to
GOP by septel.4
24. Recommend Dept repeat this message to Amb Embassies
Beijing, Jidda, Kabul, London, Moscow, New Delhi and Tehran.
Constable
He counseled that the United States should “avoid an initial linkage between the 1959
bilateral and the nuclear issue. To tie them together would confirm Pakistan’s worst
fears about American policy in this area, i.e., that U.S. is prepared to see Pakistan go
the way of Afghanistan.” Instead, Constable recommended, the United States should
inform Pakistan that “we see the 1959 bilateral as precisely intended to provide for
Pakistan’s security against aggression by a Communist or Communist-dominated
power—a definition which includes both the Soviet Union and Afghanistan.” The
“nuclear issue” referred to U.S. efforts to persuade Pakistan to suspend its nuclear
enrichment
program.
(National
Archives,
RG
59,
Central
Foreign
Policy
File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
43.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, March 30, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Allegations Concerning U.S. Role in Afghanistan (C)
The President has noted the Soviet allegations printed in Pravda
and carried by TASS on March 29 (attached).2 He directed that CIA,
ICA and State respond forcefully. He particularly wants emphasized
the atheistic nature of the Soviet and Afghan governments.3 (S)
I have sent memoranda today to ICA and CIA reflecting the Presi-
dent’s desires.4 You will also want to follow up with your resources.
Tom Thornton has already been in touch with your NEA bureau on a
possible approach to Desai.5 (S)
We have also prepared material at the President’s direction for the
use of Congressional leaders. This material has been sent to Senator
Byrd by the Vice President, who worked on it himself, and I am attach-
ing a copy for your information.6 (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Intelligence
handwritten note at the bottom of the page indicates that the memorandum was received
2 Attached but not printed. The article alleged that the Unites States, Pakistan, China,
and Iran were involved in a conspiracy to overthrow the government in Afghanistan.
It went on to accuse the CIA of aiding Afghan rebel groups.
3 An unknown hand underlined the second half of this sentence.
4 Regarding these memoranda, see Document 44.
5 Not further identified and not found.
6 Not attached and not found.

Afghanistan
44.
Editorial Note
On March 30, 1979, the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, informed Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
that he had sent memoranda to the International Communication
Agency (ICA) and the CIA relaying how President Jimmy Carter
wanted to respond to Soviet allegations that the United States was
meddling in Afghan affairs. (See Document 43.) Brzezinski’s memoran-
dum to Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner, March 30,
transmitted Carter’s request to strongly rebuke the Soviet allegation of
U.S. involvement in overthrowing the Afghan Government. Brzezinski
went on: “All information available to us in recent days has tended to
indicate quite the contrary: that the Soviet Union is preparing to inter-
vene in Afghanistan to prop up an unpopular leftist regime and is, in
fact, already doing most of the things it is accusing the United States
and other countries of doing or preparing to do.” Brzezinski requested
a status report by April 6 in response to Carter’s directive. (Central
Turner’s response to Brzezinski, April 9, outlined the steps taken
by the CIA to counter Soviet allegations: on March 31, the CIA tasked
all field stations “to make specific effort to expose the nature and extent
of the Soviet role in Afghanistan, and to characterize this interference
as a growing threat to regional stability.” Turner noted: “this tasking
expanded on an earlier requirement sent to the field on 17 February
to ‘intensify covert action efforts directed at exposing Soviet machina-
tions in Iran and Afghanistan.’” As of April 6, Turner reported, the
CIA’s messaging had been delivered to 46 governments, and articles
“have been placed in the media of 17 countries” with more media
placement forthcoming. Finally, Turner noted that the CIA was prepar-
ing “a series of black propaganda operations designed to support the
tribal revolt in Afghanistan, to encourage uncommitted Afghans to
back the dissidents, and to stimulate foreign support for the dissidents,”
in coordination with the Department of State. (National Security Coun-
cil, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 8
Brzezinski sent a nearly identical memorandum, March 30, to the
ICA. (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence
of policy decisions by country, the National Security Council noted:
“ICA reports that it is continuing to provide extensive coverage of
Soviet activities in and accusations about Afghanistan especially with
the Voice of America and the wireless file.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Unfiled Files, Box 146, Poli-
cies . . . Relating to the National Security, vol. III: [Countries: Afghani-
stan—France]: 1979)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
In a memorandum to Carter, April 11, Brzezinski informed him of
the CIA and ICA responses and also noted that the Department of State
“has taken steps to notify the Iranians, Indians, Saudis, and Pakistanis
through diplomatic channels of Soviet plans to support and possibly
participate in a major effort against the Afghan tribal and religious
rebels and will continue bilateral dialogues on the Afghan problem.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
45.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
AFGHANISTAN
BACKGROUND
In recent weeks Afghan dissidents have stepped up their insur-
gency against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) and have
achieved surprising successes, despite having few weapons and almost
no outside support. The rebellion which heretofore has been centered
mainly in Afghanistan’s eastern provinces, broke out in Herat, a major
city near the western border. Although our information is incomplete,
it appears there were large scale defections from Army units in Herat.
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
In the top right corner, an unknown hand wrote: “orig to ZB w/Eve Rept. Mini-SCC
A memorandum from Thornton and Henze to Brzezinski, March 22, called for a mini-
SCC meeting, tentatively scheduled for March 31. Thornton advocated the necessity of
convening such a meeting because the intelligence situation in Afghanistan remained
unclear; “the ambassadorial issue is still open” due to Dubs’s murder; the Americans
in Afghanistan were at risk; and there was a need for interagency policy coordination
with regard to Afghanistan. (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelli-
to a March 20 memorandum from Brzezinski that relayed Mondale’s inquiry regarding
what the United States could do about the growing rebellion in Afghanistan. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 38.

Afghanistan
The Soviets clearly are concerned about setbacks to the Afghan commu-
nist regime, and have airlifted military equipment to help shore it up.
Soviet media also has accused Pakistan, Egypt and the U.S. of support-
ing the insurgency.
The attitude of the Government of Pakistan (GOP) is crucial in
considering most CA options. Recently, the GOP has signaled to us
that it may be much more forthcoming than we previously believed.
President Zia, in an 11 March interview in the Saudi magazine Ukaz,
implied that Islamabad would like to support the anti-communist, pro-
Islamic dissidents, but has not because of Soviet support for Kabul,
which might “burn Islamabad’s fingers,” and doubts as to the real
strength of the Afghan dissidents. Zia also said Pakistan cannot act in
isolation; it must be backed by other countries in any such move. The
Director of the Pakistan Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate (ISID)
requested a meeting on 28 March 1979 with the Chief of Station, Islama-
bad to discuss possible assistance to the Afghan insurgents. He said
that the Afghans badly need small arms and ammunition and that the
U.S. “surely could find a way to provide some assistance.” He added
that he would guarantee that anything provided the Peshawar-based
rebels would be put to good use. He said it is current GOP policy
not to support the rebels “without a firm commitment from the U.S.,
Pakistan could not risk Soviet wrath.”
In a separate development, the head of the Saudi Arabian Intelli-
gence Service raised the Afghan question [less than 1 line not declassified]
and noted that there was a real possibility that the Soviets would
suffer a setback in Afghanistan. He said the Saudi Government was
considering officially proposing that the U.S. aid the rebels. This
approach indicates the possibility of trilateral U.S.-Pakistan-Saudi
cooperation in this area. At a minimum, the Saudis could be expected
to provide funds and also use their influence with the GOP to encourage
Pakistan assistance to the dissidents. Other countries, probably includ-
ing China, could be expected to provide at least tacit support for our
programs.
Soviet response to various options should be carefully gauged. We
already have been falsely accused of aiding the rebels in Soviet media,
and such accusations could be expected to intensify as we move for-
ward with various programs. The Soviets easily can resupply the
Afghan armed forces and they undoubtedly will step up their military
aid to counter guerrilla successes. While the Soviets could provide
additional “advisors,” pilots, etc., we believe they are unlikely to intro-
duce regular troops. Should they elect to occupy the country militarily,
there would be no practical way to stop them. Such a move, however,
would cause serious damage to the Soviet image in the region and
should serve to undermine Soviet influence and prestige throughout
much of the world.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Consideration must also be given to South Asian regional relation-
ships before deciding how closely we wish to involve ourselves with
the GOP. Although the question of supporting the Afghan insurgents
was originally raised by the Pakistan side, the GOP might later demand
a high price in return for its cooperation in terms of security guarantees
and economic assistance. Increased cooperation with the GOP must
also be considered in light of our relations with India, although there
is intelligence which indicates India shares our and Pakistan’s concern
over developments in Afghanistan.
COVERT ACTION OPTIONS
CIA representatives have been instructed not to delve too deeply
with Afghan sources into the theoretical possibility of clandestine sup-
port for the rebels, for fear of giving them false signals regarding U.S.
intentions. Much specific information is therefore not now available.
Listed below are a number of options, rough cost estimates and a
summary of pros and cons for each.
1. Radio Broadcasts from Pakistan
Radio Pakistan has several stations which broadcast regularly into
Afghanistan. Assuming GOP cooperation, these stations could be used
for propaganda purposes, with CIA assisting in the programming.
Costs: [1 line not declassified]
Pros: Communications are very poorly developed in Afghanistan,
and radio is the best means quickly to reach a large Afghan audience.
Costs would be moderate as we would be using existing broadcasting
facilities and existing staff including linguists. The U.S. hand would
be hidden.
Cons: GOP cooperation would be required. Pakistan would be
openly identified as opposing the Afghan regime; this would provoke
Soviet/Afghan wrath and possible retaliation. In extremis, the Afghans
might even attempt to bomb or sabotage the radio stations. More subtly,
the Afghans could stir up trouble for Pakistan in Baluchistan and
Northwest Frontier Provinces.
2. Insurgency Support—Direct Financial Aid
CIA is in contact with a number of Afghan emigres who could
serve as conduits for funds to the insurgents. These funds could be
used to buy arms, supplies, etc., as the dissidents saw fit. Because a
unified military command has not yet emerged, at least initially we
would consider providing several groups with relatively small amounts
and then evaluate which uses the funds most effectively.
Costs: [1 line not declassified]
Pros: This would be the easiest way to supply badly needed encour-
agement and support for the anti-communist rebels. Direct funding

Afghanistan
could be handled unilaterally. Explicit GOP cooperation would not be
required, although tacit approval for the movement of arms and mate-
rial through Pakistan and the continued use of Pakistan territory for
training, etc., would be needed. Nevertheless deniability could be main-
tained by both the U.S. and Pakistan. Although we would attempt to
maintain secrecy, word of our assistance would leak (or we could
deliberately leak it). This would demonstrate to informed Pakistanis,
Saudis and others that we are willing to underwrite the Afghan fight
against communism and stand up to the Soviets. Through our
funds, we should be able to exercise some influence over the insur-
gents, encourage them to put aside their parochial differences and
improve their efficiency. Assuming they are ultimately successful in
overthrowing the DRA, our contribution to this process should
give us some influence on the Afghan Government that subsequently
emerges.
Cons: Control on how our funds are used would be difficult. Money
could be wasted, stolen or used to support intramural battles among
the emigres.
3. Insurgency Support—Indirect Financial Aid
Financial aid would be provided as in Option 2, except we would
use a third party such as the Saudis or Pakistanis as an intermediary.
Costs: [1 line not declassified]
Pros: This approach should encourage a team effort. For example,
if we used the Saudis, they should be encouraged to add their contribu-
tions to ours. With this option, the U.S. hand would be better hidden
than in the case of direct financial aid.
Cons: We would lose much control over how the funds would be
spent, and also much of the influence which would accrue through
dealing directly with the Afghan dissidents.
4. Insurgency Support—Non-Lethal Material
CIA could provide a variety of non-lethal material support to the
dissidents in Pakistan. Full GOP cooperation would be required, how-
ever. Under this option we would propose to equip a 2,000-man force
for one year.
Costs: [amount not declassified]
—Communications
Equipment
[amount not declassified]
—Medical Supplies
[amount not declassified]
—Ancillary Equipment
(Pack, web gear, compass,
poncho, clothing,
entrenching tool and
some rations)
[amount not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Pros: Same as financial assistance proposals, although by supplying
direct aid of this nature we should become more deeply involved with
the Afghans and thus better able to influence events. The medical
supplies and some of the other equipment could be handled under the
rubric of “humanitarian assistance.” Once a supply channel to the
rebels is established, it later could be used, if desired, to provide them
with other types of material including lethal equipment.
Cons: Full GOP cooperation would be required. Security would be
difficult to maintain.
5. Unconventional Warfare Support—On-Site Survey
As a prerequisite for direct U.S. unconventional warfare assistance
to the Afghans, an on-site survey in Pakistan would be required to
develop a detailed operational plan. The team would hold discussions
with GOP officials and dissident leaders, survey potential training
and support facilities in Pakistan, determine support requirements and
control procedures, and finally draft a plan of action. The survey team
would consist of approximately five specialists and the survey would
take three-four weeks.
Costs: [1 line not declassified]
Pros: Survey results should greatly improve our knowledge of
Afghan rebel capabilities and provide essential information needed to
make informed decisions on whether, and how, to aid them. Security,
or at least plausible denial, could be maintained. However, our commit-
ment to the Afghans would deepen as a result of the survey, but not
to the extent that we could not pull back before making a final decision
to participate directly in supporting Afghan unconventional war resist-
ance from Pakistan.
Cons: Full GOP cooperation would be required. Although the sur-
vey team’s visibility would not be high, absolute security could not be
guaranteed, and U.S. involvement would become less easily deniable.
6. Unconventional Warfare Support—Phase I
Provide resistance organizational training in Pakistan to 40 Afghan
tribesmen from five separate areas. Develop a resistance strategy with
clear cut lines of command. Assign autonomous areas. Equip with
communications and medical kits. Locate resistance areas and specify
potential base and safe areas. Training would include: fundamentals
of resistance, mobile guerrilla warfare, psychological ops and propa-
ganda, air reception, intelligence. The training is estimated to take
eight-ten weeks [1½ lines not declassified].
Costs: [1 line not declassified]
Pros: Further improve the rebels’ unconventional warfare capabili-
ties, and enhance the possibility of achieving a successful outcome to
the conflict.

Afghanistan
Cons: Deepens U.S. involvement in the conflict. Possibilities of
plausible
denial
are
decreased.
May
provoke
vigorous
Soviet
countermeasures.
7. Unconventional Warfare Support—Phase II
Train 65 Afghan resistance cadre as guerrilla warfare instructors.
Skills taught will include: small arms, mortar and recoilless rifles, demo-
litions, ambushes, raids, small unit tactics, night operations, land navi-
gation, caching, air reception, psychological operations, mobile war-
fare, night movement, tactical communications, and intelligence
collection. Selected members of the groups will be trained in CW com-
munications and others will be trained in anti-air and anti-armor weap-
Costs: [amount not declassified] (FY 1979–80)
Pros: Same as Option 6
Cons: Same as Option 6
8. Unconventional Warfare Support—Phase III
Provide resistance groups with supplies of arms and demolitions.3
Build up arms stocks in Afghan resistance base and safe areas. Continue
Phase II training, employing 15 Afghan instructors selected from the
Phase II training course. Develop underground resistance support
within the Afghanistan population through the cadres trained in Phases
I and II. Arrange air support for delivery of arms and other supplies.
Five thousand men would be supported in this Phase over a 4–6 month
period, [1 line not declassified].
Costs: [amount not declassified]
—Ordnance, [1½ lines not
declassified]
[amount not declassified]
—5 STOL aircraft [1½ lines
not declassified]
[amount not declassified]
—Personnel
[amount not declassified]
Pros: Same as Option 6
Cons: Same as Option 6
9. Unconventional Warfare Support—Phase IV
Commence coordinated resistance operations in Afghanistan.
Expand areas of population and resistance control. Continue training
3 According to an NSA intercept, the first report found to reach U.S. officials on
Afghan insurgents’ success in obtaining foreign arms came on November 13, 1978 [text
and less than 1 line not declassified]. The intercept relayed that “rebels in Eastern Afghanistan
have succeeded in obtaining Chinese weapons, either from Pakistan or the PRC, and
communications between the area and Kabul are cut off.” (Department of Defense,
Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghanistan (1978))

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
and logistic support. Provide target data intelligence and photo inter-
preter support. Strike confidence-building soft targets and coordinate
the gradual escalation of Afghan resistance activity. Wage aggressive
psychological warfare operations in concert with increased resistance
Costs: [amount not declassified]
—Air Support Activities
[amount not declassified]
—Logistic support (5,000
man resupply)
[amount not declassified]4
—Personnel
[amount not declassified]
Pros: Same as Option 6
Cons: Same as Option 6
All portions of this document are SECRET.
4 Cost in 5,000 men increments. [Footnote is in the original.]
46.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
8384. Subject: (LOU) Soviet-Afghan Relations and the Insurgency
in Afghanistan. Ref: State 73004 (Notal).2
1. (S—Entire text)
P850147–1923. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Sent for information to Ankara, Baghdad,
Beijing, Bonn, Colombo, Dacca, Damascus, CINCPAC for POLAD, Islamabad, Jidda,
Kabul, Kathmandu, Leningrad, London, New Delhi, Paris, Rome, Tehran, Tokyo, Berlin,
USNATO, and USUN.
of issues facing Zia with regard to the situation in Afghanistan: “We wonder if the Paks
are more and more trying to have it both ways—maintaining a public stance of correct
relations with the DRA while permitting increasing insurgent activity from bases in
Pakistan. If situation in Afghanistan deteriorates further, Pakistan may be forced to make
some hard choices and may no longer be able to have it both ways.” To that end, the
Department asked a number of questions regarding future Pakistani policy toward
Afghanistan, and repeated the telegram to the Embassies in New Delhi, Kabul, Moscow,

Afghanistan
2. Summary: Availing ourselves of Department’s invitation (reftel)
to comment on possible Soviet conduct in the evolving Afghanistan
situation, we would note at the outset the obvious fact that the Soviets
have a major investment in the Kabul regime which they will go to
some lengths to protect. We doubt, however, that the Soviet leadership
would seriously consider the large-scale dispatch of Soviet combat
troops to Afghanistan under foreseeable circumstances.3 Moscow is
more likely to increase its military advice and aid to Kabul while
intensifying Soviet propaganda and diplomatic support for the DRA.4
Some forms of more direct Soviet military involvement are possible in
situations where Soviet personnel or equipment were endangered, if
foreign forces were seen as assisting the anti-DRA regime inside
Afghanistan, or if fighting approached Soviet borders. We believe that
Moscow is not irrevocably wedded to Taraki. In the coming weeks
and months, it will be prepared to stick with him or to adopt other
options, with the choice depending in large measure on developments
within Afghanistan itself. End summary.
3. We continue to see Moscow’s policy toward Afghanistan as
twofold: (A) to assist the Khalqi regime to consolidate power and
eliminate its “counter-revolutionary” opponents, and (B) to draw
Afghanistan into closer dependence on the Soviet Union in economic,
military, administrative and other areas, while maneuvering to reduce
Western and Chinese presence and influence in Afghanistan. The
December 5, 1978, Soviet-Afghan treaty served to institutionalize close
Soviet-Afghan relations and has been followed by further efforts by
both governments to deepen their relationship.5
4. The Soviets have made a considerable investment in Afghanistan
which they will go to some lengths to protect through additional steps
to shore up the Taraki regime. Afghanistan’s proximity to the Soviet
Union and recent setbacks to Soviet foreign policy interests and perhaps
that the Soviet Union would, in fact, offer direct military assistance to the Afghan
Government, a request for which would not be made “unless the leadership were
genuinely desperate in the face of a hopelessly deteriorating domestic security situation—
fully beyond the control of Khalqi military and police forces.” (Department of Defense,
May 9, the Embassy maintained that Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan remained
possible but unlikely. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790170–
(Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Soviets in Afghanistan—General
Part #2)
Union had approximately 800–1,000 military advisers stationed in Afghanistan. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
prestige in the Middle East and Asia will reinforce this commitment. So
will any Soviet-perceived efforts by other outside powers—particularly
China—to support the anti-DRA insurgency.
5. Under foreseeable circumstances, we do not anticipate the large-
scale dispatch of combat troops to Afghanistan as an option that would
be seriously considered by the Soviet leadership for the following
reasons:
—such a move might worsen Soviet-U.S. relations during a delicate
period when SALT and a summit are high on our respective agendas;
—the popular opposition to Taraki might only be exacerbated by
direct Soviet actions, and would leave open the possibility that Taraki’s
survivability would require the continuing presence and possible ongo-
ing engagement of Soviet combat troops;
—the spectre of Soviet troops battling Islamic elements would
redound to Moscow’s disadvantage throughout the Moslem world,
especially in Islamic states which Moscow is currently courting, such
as Iran and Saudi Arabia;
—Moscow’s chief interest in the region is its ties with India. New
Delhi would presumably strongly oppose direct Soviet intervention,
which would make clear Moscow’s intention to consider Afghanistan—
like Czechoslovakia—part of the USSR’s “imperium”.
6. The provision of various forms of direct Soviet military assistance
to DRA forces short of the dispatch of regular Soviet combat units is,
however, more of a possibility. Such direct assistance could come as
a result of Soviet attempts to protect or defend Soviet personnel or
equipment already in Afghanistan, as may have already occurred at
Herat. Or, depending on circumstances in combat areas inside Afghani-
stan, for example, in Badakhshan adjoining Soviet Tadzhikistan where
the Soviet press has already reported some fighting has broken out,
the Soviets could decide to provide support through the dispatch of
Soviet aircraft, helicopter gunships, or increased advisory personnel
on the ground to assist the DRA anti-insurgent efforts. The temptation
to provide this type of direct if limited military assistance would be
heightened if the Soviets believed that foreign forces from Pakistan or
Iran had actually joined the resistance inside Afghanistan, or if the
fighting approached Soviet borders. Even in these situations, however,
we believe that Moscow, for the reasons cited above, would attempt
to minimize the scope and visibility of direct Soviet military participa-
tion in the fighting.
7. To check what they may see as passive or active Pak support to
anti-DRA insurgents, the Soviets, in coordination with the Afghans,
may become more direct in warning the Paks about possible retaliation
“in kind” through Soviet-Afghan support to Baluchi and Pushtu dissi-

Afghanistan
dent elements inside Pakistan. Should the Soviets view the Paks as
working with others, particularly the Chinese, in supporting a widen-
ing insurgency inside Afghanistan, these warnings could conceivably
be translated into actions, despite the drawbacks mentioned in Islama-
8. The Soviets will be weighing the relative positions of strength
of Taraki and his domestic opponents in making their decisions on
providing assistance to the Kabul regime. If a growing domestic chal-
lenge to the regime should progressively spread and reach a point
where it is poised to overthrow Taraki, or if Taraki is unable to maintain
the military’s loyalty, we believe the Soviets will be prepared to con-
sider other alternatives to Taraki. Soviet decision-making in such a
situation would be guided by a combination of cold pragmatism and
opportunism and would be directed at the longer-range goal of estab-
lishing a rapport with—or influencing the selection of—the individual,
group or coalition most likely to emerge at the top.
9. In this connection we have picked up a number of indications
that, behind the froth of public Soviet comments about Taraki, Moscow
may not see him as the Afghan wave of the future. Our Soviet contacts
occasionally express irritation at his indecisive pace in implementing
socio-economic programs and his purge of what are seen here as “pro-
gressive” elements, such as the Parchamists. One leading specialist on
“Middle Asia” who knows the Khalqi leaders personally once blurted
out to an EmbOff that he “felt hatred” for Afghan First Minister H.
Amin. In a recent conversation with two EmbOffs, the Deputy Director
of Dushanbe’s Oriental Institute twice stated that “only time will tell”
if the Taraki regime will be able to survive.
10. In sum, we see a range of considerations relating to domestic
Afghan as well as regional and international factors—including, of
course, the U.S. attitude—as likely to influence Soviet decisions on
assisting what may be an increasingly beleaguered Taraki regime. Mos-
73004 (see footnote 2, above). Regarding the fear of Soviet aggression, the Embassy laid
out three assumptions about Pakistan’s policy: “(A) A crisis in Pak-Afghan relations
may be unavoidable, in time, if the Afghans continue their present policies; (B) Pakistan
would prefer that such a crisis come later rather than sooner; and (C) time may be on
Pakistan’s side as dissidence inside Afghanistan mounts possibly to levels sufficient to
threaten the regime itself or at least to temper the activist naiveté of the DRA leadership.”
Regarding a question posed in telegram 73004, the Embassy answered that there were
“undoubtedly elements within Pakistan’s political life which would support a more
activist/interventionist policy in Afghanistan,” which included the various conservative
religious, nationalistic, and tribal factions in the country. But the Embassy noted that
such support had its limits: any interventionist policy in Afghanistan would have to be
effective to remain popular, and not so confrontational as to provoke a hostile, Soviet-
backed response by the DRA. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
cow will very likely be keeping its options under continuing review
as events in Afghanistan unfold in the coming months.
Toon
47.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
Possible Soviet Reactions to Specific
Covert Action Initiatives
I. Afghanistan
General Comments
Consideration of possible Soviet responses to proposed US covert
action options is dominated by one large and irreducible uncertainty:
How far are the Soviet leaders prepared to go in support of the Teraki
regime in the absence of significant and visible external assistance to
insurgents?
If successful, US covert action assistance to insurgents would
increase Afghanistan’s need for Soviet support and, if the Soviets are
willing to provide it, would raise the military and political costs of
larger and more visible increments of Soviet assistance. If the Soviets
are determined to keep the Teraki regime in power, including, if neces-
sary, by committing Soviet combat forces on a substantial scale, even
the most extensive covert action programs cannot prevent them from
doing so. It is true that external assistance to insurgents, particularly
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
The memorandum was one of several papers prepared for the April 6 SCC meeting.
See Document 48. In a memorandum to Brzezinski, April 4, Henze characterized this
memorandum and the paper, Document 45, as “serious intelligence papers that provide
a basis for realistic discussion.” Still, Henze noted, the Department of State was not
enthusiastic about implementing the proposals, while CIA personnel were divided as
well: “Turner wants to please everybody and avoid controversy; Carlucci is in a Hamlet-
like pose; McMahon wants to straddle everybody’s position. All this is clearly sensed
by the sharp minds that still exist in the DDO. Many DDO officers oppose all these
actions because they do not believe the Agency has the capability to carry them out
effectively in the field. Others are primarily concerned about what they consider to be
inevitable leaks which will cause the Administration to back down, even if it does launch
some of this activity, and leave CIA again exposed as well as embarrassed abroad.”
Henze’s memorandum is attached to Document 48, but not printed.

Afghanistan
if and when it became more visible, would be exploited by the Soviets
to justify their own deepening involvement. But this line will be taken
by the Soviets in any case to justify their own increased support for
the Teraki regime, whether or not insurgency is substantially aided by
covert action. The Soviets are already making such charges.2 Successful
covert action would however raise the costs to the Soviets of larger
and more visible increments in their role. It would inflame Moslem
opinion in many countries against the USSR, which would be seen as
suppressing a religious-motivated insurgency.
On the other hand, if the Soviet leaders are uncertain how far they
are prepared to go to rescue the Teraki regime, and are waiting to see
if smaller increments of help will suffice, then a substantial covert
action program, particularly if highly visible, could raise their stake in
the issue. It is conceivable that some Soviets could view such a height-
ened US role as enhancing the dangers and uncertainties of more
direct Soviet combat involvement, and therefore as additional cause
for caution. But it is more likely that a large US-backed covert action
operation would be seen as a challenge on their periphery, and would
induce them to intervene more directly and vigorously than otherwise
intended. While we believe the Soviets are strongly predisposed to aid
this Afghan regime—which is ideologically sympathetic, closely tied
to them, and most important, geographically contiguous—we have as
yet insufficient basis for judging in which direction they are so far
leaning on the subject of eventual combat intervention.
Alternative Options
1. Radio Broadcasts from Pakistan: The Soviets are already heavily
denouncing Pakistan and the US in their own propaganda as responsi-
ble for the Afghan insurgency, and they will probably continue to do
so, no matter what the US and Pakistan do, so long as a serious security
problem remains in Afghanistan. In the event of the Pakistan propa-
ganda counteroffensive with covert US support postulated, the Soviets
would probably escalate their rhetoric somewhat more, and would be
likely to make additional diplomatic demarches in Islamabad in protest,
citing broadcast evidence of Pakistani support for the insurgents.
Beyond this, the main potential Soviet lever in dealings with Paki-
stan is the possibility that the USSR might retaliate by inciting unrest
among Pakistan’s Baluchi tribes. So long as a major Afghan insurgency
continued, the Afghan regime might hesitate to attempt this itself
because of fear that Baluchi separatism in Pakistan might spread to
Afghanistan and compound the security problem. The Soviets, how-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ever, probably have some independent capability to bring pressure
upon Pakistan in more measured and insulated fashion by inciting
activity by Marxist groups among Pakistan’s Baluchis. It is conceivable
that the USSR might begin to do this in response to a sustained Pakistani
radio propaganda aimed at Afghanistan. The degree of provocation
the Soviets would perceive, however, would be considerably less than
would be the case in the combat support options below. The US hand
would not be very visible, the Pakistanis could claim that their propa-
ganda was a response to that of the USSR, and the Soviets might be
reluctant to burn their bridges to Islamabad too quickly. As time went
on, however, if Pakistani broadcasts were perceived by the Soviets as
having a significant inflammatory effect upon the Afghan population
and as worsening the security situation, the Soviets would be progres-
sively more likely to play the Baluchi card.
2. Insurgency Support—Direct Financial Aid. Soviets would of course
exploit the expected leakage of the fact of such aid in their own already
ongoing propaganda campaign, and use this as evidence that the revolt
from the start had been US-instigated. The Soviets would use this in
the West and in the US in an effort to paint US policy as provocative
and reactionary, and thus to generate internal counterpressures on US
policy machinery. Likelihood of Soviet attempts to injure Pakistan,
however, would not be significantly greater than it is already in absence
of such funding, since the Pakistan government position would remain
essentially what it is now—one of tacit connivance rather than active
encouragement and direction of insurgent use of Pakistan territory.
3. Insurgency Support—Indirect Financial Aid. In this case, with the
US somewhat less visible and vulnerable and the Saudis and Paks
proportionately more so, Soviet incentives to exert pressure on the
latter two would be increased. The Saudis already fund a wide variety
of anti-Soviet projects in various areas (from the Middle East to Angola),
and the additional Soviet incentive for wanting to be able to change
these Saudi policies and Saudi regime would be superfluous. There is
little that the Soviets themselves can do, in practice, to retaliate against
the Saudis; it is other Arabs who possess what leverage exists on the
Saudis, and the USSR has only a marginal capability to affect the extent
of such pressure. In any case, most Arab governments, including most
“progressive” ones, would sympathize with Moslem insurgents seek-
ing to overthrow a communist regime in Afghanistan. The Pakistani
government, however, would be considerably more vulnerable to pres-
sure from the Soviets if it followed this option, and the chances that
the Soviets would move toward employment of their Baluchi option
would rise.
4. Insurgency Support—Non-Lethal Material. This would not signifi-
cantly change the equation spelled out in (3) so far as Soviets are

Afghanistan
concerned, except that the scope of the operation would be somewhat
enlarged, and with it, the visibility. The distinction between non-lethal
and lethal would be believed by nobody, even if it were closely main-
tained; hence it would not significantly reduce Pakistan-US propa-
ganda vulnerability below that which would otherwise exist.
5. Unconventional Warfare Support—On-Site Survey. In view of the
unsatisfactory state of present US knowledge of the nature, extent of
and potential for support of the Afghan insurgency from Pakistani soil,
this option is one which should logically precede all the others. If the
Soviets became aware of such a survey, they might interpret it as a
possible harbinger of a more active US role both in the Afghan insur-
gency effort and in providing security backing for Pakistan against
Soviet pressure. If the USSR drew this conclusion it would be likely
to become more active diplomatically. The Soviets would seek to alarm
the Indians about an imminent strengthening of the US security rela-
tionship with Pakistan. They would present more demarches to the
Pakistanis about the dangers Islamabad was bringing on itself by tying
itself to an unreliable and ephemeral US relationship. Beyond this,
however, the Soviets would probably wait upon events before taking
more vigorous action.
6. and 7: Unconventional Warfare Support—Phases I and II. At some
point in the sequence between phases I and II, the Soviets would be
likely to begin to incite unrest among Pakistan’s Baluchis, if they had
not already done so. The Soviets in this phase would also become more
likely to make a direct demarche to the US, warning Washington against
expanding interference in fraternal Afghanistan. The USSR might now
add demarches to leaders they might think susceptible in Western
Europe, arguing that the US was once again venturing on the same
adventuristic line of policy that proved so disastrous in Vietnam, that
the US was endangering the stability of detente not only between US
and USSR but also for West Europeans, that the USSR had demon-
strated its responsibility and restraint during the Sino-Vietnamese war,
in contrast to US incitement of that war, but that the USSR could not
be expected to stand idly by and see a socialist neighboring state
undermined and “destabilized” as in distant Chile by the perfidious
CIA. In talking to the Iranians, the Soviets would seek to counter anti-
Kabul sentiments in Tehran by playing upon Iranian paranoia about
US imperialism left over from the Shah relationship, and by intensifying
any efforts which may be already under way to persuade Khomeini
that US covert action is responsible for some of Iran’s present troubles
with its own minorities. Finally, the USSR would seek to alarm the
Indians about an imminent strengthening of the US security relation-
ship with Pakistan, and would inter alia suggest that the US was about
to adopt a more permissive attitude toward Pakistan’s acquisition of
a nuclear capability.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
8. Unconventional Warfare Support—Phases III and IV. At these stages,
to the degree that this support from Pakistan was seen by the Soviets
as becoming critical for the insurgency, this might tip the balance
in Soviet thinking on whether to commit ground combat forces to
Afghanistan. That is, the Soviet decision on this point would to some
extent begin to be influenced not only by the gravity of the insurgency
itself, but also by the fact of a perceived US challenge. At the same
time, the possibility would rapidly begin to grow that the Afghan
military authorities might react directly against Pakistani base areas.
If Soviet combat forces were present, they might under some circum-
stances take part in such a cross-border punitive operation. The Soviets
would be particularly likely to move in this direction if the US security
relationship with Pakistan remained somewhat ambiguous.
If, on the other hand, the US had in the meantime negotiated a
clear and strongly-enunciated security relationship with the Paks which
the US had unambiguously communicated to Moscow, the Soviets
would be less likely to allow their own forces to respond with raids
into Pakistan, but would in any case seek to enhance Kabul’s ability
to do so. The Soviets would in the meantime vigorously seek to exploit
Indian fears and resentment of such an unambiguous US military tie
to Pakistan.
[Omitted here is a section on the Arabian Peninsula.]

Afghanistan
48.
Minutes of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Covert Action and Sensitive Collection Issues (S)
PARTICIPANTS
Vice President*
OMB
Randy Jayne, Associate
State
Director, Nat’l
David Newsom, Under Secretary
Security & Int’l Affairs
for Political Affairs
Justice
Defense
Attorney General Griffin
Charles Duncan, Deputy Secretary
Bell
JCS
NSA
Lt. Gen. William Smith, Assistant
Robert Drake, Deputy
to Chairman
Director
CIA
White House
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Zbigniew Brzezinski,
Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director
Chairman
NSC
Paul B. Henze, Notetaker
Thomas Thornton**
* Present only for first ten minutes.
** Present only through discussion of Afghanistan/Pakistan.
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The Vice President’s views: The Vice President opened the meeting
with a brief discussion of the situation in Afghanistan, underscoring
the problems the Soviets are encountering there and the concerted
effort they are making to obfuscate them and shift blame onto the
United States. He stressed the need to defend our interests and commit-
ments in this part of the world and expressed the hope that the group
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–020, Minutes—SCC 1979. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Henze. The meeting took
place in the White House Situation Room. Attached but not printed is a covering memo-
randum from Brzezinski to Carter, April 9, which summarized the meeting. Brzezinski
noted: “the Attorney General opined that a Presidential Finding and report to Congress
was not required at this stage. It was understood, however, that if the Pakistanis respond
positively, you will be asked to execute a Finding that would authorize CIA to implement
the most feasible and otherwise desirable options.” Carter drew a line in the left margin
beside the first sentence and wrote: “Better expression than SCC minutes,” and underlined
“if the Pakistanis respond positively.” Also attached but not printed is Henze’s April 4
memorandum to Brzezinski; see footnote 1, Document 47.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
would be forward-leaning in its consideration of proposals for dealing
with this problem. (S)
Afghanistan/Pakistan: The Vice President then departed and the
meeting then turned to a detailed discussion of the problem of provid-
ing encouragement or aid for insurgency in Afghanistan. It was agreed
that this could be done realistically only through and/or with the
assistance of the Pakistanis and in the framework of other recent high-
level policy decisions on Pakistan. After review of CIA’s proposals it
was decided that CIA would have early exploratory talks with Pakistani
intelligence officials about
• radio broadcasts to Afghanistan
• financial assistance for selected insurgent groups
• an effort to assess the insurgent movement from the viewpoint
of providing training and material assistance.
It was agreed that a Presidential Finding will be required to cover
such activity and, unless there is a negative response from the Paki-
stanis, such a Finding will be forwarded to the President and CIA will
be authorized to proceed with the task of working out operations in
these fields in cooperation with the Pakistanis.2 If the Pakistani response
to CIA’s exploratory talks is negative, the SCC will reconvene and
review the issues anew. (TS)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Near-Verbatim record of SCC of April 6, 1979
VP: It seems to me that this Afghanistan issue provides a good
opportunity for us here. We have the Russians deeply involved in the
internal affairs of another country and they are obviously trying to mask
it with counterattacks to put us on the defensive. They are supporting
a highly unpopular government in Afghanistan; secondly, they are
fighting the world of Islam. It is embarrassing to them. It would be
nice for us to be seen on the other side. I have been encouraging us to
make that point wherever we can. The State Department had made a
good statement on it. Senator Pell did a statement on it. We have talked
with Zablocki and others and they will be making statements. I think
we ought to keep the heat on this. The Russians are jumpy as hell
about this. I gather when we say we are not involved that that is
accurate. Are the Egyptians and the Pakistanis involved?
FC: We have no evidence that they are; but they cannot control
the border.
2 An unknown hand underlined “unless there is a negative response,” and placed
a question mark in the left margin next to the sentence.

Afghanistan
ZB: The Pakistanis are not involved except that the insurgency
started in three areas across the frontier from Pakistan.
WS: They do not want to get too involved because they are afraid
the Russians will step on them.
DN: [2 lines not declassified] he protested to the Russians that they
were making irresponsible accusations.3
VP: The Russians are getting away with murder and we should
not take it.
ZB: We have a few modest proposals for assisting the Afghans
and the Pakistanis. We will be considering these items in the light of
your helpful comments. We are sorry you have to leave now.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
ZB: In view of the Vice President’s comments—which are shared
by the President—let us go first to the action proposals for Afghanistan.
We have all read Stan’s paper—the proposals all involve either some
assistance to the Pakistanis or direct financial aid to the insurgents
(read summary of proposals). Let’s consider CIA’s options. We have
already spent a lot of time discussing covert assistance to the Afghans.
We are aware that a major insurgency is in progress. It is in our national
interest that this insurgency continue even if it does not succeed. The
question is whether any one of these steps would be helpful. We do
not have a national policy that covert activity is to be abandoned. We
have a national policy that covert activity should be undertaken when
it is warranted.
ST: I want to make the point that covert actions will not turn the
tide but they could help sustain insurgency there. Whether we are going
to overturn the government or not should not be the main question.
This program has to be accompanied by a strong policy of support for
Pakistan. Unless the Pakistanis feel we are going to live up to the 1959
treaty, they are not going to cooperate with us. Radio broadcasts are
totally dependent upon them. We could not do them without their
GB: Why can’t you just bring a ship up and do them from it?
ZB: We can do only the smallest amount of support for the guerril-
las without cooperation with the Pakistanis. I am concerned if we try
to get sites for [less than 1 line not declassified] we have to relate these
actions to other things we do—it is almost bound to leak. We are going
to have to give a degree of guarantee to the Pakistanis in any case.
This issue is really a State Department issue—how far we are willing
to go in giving the Pakistanis support for the cooperation they give
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
us. Then there is the nuclear problem and a lot of other issues with
them.4 I do not know how to sort it out. In a different context we have
settled on a 4-pronged approach to Pakistan which is in the process
of being implemented by the Department of State. One element of
that involves reiteration of our commitment of the late 1950’s without
permitting the Pakistanis to engage in hypothetical exercises as to what
we might do under certain contingencies. We are trying insofar as
possible to separate contentious issues from issues where we have a
common interest—one of these being preservation of the countries to
the south of the Soviet Union in this part of the world and expressing
sympathy for the insurgency in Afghanistan. The question is whether
any of these proposed activities would further our policy regarding
Pakistan and whether it would have the effect of complicating the
takeover of Afghanistan itself—not to speak, perhaps, of the ultimate
objective which would be to reverse the takeover and keep the situation
boiling the way that they (the Soviets) have kept it boiling for us in
other parts of the world.
DN: I would like to raise a more general question. Right now there
is an active insurgency going on in Afghanistan. All indications are
that the Pakistanis want to maintain a posture that they are now [not]
involved. If we go ahead with anything that requires a Presidential
Finding and reporting to seven committees under Hughes-Ryan proce-
dures, we are running a risk.5 The American role is likely to come
out—knowledge of the American role could change the prospects as
far as the Soviets are concerned. They could react differently. I want
to raise this question, for we run the risk of upsetting the Soviets if
we undertake these covert activities.
ZB: That risk is there and its implication is that we should not
undertake covert activity at all.
GB: Then we would be out of business.
FC: There is considerable concern on the Hill about just that point
now. Congress has raised it with us. They say they intend for us to
engage in covert action and they feel that they need to do something
about cutting down access to sensitive information to minimize the
chances of leaks. In a recent SSCI meeting I was asked why we in CIA
were not doing something in Afghanistan.
5 A reference to procedures required by an amendment to the Foreign Assistance
Act of 1974. Also called the Hughes-Ryan Amendment after its co-authors Harold E.
Hughes (D–Iowa) and Leo Ryan (D–California), the legislation obligated the President
to find that a particular covert action was important to U.S. national security. The finding
and “a description and scope of such operation” must be submitted “to the appropriate

Afghanistan
GB: I believe we should change the law only to report through the
select committees on intelligence. I bet we can do that.
ZB: I was on a plane with Chuck Percy the other day—he told me
that if we wish to do serious covert activities, the Senate will give us
overwhelming support now. The way to get going is to pick a place
and to try to do it.
GB: We have to put pressure on the intelligence committees to
control the leaks.
FC: I think they are in a mood to do it. That does not meet our
immediate problem, however. The law still requires us to brief seven
committees.
DN: If what is going on is already causing real problems for the
Soviets in Afghanistan, what additional benefit do we gain by getting
involved in it ourselves? Especially if we run the risk of having what
we are doing leaked and thus changing real perceptions in Moscow?
ZB: Another question that can be asked—if the insurgency is not
doing well, why help it? But you then come up again with the conclu-
sion that if you don’t do it, you lose an opportunity. You have an
important point re Pakistan. My inclination would be to pick from this
list those actions that we would only undertake with Pakistan if they
are willing to cooperate. If they are not willing to cooperate, we do
not do it. I would be inclined to go for the radio broadcasts. This is
an important mechanism for influencing political conduct. This can
only be done together with the Pakistanis. Then we could consider
some financial aid and send in a survey team to examine on-site possi-
bilities for other forms of support—all of these actions would require
cooperation with the Pakistani intelligence services. If they come back
and say no—then we have to reconsider.
DN: There is one other avenue—through the Saudis and through
the emigre groups if the Saudis will provide funds.
ZB: Would you be willing to do that without telling the Pakistanis?
DN: No.
GB: My feeling after reading this was that we should do whatever
we can without involving the Pakistanis so that they can say they know
nothing about what is going on.
ZB: Is that possible?
ST: We feel that we could only do a little of this and then we would
have to tell the Pakistanis.
ZB: This brings us back to David Newsom’s point—there may be
a leak. If it is a leak about something we are doing without the knowl-
edge of the Pakistanis, then we have a greater problem with them in
case of a leak . . .

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
FC: They have already given us some indications they want to do
something.
GB: Then I withdraw my observations.
ZB: What about the package I have suggested?
ST: It will take a survey before we can give financial aid to anybody.
DN: You have to do the survey before you can make a precise
recommendation on financial support?
FC: We can engage the Pakistanis in discussion of financial sup-
port for dissident groups and then channel the support with their
knowledge.
DN: When do we have to make the Presidential Finding?
FC: I strongly recommend that we make a Finding first.
ZB: What do you think, Griffin?
GB: You can talk to them without making a finding.
FC: But that would confront us with the problem of arousing
expectations that we could not meet. We would feel a lot better having
these discussions after having a Finding.
GB: If you do that, it may leak and then we don’t have the chance
to do it.
ZB: Can we have a Finding by the President and then not do it?
FC: We have to inform the Congress in a timely manner.
GB: You don’t have to tell the Congress until you do it.
ST: You can have the SCC approve the finding and not have the
President sign it.
FC: Our people in the field want to have some blessing before they
talk about this sort of thing with the people they are dealing with.
GB: If the SCC authorizes you to negotiate that is enough—if they
say that they don’t want to do that—how will we then unravel this
thing that we have started?
FC: If the position of the SCC is clear that if we negotiate and the
Pakistanis are interested, then we will get finding and go ahead, then
we can do it.
ZB: Is that possible, Griffin?
GB: That is possible.
ZB: Let us say what we will be saying.
DN: I am willing to go along with the radio broadcasting and
financial aid subject to agreement from the Pakistanis. I am only in
favor of a survey without future commitments.
ST: I fear we may have confused this in the way we have presented
it. Unless we find out what is really going on in Afghanistan and
among these insurgents, any money we give to the Pakistanis could
simply go down the drain.

Afghanistan
ZB: For the minutes: the SCC will recommend to the President that
he issue a finding involving these three items subject to Pakistani assent.
GB: And we do not have to report anything to the Congress until
the President signs the Finding.
ST: I see one possible glitch. As my COS starts talking to the
Pakistanis—he will be encouraging Pakistani support of the Afghan
rebellion.
GB: There is nothing wrong with a little salesmanship.
FC: We have had a couple of rulings out of your department that
didn’t recognize that.6
ST: You say he is trying to influence the Pakistanis to take a more
forward position. This gets to be a very fine line . . .
DN: How would you describe the survey team and its proposals
in your report to the Congress?
FC: “Survey team” is too formal a description. We might step up
our collection in collaboration with the Pakistanis. We are not going
to mass a group of people together to do this.
GB: I suggest you drop the word “Survey team” and say you are
going to assess the situation.
ZB: That is highly desirable. We could be dealing with a bunch
of frauds.
RJayne: I am worried that the Pakistanis may simply tell us to buzz
off. If that is the case, we ought to amend the three items so that we
can consider some other avenue of support.
ZB: Yes, but in that case we would have to reassess what we might
try. I am not against covert action, but it has to have some relationship
to foreign policy in general or it makes no sense.
RJayne: What if the Pakistanis say we do not want to have anything
to do with these activities, but we will let you come and do whatever
you want—go ahead.
ZB: That would be a different problem.
FC: What is likely to happen is that they will say we will explore
this but we want to talk about the 1959 agreement you have with us.
ZB: That has some advantages. Let us sum up what we have
decided. Let us say that the SCC has voted to approach the Pakistanis
to determine whether they have a positive attitude toward radio broad-
casts, U.S. financial assistance of a type yet to be specified as to size
and means of conveyance and recipients and on the issue of assessing
the nature of the Afghan insurgency . . . and subject to the absence of
6 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
a negative response from the government of Pakistan, we will proceed
with a Finding which will be laid before the President. If the Pakistani
response is negative, we would meet again and take up these questions
DN: Under the instructions we have prepared for Art Hummel,
we are authorizing him to say if it is raised by Zia that we will examine
these questions—do we want him to initiate discussion under these
circumstances?
ZB: What is your judgment?
DN: I am inclined to think that Zia would be aware that this other
contact is going to be made and that a Finding coming out of these
discussions will require further review in Washington.
ZB: Should Hummel initiate it if Zia asks?
DN: We will leave it on an if-asked basis.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
49.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
91597. Subject: Secretary’s Démarche to Dobrynin on Afghanistan.
1. (S—Entire text)
2. During a meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin, April 11, the
Secretary made the following démarche concerning Soviet accusations
of U.S. support for the insurgency in Afghanistan.2
3. The Secretary made the following points:
—The United States is not interfering in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan and is in no way responsible for the current unrest in that
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
tion Immediate to London, Beijing, Jidda, New Delhi, Kabul, Islamabad, and Tehran.
Printed from a copy received in the White House Situation Room.
Afghanistan, Vance protested recent Soviet propaganda alleging U.S. involvement and
asked Dobrynin if such propaganda foreshadowed Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.
The Soviet Ambassador denied Soviet intentions to intervene and countered that the
Voice of America had broadcast “hostile content” to the Soviet Union. (National Archives,

Afghanistan
country. This was made clear to the Soviet Government in repeated
U.S. public statements and in a private démarche delivered by our
Embassy to the Foreign Ministry in Moscow.3
—At the same time, the United States has made clear that we
categorically reject the baseless allegations made by Soviet media of
U.S. involvement in Afghanistan’s internal affairs.
—Despite this, accusations continue to appear in Soviet media.
Given similar statements by high Soviet officials we assume these
media reports are inspired by the Soviet Government.
—One particularly objectionable example was the April 10 Pravda
article by one A. Petrov. This article makes unfounded allegations
against Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher and purports to give the
names of U.S. experts in subversive activity.
—These reports that the United States is responsible for anti-gov-
ernment activity by various Afghan groups are completely false and
do not serve the interests of U.S.-Soviet relations or stability in an
unsettled area of the world.
—Our two countries can surely agree that the present period is
characterized by various tensions and instability in South Asia and
the Persian Gulf. Our respective interests should be directed toward
insuring peace and stability in these troubled regions, and we believe
that an important step in this direction is the avoidance of provocative
recriminations and unfounded allegations of outside interference.
—Continued untrue accusations of involvement of the United
States can affect the safety of American citizens in Afghanistan. More-
over, steps which inflame regional tensions can lead governments of
the region to call for greater involvement of both our countries, a
development which would make the instability of the area more dan-
gerous to international peace and security.
Vance
3 Instructions and talking points for the démarche were sent in telegram 69537 to
2586) The Embassy delivered the démarche the same day. (Telegram 6958 from Moscow,
Department issued public statements denying involvement in Afghanistan on March 23
and April 2. (Stuart Auerbach, “U.S. Cautions Soviets on Interfering in Afghanistan,”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
50.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
[paper number not declassified]
Washington, April 12, 1979
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
AFGHANISTAN: Prospects for the Insurgents
The widespread insurgencies in Afghanistan continue to erode the loyalty
of the armed forces—the main prop for President Taraki’s regime. Tribal rebels
lack the strength and organization to confront the Soviet-supported Army
outside their home areas, however, and by themselves have little prospect of
overthrowing the government. Unrest in the cities and more settled areas may
pose a more difficult problem for the regime. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Muslim tribesmen along the Pakistani border took up arms almost
immediately after the military coup a year ago that brought the Marxists
to power in Kabul. Since then, many additional tribal groups, motivated
mainly by religious sentiments, have instigated rebellions in their native
areas. A government crackdown last winter against Muslim clergymen
critical of the regime gave new impetus to the unrest. ([classification
marking not declassified])
The insurgencies seem to be gaining momentum, and the govern-
ment’s authority is now being contested to some degree in nearly every
province. Along much of the eastern border with Pakistan, government
control is limited to major towns and main roads. Rebel sources report
that two towns in this region—Chiga Serai and Asmar—are surrounded
and will soon fall. Farther west, rebels this week seized control of
Arjestan and killed the district governor. Fighting continues near
Mazar-i-Sharif in the north-central region and also in the northwest,
where rebels control one large area along the Soviet border. ([classifica-
tion marking and handling restriction not declassified])
The Afghan Government has been forced to redeploy most of its
available troops from the capital toward the Pakistani border. More
than two-thirds of the Army’s infantry regiments are in the east, leaving
few units available for deploying elsewhere. [2 lines, classification mark-
ing, and handling restriction not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Pre-Invasion Reporting. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. Prepared by [text not declassified].

Afghanistan
Uncoordinated Rebellions
There is little cooperation among the various rebel groups operat-
ing in Afghanistan’s tribal areas. Along the Pakistani border, however,
there has been limited cooperation between neighboring tribes, [2 lines,
classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]
Coordination is better among the exile groups in Pakistan, but
despite an announcement on 11 March that the three most important
factions would cooperate, there has been little indication that they are
actually working together. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
The tribal rebels alone have little immediate prospect of overthrow-
ing the Taraki government. The tribes can hold their own in the moun-
tains and may even win minor victories against the government, but
they have little chance of capturing a major city or waging a successful
campaign outside the tribal areas. ([classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified])
The government was confronted with a different and more threat-
ening challenge in western Afghanistan last month when mobs, aided
by personnel from the local military garrison, took over parts of Herat,
the country’s third largest city. After several days, reinforced govern-
ment troops regained control of the city, but not the surrounding areas.
This appears to have been a largely spontaneous uprising not directly
related to the tribal insurgencies. ([classification marking not declassified])
In the cities and those rural areas where the government has tradi-
tionally maintained control, the people have fewer arms and are more
poorly organized than the tribesmen. Popular unrest could again erupt
into rioting as it did in Herat, but sustained resistance will depend on
the refusal of government troops to oppose the rebels. A few organiza-
tions—such as the Muslim Brotherhood—may still be able to stage
isolated terrorist acts in the cities. ([classification marking not declassified])
Foreign Support
Foreign backing for the insurgents is limited. Exile groups in Paki-
stan claim—and probably have received—some support from Saudi
Arabia. They also assert that China has offered them arms. This can-
not be confirmed. ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
Pakistan has permitted Afghan exiles, Pakistani religious organiza-
tions, and tribesmen to funnel some help to the Afghan tribes. There
is little Islamabad could do to prevent Pakistani tribesmen from assist-
ing their Afghan neighbors across the very porous border, and it is
not inclined to try. The evidence, however, suggests no significant
Pakistani military support for the rebels. Occasionally, when exile
groups have been too open in their activities, the government has

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
asked them to stop.2 ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
Soviet backing for the regime has been a major deterrent to Paki-
stani support for the insurgents. Even clandestine help to the rebels
has been limited by fear of Soviet retaliation and of provoking much
greater and more open Soviet military support for Kabul. ([classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified])
The new regime in Iran is strongly sympathetic to Afghanistan’s
dissident Muslim tribesmen but its problems at home prevent it from
furnishing significant material help. Iran’s main contribution has been
moral encouragement to the insurgents. ([classification marking and han-
dling restriction not declassified])
The Afghan Military
Tribal loyalties, religion, heavy casualties, suspicion of Soviet
motives, and the slim prospects for an early end to insurgency have
already seriously damaged morale in the Afghan Army. Purges of
suspected disloyal officers have placed inexperienced men in key posi-
tions, and desertions occur daily. Some Afghan units reportedly have
fled or surrendered after only token resistance. ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
The government is taking steps to limit the impact of these losses.
The Army is retaining soldiers beyond their obligatory terms of service
and may have begun recalling individuals released from active duty.
The Army also is using tribal irregulars to fight other tribes opposing
the government. Kabul is undertaking a longer term program to im-
prove command and control in the eastern provinces and to expand
the Army as a whole. None of these measures, however, will have any
immediate impact on the military’s ability to cope with the insurgency.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
day Radio Afghanistan alleged that “a large number of Pakistani soldiers in Afghan
dress” had attacked camps in the border province of Paktia. The Embassy further noted
that the charge, delivered during a high-level Soviet military visit to Kabul, suggested
both Soviet endorsement and a “considerable escalation of the propaganda war” that
Afghanistan was waging against its neighbors. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790163–0227) A memorandum prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency,
May 3, noted that Pakistan’s decision to aid “tribal rebels” would likely raise border
tensions and could possibly lead to increased involvement in Afghanistan by third
countries. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Pre-Invasion Reporting) A field report prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency, May 23, forwarded information from [text not declassified]
claiming that Pakistan commenced a covert aid program on May 18 to support Afghan
rebels through material and financial means. (Department of Defense, Afghan War

Afghanistan
The pressure on the military could eventually become so severe
that officers who now appear loyal would advocate the overthrow of
the Marxist regime. Both Kabul and Moscow are attempting to meet
this danger. Further purges, more Soviet advisers and arms, strengthen-
ing the Army, and gestures such as the recent appointment of a popular
officer as Defense Minister may help. At the same time, these remedies
could intensify the problems in the military by increasing distrust
of Soviet intentions, forcing the government to rely even more on
inexperienced officers, and further revealing the government’s weak-
ness. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Soviet Support
Even before Taraki came to power last year, the USSR was Afghani-
stan’s major source of economic aid and almost the sole source of
military assistance. Since then, the Soviet role has grown significantly.
[3 lines, classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not
declassified]
Greater Soviet involvement is likely. Soviet assistance is needed to
improve the military logistic system and increase mobility of its forces.
Soviet personnel could also become more involved in the fighting in
the hinterlands without seriously risking an adverse foreign reaction
to their role. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction
not declassified])
The Soviets currently are taking pains to conceal the extent of their
involvement, and it is unclear how far they are prepared to go to save
the present government. The current visit to Afghanistan by the USSR’s
ranking political-military general suggests that Moscow wants a close
reading of the reliability and capability of Afghan armed forces before
deciding on its next steps.3 ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
3 A reference to General Alexei A. Yepeshev, Soviet First Deputy Minister of Defense
and President of Political Affairs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
51.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 26, 1979
SUBJECT
Status of CIA Discussions with the Pakistanis Concerning Aid to the Afghan
Dissidents (S)
CIA should explore with the Government of Pakistan (GOP) provisions
of U.S. financial and material aid to Afghan insurgents as well as the
feasibility of radio broadcasts into Afghanistan.2 The following is a
status report on the CIA response to this tasking: (S)
a. Discussions with GOP. From the two discussions we had with
Pakistan liaison, after an initial delay on their part, it is apparent that
the matter of aid to the Afghan insurgents has become increasingly
politicized. (See attachment for a detailed report on our liaison discus-
sions to date.)3 This perception is based in part on comments by GOP
liaison that Pakistan would not risk acting against Afghanistan without
firm U.S. backing. Also, at the request of liaison, our discussions with
them are now in a “pause” status while they review the situation.
We suspect that General Zia is orchestrating this slowdown awaiting
developments in his ongoing talks with Ambassador Hummel. If we
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
ski’s handwritten note forwarding the memorandum to Aaron: “DA, Please get on top
of this through a mini-SCC. We need action. E.g, give them money. Also black ops.” At
the top of Brzezinski’s note, Henze wrote: “Turner will take up formally with ZB 1 May
79.” Neither a record of the May 1 meeting nor a record of a mini-SCC on the topic was
found. The next SCC meeting that took up the Afghanistan issue was held June 26. See
Document 53.
2 See Document 48.
3 Attached but not printed. The attached memorandum reported on two meetings
the Chief of Station in Islamabad had with ISID Director Major General Mohammad
Riaz Khan and ISID Deputy Director Brigadier General Kamal Rabbani. At the first
meeting, Riaz proposed that the United States fund Pakistan’s procurement and distribu-
tion of medical supplies to Afghan rebels and provide non-U.S.-made small arms and
ammunition to be distributed to the rebels. The supplies would go to Pathan tribesmen
on the Pakistani side of the border who were supporting the rebels based on the Afghan
side of the border. The second meeting effectively froze these propositions; in light of
Soviet and Afghan charges of Pakistani involvement in the Afghan rebellion, ISID had
become wary of commencing direct support. Additionally, Rabbani disclosed that the
tribesmen “could not be disciplined to keep quiet about outside aid,” and that in any
case, the Afghan Government had sufficiently penetrated the rebel groups so that it
would learn the source of the aid.

Afghanistan
have not heard from liaison by 26 April, we will take the initiative
again and request a meeting. (S)
b. Unilateral Contact with Dissidents. You should be aware that Isla-
mabad Station is in unilateral contact with a fairly prominent Afghan
dissident leader, who, on 24 April requested $1,000,000 from us to
purchase ammunition from unidentified sources in Pakistan. We
advised him that we had no policy authority to grant his request.4 (S)
c. Radio Broadcasting. We continue to explore radio broadcast possi-
bilities, although host country political sensitivities and lead time for
acquiring broadcast equipment cast doubts on this option. We believe,
however, that radio services such as [1½ lines not declassified] can be
utilized indirectly by providing unique news stories to journalists and
publications from which [less than 1 line not declassified] often obtains
its program material. This effort is underway. (S)
d. Psychological Operations. We are readying a senior covert action
officer to visit Islamabad and Kabul, to assess and, where appropriate,
to initiate psychological operations against the Soviet presence in
Afghanistan. The activities which this officer will discuss in the field
include: distribution of anti-Soviet propaganda leaflets; production and
distribution of cassette tapes; development of spokesmen to project the
dissident message effectively; means of getting that message to the
foreign press; and black operations (see f. below). (S)
e. Worldwide Propaganda. We have already tasked the worldwide
covert action infrastructure on Afghanistan and are directing appropri-
ate briefings and propaganda material to our assets. As of 25 April we
have obtained media placements in 25 countries and have provided
liaison and agent of influence assets with tailored briefings in 51 coun-
tries. Some examples of this effort include:
—Senior [less than 1 line not declassified] officials were briefed on
12 and 16 April.
—The President of [less than 1 line not declassified] was briefed by
his intelligence service.
—The highest levels of the [less than 1 line not declassified] govern-
ment have expressed intense interest in material we provided on the
Afghan situation.5
—A briefing was prepared for the President and Prime Minister
of [less than 1 line not declassified].
—The Prime Minister and Cabinet of [less than 1 line not declassified]
were briefed by their intelligence service.
4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin and an arrow pointing to the
last sentence of paragraph b.
5 In the left margin next to the first three bullet points, Henze wrote: “Indian and
Islamic World?”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—Significant new media placements have appeared in [3 lines not
declassified].
f. Black Ops. Part of our projected program involves dissemination
of a strictly limited number of black documents designed to support
and enhance the already ongoing gray propaganda program. The SCC
meeting of 6 April, however, directed us to develop plans for interfering
in Afghanistan, and the SCC meeting of 6 March had already endorsed
“internal propaganda.”6 This activity has policy approval under the
General Finding on “Soviet Interference in Other Countries’ Affairs.”
The Department of Justice, however, has ruled that we had to obtain
cleared guidelines on a black program from State, as black operations
had not been covered specifically in the relevant “Perspectives.” Unfor-
tunately, attempts to obtain such cleared guidelines have been rebuffed.
State takes the position that black operations by themselves would
have little impact. This argument fails to take into account our gray
program, which black operations will complement and reinforce, as
well as the propaganda warfare by leaflet and “night letter” already
being waged by the dissidents. (We would expect that our black ops
would be picked up and exploited fully by the dissidents.) State also
argues that since the Soviets might assume the U.S. hand lay behind any
fabricated documents, their dissemination would embarrass Secretary
Vance in view of the “strong assurances the Secretary recently gave
Ambassador Dobrynin, with NSC concurrence, to the effect that we
have no intention of interfering in Afghanistan.”7
Stansfield Turner8
7 See Document 49.
8 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above his typed signature.
52.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency
[cable number not declassified]
[Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7,
USSR in Afghanistan (May 79–Jun 79). Top Secret; [handling restriction
not declassified]. 2 pages not declassified.]

Afghanistan
53.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Afghanistan and Grenada (S)
PARTICIPANTS
The Vice President
Major John Matheny
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Frank Carlucci, Deputy
State
Director
David Newsom, Under Secretary
[name and title not declassified]
for Political Affairs
*[name and title not declassified]
David Mark, Deputy Dir, INR
Justice
OSD
John Harmon, Ass’t AG,
Admiral Daniel Murphy, Deputy
Office of Legal Counsel
Under Sec. for Policy
OMB
JCS
James McIntyre
Lt. Gen. W.Y. Smith, Ass’t. to the
Randy Jayne, Assoc. Dir. for
Chairman
Nat’l Security & Int’l
Lt. Gen. John Pustay, Ass’t. to the
Affairs
Chairman
White House
Zbigniew Brzezinski,
Chairman
David Aaron
NSC
Donald Gregg, Notetaker
* Present for Item 2 only.
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The Chairman summarized previous discussions on aid to Afghani-
stan dissidents and recalled that CIA had been approved to undertake
a probe to determine what support to the dissidents was feasible. He
called on the DCI to summarize. (S)
The DCI stated that ties with Afghanistan dissident leaders had
been established in Pakistan. It is CIA’s judgment that monetary sup-
port for food, clothing, and medical supplies is critical if opposition to
the Taraki regime is to be sustained throughout the winter. Pakistani
The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. Tabs A–G are attached but
not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
support to the dissidents appears to be tailing off. The DCI stated
that a modest amount of aid can be funneled directly to Afghanistan
dissident leaders in Pakistan. (TS)
Discussion ensued as to how the money would be handed out and
spent. CIA responded that the money would be doled out incrementally
and that accountings would be sought and impact and feedback would
be looked for. All the goods (food, medical supplies, and clothing) are
to be purchased in Pakistan. (S)
Turning to CIA option 1, the DCI stated that the [less than 1 line
not declassified] has had an existing radio that sends a strong signal
into Afghanistan.2 The CIA probe had reached the conclusions that
Afghanistan language broadcasts to the largely illiterate insurgents
would provide a rallying point now lacking. The broadcasts would
soon be attributed to [less than 1 line not declassified] and would appear
to be commercially purchased time on the [less than 1 line not declassified]
broadcast. Broadcast tapes would be made in the United States and
shipped to [less than 1 line not declassified] for playing. The [less than 1
line not declassified] have not yet been sounded out as to their willingness
to participate in this effort. (S)
Following discussion a consensus emerged to take the following
steps:
To approve Option 2, spending at first the [amount not declassi-
fied] now in the CIA budget [less than 1 line not declassified] as
necessary.3 It was agreed that the Pakistan government would
be informed of our support to the Afghan dissidents but that
the CIA operation would be conducted unilaterally. (S)
2 Attached but not printed at Tab B is a memorandum from Gregg to Brzezinski, June
25. Option 1, entitled “Psychological Operations,” called first for approval to “establish
an international ‘Voice of Free Afghanistan’ radio capability for the insurgents from a
third country,” noting that Afghan insurgents needed “regular and dependable” radio
access to the general population, which was 90 percent illiterate. The erection of a
transmitter facility was estimated to take 18 to 24 months at a cost of [amount not
declassified] per annum, and with adequate deniability for the United States. Second,
Option 1 called for approval to “assist the insurgents to expand and distribute their
recorded and printed propaganda,” at a cost of [amount not declassified] and with minimal
risk of linking the program to the United States.
3 Attached but not printed at Tab C. Option 2, entitled “Material Support,” called
for “cash payments to the insurgents,” arguing that cash support might not be as efficient
as food and material distribution, “but it should enable them to survive the approaching
winter and maintain the momentum of their struggle.” The paper further noted that the
funds would be used by rebels to ensure tribal loyalties, and that “accountability may
be difficult, but it is judged that most of the funds will be expended for needed supplies.”
At a projected cost of [amount not declassified], the option predicted moderate risk of
linking cash payments to the United States, given that it was likely the Pakistanis would
learn of the program. Pakistan might “overlook” the program, given the “variety of
individuals and countries who have been approached for funds by the insurgents and
who might locally be the source of financial support.” Finally, the paper surmised an
element of deniability because all non-lethal goods “could be rationalized on humanitar-
ian grounds.”

Afghanistan
CIA is authorized to explore with the [less than 1 line not
declassified] government its reaction to utilization of its broad-
casts into Afghanistan. (Option 1) (S)
CIA was also given approval to expand psych efforts to sup-
port the insurgency and to unite the Afghan dissidents. Autho-
rization was also given to work with an existing Pakistani
agent asset with ties to Afghanistan dissident groups. (S)
Options 4 and 5 (which were defined as alternatives, and not
separate options) will be considered after Pakistani reactions
and other political fallout are taken into account.4 (S)
It was also agreed to tell the government of Saudi Arabia of
the US decision to give covert non-military support the Afghan
dissidents. The Saudis will also be encouraged to put some
of their own funds into similar covert aid projects. (S)
CIA was asked to draft a Presidential Finding which would cover
implementation of the first five options of the CIA proposal on a step-
by-step basis, with as much flexibility built into the plan as possible.5
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
4 Attached at Tabs E and F, respectively. Option 4, entitled “Humanitarian Support,”
called for approval to use “a third country as a front for providing humanitarian aid to
the insurgents.” The paper proposed that countries such as Saudi Arabia, Oman, or
Egypt might act in such a capacity, given that “politically, this may be more acceptable
to Pakistan than becoming directly involved with the U.S. in insurgent support.” On
the other hand, “U.S. control of the program would be reduced” with participation of a
third country, “which may intimate the ultimate source of such support to the Pakistanis,”
which could in turn result in complications that might deprive the Afghan insurgents
of support in the time frame they required. At a cost of [amount not declassified] (divided
among medical supplies, food, clothing, transportation, and cash to insurgent leaders),
the option posed moderate risk of linking the United States to the program. The USSR
and DRA might take notice of such involvement, but if not, Soviet reaction would be
minimal and Pakistan “would be able to maintain deniability.” Option 5, also entitled
“Humanitarian Support,” called for approval to “provide humanitarian supplies to the
insurgents through the Government of Pakistan.” The objective and cost were identical
to Option 4, while the projected risk of Option 5 was slightly lower, and if Pakistan
agreed to act as a conduit to the insurgents “this option would likely be the most efficient
means of providing such support.” Option 6, attached but not printed at Tab G, was
not discussed at the SCC meeting. It called for approval “to provide limited military
supplies to the insurgents through the Government of Pakistan,” at a cost of [amount
not declassified] and with moderate to high risk of exposure.
5 The SCC meeting led to two Presidential Findings on Afghanistan, both signed
by Carter on July 3. The first, whose scope covered Afghanistan, provided authorization
to “support insurgent propaganda and other psychological operations in Afghanistan;
establish radio access to the Afghan population through third country facilities;” and
“provide unilaterally or through third countries as appropriate support to Afghan insur-
gents, either in the form of cash or non-military supplies.” The second finding, whose
scope was worldwide, provided authorization to “expose the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan and its leadership as despotic and subservient to the Soviet Union” and to
“publicize efforts by the Afghan insurgents to regain their country’s sovereignty.” (Carter
Library, Staff Office, Counsel, Cutler, Box 60, Central Intelligence Agency Charter:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
54.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
[paper number not declassified]
Washington, July 1979
[Omitted here are a title page, cover page, and security informa-
tion page.]
Afghanistan: A Regime Besieged ([classification marking not
declassified])
Key Judgments
The localized tribal fighting that erupted in the eastern provinces
when the pro-Soviet coup group seized power in late April 1978 has
since grown into a countrywide insurgency. Faced with the hostility
of the devoutly Muslim and traditionally independent population, the
regime of President Taraki and Prime Minister Amin has no better
than an even chance to complete its second year in power.
Taraki will survive only as long as the loyalty of the military, the
security services, and the party remains intact under the heavy pressure
being brought to bear by hostile forces. The prevailing instability por-
tends a highly fluid political situation in the next 12 months. A number
of outcomes are possible.
The most likely successor regime would be led by, or at least have
the backing of, leftist military officers, who are now considered loyal
but who might become disaffected. Coup plotters might seek Moscow’s
tacit approval to seize power and in any case would retain strong ties
with the Soviet Union.
Despite the loss to the insurgents of more than half of the country,
the government’s control of Kabul, the other major cities, and the main
lines of communication equates to political control of the country.
Tribal forces, lacking a centralized command and deficient in material
support, do not appear capable of challenging the Soviet-equipped
army’s control of the main population centers.
The insurgents’ prospects would be enhanced if Pakistan were
to provide substantial material support, tactical advice, and training.
Barring an improvement in the insurgents’ military capabilities, the
Intelligence Publication Files, Box 1, NESA Research Paper—Afghanistan: A Regime
Besieged, July 1979. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. A
statement on the cover page reads: “The author of this paper is [less than 1 line not
declassified] Office of Political Analysis. The Office of Strategic Research contributed to
the report.” Another statement on the cover page reads: “This report has been coordinated
with the Office of Economic Research, the Directorate of Operations, and the National
Intelligence Officer for the Near East and South Asia.”

Afghanistan
outlook is for a prolonged period of inconclusive fighting for control
of territory, population centers, and main roads.
The beleaguered Taraki regime’s survival has come to depend
increasingly, as the insurgency has spread, on Soviet political, military,
economic, and technical support. Taraki’s nearly total dependence on
Moscow has given the Soviets far more say in the Afghan Government’s
day-to-day decisionmaking process than they have ever had, but Taraki
still appears to be setting the main lines of policy.
Kabul has closely associated itself politically with Moscow and has
adopted foreign policy positions that are virtually indistinguishable
from those of the Soviet Union.
In part because it has accorded the Soviet Union patron state status,
Afghanistan shows no interest in improving frayed relations with the
United States and other Western powers. Relations with its neighbors
Pakistan and Iran are poor and could deteriorate further if Kabul comes
to believe Tehran and, in particular, Islamabad are giving substantial
backing to Afghan insurgents.
The regime does not yet face a security situation that might prompt
a request to Moscow for the direct intervention of Soviet forces, but
such an appeal is conceivable over the next 12 months. The Soviets
have an important stake in Afghanistan. They will go to some lengths
to protect it, but probably not to the extent of intervening militarily.
The Soviets would be deterred by the possibility that their forces would
be bogged down indefinitely trying to shore up a discredited regime.
Soviet leaders also would have to weigh the regional and international
political costs of direct intervention.
The USSR might consider other options short of dispatching combat
units to protect its interests in specific contingencies. Moscow, for
example, might permit more open use of Soviet advisers in ground
combat roles to defend Soviet personnel or equipment. If serious fight-
ing broke out in areas adjoining the Soviet border, Soviet leaders might
decide to provide increased numbers of tactical ground support aircraft,
helicopter gunships, pilots, and advisers on the ground to assist Kabul.
[1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified]
[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
55.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton and Marshall
Brement of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Feeler on Afghanistan (C)
We convened a meeting this afternoon of Soviet and Afghan spe-
cialists from State and CIA to discuss how we should respond to the
message conveyed to our charge in Kabul by the GDR Ambassador.
(You will remember that he alerted us that the Soviets would try to
oust Amin, probably during August, but that they intended to “protect
the Afghan revolution.” He also suggested that the situation might
become bloody and pointedly said that he was sending his family
We did not come to any agreed conclusions about what the Soviets
really mean by passing this signal—perhaps just to alert us to protect
our people since we have been hitting them hard in the aftermath
of the Dubs killing, or perhaps they want us to acquiesce in Soviet
establishment of a new government. (S)
For starters we decided to move along two tracks:
1. Amstutz will be deciding on Saturday whether to evacuate
dependents. (There are other good reasons to do so beside the German’s
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1979. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.
The memorandum is stamped “ZB has seen.”
2 Amstutz reported on his “extraordinary meeting” with GDR Ambassador to
Afghanistan Dr. Hermann Schwiesau in telegram 5459 from Kabul, July 18. Schwiesau
asserted that it was Amin, not Taraki, who effectively controlled the government, and
that Soviet Minister-Counselor Safronchuk was working “behind the scenes” with DRA
officials to bring about a “radical change” in leadership through an internal military
coup. Schwiesau further noted that it would not be possible for Amin and the exiled
Parchamist leader Babrak Karmal to be part of the same government; nonetheless, the
current Khalqi-dominated government needed to extend its base and share more power
with the Parchamists. (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Soviets
in Afghanistan—General Part #1) According to [text not declassified], March 28, Amin’s
elevation the previous day from Deputy Prime Minister to Prime Minister (Taraki
remained President) “grants recognition of” Amin’s “de facto control of the country’s

Afghanistan
warning.) We will probably accept a positive recommendation from
2. We will cut out the middle man (the German) and instruct
Amstutz to approach Soviet Counselor Safronchuk, who is supposed
to be the Soviet point man in the dump-Amin operation and who
foreshadowed this entire matter to Amstutz in a previous conversa-
State will prepare (and we will clear) instructions to Amstutz for
the meeting. He is to raise the question of safety of Americans (appro-
priately, since the Soviets are the dean of the corps in Kabul) and tell
him that we expect the Soviets not to make a propaganda issue out of
the withdrawal of US dependents. He will then determine whether the
GDR Ambassador was in fact speaking with the full sanction of the
Soviets. He will also convey these points: We do not believe that any
cosmetic changes in the Afghan Government will solve the Soviets’
problem; we will not give our blessing to any such government; we
believe that a restoration of a truly neutral Afghan Government would
be in our mutual interests; and we have no interest in seeing a govern-
ment in Afghanistan that would pose a threat to legitimate Soviet
interests.5 (S)
It would be premature to make further decisions about how we
will handle this signal until we get a reading on the Safronchuk conver-
sation. We will, however, be giving thought to a number of other
questions, not least of all the impact of a Soviet move on the SALT
debate. We will also keep our covert action options under review,
Department relayed Amstutz’s approval of evacuating approximately 100 U.S. depend-
ents and non-essential personnel from Kabul. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
that an Afghan diplomatic note demanded a staff reduction of Embassy Kabul. Amstutz
described the note as evidence of the “inept, if not stupid, leadership of the DRA,
exemplified by Prime Minister/Foreign Minister Hafizullah Amin, person now desper-
ately trying to survive politically.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box
7, USSR in Afghanistan (July 79))
4 Brzezinski wrote “OK” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
5 Brzezinski drew a vertical line and a checkmark in the right margin next to the
last sentence of the paragraph. Safronchuk and Amstutz met on August 11. The Embassy
reported their conversation in telegram 6152 from Kabul, August 13. According to the
telegram, neither the question of the safety of Americans in Afghanistan nor the informa-
tion passed by the GDR Ambassador arose during the conversation. Safronchuk did
acknowledge the possibility that the Soviets would have to deal with a successor regime
in the future, but asserted that the USSR “would not under any circumstances” introduce
combat troops to support the Afghan Government. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790367–0048) No record of a meeting with Safronchuk was found
that might reflect more directly the points Amstutz was to convey per the NSC
instructions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
especially since one part of the Soviet motivation may have been to
deflect us from anti-regime activities. (S)
CIA will make a special effort to see what they can pick up in
Kabul that would confirm what the German told us and they will try
to learn if a similar message has been passed to [less than 1 line not
declassified]. Finally, FBIS will see if there has been a cutback in Soviet
propaganda alleging US involvement in the insurgency. (S)
Late note: FBIS confirms that there has indeed been a dropoff—
perhaps related to the Summit, but they also note that Soviet propa-
ganda sometimes declines as an issue becomes more critical. (S)
56.
Editorial Note
In August 1979, the Central Intelligence Agency issued a number
of reports assessing Soviet intentions with regard to Afghanistan and
the increasingly precarious position of the Afghan Government. While
stopping short of predicting with certitude the ultimate collapse of the
Taraki-Amin regime and consequent military intervention by the Soviet
Union, intelligence reporting noted two fundamental and interrelated
trends: the Afghan Government was weakening in the face of the
growing rebel insurgency, and in response the USSR was steadily
increasing its efforts to equip and train the Afghan military in an
attempt to contain and ultimately defeat the insurgency.
Branch of the Regional Analysis Division noted that control of Afghani-
stan was effectively split: “Anti-government forces control most of the
countryside, while the Afghan Army controls the cities and main
roads.” Further, the division of control was not necessarily static; the
Afghan Army, the memorandum reported, was experiencing high rates
of casualties and desertions—a manpower problem exacerbated by
political purges of field grade officers from the previous year. The
Afghan Air Force was suffering “acute shortages of qualified pilots
and maintenance technicians.” The memorandum also observed that
the presence of the Soviet military in Afghanistan had “more than
doubled” since Taraki came to power in 1978. Soviet military advisers
numbered between 1,000 and 2,000, and according to a field report by
the Chief of Station in Kabul, July 31, the Soviet advisers have “virtually
taken command” of the Afghan military units to which they were
assigned. Further, the Soviets expanded the military supplies to
Afghanistan, including increased shipments of tanks, artillery, and

Afghanistan
ammunition. (Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence,
Office of Support Services, Job 81T00031R: Production Case Files, Box
1, Afghanistan’s Military Forces) The Chief of Station report is in the
Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghan-
istan (July 79)
In an August 2 CIA intelligence memorandum entitled “USSR-
Afghanistan: The Case for Soviet Military Intervention,” the Office of
Political Analysis (OPA) provided an overview of the factors that could
compel the Soviet leadership to send troops into Afghanistan. In light
of the trends noted in the August 1 memorandum (above), and the fact
that President Taraki and Prime Minister Amin had already appealed
to Moscow “for more direct military involvement,” the memorandum
asserted “there would be strong arguments for those Soviet leaders
inclined to more forceful measures to prevent an anti-Soviet govern-
ment from coming to power on their southern flank.” The memoran-
dum noted the strategic and psychological ramifications the “loss” of
Afghanistan would have for the Soviet Union, especially in light of its
recent inability to prevent the Chinese invasion of Vietnam. Addition-
ally, those arguing for intervention might see the political and economic
liabilities of such an operation as manageable, given Afghanistan’s
close proximity to the Soviet Union and the fact that Afghanistan’s
neighbors, Iran and Pakistan, were already anti-Soviet. OPA went on
to lay out a number of events that could lead to Soviet intervention.
These included: rescue operations of Soviet personnel whose large
presence itself already constituted a form of military intervention; tribal
violence that embroiled nationality groups on either side of the Soviet-
Afghan border; “significant increase in third party assistance” to the
rebels from countries such as Pakistan or Iran; and a “serious threat” of
rebels overtaking a major urban area such as Kabul. The memorandum
concluded with an assessment of the varying degrees of intensity a
Soviet intervention could take, ranging from limited operations involv-
ing air raids and tank units securing the Soviet-Afghan border, to a
“full-fledged intervention” requiring military occupation of strategic
areas throughout the country. The latter option, the memorandum
asserted, would amount to a “last-ditch Soviet effort” to prevent the
fall of the Afghan Government and one that would be complicated by
Afghanistan’s rugged terrain and an Islamic population that would
mount “intense opposition” to the occupation. (Central Intelligence
Afghanistan)
In a more detailed look at the position and mobility of Soviet
military forces in the event of an impending invasion, [name not declassi-
fied] Chief, USSR/EE Branch, noted in intelligence memorandum SR

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
in Afghanistan could not, in their present formation, “conduct any
significant unilateral operations” because they were lightly equipped
and spread thin among all components of the Afghan military. Soviet
military intervention would require an influx of troops from inside
Soviet territory, with the closest units located in the Turkestan Military
District, which housed 45,000 troops with an additional 50,000 reserves
who could be called up within a week to get the District to wartime
strength. Another six divisions were located in the Central Asian Mili-
tary District but, the memorandum prognosticated, the Soviet leader-
ship would probably be reluctant to redeploy those troops “for fear of
weakening their position opposite China.” A faster influx of troops
could be accomplished with the Soviet military’s airborne divisions.
Airlift of “just one complete airborne division and its support units
would, however, severely tax the capacity of the Soviet military trans-
port fleet,” the memorandum noted, and it was unlikely any airlift of
troops would be executed without “an eventual linkup of ground
forces.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office
Military Forces in and Near Afghanistan)
In a memorandum written three days later, August 10, Director of
the Strategic Warning Staff Douglas MacEachin provided the National
Intelligence Officer for Warning with three courses of action which the
Soviets would likely choose regarding Afghanistan:
“a. Continue the present course of providing material support,
advisors and technicians, but refrain from committing Soviet combat
units (possibly at the same time continuing to seek a political solution).
“b. Commit a limited number of Soviet combat forces, sufficient
to insure at least the security of Kabul and its immediate area, and
perhaps a few other key centers.
“c. Commit large combat forces for the purpose of inflicting major
military defeats on the insurgent forces and recapturing much of the
territory now in rebel hands.”
Speaking on behalf of “most other community analysts,” MacEa-
chin asserted that the third option was the least desirable for the Soviets,
given the military and political challenges it would create. Instead,
MacEachin predicted with “strong likelihood” that the Soviets would
undertake option b, “and probably in the near future.” Without a
limited intervention, MacEachin reasoned, the “USSR faces the likeli-
hood of being forced to evacuate its mission from Afghanistan,” a
development the Soviets would view as worse than any costs associated
with limited military intervention. MacEachin saw the beginnings of
a trap: “once having undertaken the increase in their military ante,
however, the Soviets are likely to find themselves being drawn into
the larger operation despite whatever resolve they might have to avoid
it.” Although MacEachin specified that the intelligence community had

Afghanistan
no “concrete evidence” that the Soviets had already decided on even
a limited intervention, the evidence was, in his view, sufficiently strong
to issue an alert memorandum, a vehicle by which the intelligence
community intended to warn policymakers in advance of an interven-
tion, rather than a report on a fait accompli. MacEachin based his
argument on the fact that the Soviet military posture in Afghanistan
“already has gone about as far as it can short of direct action by Soviet
combat units,” and that the Soviets viewed some form of intervention,
without which the Taraki regime would fall, as the “least bad” option.
(Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job
ment 62.
A more historically focused memorandum, drafted August 10 by
H.C. Cochran of the CIA’s Strategic Warning Staff, examined the
choices the Soviet Union faced in light of Soviet policy toward Afghani-
stan since tsarist times. Russia’s longstanding interest in exerting con-
trol in Afghanistan, coupled with its proximity to Soviet territory, and
the socialist revolution in April 1978, made Afghanistan a “special
case” in the minds of Soviet leaders, who ranked its priority well above
the importance they attached to supporting “liberation movements”
elsewhere in the Third World. Together, these factors “would seem to
rule out the theoretical option of Soviet withdrawal and cutting of
losses,” particularly because the Soviet leadership believed that a suc-
cessor government to the Taraki regime would inevitably be composed
of Muslim “counterrevolutionaries,” allied with Iran and Pakistan and
hostile to the Soviet Union. Cochran argued that from Moscow’s van-
tage point, the situation was both high stakes and lacked any satisfac-
tory low-risk options, presenting “Moscow with one of the most diffi-
cult foreign policy decisions since the Cuban missile crisis.” Further,
the memorandum observed, the hesitancy the Soviet Union displayed
in its Afghan policy over the past several months represented a
“delayed recognition that the USSR had seriously miscalculated the
strength of the forces opposed to the Taraki regime.” Cochran con-
cluded by noting that the Soviets might still continue to consider all
options, but the impending collapse of the Taraki regime—which Coch-
ran calculated would come by the month’s end—would effectively
preclude any non-military options the Soviets would consider, no mat-
ter the diplomatic and economic consequences. (Central Intelligence
Afghanistan)
The Office of Political Analysis and the Soviet Branch of the
Regional Analysis Division each produced memoranda on Soviet
options in Afghanistan dated August 17. The OPA memorandum, PA
M 79–10378C, noted that despite significant successes mounted thus

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
far by insurgent groups, their capacity to challenge the Afghan Govern-
ment remained limited: rebels had “been unable to take and hold any
major town;” they had no means of procuring arms beyond “gun
dealers” in Pakistan and whatever they could capture from the Afghan
Army; and rebel groups were driven more by provincial desires to rid
their territory of government influence than a unifying, countrywide
effort to topple the Kabul regime. Still, the memorandum noted, these
limitations did not mean the Afghan Government would be able to
survive the insurgency, and in recent months Soviet political efforts to
moderate antipathy toward the Taraki-Amin government had largely
failed: Taraki and Amin still refused to broaden their political base;
leading members of the Parchamist faction were under arrest; and the
regime remained unremittingly hostile toward Pakistan despite the
Soviet Union’s attempts to mitigate tensions between the two countries.
Further, the memorandum noted, while the Soviets “should have suffi-
cient assets to pull off a coup,” it remained unclear to them what kind
of successor government would be preferable to their interests, and
therefore “they probably see no alternative at present to trying to tough
it out with Taraki and Amin, even though this option will almost
certainly require still deeper Soviet military involvement in Afghani-
stan.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office
Situation in Afghanistan and Soviet Options)
The second memorandum, SR M 79–10109J, built on Douglas
MacEachin’s proposition that, for all intents and purposes, Soviet mili-
tary intervention in Afghanistan was already underway. According to
intelligence reporting, the memorandum noted, Soviet advisers had:
accompanied Afghan patrols on the Pakistan border; operated tanks
in fighting against rebels in the eastern provinces; coordinated defense
plans of major Afghan cities; and might be flying helicopters in anti-
insurgent operations. The various options before the Soviets to intensify
its military presence in Afghanistan ranged from incremental increases
of Soviet advisers to large-scale deployment of ground and airborne
forces. The memorandum concluded with the assertion that the Soviet
leaders “almost certainly do not believe” that anything short of the
“most massive intervention options” would ensure that the Afghan
Government was not overtaken by rebel forces. (Central Intelligence
Afghanistan)
On August 20, the Office of Political Analysis issued memorandum
PA M 79–1038C, which raised many of the same points stated in previ-
ous memoranda, but argued that a full-scale military operation was
not yet a foregone conclusion, contrary to Cochran’s analysis. It noted
the possibility that increasingly intensive direct military operations

Afghanistan
could provoke widespread defections from the Afghan Army to rebel
forces, which in turn would require a full-scale military intervention.
While “there is no question that the Soviets could install a regime of
their choosing with a massive military intervention,” the memorandum
argued, a gutted Afghan Army would require an “open-ended” com-
mitment of regular ground force divisions. Thus, “we see few signs
that the Soviets are so wedded to leftist rule in Afghanistan that they
will undertake an operation of this magnitude. Their unwillingness to
label this regime Communist when its leaders clearly view themselves
as such, and their willingness to talk to non-Communist figures from
old regimes about participation in a new government suggests they
have long been mindful of the possibility that the leftist experiment in
Afghanistan will fail.” (National Security Council, Carter Administra-
In a memorandum to Arnold L. Horelick, NIO for USSR–EE, the
NIO for Conventional Forces added a military dimension to assumed
Soviet considerations that might point away from a full-scale military
intervention in Afghanistan: such an operation would “appear to
require undertakings, quite unlike the massive armor-heavy thrusts
against clearly-defined objectives which have heretofore been the Soviet
forte. Seizure of Kabul offers no finality, like that of Berlin, Budapest,
or Prague. The Soviet advisors with the Afghan Army have been at it
long enough to have reported the frustrations and costs of trying to
winkle the will-o’-the-wisp insurgents out of the hills, and to have
assessed for Moscow the ephemeral fighting qualities of their Afghan
allies.” Even in the event of an “anti-Soviet regime seizing power” in
Afghanistan, which might compel such an intervention, it would be
unlikely that Soviet planners “would contemplate a swift (large-scale)
strike like those into Hungary and Czechoslovakia—nothing much to
strike against; no assurance that, having struck, any decisive political
or military change in the internal security situation would eventuate;
and no threat of external counter-intervention to forestall.” Instead, the
memorandum argued, the Soviets would employ “recourse to classic
counter-guerilla strategy, tache d’huile—seizure of Kabul plus other
centers which would constitute a minimal Soviet-controlled Afghan
polity, creation of a ‘legitimate’ Afghan regime, and retrenchment of
the Afghan Army.” (Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence
not declassified] 28 Sept 79, Soviet Options in Afghanistan)
The CIA ended its August reporting on an equivocal note. Intelli-
gence information cable [cable number not declassified], August 27, noted
the challenges facing both the Afghan Government and the insurgency.
For the former, the only positive development was a “non-event” in
that “the government had not lost control of any major urban area

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
during the month.” Still, the cable reported, the insurgents’ tactics had
grown more sophisticated, and government forces struggled to control
major urban areas and the transportation routes connecting them.
Meanwhile, the insurgents confronted the same problem that had
plagued their campaigns since 1978: while the government enjoyed
loyalty from only about 20 percent of the population, the insurgents
could claim even less; and politically, rebel leaders had not unified
their forces—a fact, the cable observed, that was “part of the reason
this regime survives.” With the coming winter, the cable concluded,
the advantage might shift to the Afghan Government, which would
take advantage of the inevitable slowdown in insurgent activity to
shore up its support among the Afghan people, of whom more “may
come to realize that even an odious government is better than none.”
(Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in
Afghanistan (August 79))
57.
Telegram From the Consulate in Lahore to the Embassies in
Pakistan and Afghanistan1
1098. Subject: Call by Afghan Rebel Leader. Ref State 173258
1. (C—Entire text.)
2. Summary: Gailani of (moderate religious) National Front for
Islamic Revolution of Afghanistan claims that major advances being
made against Taraki regime, that it will fall in two months, but that
thereafter there may be confrontation among victors, between his “lib-
eral” and ultra-conservative religious rebel groups. Latter group receiv-
ing most outside financial support now; their ascendancy would insure
USSR entry en masse into Afghanistan to forestall development of
“Khomeini-like” force with possible influence on Soviet-Muslim border
areas. “Liberal” ascendancy on other hand would be something USSR
could live with, and would not stimulate massive Soviet intervention.
Confidential; Limdis. Repeated for information to Jidda, Moscow, and the Department
of State. A copy of the telegram was also found in the Department of Defense, Afghan
War Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghanistan (August 79).
Foreign Policy File, D790304–0500)

Afghanistan
Gailani asked that U.S. urge Saudi Arabia to provide major material
assistance to Front as rebel force favored by U.S. He was informed we
play no favorites in current civil war. End summary.
3. August 15, Louis Dupree, American universities field staff/
Lahore, requested appointment with ConGen and without indicating
he was bringing guest, appeared with Syed Ahmad Gailani, leader
National Front for Islamic Revolution of Afghanistan (reftel). To avoid
offense to an important rebel religious leader, ConGen had no alterna-
tive but to receive him. As expected, he asked for U.S. support but only
indirectly, to encourage Saudi Arabia to provide material assistance.
Request was duly declined.
4. Gailani reported that his forces, operating from Pakistan and in
Afghanistan, now number 70,000 and could be swelled to 200,000 (cf.
Afghan army strength of reportedly up to 100,000). Gailani claimed
his men now total 90 percent of all rebel fighting contingents. At pres-
ent, they have adequate equipment but need ammunition and want
financial support.
5. In contrast, various ultra-conservative religious rebel elements
are getting funds. An unidentified Arab recently appeared in Peshawar
with $3 million, to be distributed through Jamaat-I-Islami. Money to
ultra-conservatives attracts peripheral groups to their side, while “lib-
eral” Gailani forces are getting only minor contributions from abroad.
Yet former doing hardly any of fighting.
6. Gailani said he had recently met with Prince Fahd, “main power”
in Saudi Arabia, and had been assured Saudis support NFIRA over
ultra-conservative groups. However, Saudis hesitant to initiate major
flow of aid to Front unless U.S. indicates latter is its favorite among
dissident forces. Gailani also has met with ex-King Zahir Shah, who
similarly favors NFIRA. (Zahir wants to return to Kabul but “not as
King”; relatives are more ambitious, Gailani said.)
7. Both Gailani and Dupree emphasized that now was critical
period for support for NFIRA, as liberal vs. ultra-conservative confron-
tation growing. It was important that former win out because if latter
does, USSR will move into Afghanistan in force. Moscow not willing
to stand idly by as a “Khomeini-like” movement takes over Afghanistan
and spreads anti-Communist, ultra-conservative Islamic influence into
Soviet-Muslim border areas. On other hand, USSR might be willing to
countenance a “liberal” takeover, returning Afghanistan to status quo
ante—nonaligned, with necessary tilt toward traditional friend to north.
Gailani urged that U.S. should move now, indicate preference for
NFIRA and encourage Saudis to make substantial contribution to cause.
In this way, Front would be strengthened against ultra-conservatives,
and after overthrow of Taraki regime, Afghanistan would be spared
a further war (between liberals and conservatives).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
8. Gailani said Taraki regime would be toppled in two months.
Most of Afghanistan area along border, from Torkham (near Peshawar)
to Chaman (near Quetta), now under NFIRA dominance. Afghan Army
brigade (two battalions), which according to press has surrendered to
dissidents, actually defected to Front near Abu Kala (70.8 miles east
of Kandahar). Urgun and Gardez virtually surrounded by Front
(respectively 60 miles southeast and 50 miles east from Ghazni, main
town on highway between Kandahar and Kabul). Pincer movement
now planned against Ghazni itself, by Front from east, in coordination
with Hazara Shias from mountainous area west of town. Combined
forces may then move northward toward Kabul.
9. Government troops in area mostly new raw recruits. Officer
corps dominated by Khalqi political commissars. Gailani estimates that
at present there may not be more than 15 Soviet advisors to government
military force in area. Latter however fight to bitter end; NFIRA has
no Soviet prisoners—those captured alive are killed. Gailani said
professional Afghan Army troops largely concentrated in Kabul area.
He described Nooristan as “practically independent” and Paktia
almost so.
10. ConGen informed Gailani that U.S. not disposed to provide
any support, direct or indirect, to any parties in Afghan civil war.
Gailani said he had spoken to American Ambassador in Jidda and
might want to make contact with Embassy in Islamabad.
Fuller
58.
Intelligence Appraisal Prepared in the Department of
Defense1
[appraisal number not declassified]
Washington, August 21, 1979
[Omitted here is a cover page.]
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
not declassified]. The appraisal was attached at Tab E to an August 22 memorandum from
Henze to Denend, not printed, that responded to Mondale’s request for information on
Afghanistan. Henze did not specify when Mondale made the request.

Afghanistan
AFGHANISTAN: TRIBAL REBELLION (U)
Summary
(C) Afghan tribal and religious leaders have historically resisted
government encroachments. Central authority has always been weak
in the provinces except when tied to local leaders. With the encourage-
ment and support of dissaffected elements of the ruling elite, serious
opposition by traditional forces has invariably resulted in political
change in Kabul. Only in 1929, however, did tribal rebels manage to
take the capital and then were unable to hold it.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The
present rebellion began within a month of the April 1978 coup by the
leftist Khalqi group. Almost immediate implementation of far-reaching
reforms, degradation of Islam, alliance with the USSR, and extension
of close government control into the lowest levels of society produced
strong and steadily escalating opposition in the countryside. The gov-
ernment managed to contain dissent through much of 1978 but not
suppress it, largely because of the depth of discontent and its own
preoccupation with consolidating the revolution.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) No
distinct pattern of tribal opposition is evident, nor are the numbers of
rebels known. Violence has occurred throughout Afghanistan and has
involved elements of all five major ethnic groups and many minor
ones. The fighting is generally confined to tribal valley homelands.
Islam and hatred of the Soviets and godless leftists serve as unifying
motives for rebellion, but they are not strong enough to produce a
coordinated rebellion. Despite much publicity, calls for a holy war,
and inflated claims, most exile groups play a very small role in the
fighting or its support.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) In the
past several months rebel forces, aided by army defectors and captured
equipment, have demonstrated improved capabilities in some areas
and continued to expand the rebellion. Rebels are now able to operate
freely in 20 of 28 provinces, and the recent outbreak of serious fighting
in three major areas is severely taxing government forces. Nevertheless,
without some additional catalyst, such as a military collapse, the rebels
lack the capability to remove the regime.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The
threat to the government stems less from rebel strength than Army
weakness. The Army has never been tested in battle nor trained in
counterinsurgency. Despite extensive Soviet support and the presence
of about 2,000 military advisers, Army capabilities continue to decline.
The Army holds only the major towns and provincial capitals, but
increasingly it has been unable to secure the roads between them.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Frustrated at fighting a no-win struggle, poorly trained, dependent on
tenuous air resupply, and badly overextended, some units have refused
to fight. More important, at the recent rate of losses and desertions
major units may be unable to maintain organizational integrity and
combat effectiveness through the winter.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) As
the government’s power base has narrowed, the Army’s role as the
primary national-level stabilizing institution has become critical. Nei-
ther non-Khalqi officers nor the Soviet advisers are likely to allow the
Army to collapse or be sacrificed. Before such a development, key
military units in Kabul are likely to turn on the government. Such a
struggle could result in anarchy, and the outcome is far from clear. In
the event of a power vacuum in Kabul, a tribe or combination of
rebel tribes might seize the capital, but this would only aggravate the
bloodshed. In any case, serious violence in Kabul and political change
seem almost inevitable and could occur at any time.
[Omitted here is the body of the appraisal.]
59.
Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, August 22, 1979
SUBJECT
CIA Covert Action Activities in Afghanistan
1. Since the signing by the President on 3 July of Specific and
General Findings on Afghanistan (attached), CIA has initiated action
to implement this policy.2 The following provides a status report on
such action.
2. The Specific Finding: This Finding tasked CIA to carry out three
options approved at a meeting of the Special Coordination Committee
on 26 June. Those options and related actions follow.
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
The report was attached at Tab C to an August 22 memorandum from Henze to Denend,
not printed, that responded to Mondale’s request for information on Afghanistan. Henze
did not specify when Mondale made the request.
2 Attached at Tab B to Henze’s August 22 memorandum to Denend, but not printed.
For the Presidential Finding approved at the June 26 SCC meeting, see footnote 5,
Document 53.

Afghanistan
A. Option 1: Provide International Radio Capability and Expand Insur-
gent Propaganda
—Initially, the possibility was explored of using [less than 1 line
not declassified] radio facilities for a “Voice of Afghanistan” program.
This was rejected for political considerations. CIA is considering use
of [less than 1 line not declassified] radio for such broadcasts.
—A special team of propaganda and linguistic experts has been
assembled and is producing both broadcast and printed material for
distribution inside Afghanistan. Six leaflets have been produced and
two of these have been circulated in Afghanistan, including Kabul.
Four tape cassettes have been recorded with two of these distributed
in Afghanistan. Radio material is being produced regularly for a low-
power insurgent radio now operating near the Afghan-Pakistan border.
B. Option 2: Provide Cash and Nonlethal Support to the Insurgents
The amount of [amount not declassified] was established for this
purpose. The following actions have been taken:
—[amount not declassified] has been handed to a Nuristani asset in
support of that tribe’s unique insurgency effort.3
—A principal Afghan asset with excellent ties to the Peshawar
insurgent leadership is enroute to Pakistan to provide [amount not
declassified] to aid a coalition of dissident Afghan leaders.
—Pakistan liaison has agreed in principle to serve as a channel for
CIA aid to the insurgents. We have not as yet pressed them to convey
money. We believe the next week or two will provide a clearer idea
as to whom the balance of the funds [amount not declassified] would
best be given, unilaterally or through liaison.
—Action is being taken to assemble up to 50 medical kits for the
insurgents, one kit serving 50 men.
C. Option 3: Establish a Psychological Operations Program in Pakistan
We have discussed with Pakistan liaison their interest in providing
to the insurgents a dependable broadcast capability. In judging this
local capability by the insurgents to be even more important than the
projected international broadcasts of Option 1 above, CIA has taken
the following action:
—Located and ordered for immediate delivery a shortwave broad-
cast transmitter with backup equipment which will permit the insur-
gents to cover nearly one-half of Afghanistan. This transmitter package,
sturdy and lightweight, will be ready for shipment 10 September. Paki-
stan liaison has agreed to position the transmitter for the insurgents.
3. The General Finding: This Finding tasked the worldwide covert
action infrastructure to expose the Kabul regime as despotic and subser-
vient to the Soviets, and to publicize insurgent activities. A Perspectives
3 The Nuristani are an ethnic group indigenous to northeastern Afghanistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
was coordinated with Department of State on 3 August and sent to
the field. Under this Perspectives and an earlier one on Soviet Interfer-
ence in Other Countries Affairs, the following has been accomplished:
—145 major items have been placed in the media of 35 countries.
—Regular monthly briefings on Afghanistan are being provided
friendly liaisons.
—Briefings have been utilized by 23 agents of influence.
All portions of this document are SECRET.
60.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
6398. Subj: The Future of the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan: Some
Thoughts. Ref: Kabul 6396.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary. I think it very important that those directly concerned
with our policy towards Afghanistan read the cable under reference.
It is another chilling report about one of our FSNs being tortured. The
significance of the incidence however goes well beyond the discomfi-
ture experienced by our employee. It is to that aspect I address this
msg. End summary.
3. Our presence in Kabul is, in my view, faced with three perils.
The first is, of course, the insurgency and the related possibility of an
internal coup, either of which could bring physical harm to members
of the small American community.
4. The second danger relates to the brutal intimidation being experi-
enced by our FSNs. Nowhere else in the Foreign Service today, I ven-
ture, are our locals being subjected to such gross mistreatment by the
host govt. The DRA is obviously bent on penetrating this Mission,
regardless of human rights considerations, to develop hopefully
“proof” of USG subversive activities. In this they are undoubtedly
being assisted by the Soviets. The implications of this DRA policy are
Secret; Immediate; Exdis; Stadis.
Foreign Policy File, [no film number])

Afghanistan
worrisome. Not only does it confirm the enmity which Hafizullah
Amin has for the United States (the secret police are under his direct
control), but it raises a real concern about the safety of our American
personnel. As Langley and SY can confirm, this govt is, quite aside
from intimidating our employees, also making an all-out effort to plant
listening devices in our residences, and we can only assume they have
been successful in many instances. The experience too of the Pakistan
Embassy here, wherein its Pak employees have been harassed and one
abducted (in somewhat mysterious circumstances) shows that the DRA
is not above ignoring diplomatic immunities and international stand-
ards of decency. In sum, I worry that at some point Hafizullah Amin
may arrest one of our American employees, on doctored or circumstan-
tial evidence, in order to “prove” some point of his or hold us hostage.
5. Third, we have a nettlesome problem with respect to the DRA’s
apparent determination to reduce the size of this Mission. This is again,
I suspect, related to Hafizullah Amin’s semi-psychopathic desire to
humiliate and revenge himself against the United States.3 In this msg
I do not want to prejudge the outcome, but I am not sanguine we can
maintain a Mission of some 45 employees. Needless to say, I do not
relish the prospect of presiding over a humiliating, forced reduction
of the United States presence by a small and one of the most unsavory
govts in the world today.
6. Complicating the above scenario is the still unfinished business
of who was responsible for Ambassador Dubs’s death. I do not want
in this msg to get into this subject either, but as the Dept knows, we
continue to get disturbing reports about Hafizullah Amin’s role in
the affair.
7. In sum, I send this msg because I am worried about our presence
here, not only for the safety of our Americans but for the honor of the
U.S. Govt in the face of Hafizullah’s enmity for us. One of the possible
recommendations I am turning over in my mind, and the Dept may
wish to mull this over as well, is whether we shouldn’t reduce our
that “anti-U.S. blasts were the order of the day” during the “International Conference
of Solidarity with the People of Afghanistan,” sponsored by what the Embassy character-
ized as the “Communist front” World Peace Council of Helsinki. Amin gave the keynote
speech on August 24, and the conference proceedings, which were published in the local
media and thus suggested official Afghan endorsement, included the charge that “armed
intervention from across Afghanistan’s borders is entirely the work of the United States”
and there was “no support within Afghanistan for this intervention.” (National Archives,
in the Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghanistan

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
staff further, even at the cost of handicapping our ability to serve as
a listening post.4
Amstutz
4 The United States Mission in Afghanistan had already been reduced the previous
month. See footnote 3, Document 55.
61.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, September 8, 1979
SUBJECT
The establishment of an Afghan Liberation Front
The more over-extended the Soviets feel, the better off we will be
and the less likely that they will undertake reckless future action.
Afghanistan has all the earmarks of a situation in which the Soviets
could become embroiled endlessly. The only thing that is missing is a
sense of unity on the part of the opposition.
I therefore believe that we would derive great benefits if the various
Afghan exiles, together with representatives of the tribal groups doing
the actual fighting, could get together and proclaim an Afghan Libera-
tion Front (ALF) analogous to the NLF, which was such an effective
device for the Vietnamese. Like the NLF, the Front could be across a
wide spectrum that would include women’s groups, Royalists—even
avowed Communists. The stated aim of the ALF would be to rally
world opinion behind the Afghan freedom fighters’ heroic struggle
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
Sent for action. Attached but not printed is a September 11 covering note from Brement
to Henze and Gregg asking “to get together with you on this ASAP.” Below Brement’s
request, Gregg wrote a note to Henze reporting he had met with two CIA officials,
September 12, who told him that a liberation front existed outside Afghanistan but was
fragmented and not in contact with rebels in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan
against the forceful imposition of an atheistic Soviet regime in their
homeland.
Like the NLF, the Front should establish links to other similar
groups and set up offices throughout the world. It should, if handled
correctly, receive support from all the Muslims, from Iran, Egypt and
Saudi Arabia, to Algeria, Libya and Iraq. Not least of all, it would
offer many people in the United States and in Western Europe the
opportunity to demonstrate their consistency in having opposed us in
Viet Nam and in opposing a Soviet-backed regime in Afghanistan
as well.
Because of longstanding rivalry, it will be very difficult to get some
of these groups to cooperate with each other. But with a little effort
and a lot of money, it might be possible to bring this about. The one
thing that should be avoided in an operation of this kind, of course,
is the appearance that this is a US undertaking. I would therefore
suggest that we approach the Chinese with this idea and determine
whether they would be willing to carry the ball and work together with
the Pakistanis and perhaps the Iranians to set up such an organization.
RECOMMENDATION
That I work with David in investigating what it would take in the
way of US resources to help in the establishment of an ALF.2
Thornton concurs, but is not optimistic that Joan Baez and Jane
Fonda can be persuaded to support the organization.3
2 Brzezinski placed a checkmark approving the recommendation and wrote: “Speak
also to DG, PH” in the right margin; a reference to Donald Gregg and Paul Henze.
3 An unknown hand, possibly Brement’s, wrote: “at least not together” underneath
this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
62.
Alert Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
NI IAM 79–10012K
Washington, September 14, 1979
[additional memorandum number not declassified]
ALERT MEMORANDUM2
USSR-Afghanistan
The Soviets may have begun to give more serious consideration to the
spectrum of possibilities for direct combat intervention in Afghanistan. We
are watching Soviet forces near Afghanistan closely but our collection capabili-
ties there are poor, and we cannot confirm or deny reports that the Soviets have
introduced or are preparing to introduce small combat units into Afghanistan;
however, we do not see preparations for a large scale ground force intervention.
There are no indications of changes in the status of the Soviet [1 line not
declassified] near the Soviet border. ([classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified])
Our judgment of an increased Soviet concern is fortified by the
mid-August arrival in Kabul of General Pavlovskiy, Commander of
the Soviet Ground Forces, and a high-level delegation which includes
several other generals and colonels, reportedly to prepare a detailed
report on the Afghan insurgency and the Afghan military. Pavlovskiy
is probably charged with assessing the extent of the threat to the Afghan
government and preparing contingency plans which will outline the
amount and nature of Soviet military support needed to contain that
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job
restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed is a September 14 memorandum
from Turner to the National Security Council that read: “The Soviet leaders may be on
the threshold of a decision to commit their own forces to prevent the collapse of the
Taraki regime and protect their sizable stake in Afghanistan. Small Soviet combat units
may already have arrived in the country. I am concerned that the Soviets may be
underestimating the difficulties of shoring up the regime and may find themselves under
growing pressures to escalate the scope of their intervention in the next few months.
Moreover, the Soviets may now be more inclined to gamble on a substantial intervention
in Afghanistan because of their perception of a downturn in relations with the US and
the uncertain prospects for Senate approval of the SALT treaty.”
2 The Alert Memorandum is an interagency publication issued by the Director of
Central Intelligence on behalf of the Intelligence Community. Its purpose is to ensure that
senior policymakers are aware of the serious implications for US interests of impending
political developments. It is not a prediction that these developments will occur. This
memorandum has been coordinated at the working level by CIA, [less than 1 line not
declassified], NSA, and State/INR. [Footnote is in the original.]

Afghanistan
threat, both in its current stage and if it worsens.3 ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
As opposition to the Afghan government has increased over the
past year, the Soviets have gradually augmented their military advisory
presence. Early this year, at least five generals and an estimated 750–
1000 military advisors were stationed in the Kabul area, assisting newly
promoted officers in the Ministry of Defense and training Afghan
recruits. Since then, the Soviet presence has grown to at least 2,500.
Moreover, the role of Soviet troops has increasingly changed from a
mere advisory one to active participation in and supervision of a wide
variety of activity including logistics and combat planning functions
as far down as some regimental and battalion-level units. They are
apparently heavily involved in guiding Afghan combat operations, as
well as logistics and administration. Some unconfirmed reports allege
that Soviet helicopter pilots, with Afghan co-pilots, have flown strike
missions against the insurgents and that Soviet tank personnel have
participated in combat operations. In addition, Soviet advisors have
reportedly suffered about 80 casualties. If these reports are true, the
Soviets are also actively participating in combat on a small and limited
scale with Afghan units. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
[less than 1 line not declassified] in early September that the Soviets
have moved up to 3,600 troops into Kabul within the past two or three
weeks to protect Soviet facilities and personnel there. The information
has not been corroborated, but Embassy Kabul has submitted similar
reports from two other sources in the diplomatic community.4 It is
possible that such a force, without heavy equipment, could have been
brought into the city from the USSR undetected by the US, particularly
if this was done incrementally over a few weeks or so as part of the
ongoing airlift of material for Afghanistan. Such a movement of forces
by the Soviets would suggest increased security precautions and an
escalation of Soviet involvement beyond an advisory role. The Soviets
might consider such a move into Kabul to be prudent in view of the
uprisings that have occurred in Kabul this year and the continuing
3 The mission of the Deputy Chief of the Soviet General Staff, General I.G.
Pavlovskiy, to Afghanistan, August–October 1979, was reported in telegram 6604 from
Kabul, September 2. The Embassy surmised that the visit of the high-ranking general
possibly signaled a Soviet decision to lay a “detailed contingency groundwork for the
future intervention of Soviet forces in Afghanistan.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790400–1145)
4 The clandestine source reporting of early September was not found. [text, 1 line,
and citation not declassified] In telegram 6672 from Kabul, September 6, the Embassy
estimated the number of Soviet military advisers at between 3,000 and 3,500. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
possibility of violence in the capital. ([classification marking, codeword,
and handling restriction not declassified])
In expanding the level of their own involvement in Afghanistan,
there is a danger that the Soviets—consciously or unconsciously—will
amplify their own stake in the ultimate outcome, making it increasingly
difficult for them to resist raising the level of their participation still
another notch should they feel it necessary. ([classification marking and
handling restriction not declassified])
[Section heading not declassified]
[2 paragraphs (10½ lines) not declassified]
63.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
6914. Subject: Hafizullah Amin Takes Over Rule in Afghanistan.
Ref: Kabul 6913.2
1. (C—Entire text.)
announced that Noor Mohammed Taraki had informed the Politburo
of the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) and the Revo-
lutionary Council that he was “sick” and could no longer undertake
the duties of office. At Politburo and Revolutionary Council sessions
chaired on September 16 by Foreign Minister Shah Wali, who had been
the third-ranking official of the Khalqi hierarchy, those bodies decided
to name Hafizullah Amin as President of the Revolutionary Council
and Secretary-General of the PDPA. Amin would also retain his title
as Prime Minister.
3. The television announcement also revealed that four persons
had been killed at the Arg palace (“House of the People”) on September
14th. Among the dead was Sayed Daoud Taroon, Chef du Cabinet
of President Taraki—and former Police Commandant of Afghanistan.
Confidential; Flash. Sent for information Immediate to Ankara, Beijing, Dacca, Islamabad,
Jidda, Karachi for RSS, London, Moscow, USNATO, New Delhi, Paris, Peshawar, Tehran,
USUN, CINCPAC also for POLAD, and CINCEUR also for POLAD.
Policy File, D790422–1274)

Afghanistan
There are rumors at Kabul, not touched upon by this television
announcement, that Taraki was wounded in that same encounter.3
Flags will fly at half-mast on September 17 for “martyr” Taroon.
4. As of 2100 hours Kabul is quiet, but several tanks and nervous
troops still guard the streets near the Embassy. The customary 2300
hour curfew has been announced for tonight. We have a staff at the
Embassy who will continue to monitor events throughout the evening.
5. Comment: Amin now takes over undisputed control of the party
and the government, having already exercised undisputed operational
control since the revolution. Many of the victims of the past several
days (through death and through purges), such as former Interior
Minister Mohammed Aslam Watanjar and Taroon, were persons who
were considered supporters of Taraki, rather than Amin. The Embassy
will be analyzing these developments further in subsequent messages.4
6. Taroon’s passing will go largely unmourned. This brutal, psycho-
pathic killer was second only to Amin in the amount of blood on
his hands.
Amstutz
Amin’s guards attempted to kill three high-ranking Afghan Government ministers, whose
fate at the time of reporting was unknown. The following day, Amin and Taroon were
shot at while they were walking to Taraki’s office. Taroon was killed while Amin
“miraculously escaped.” Following this incident, military units “besieged” the palace,
during which Taraki may have been killed. [text and 3 lines not declassified] The report
further surmised that Amin took these actions without “connivance” with Moscow.
4 See Document 65.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
64.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 17, 1979
SUBJECT
What Are the Soviets Doing In Afghanistan? (S)
Simply, we don’t know. Speculation is, however, intriguing. (S)
There appear to be three possibilities:
1. The entire sequence over the weekend (dismissal of the military
in the cabinet; retirement of Taraki; Amin’s announcement of the end
of one-man leadership) was stage-managed by the Soviets as a way of
getting a more acceptable government installed in Kabul. This doesn’t
seem likely. The Soviets made quite a fuss over Taraki last week in
Moscow; Taraki would have been a much better figurehead for a
national front government in Afghanistan; and the Soviets would not
seem to have any reason to do in the military faction. This would seem
to be the least likely explanation.2 (S)
2. Amin is doing the whole thing in defiance of the Soviets, facing
them with a fait accompli. This would be a high-stakes game for him,
but he is capable of it. It is not clear, however, why Amin would
now be calling for broadened leadership unless that is solely window-
dressing or nothing more than a gratuitous slap at Taraki. (S)
3. Amin started out on his own, but after the dropping of Taraki,
the Soviets stepped in, called his bluff, and are now forcing him to
accept a collective leadership—something the Soviets have probably
been looking for for quite a while. (S)
We have no evidence that proves or disproves any of these. High
levels of Soviet [less than 1 line not declassified] before the ouster of the
military men may denote foreknowledge, but not necessarily complic-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
for information.
was in Moscow September 9–11, during which he secured an “authoritative reaffirma-
tion” of the Soviet Union’s commitment to the Afghan “people,” which the telegram
noted was vague, as opposed to a more specific commitment to the Afghan Government.

Afghanistan
ity.3 As between the second and third explanations, I like the second
one since I think that Amin would have held out longer in his bluff
against the Soviets, and will doubt his vague professions of future
collegiality until he starts implementing them. That, however, is only
a guess. (TS/Codeword)
It is hard to see how the Soviets can come out winners no matter
which is the case. They tried before to put a national front together
and failed, probably because nobody else would play. Why would
anybody be more willing to sign on now—unless the Soviets could
give credible guarantees that there would be a genuine sharing of
power? That doesn’t seem too likely. And, given the growing weakness
of the regime, why would anybody want to share power now when
they might get the whole thing shortly? (There may be in fact reasons
that would impel people to do so, arising perhaps from inter-tribal
considerations. But I don’t understand these and know nobody who
Most likely, the Soviets have just been pushed a big step nearer to
their moment of truth in Afghanistan. In this game of “Ten Little
Afghans,” there is now only one left. (S)
Whatever the Soviet role in this, they should be made to look as
if they had a hand in the operation. Taraki was something of a Lenin
figure and had a degree of foreign respect. Amin is the Stalin of the
drama and the Soviets should have him hung prominently around
their necks. (S)
Brement concurs.
3 This uncertainty was reflected in a September 17 intelligence note for the Secretary
of Defense, which stated that on the one hand [text not declassified] “possibly reflected”
Soviet foreknowledge; on the other, Soviet facilities and residential areas in Kabul only
received extra protection in reaction to the fighting that broke out at the palace, thus
suggesting Amin’s move took the Soviets by surprise. (Department of Defense, Afghan
Kabul, September 22, the Embassy reported that Vasily Safronchuk, Minister-Counselor
of the Soviet Embassy, denied that the Soviets had any advance knowledge of the
takeover. (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Soviets in Afghani-
stan—General Part #1) A situation report prepared in the CIA, September 18, found “no
evidence” of Soviet complicity in Taraki’s ouster, and cited the unlikelihood that Brezhnev
would have met with Taraki during his visit to Moscow had Brezhnev known Taraki’s
fate. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job
6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Pre-Invasion Reporting) A CIA intelligence information cable,
September 19, quoted Aleksandr Puzanov, Soviet Ambassador to Afghanistan, who
allegedly told the Yugoslav Ambassador to Afghanistan that Brezhnev and Taraki had
discussed replacing Amin as Prime Minister. According to this report, Amin learned of
the discussion and was consequently prepared for the “power play” of September 14.
(Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, USSR in Afghanistan (Septem-
ber 79))

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
65.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
6978. Subject: Some Reflections on the Afghanistan Political Crisis.
1. (C—Entire text).
2. I think it must be quite evident to the Dept and addressee posts
that we are witnessing a very significant political crisis in Afghanistan.
In this regard, I would like to highlight some aspects and share some
personal thoughts:
—The crisis is not over. At this point in time the loyalty of the
DRA military units in such areas as Ghanzi, Kandahar and Kunduz is
not clear, and there are widespread reports (and some evidence) that
the three deposed military figures in the Cabinet (Watanjar, Gulabzoi,
and Mazdooryar) have managed to escape the city and are at large. It
is quite possible that civil war among major DRA military units could
ensue, led by pro-Taraki or otherwise anti-Amin elements. Here in
Kabul, we are very much aware that the political situation remains
tense. Major streets adjacent to important ministries remain blocked
off to regular traffic, and here at the Chancery, manned Soviet-built
tanks are stationed astride the three streets bordering the Embassy
property. We can’t enter or exit by the front gate because the street is
closed, so we are using our emergency back gate, but do so under the
barrel of a large T–62 tank. It is all a bit unnerving, but something
certainly to write home to mother about.
—For 18 months now we have watched this Marxist party (PDPA)
devour itself. An Afghan official last night quietly described the leader-
ship to an Embassy officer as a “bunch of scorpions biting each other
to death.” By way of illustration, there have been 25 Cabinet changes
since the original list was promulgated in April 1978. The number of
Deputy Minister changes has been even more: 34. Purge after purge
has occurred, and one can’t help wonder how the regime manages to
survive. Part of the answer is, of course, brutal suppression of perceived
opposition. The number of political prisoners killed may have reached
6,000, and probably more than four times that number have been in
and out of political jails.
Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Sent for information to Islamabad, Moscow, New Delhi,
and Tehran.

Afghanistan
—The insurgency during this crisis period has been inept and
quiescent. It has not taken advantage of the political crisis to push its
advantage.
—I don’t know what the future will bring. Amin has amazingly
survived plot after plot against him. Surely the law of averages should
catch up with him someday. But then Stalin died in bed. Personally, I
would give him no better odds than 50 per cent to survive in power
this calendar year. I give his chances of dying in bed of old age as nil.
I would though, lay higher odds that the party itself (PDPA) will
survive in control in some form.
3. It is an interesting time to be in Kabul. Let’s hope nobody
gets hurt.
Amstutz
66.
Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for International Security Affairs (Murray) to the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security
Affairs (McGiffert)1
Washington, September 21, 1979
SUBJECT
Afghanistan
NSC staff member, Tom Thornton, used a meeting in his office
yesterday afternoon to produce a list of options on Afghanistan for the
President to consider on Friday morning at the “Breakfast of Cham-
pions”—with Zbig and Cy. Thornton said the list would not be pre-
sented as a cleared agenda of action but as a guide to discussion.
Thornton said that [less than 1 line not declassified] it was predicted
the Soviets were on the verge of a large scale military intervention
which had produced in the White House staff a feeling that intervention
would doom SALT, and strong U.S. diplomatic action would be
required to prevent such intervention or try to counter it. Thornton
proposed to work out options on the basis of what we might do if
1 Source: Library of Congress, Donated Material of Secretary of Defense Harold
Brown, Box 82, Afghanistan. Secret; Sensitive.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
such an intervention does not occur and, alternatively, if it does. (See
Tab A.)2
DIA is skeptical [less than 1 line not declassified] that there is a
battalion of Soviet airborne already in Kabul, with a full division getting
ready to follow. [1 line not declassified] made the point that in the first
instance our concern should be with SALT. Thus, while we might want
to deplore Soviet presence in Afghanistan, we do not want to create
expectations of actions on our part or concessions on the Soviet part
if neither was likely to materialize. This could contribute to the defeat
of SALT in the Senate. The other argument [less than 1 line not declassified]
was that, notwithstanding the importance and difficulty of our discus-
sions with the Soviets on removal of the Soviet brigade from Cuba,
we should not pass up the opportunity to tell them that intervention
in Afghanistan could doom the treaty just as surely as continued prob-
lems on the brigade in Cuba.
Thornton and others did not accept that we should add the Afghan-
istan item to our talks with the Soviets tomorrow (I knew nothing
about them) but said the item would be taken up by Vance with
Gromyko in New York on the 27th.3
On the other point, however, a consensus emerged on demarches
to regional and other capitals which would avoid overstating our inter-
est, our need to react, and our demands on the Soviets in a way that
would box us in with SALT critics here. The demarches are to focus
on the—
—Soviet-South Asia relationship, not the Soviet-U.S. relationship.
—Possibilities of further expansion of the Soviet role in a civil war
in Afghanistan.
—In this way we could get the publicity we sought for Soviet
action—perhaps inspiring a wide and adverse public and diplomatic
2 Tab A, a paper dated September 20, is attached but not printed. The paper,
organized in two parts, outlined actions the United States could take before and after
a Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and called such an action a “watermark event of
global import.” The paper emphasized that the United States could not be perceived to
be responsible for Afghanistan’s security and that Afghanistan must not be understood
as a Soviet-U.S. bilateral problem. Prior to a Soviet intervention, the paper argued that
the United States should remain in strong consultation with its regional and strategic
allies and must raise public consciousness to foster global condemnation of any Soviet
moves into Afghanistan. The paper also argued against military assistance to rebel forces
in Afghanistan or military moves in the region. Following Soviet intervention, the United
States should consider closing down the Embassy in Kabul, complaining to the Soviet
leadership that the intervention posed a danger to the U.S.-Soviet relationship, and
giving “open assistance to the rebels.”
3 Vance and Gromyko met during the UN General Assembly meeting on September
227. They did not discuss Afghanistan.

Afghanistan
reaction in the Arab world, Iran and the subcontinent—without taking
on Amin directly or aligning ourselves with the rebels. This is essen-
tially a non-interventionist view, and most held it to be compatible
with our military capabilities, both direct and indirect in the region,
and with our limited interests. It means that we will reject the strong
suggestion which the Chinese have apparently made to us to provide
weapons for the rebels through the Pakistanis. In fact, most parties
were cool to the idea that such aid might be useful even if the Soviets
do intervene in great force. The State, NSC, and CIA view was that
we want to “wring our hands like mad” and “make them pay a price”
but not be drawn into the melee inside Afghanistan.
Constable of State, however, advanced the view that if there was
a large scale intervention we would want to:
—Deploy forces (tactical air) to Pakistan and accelerate the deploy-
ment of a carrier task force to the Arabian Sea.
—Condemn Soviet action in UN as a threat to peace.
—Consult with the Indians about defense of the Subcontinent.
The meeting did not really come to grips with the problem that
an enlarged U.S. role in defense of the Subcontinent probably means
arms for Pakistan and a reduction, if not end, of our pressures on the
Pakistanis in nuclear matters.
Also, given our wholly diplomatic posture on the current increased
Soviet presence in Afghanistan—5000–6000 people, propping up
another hateful radical regime—we can expect another chorus of dis-
content from the Saudis, Israelis, Jordanians, Pakistanis, Chinese, Egyp-
tians and others about an America which is unable or unwilling to act.
While we may be constrained in acting in the public arena at the
moment—by the precarious position of the SALT treaty and our limited
interests in Afghanistan and limited resources which can be brought
to bear, we should consider a more active clandestine effort in both
propaganda and support for rebel groups. Iran would probably be
sympathetic. The Paks would cooperate. The Iraqis would not object.
The Saudis would be mollified. The stakes would be raised for the
Soviets near our most crucial and vulnerable overseas resource region—
the Gulf.
Robert J. Murray4
Deputy Assistant Secretary
4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
67.
Interagency Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency1
NI IIM 79–10022J
Washington, September 28, 1979
[Omitted here are a cover page and a security warning page.]
SOVIET OPTIONS IN AFGHANISTAN
KEY JUDGMENTS
Moscow probably views the situation in Afghanistan as even more
unstable after the fall of Taraki. While the Soviets may have previously
decided to implement new military measures to support Taraki against
the rebels, the uncertain tenure of Prime Minister Amin’s regime makes
it likely that Moscow is deferring major new initiatives to expand
the counterinsurgency effort pending a decision as to whether Amin
can consolidate his position. ([classification marking and codeword not
declassified])
The Soviets, however, have imposed an increased readiness posture
on airborne forces in the Turkestan Military District, evidently as a
result of concern over regime stability in the wake of the Amin coup.
They may fear that this coup might fragment the Afghan Army and
lead to a breakdown of control in Kabul. In this event, they would be
likely to deploy one or more Soviet airborne divisions to the Kabul
vicinity to protect Soviet citizens already there as well as to ensure
continuance of some pro-Soviet regime in the capital. Although we
might not receive prior warning, we believe it likely that we would
promptly detect a deployment of Soviet forces on this scale once it
began. We do not believe that Moscow would intend such a deployment
for use in fighting against the Muslim insurgency, although, once in
Afghanistan, such Soviet airborne forces could eventually be drawn
into such fighting. We have not seen indications that the Soviets
are at the moment preparing ground forces for large-scale military
intervention in Afghanistan. ([classification marking and codeword not
declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, History Staff Files. Top Secret; [codeword and
handling restriction not declassified]. A typed statement on the first page reads: “This
memorandum was prepared under the auspices of the National Intelligence Officer for
USSR and Eastern Europe, National Foreign Assessment Center. It was coordinated
within the Central Intelligence Agency; with the Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State; [less than 1 line not declassified] with the National Security Agency;
and with the intelligence organizations of the Departments of the Army, the Navy,
and the Air Force. Information available through 27 September 1979 was used in the
preparation of this memorandum.”

Afghanistan
In the months before the coup, as the insurgency in Afghanistan
intensified and spread, the Soviets increased the numbers and
expanded the counterinsurgency role there of what now are at least
2,500 of their military personnel, who are heavily involved in guiding
combat operations. Moscow may also have permitted direct participa-
tion of Soviet helicopter pilots, and possibly some tank personnel, in
combat alongside the Afghans. In addition, we believe that one lightly
equipped Soviet airborne battalion has been quietly deployed in
Afghanistan since early July to provide security at Bagram Air Force
Base.2 Meanwhile, also during the summer of 1979, the Soviets have
apparently tried and failed to induce the regime to admit other political
elements to the government to broaden its base.3 All these measures
have proved inadequate to halt the deterioration of the regime’s posi-
tion. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
Amin’s seizure of sole power within the Khalqist regime in mid-
September has further complicated these Soviet problems in dealing
with both the regime and the insurgency. We believe that the Soviets
probably did not instigate or foresee this move by Amin. Moreover,
they probably also evaluated it as rendering the counterinsurgency
task more difficult, at least in the short term, because it further narrowed
the regime’s base of support, and, in fact, threatened to divide the
ruling party itself. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
If Moscow, within the next few weeks, concludes that Amin has
consolidated his position and that no effective challenge from within
the regime and the Army is likely, we believe the Soviets will probably
increase their counterinsurgency role over the next few months, albeit
incrementally rather than dramatically. In this case, Moscow may fur-
ther increase the number of Soviet advisers and expand their combat
activities, and may gradually bring in additional special battalions or
regiments to provide security in key cities. In addition, Moscow could
bolster the counterinsurgency effort by providing Soviet-manned com-
bat support and combat service support units, such as attack helicopter,
logistic, and maintenance units, to enhance Afghan combat reach and
effectiveness. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
We believe the introduction into Afghanistan of additional Soviet
battalion- or regiment-size units for security purposes, like the forces
already at Bagram, could be accomplished without immediate detection
if this were done gradually, along with the ongoing airlift of materiel.
2 [less than 1 line not declassified] believes that there is insufficient evidence to deter-
mine the role or function of the Soviet unit deployed at Bagram Air Force Base. There
is no evidence that this unit is equipped with crew-served weapons. [Footnote is in
the original.]
3 See Document 56.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Our ability to detect promptly the incremental introduction of Soviet
combat support and combat service support units is similarly limited,
although time would increase the probability of our learning that such
units had entered Afghanistan. ([classification marking and codeword not
declassified])
The Soviets are probably well aware of the open-ended military
and political difficulties that could flow if such limited intervention
were allowed to grow into a larger and more visible commitment. They
are also aware of the adverse political consequences this would entail
for them in South Asia and the Middle East. On the other hand, it is
clear that the Soviets’ sense of their interests in Afghanistan is now
more ambitious than it was before the advent of the Marxist regime
in 1978. They see the maintenance of a Marxist state in Afghanistan as
important to their strategic and political interests in the region. This
perception has increasingly supplanted the Soviets’ earlier and less
ambitious goal of simply maintaining a friendly buffer state on their
southern border. If they do decide to provide some additional military
support to Amin, they are likely to do so in the hope of bolstering the
anti-insurgent struggle sufficiently to avoid facing a decision as to
whether to use Soviet combat units on a large scale. ([classification
marking and codeword not declassified])
In the event that Amin does not consolidate his position but that
an acceptable and viable Marxist alternative emerges, the Soviets are
likely to shift their political and military support accordingly. If no
such viable leftist alternative appears, and the Khalqi regime fragments,
the Soviets would promote installation of a more moderate regime
willing to deal with them, rather than accept the political costs and
risks of a massive Soviet invasion to fight the insurgency. Nevertheless,
we can foresee contingencies under which the chances of large-scale
and long-term Soviet intervention would become substantially greater:
—Prolonged political chaos.
—The prospect of advent of an anti-Soviet regime.
—Foreign military intervention. ([classification marking and codeword
not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]

Afghanistan
68.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Afghanistan1
256809. Subject: Newsom Meeting With Afghan Foreign Minister.
1. Confidential—Entire text.
2. Summary: During lengthy, businesslike session in New York,
Under Secretary Newsom and Afghan FonMin Shah Wali traded
mutual expressions of interest in improving bilateral relations, but
agreed on little else. Discussion touched on the Dubs assassination
and the DRA approach to acceptance of foreign assistance. Shah Wali
endorsed good relations with Pakistan, but complained that Afghan
“fugitives” were being trained there. He minimized the Soviet presence
in Afghanistan and defended his government’s independence and non-
alignment. We expressed appreciation for the DRA’s interest in control-
ling narcotics. End summary.2
3. At U.S. initiative, Under Secretary Newsom called on Afghan
FonMin Shah Wali for a general hour-long exchange of views Sept 27
in New York. Assistant Secretary Saunders and NEA/PAB Director
Peck sat in. Shah Wali had only a notetaker with him.
4. Newsom opened by noting that when he was last in Afghanistan
he had met with then-President Taraki and Fon. Minister Amin.3 He
wanted to use the opportunity of the FonMin’s visit to extend his
best wishes to Amin and to Shah Wali as they assumed their new
responsibilities. Newsom said Chargé Amstutz had reported that he
had a cordial conversation earlier the same day with President Amin.4
5. In response Shah Wali said the DRA had from the beginning
wanted to have good relations with all countries without exception.
Afghanistan had traditionally friendly relations with the U.S. and the
DRA had been desirous of maintaining these ties. Referring to the Dubs
assassination, Shah Wali said “certain events” had occurred which the
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to Islamabad, Moscow, New Delhi,
and Tehran. A copy of this telegram was also found in the Department of Defense,
Afghan War Collection, Box 4, USSR in Afghanistan (September 79).
2 Newsom and Wali were in New York for the UN General Assembly meeting.
3 See Document 26.
4 The meeting between Amin and Amstutz was reported in telegram 7218 from
Kabul, September 27. Amstutz described the meeting as “amicable” and reported that he
followed Department orders to keep the meeting short and avoid substantive discussion
beyond sharing Amin’s “oft-repeated request” to improve relations between the United
States and Afghanistan. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
DRA did not want. The DRA had done its best to prove that these
events had been outside its control.
6. Newsom noted that the reaction in the U.S. to the Dubs assassina-
tion had been very strong and led to the congressional action which
reduced somewhat our cooperation. We have tried to extend our assist-
ance programs as long as we could under the law, and are phasing
out our programs in an orderly fashion. The U.S. was always ready to
discuss steps which might be taken to put our relations back on a more
normal basis. We welcomed word that President Amin wanted better
relations. When the time came when better relations could be discussed,
we were willing to explore how the conditions laid down by Congress
might be met.5
7. In reply to Shah Wali’s suggestion that “false propaganda” on
this issue had unduly influenced U.S. political leaders, Newsom said
it was the events surrounding the assassination that were responsible,
not newspaper reports. We also felt that we had not gotten as much
cooperation in the investigation as we could have expected. In defense,
Shah Wali pointed to the serious doubts still remaining about the
Kennedy assassination and reiterated that the DRA believed it had
done its best.
8. Reminded of previous USG assistance to Afghan development
projects such as the Helmand Valley,6 Shah Wali said that it was because
of the previous friendly relations between our two countries that the
DRA considered the present situation to be “abnormal.” He saw no
hindrance or problem which could not be solved. He denied that the
DRA was turning away from the prior Afghan practice of drawing
on multiple aid sources and advisers in putting together cooperative
projects. Shah Wali pointed to the continuation of World Bank, German
and other projects, and argued that Afghanistan’s actions in some
“specific cases” (read U.S.) had arisen from a feeling that individuals
5 A reference to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee amendment to the Interna-
tional Development Assistance Act of 1979 signed by the President on August 14. The
amendment, inserted at the end of Chapter 1 of Part III of the Foreign Assistance Act
of 1961, reads: “(A) None of the funds authorized to be appropriated under this act may
be used to furnish assistance to Afghanistan nor may funds authorized to be appropriated
under this act before October 1, 1979, be expended for assistance to Afghanistan until
the President certifies to the Congress that (1) the Government of Afghanistan has
apologized officially and assumes responsibility for the death of Ambassador Adolph
Dubs; and (2) the Government of Afghanistan agrees to provide adequate protection
for all personnel of the United States Government in Afghanistan. (b) The provisions of
subsection (a) shall not apply if the President determines that it is in the national interest
of the United States because of substantially changed circumstances in Afghanistan.”
6 On U.S. assistance for Afghan development of the Helmand River Valley, see, for
Document 28.

Afghanistan
did not have proper qualifications. He added that Afghanistan had
asked for more personnel in certain cases, citing their request to Care-
Medico (which had a large U.S. personnel component) for more medical
specialists. He added with apparent regret that Care-Medico had been
unable to comply, and that he had learned shortly before departing
Kabul of Care-Medico’s decision to withdraw all of its personnel from
the country.
9. Shah Wali replied in the negative when asked if he expected
changes in basic DRA policies following recent leadership changes. He
expected continuity since the policies were laid down by the party,
and the party still existed. Newsom said we had noticed President
Amin’s stated desire for good relations with Afghanistan’s neighbors
Pakistan and Iran. Shah Wali said this reflected the sincere desires of
the Afghan people and the party. He said Deputy FonMin Dost’s visit
to Pakistan had resulted in “fruitful talks,” and that he had met with
Agha Shahi in Havana and former President Taraki had also talked
with Pakistani President Zia there. He was careful to point out that
the latter meeting “reflected the desire of our government.” He indi-
cated that both Agha Shahi and Zia had been invited to Kabul, but
that it was understood Zia would come only after an Agha Shahi visit
had taken place.
10. At another point in the conversation, Shah Wali took a mild
swipe at Pakistan when discussing the underlying causes of the insur-
gency. He said the rebels were mostly those who had lost their former
feudal privileges, but added that part of the problem was created by
Afghanistan’s neighbors. He pointed to the camps in Pakistan where
Afghan “fugitives” were trained. He added that Pakistan also sent
some “militia” into Afghanistan. Asked about the refugee situation,
Shah Wali argued that Afghanistan’s borders were very porous and that
2.5 million nomads crossed the frontiers every year. The explanation,
he concluded, was that “they have detained our nomads.”
11. On the subject of relations with the Soviet Union, Shah Wali
said Afghanistan’s traditional good relations with its northern neighbor
had changed little with the change of governments over the years.
Asked if he saw any contradiction between Afghanistan’s profession
of non-alignment and the presence of Soviet troops in the country,
Shah Wali said the numbers of Soviet advisers had been exaggerated.
A mountain had been made out of mole-hill. He pointed out that
Afghanistan had had Soviet advisers before the revolution, and said
the number had not changed much. He declined to be pinned down
as to exact numbers there now, and said there were advisers from
other nations such as India. In apparent contradiction of his earlier
statement, he concluded there had been no qualitative change in the
situation, just a quantitative one.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
12. Shah Wali also declined to be pinned down as to whether
the Peoples Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) was a Marxist-
Leninist party. He said we could judge ourselves from the program of
the party. The PDPA, he added, reflected the Socialist structure of the
country. Newsom recalled his earlier discussion with then Foreign
Minister Amin on the nature of the PDPA in light of U.S. legislation
bearing on relations with nations dominated or controlled by the inter-
national Communist movement.7 Did Shah Wali consider the PDPA a
part of the international socialist movement or as a purely Afghan
entity? Shah Wali said the PDPA wanted relations with all parties, not
just those in Socialist countries. He assured Newsom that his was a
sovereign government not under the influence of another government
or party. Afghanistan was faithful to the Non-Aligned Movement and
wanted to have a policy of its own. Newsom commented that the
U.S. respected “true non-alignment,” but that we had philosophical
differences with some countries’ definition of non-alignment—specif-
ically that of Cuba.
13. Saunders said we appreciated the DRA’s interest in controlling
the flow of narcotics. Describing narcotics as a major national problem
in the U.S., Saunders said we were prepared to work with Afghan
authorities and would appreciate any cooperation the DRA might give.
Shah Wali brightened visibly in thanking us for mentioning this matter.
He said the DRA had burned a cache of hashish last year worth dols
25 million, but the Western press had paid this no heed. Newsom
regretted the lack of publicity but said we in the USG had noticed. We
recognized the difficulties countries faced in interfering with traditional
narcotics culture and trafficking, particularly since narcotics could be
an important source of income for poor farmers. It was an act of courage
for a government in a country such as Afghanistan to take a strong
stand, and we appreciated this. He added this was a positive element
in our relations.
14. In closing, Newsom said he wanted to keep the lines of commu-
nication between our two countries open. He had asked a lot of ques-
tions, but this had been in the interest of finding a basis on which we
could improve our relations. He had been encouraged by the reception
President Amin had given to our Chargé earlier in the day and hoped
this would signal continued improvement in our relations.
Vance
7 See Document 26.

Afghanistan
69.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
Afghanistan/USSR
SUBJECT
General Contents of a Personal Note From President Amin to Soviet Head of
State Brezhnev. [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[5 lines not declassified]
1. After the ousting of Nur Mohammad Taraki from the Afghan
Presidency in mid-September 1979, Hafizullah Amin sent Dastigar
Panjshiri, Minister of Public Works to the Soviet Union with a personal
message from Amin to Soviet Head of State, Leonid I. Brezhnev. In
the message, Amin made the following points:
A. Amin claimed that he was not responsible for the 14 September
crisis which resulted in the removal of Taraki and the three military
members of the Cabinet. The events of that day had been forced
upon him.
B. Taraki’s fall has not affected the relationship between Afghani-
stan and the USSR; Afghanistan continues to require the full support
of the USSR in order to carry out Afghanistan’s revolution.
C. The fall of Taraki has not affected the historical outlook of
Afghanistan, an outlook that is shared by the USSR.
D. The message concluded with Amin sending his personal regards
to Brezhnev.
2. (Source comment: Since the 14 September episode, relations
between the Afghan Government and the Soviet Union do not appear
normal. Contacts between Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA)
officials and officials from the Soviet Embassy have decreased sharply
since 14 September.)
3. ACQ: [2 lines not declassified]
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, USSR in Afghani-
stan (October 79). Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
70.
Memorandum from the Secretary of State’s Special Adviser
on Soviet Affairs (Shulman) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, October 3, 1979
SUBJECT
Afghanistan: Intelligence and Policy
Our confrontation with the Soviets over Cuba arose because of
the premature release of intelligence into a highly charged, domestic
political atmosphere. While Afghanistan is not Cuba, both countries
receive substantial Soviet military assistance. In Afghanistan, even
more than in Cuba, Soviet policy is dictated by security concerns and,
therefore, is less susceptible to arguments that it should be altered for
the good of US-Soviet relations. Of immediate importance, however,
is the fact that in both cases the findings of the Intelligence Community
can have a serious effect upon our relations with the Soviets.
The events of the last two weeks provide a graphic illustration. On
September 16–17, Amin’s takeover in Kabul coincided with intelligence
reports that a Soviet airborne division designated for service in Afghan-
istan was in heightened readiness.2 The intelligence implied a threat
of Soviet intervention and created a perceived need for a US response.
In rapid order, we launched a campaign of high level press background-
ers, spokesman’s statements and diplomatic demarches which noted
“increased Soviet military activity north of the Oxus” and repeated US
opposition to Soviet intervention.3 Although the Intelligence Commu-
nity admitted it had no direct evidence linking the unit’s activity with
the Afghan power struggle, we acted because we could not take a
chance that the Soviets might move.
Since the airborne unit was not deployed and now has apparently
stood down, it might be argued that our action may have done some
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
2 See Document 67.
3 See, for example, Harold Saunders’s September 29 statement before the Subcom-
mittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs of the House Foreign Affairs Committee on the
See also the Department of State Bulletin, December 1979, p. 43, which reprinted a
Department statement to the news media, October 29, that “we are opposed to interven-
tion by any country in Afghanistan’s internal affairs.” The reference to a diplomatic
démarche is likely to instructions in telegram 250400 to multiple posts, September 23,
to inform host governments of “disturbing signs of increased Soviet military activity
north of the USSR-Afghanistan border.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790435–0449)

Afghanistan
good and, at least, did no harm. However, this conclusion would ignore
the impact on US-Soviet relations and on US credibility in general.
If the Soviets were not planning to use those forces in Afghanistan,
they probably view our actions as yet another propaganda campaign
and not as a serious initiative. Further, having raised the possibility of
Soviet action with our friends, we have risked being accused of “crying
wolf” or, worse, of being clearly aware of “the Soviet threat” without
doing anything about it. With both our friends and the Soviets, we
cannot raise the spectre of Soviet intervention too often without having
our statements discounted.
In our consideration of the Afghan problem, we have had a sliding
definition of “Soviet intervention.”
—In the beginning, we simply talked about “Soviet military inter-
vention”; however, with a $275 million military assistance program in
process and 3,000 or more advisors in the country, this has already
occurred.
—Subsequently, we talked about “the introduction of Soviet com-
bat units”; however, with the introduction in June 1979 of a security
force of 400 Soviet troops at Bagram airbase, this has already occurred.
—Lately, we have talked about “large scale Soviet intervention”;
however, with an earlier report of 3,600 Soviet military personnel in
Kabul and a more recent report of 500–1,000 Soviet advisors arriving
at two Afghan armored divisions nearby, this may also have occurred
or be in progress.
Unless we are treated to a spectacular show of Soviet airborne
units being airlifted en masse into Afghanistan, we may not know
that large scale transfers of personnel have occurred. The Intelligence
Community readily admits that it cannot monitor incremental increases
and might not know of the existence of a large Soviet force until it was
already in place. Should this occur, the parallel with the situation in
Cuba would become obvious.
In response to a belated US discovery of a large concentration of
Soviet forces, the Soviets would say that their personnel were simply
advisors, not different in “kind or purpose” from those we had previ-
ously noted. It would then again be our word against theirs that the
situation had changed.
An inter-agency working group has recently decided that “preven-
tion of large scale Soviet intervention” is our primary goal in Afghani-
stan.4 Since we have no definition of “large scale” and have difficulties
in monitoring Soviet activity, we may not know with any precision
4 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
when and if this occurs. It would, therefore, be in our interest to begin
thinking about how we will handle this situation in terms of US-
Soviet relations, SALT, and the Congress in advance. Otherwise, an
intelligence “breakthrough,” plus a press leak, or a Congressman’s
statement about “Soviet brigades in Afghanistan” could put us right
back in another US-Soviet confrontation.
At a minimum, we should try to ensure that any public announce-
ment of such an intelligence finding be placed in the proper context.
This would suggest an official spokesman’s statement that while we
deplore Soviet intervention we see it as a sign of the failure of Soviet
policy and not as a success.
Moreover, I recommend that you discuss with Stan Turner how
to ensure that intelligence reports on Soviet military actions are not
allowed to reach persons who might make them public in a sensational
manner. In particular, we should consider ending our present practice
of treating this subject in the NID and other publications which receive
wide distribution. Instead we should work with CIA to develop a
means of providing this information only to a carefully selected list of
officials under stringent controls over further dissemination. We should
also consider similar restrictions on cables from Embassy Kabul which
deal with Soviet military involvement in Afghanistan.
71.
Editorial Note
Following an October 4, 1979, meeting with the President’s Assist-
ant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Director of Cen-
tral Intelligence Stansfield Turner wrote in a memorandum for the
record:
“We discussed the Afghan situation and reported that we have
disbursed the funds authorized.” Brzezinski “suggested we come in
for more. I said no. I said that all the signs were that only arms were
really wanted at this point. He then indicated that he was really the
one who advised Mubarak that he would try to get the Paks to buy
Russian arms from the Egyptians to give to the Afghans. I didn’t make
any real progress on where that left us from a legal point of view.”
(Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
Memos, Agendas of Brzezinski/Aaron Meetings, January–December
1979)
The disbursement of funds mentioned by Turner was approved at
the Special Coordination Committee meeting of June 26 and subse-
quently authorized by the Presidential Findings of July 3. See Docu-
ment 53.

Afghanistan
72.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
7326. Subj: Some Disturbing Signs Affecting Afghanistan’s Inde-
pendence and the Position of Amin: Part One of Two.
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary. Much concern has been expressed in Washington
over Soviet troop movements on the Soviet side of the Oxus, but more
significant and ominous may be the growing Soviet military presence
in Afghanistan. The number of troops and military advisors—totalling
perhaps 7,000—and the role the latter are playing, makes it moot
whether this or any other Afghan regime can again exercise full inde-
pendence. End summary.
3. While a great deal of concern has been expressed in Washington
about the possible positioning of Soviet airborne troops just north of
the Oxus, I think a more dangerous and significant development has
been the continued build-up of Soviet equipment and forces in the
country, and the recent appointment of Soviet generals to direct the
counter-insurgency operations in the troubled Provinces of Paktia,
Ghazni and Konar.
4. To recapitulate the situation:
(A). Soviet troops are now known to be stationed in the following
two strategic areas:
—Bagram Air Force Base, located about 25 miles north of Kabul,
the single most important air base in the country. The number of Soviet
troops guarding the base is modest: about 600. More significant is that
the Soviets have apparently been given control of the base. It together
with Kabul Airport (partly an Air Force base as well) are highly strategic
points for control of the capital and surrounding areas.
—Kabul itself at probably three locations: Kabul Airport (at the
Air Force area), Pol-i-Charki tank base, and the Microrayon apartment
complex where many Soviets live. These troops, numbering perhaps
3,600 are probably here for several purposes, such as guarding the
Soviet community in the event of civil war and chaos. The troops would
also be in a position to try to secure Kabul Airport and the principal
tank base (over 150 tanks) if necessary.
Secret; Exdis. Sent for information to Islamabad, Moscow, and New Delhi.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
(B). The amount of military equipment continues to arrive in
impressive amounts. The large number of military tanks at Pol-i-Charki
tank base appears to be well in excess of the number of Afghan troops
able to operate them.
(C). The number of Soviet military advisers seems to be always
increasing and may now number about 3,000.
(D). Perhaps just as important is the fact that the role of these
military advisers seems to have been enhanced over the last some
weeks. This may be connected with the 6-week-long visit of a contingent
of 13 Soviet generals in country. The growing role of the Soviets is
noticeable in two ways. One is the elevation of three Soviet generals
to positions of, in effect, directing the counter-insurgency operations
in the three most troubled Provinces: Paktia, Ghazni and Konar. The
other is growing evidence of more sophisticated counter-insurgency
tactics in at least the Ghazni area, pointing to a Soviet hand.
5. I think the expanded Soviet role in the country raises some
fundamental political and policy questions for us. One is whether the
Soviets are not now in such an influential position that they have a
controlling influence over the regime and the country’s future. While
I do not suggest that the country has totally lost its independence, I
wonder whether the Soviet presence and influence here are not now
such that Afghanistan should be classified as a Soviet satellite state
akin to most of those in Eastern Europe and Mongolia. Certainly,
Hafizullah Amin, or any other party successor, is very beholden to the
Soviets to stay in power. The leverage and influence the Soviets can
now exert is tremendous, and given the unpopularity of the Khalqis,
no Khalqi regime could last a week here were the Soviets to withdraw
their support. Hafizullah Amin and senior party officials must know
this.2
6. I also see no likelihood that the Soviets intend to diminish their
military presence or their special position in this country. Were Hafizul-
lah Amin, or a successor, to desire to expel the Soviets, I doubt they
could now do it. The Soviets would likely respond by putting forward
2 An October 7 CIA intelligence report, [text not declassified] listed numerous reasons
for Amin’s unpopularity among Afghans. [text not declassified] asserted there was wide-
spread belief that Amin killed the more popular Taraki; that he was “openly prejudiced
in favor of Pashtuns;” that he was an “avowed Communist infidel;” and that Amin “has
given considerable authority to the Soviets in return for their support, and is selling out
Afghanistan to the Soviets.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4,
USSR in Afghanistan (October 79))

Afghanistan
some amenable Khalqi “leader” who would “request” the continued
Soviet presence, and there are probably enough in the party who would
go along with a change.
7. By septel (part two), I discuss Hafizullah Amin, his likely vision
of the Soviet role, and where the U.S. might fit in.3
Amstutz
3 See Document 74.
73.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, October 4, 1979
SUBJECT
Growing Soviet Involvement in Afghanistan
In view of General Pavlovsky’s extended presence in Afghanistan
and the gradually growing character of the Soviet involvement there,
the President feels that we face the prospect of an evolutionary interven-
tion. Accordingly, he wishes the two following steps to be undertaken:
1. This situation should become subject to more frequent public
comment;
2. Our allies and the countries more immediately concerned in the
region of Afghanistan should be promptly informed on the pertinent
facts available to the U.S. Government.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs David Newsom, Lot 81D154, Afghanistan. Secret. A handwritten note at the
bottom of the page indicates that the memorandum was received in S/S–I on October
5 at 12 p.m.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Please undertake
the above,
and inform
the President
on
implementation.2
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 Attached but not printed is Newsom’s October 10 covering memorandum to
Saunders, forwarding Brzezinski’s memorandum. Citing Brzezinski’s memorandum as
indicative of the President’s interest in the situation in Afghanistan, Newsom observed:
“with the changed circumstances and some of the indications which we have had of
Amin’s desire to improve the contact with us, the time has come for a further review
of our basic approach to Afghanistan.” Newsom further noted that recently Amin had
sought to improve communication with the United States and, with Amstutz due back
in Washington for consultation, his presence could be a “focal point” for a review of
current U.S. options regarding Afghanistan. Newsom contributed to that review in the
SCC meeting on October 26. See Document 76.
74.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
7392. Subj: The Position of Amin and Afghanistan’s Independence:
Part Two of Two. Ref: Kabul 7326.2
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary. Though the dominant position of the Soviets in
Afghanistan is probably due more to Hafizullah Amin than to any
other Khalqi leader, Amin is a nationalist. His vision for Afghanistan
may be a Marxist one—but it is for an independent state. Amin is
probably sincere in professing a desire for friendly relations with the
rest of the world, but he has made clear too that he sees Afghanistan
as belonging naturally to the pro-Moscow camp of “Socialist” countries.
Though claiming that his country will not meddle in the internal affairs
of other countries, he speaks of supporting progressive and liberation
forces everywhere, and the Pakistanis are worried about Amin’s fre-
quent abstruse references to the Afghan peoples between the Oxus and
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Islamabad, Moscow, and New
Delhi.
2 See Document 72.

Afghanistan
the Indus. As for U.S. relations, I think they will remain difficult, if for
no other reason than VOA’s Persian-language broadcasts which the
DRA finds irritating. If the insurgency starts to ebb—and it has shown
few signs of intensifying—we may have to come to terms with Amin.
Of fundamental interest to us will be whether the U.S. can woo, to any
degree, Afghanistan away from Moscow’s orbit and can discourage
any inclination by Amin to be irredentist. I am not sure we can. End
summary.
3. Though Hafizullah Amin has welcomed the massive support of
the Soviets, I believe him nonetheless to be a nationalist—and the only
strong Khalqi leader around. Amin has shown himself to be intelligent,
decisive, and extraordinarily energetic. He is also ruthless; otherwise
he would not be where he is.
4. While in part one of this message, I expressed concern that the
Soviets may now have a commanding influence in this country, I believe
also it would be a mistake to characterize Amin as a Soviet toady. We
have lots of evidence that he wants to run his own show, and that
Moscow is less than ecstatic over the successive purges which have
caused division in and depleted the ranks of the “progressive forces.”
In this respect, Foreign Minister Shah Wali made a remarkable series
of disclosures this week. On Oct 6, he invited all the “Socialist country”
Ambassadors (excepting the Chinese) for a briefing. According to the
Yugoslav Ambassador who was there, Shah Wali spent most of the
time telling about the Sept 14 Palace shootout when Taraki was
removed, and made the following startling disclosures:
—Soviet Ambassador Puzanov was with Taraki on Sept 14 when
Amin was called over to the latter’s office to be arrested. The inference
is that the Soviets knew about the anti-Amin plot.3
—After the shootout, Amin’s departing car was fired on in the
Palace complex by a rooftop sniper, apparently pre-positioned, but
Amin had left Taraki’s building by another way.
—Interior Minister Watanjar, together with the two other military-
officer Cabinet ministers plus the secret police chief, fled to the Soviet
Embassy but later allegedly left there.
—At the Soviet Embassy, Watanjar placed a phone call to the Kabul
Central Military Command ordering immediate action against Amin.
But the commander refused to act unless so ordered by the Politbureau.
Thus ended the anti-Amin plot.
5. Though the above Sept 14 account shows that Amin may not
be Moscow’s first preference as the DRA leader, Moscow has now
3 For discussion of alleged Soviet foreknowledge of Taraki’s ouster, see Docu-
ment 65.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
seemingly accepted Amin and reached a modus vivendi with him.
Last week, when I asked the Hungarian Ambassador about Moscow’s
alleged unhappiness over the purges of Taraki and Watanjar, and the
reported coolness between Amin and Moscow, he cautioned against
reading too much into this. He said, “As long as Afghanistan does not
change its basic policies (read Communism and a pro-Moscow foreign
policy), Moscow doesn’t care who is in charge.” From Moscow’s and
Amin’s behavior since September 14, I think the Ambassador may
be right.
6. This is not to say that the Amin-Soviet relationship has been or
will be an easy one. Before Sept 14, there was tugging and pulling on
both sides—and now there may be distrust. A few days ago, an Asian
Ambassador here aptly described the situation when he said: “They
are like a husband and wife who don’t much care for each other but
nightly keep climbing into the same bed, because each has compelling
needs and no options.”
7. If Amin survives, a relevant concern for the U.S. will be whether,
in shaping foreign policy, he will keep a low profile such as did Hunga-
ry’s Kadar or be bent on playing an active international role like Fidel
Castro. The departing Pakistani Ambassador (to be Pakistan’s Foreign
Secretary) fears the latter. He sees Amin as irredentist, and told me
that during his farewell call on Amin, the latter’s evasive answers on
Pushtunistan and Baluchistan heightened rather than assuaged his
fears. This is notwithstanding assertions, like Foreign Minister Shah
Wali made to me last week, that Afghanistan has “no territorial
ambitions.”
8. As for U.S.-Afghanistan relations, if Amin and his Khalqi Party
survive (and I fear time is working in their favor), we will have to give
thought as to what kind of presence and role we can have here. Can
we exert a moderating influence? I am not sure we can, though the
Sept 14 incident involving the Soviets gives some grounds for cautious
hope. Certainly Amin would welcome resumption of U.S. economic
aid—on their terms—but I am doubtful this would necessarily give us
leverage. When we had a $17 million aid program here, we enjoyed
almost no influence.
9. I doubt, too, that Amin would ever sincerely turn to us (or to
the Chinese or Yugoslavs) as a political alternative to the Soviets. For
one, our political ideology is so different from his. I also don’t think
the Soviets would allow it, and Amin must realize this. Yet, I cannot
ignore that in years past, nationalism has been a powerful force in
Afghanistan, rejecting foreign influence. It is conceivable that over the
next year or so it could assert itself in ways which would diminish the
Soviet presence. The insurgency is one manifestation of this. Though
so far the rebellion has disappointed many well wishers, and does not
immediately threaten this regime, it may gain momentum.

Afghanistan
10. What should our posture be during this period of uncertainty?
I think our best strategy is to continue what we have essentially been
doing: maintaining a low profile, trying to avoid disputatious bilateral
issues, and waiting to see what happens.
Amstutz
75.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
7421. Subj: (U) DRA Announces Death of Former President Taraki.
1. (U) Kabul Radio announced last night in a brief news item that
Noor Mohammad Taraki, recently deposed President of Afghanistan,
had died that morning (October 9) after a severe illness. The announce-
ment added that he was buried in the family graveyard the same day.
We have, thus far, not noted any particular signs of mourning in Kabul.
Government flags remain at full mast and there have been no public
demonstrations of regret at Taraki’s passing.
2. (C) According to a source with wide-ranging contacts in Afghan
circles, a Cabinet official had disclosed two weeks ago that Taraki
had died during or soon after the September 14 shootout at Kabul’s
Presidential Palace, which brought Amin to power. Amin and his gov-
ernment’s official public line since that time has been that Taraki was
under a doctor’s care because of a severe illness. A DRA official had
recently insisted to an officer of this mission that Taraki was paralyzed
on one side and that that was why he had had to relinquish the Presi-
dency to Amin.
4. (C) Comment: Whatever the manner or timing of Taraki’s demise,
we have reason to believe that some Khalqi stalwarts remain disgrun-
tled that Amin so unceremoniously ousted Taraki, the Khalqi Party’s
founder, last month, and consider Amin and his crowd to be nothing
more than opportunistic usurpers. Amin is undoubtedly aware of such
resentment and is presumably plotting to neutralize those die-hard
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information to Islamabad, Moscow, New Delhi, and
Tehran.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Taraki supporters who could pose a threat to his regime, whether
among the military or civilian elements.
Amstutz
76.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Covert Action
PARTICIPANTS
State
Justice
David Newsom, Under Secretary for
Attorney General Benjamin
Political Affairs
Civiletti
OSD
OMB
Secretary Harold Brown
Dr. John White, Deputy
W. Graham Claytor, Jr., Deputy Secretary
Director
JCS
White House
Lt. Gen. John Pustay, Assistant to the
Zbigniew Brzezinski,
Chairman
Chairman
Donald Gregg
Hedley Donovan
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director
NSC
[name not declassified] Deputy Chief/LA/
Paul B. Henze, Notetaker
DDO
[name not declassified] Deputy Chief/NE/
DDO
[name and title not declassified]
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
in the White House Situation Room. The summary of conclusions was attached at Tab
B to a memorandum (not printed) from Brzezinski to Carter recommending the President
sign the Presidential Findings (attached together at Tab A, not printed). The Presidential
Finding with the scope of Afghanistan stated: “provide support, either directly or through
third countries, to the Afghan insurgents in the form of cash, non-military supplies,
communications equipment and procurement advice.” Under the description, Carter
wrote: “My preference is that we have the consultations with the Saudis (& perhaps
Paks) first, to see what we can do to help them with covert action. Expedite, and report
back to me. J.” Under Carter’s note, an unknown hand wrote: “Finding signed 11–7–
79.” [text not declassified] Tabs C and D were also attached to Brzezinski’s memorandum
but not printed.

Afghanistan
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
[Omitted here is material unrelated to Afghanistan.]2
The proposals on Afghanistan were discussed in detail.3 CIA repre-
sentatives pointed out that they followed naturally on the actions that
had already been undertaken as a result of the Presidential Finding of
further actions supporting the Afghan rebels be deferred until spring
so that we could see how the insurgency fared through the winter
months, but all other members of the committee felt the need to act
now was urgent. The Chairman stressed the political importance of
demonstrating to Saudi Arabian leaders that we were serious in oppos-
ing Soviet inroads in Afghanistan and the likelihood that a substantial
commitment of assistance on our part would result in increased Saudi
willingness to provide support. CIA representatives pointed out that
delays of various kinds were bound to occur even under the best
of circumstances but that decisions made now greatly improved the
possibility that some of our aid could reach rebel forces in time to help
them through the strains of the winter. (S)
The committee concluded by endorsing unanimously a proposal
for [amount not declassified] of additional aid for Afghan rebels, to be
provided primarily through Pakistan and Saudi Arabia in the form of
cash, communications equipment, non-military supplies and procure-
ment advice. No more than [amount not declassified] of this sum will be
for communications equipment. An amendment to the Presidential
Finding of 3 July 1979 will be prepared. The Chairman directed CIA to
undertake at an early date a briefing of senior Saudi leaders (specifically
Prince Sultan and Prince Fahd) on Afghanistan and our decisions on
aid for the insurgents. (S)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
America, Document 396. Regarding the discussion of Jamaica, see Foreign Relations, 1977–
1980, vol. XXIII, Mexico, Cuba, and the Caribbean, Document 199.
3 The detailed proposals were attached at Tabs E, F, and G to Brzezinski’s memoran-
dum to Carter (see footnote 1, above). They are printed below.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Tab E5
Option No. 1
Washington, undated
OPTION NO. 1
Provide additional funds to the Afghan insurgents, jointly (with the
Saudis and Pakistanis) and unilaterally, for the procurement of non-military
supplies; and provide additional funds for the continuation and expansion of
propaganda activities.
up to $695,000 to support the Afghan insurgents, either unilaterally or
through third countries, by providing cash or non-military supplies;
and also authorized CIA propaganda operations in support of the
insurgency. At the time the SCC discussed this proposal, it was agreed
that consideration would be given in the future to increased support
should circumstances indicate additional funds were warranted.
2. Since receiving this authorization, CIA has expended or obligated
80. These funds have been or will be expended as follows:
—[amount not declassified] in cash payments to the insurgents and
the provision of a limited amount of medical supplies.
—[amount not declassified] for propaganda operations.
Pakistani liaison has begun to disburse some of these funds and
medical supplies to insurgents inside Afghanistan. Unilateral assets
have separately transferred funds into Afghanistan, and to insurgent
leaders in Pakistan. Propaganda activities have included the procure-
ment of two complete radio broadcasting stations which are now in
Pakistan awaiting onward shipment into Afghanistan. A support mech-
anism to produce propaganda material, including tapes for broadcast
on insurgent radios and for hand-to-hand passage inside Afghanistan,
has been created and is in operation.
3. The Afghan insurgency has intensified and spread, and Afghan
Government forces are increasingly stretched thin in their efforts to
suppress it. At the same time, it is clear that the insurgents continue
to lack funds and as yet are uncoordinated. The Soviets appear to have
stepped up their support to the Afghan Government. It is likely that
this winter will see something of a hiatus in military operations by
5 Secret; Sensitive.

Afghanistan
both sides—a result of the insurgents’ shortage of supplies and the
DRA’s likely desire to reorganize in the wake of both a long spring/
summer campaign and recent political changes in Kabul.
4. It is too early to estimate precisely what effect the limited funding
may have had on the insurgency. Indeed, some of the funds are still
in the pipeline and have not yet reached the insurgents. The creation
of a production mechanism to prepare propaganda materials, and the
delivery of two radio transmitters to Pakistan to give the insurgents
their “own radio” are significant steps. However, the effect of a propa-
ganda operation is incremental and is part of a larger effort. The intensi-
fication of the insurgency will be abetted by these support efforts.
5. The insurgents have a continued critical need for funds. Timing
is important. The current need is particularly relevant in view of both
the expected hard winter, which will impede any resupply efforts,
and an anticipated increase in Afghan Government pressure on the
insurgents—possibly this winter, almost certainly in the spring.
Specific proposals on expending this sum are:
—An approach to the Saudis stating that we have already provided
aid to the insurgents—citing funds, medical supplies, and radio broad-
cast transmitters. We would tell the Saudis that we wish to provide
additional aid—[amount not declassified] for non-military support—and
would inform the Saudis of our interest in discussing what support
they may wish to provide in concert with our efforts. (This step is
intended to accomplish several ends: to spur significant Saudi contribu-
tions, thus increasing the total amount of aid provided; to give evidence
to the Saudis of the U.S. Government’s determination, expressed in
concrete terms, to oppose communism; and to meet a recent Pakistani
liaison request for our assistance in coordinating external support for
the insurgents.) [less than 1 line not declassified] informal discussions
with the Saudis indicated Saudi receptivity.
—Depending on our discussions with the Saudis, we may subse-
quently participate in joint discussions with the Saudis and Pakistanis
on coordinated support to the insurgency.
—[amount not declassified] would be reserved for unilateral passage
to insurgents or for subsequent passage to liaison.
—[amount not declassified] would be utilized to continue and expand
propaganda activities, including support for insurgent clandestine
radio broadcasts.
Risk: Operational risks are low. However, the insurgency has
placed great strain on the Afghan Army and challenges the continued
survival of the Government. To counter this, the Soviets have gradually
augmented their military advisory presence, and the role of Soviet
troops has increasingly changed from an advisory one to active partici-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
pation in and supervision of anti-insurgent military operations. It is
possible that further insurgent successes might prompt still greater
Soviet involvement, which could range from still more advisors and
equipment to the use of Soviet combat units. (TAB D)
Cost: [amount not declassified] (for breakdown, see above)
Tab F6
Option No. 2
Washington, undated
Option No. 2
Provide tactical military communications equipment to the insurgents
1. Discussion: Prince Turki Ibn Faysal, Director of the Saudi Ara-
bian General Intelligence Service, recently recommended to [2 lines not
declassified].
Prince Turki expressed concern at what he perceived as U.S. failure
to defend its own (and by implication, Saudi Arabia’s) interests in such
areas as Zaire, Iran, Somalia and Afghanistan. At the same time, Turki
recognized the difficulties which the U.S. would have encountered in
intervening in these areas overtly. He implicitly recognized that U.S.-
Saudi collaboration could provide a means for masking U.S. support
of friendly elements in Middle East crisis areas.
2. Turki suggested a number of areas for such collaboration, includ-
ing Afghanistan. He stated that his government was providing limited
support to the insurgents. In addition, he mentioned that their insurgent
contacts reported that lack of radio communications was seriously
hampering the coordination of their military activities.
3. It is believed that approaching Turki with a proposal that CIA
provide communications equipment to the insurgents, possibly
through Saudi channels and attributable to the Saudis, would allow us
to propose that the Saudis, in addition to our radios, provide significant
funds from their own resources to support the insurgency. If the Saudis
agreed to the proposal, but indicated that they would prefer—for logis-
tical or other reasons—not to act as “middle-men,” we would give the
radios directly to the Pakistanis, and advise the Saudis of our action.
4. In addition, this proposal would have the following benefits:
6 Secret; Sensitive.

Afghanistan
a. It would reassure the Saudis of the USG’s interest in resisting
the spread of communism in the Middle East;
b. It could develop a precedent for using the Saudis as an intermedi-
ary, concealing U.S. involvement, to support friendly political elements
or other covert assets elsewhere in the area.
5. The lack of radios to coordinate their activities has placed the
insurgents at a tactical disadvantage vis-a`-vis the DRA. It compels the
insurgents to operate on a piece-meal, local basis, and consequently the
DRA is able to deal with their raids one at a time, bringing preponderant
strength to bear on the area of the insurgent attack. Coordinated simul-
taneous attacks in several areas would force the DRA to stretch its
forces much more thinly in dealing with these attacks and significantly
improve insurgent chances of success. Radios would also permit rapid
transmission of intelligence on DRA activities from one insurgent unit
to another, and could also be used to spread propaganda.
6. To establish a basic communications net for the insurgents, we
would provide 16 transceivers with power supply and related equip-
ment: 12 to serve as active units, and four to be held for spare parts;
We would also provide 100 walkie-talkies for tactical use. All equip-
ment would be of foreign manufacture or sterile U.S.-made equipment.
Risk: The provision of foreign-made (or marked) radio equipment
should involve relatively little risk of exposure.
Cost: 16 transceivers and related equipment (including delivery)
100 Walkie-talkies [amount not declassified]
[amount not declassified]
Tab G7
Washington, undated
Option No. 3-a
Broker Saudi agreement to pay for munitions for the insurgents, with the
Pakistanis actually making the purchases abroad
1. Discussion: The Saudis, once made aware of our willingness
to expend significant sums of money aiding the insurgency (See TABS
C & D), could be asked to provide funds for use by the Pakistanis to
purchase munitions. If the Saudis are amenable to this, we could
7 Secret; Sensitive.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
attempt to broker meetings between a foreign arms dealer and the
Pakistanis (who would make the actual purchases), and attempt to
monitor Pakistani purchases through this arms dealer.
2. The bulk of the purchases would be ammunition for Soviet-
made weapons captured by the insurgents from Afghan Government
forces, although it may be deemed wise to purchase some ammunition
for vintage weapons in the hands of the insurgents.
3. In addition to ammunition, a small amount of explosives, and
perhaps a limited number of Soviet-made antiaircraft weapons, be
purchased.
4. The insurgents are critically short of weapons for use against
Soviet-supplied helicopters and aircraft and are beginning to suffer
significant losses to the weapons systems, which they cannot counter.
Shortages of both light small arms/ammunition and heavier weapons,
in the face of increased pressure from the DRA, may cause the insur-
gents to lose heart and result in their being destroyed piecemeal.
RISK: Brokering Saudi payment for lethal military supplies should
involve relatively little risk of exposure.
Option No. 3-b
Provide the Pakistanis with funds to purchase munitions abroad for
subsequent passage to the insurgents
1. Discussion: The Pakistani Inter-Service Intelligence Directorate
(ISID) has advised the CIA Chief of Station that, in ISID’s opinion,
despite the fall of Asmar and other recent favorable developments, the
insurgents remain very much in need of weapons, ammunition and
demolitions. According to an ISID representative, President Zia
endorses this view and is anxious that CIA provide this equipment
through the ISID. We have thus far advised the ISID that we do not
have authorization to provide weapons or ammunition. Nevertheless,
the ISID asserts that there are areas in Afghanistan where the insur-
gents’ weapons needs are very real. Reporting indicates that the insur-
gents are trying to secure new weapons. Moreover, the insurgency
continues to spread, involving a greater number of irregular forces,
while, correspondingly, Soviet aid to the DRA is steadily increasing.
2. If the Saudis do not indicate a willingness to pay for weapons
for the insurgents (Option 3-a), we would attempt to place the ISID in
contact with a foreign arms dealer, and, [less than 1 line not declassified]
monitor Pakistan purchases to verify that funds provided are properly
used. Funds to cover the purchases of ordnance supplies would be
provided by CIA to the Pakistanis. Comments on the types of munitions
involved are noted above and in Option 3-a.

Afghanistan
RISK: While the risks of exposure are somewhat higher than in
merely brokering Saudi funding of these arms/ammunition purchases,
the Pakistanis are the ostensible purchasers, and thus the USG can
plausibly deny involvement.
COST: The cost of ammunition/weapons would be approximately
[amount not declassified].
Option No. 3-c
Provide the Pakistanis with munitions from CIA stocks, and with
munitions purchased by CIA from foreign arms dealers, with CIA
arranging delivery of these munitions to Pakistan
1. Discussion: CIA can provide, from its own stocks, ammunition
for Soviet small arms. The advantage in supplying this ammunition is
the speed with which it can be assembled and delivered (in approxi-
mately two weeks). In addition to stocks on hand, supplies of special-
ized Soviet-made ammunition and weapons can be purchased by CIA
and shipped to Pakistan, possibly within two months. CIA could also
provide supplies of demolitions, suitably disguised as to origin, from
its own stocks.
2. Supplies from CIA stocks could be moved with relative speed
to Pakistan and turned over to the Pakistani service for transfer into
Afghanistan.
RISK: This is somewhat more risky than either of the above options
in that CIA is directly involved in providing the equipment.
COST: [amount not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
77.
Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Warning
Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (MacEachin) to the
National Intelligence Officer for Warning, Central
Intelligence Agency (Lehman)1
[memorandum number not declassified]
Washington, October 26, 1979
SUBJECT
USSR-Afghanistan
1. We are concerned that in the month that has elapsed since
the USSR-Afghanistan Alert Memorandum and the IIM Soviet Options in
Afghanistan were issued,2 the Soviets appear to have put themselves
in position to move a larger ground combat force into Afghanistan in
less time and affording less advance warning than was believed possi-
ble at the time those papers were written. [classification marking not
declassified]
2. Activity at the Soviet ground force installation at Kushka, some
five kilometers from the Afghanistan border, indicates that the readi-
ness of the motorized rifle division whose units are located there has
been substantially increased. Indeed, the evidence suggests that
through the last month at least some elements probably have been
fleshed out with reservists to full combat strength. This division sits
on the best surface route into Afghanistan. With full manpower and
equipment, it could move by road in armed convoy from its present
location to as far as, for example, Kandahar in Afghanistan in about
24 hours. [classification marking and codeword not declassified]
3. The Soviet motorized rifle division units at Termez, also located
directly adjacent to the Afghanistan border at a major crossing point,
have been unusually active recently. The activity there has not been
as extensive in either scale or duration as that at Kushka. This division
would not be able to move by surface routes into Afghanistan as easily
as the one at Kushka because it would have to cross the Oxus by barge.
Nevertheless, if the division is at increased manning and readiness, as
the evidence suggests, at least major elements could move into the
Mazar-i-Sharif area of Afghanistan in 24–48 hours. [classification marking
and codeword not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job
fied]. Attached but not printed are an October 29 covering memorandum from MacEachin,
a map of Afghanistan, a distribution list, and a memorandum from [text not declassified]
to MacEachin, October 30, registering INR’s endorsement of MacEachin’s memorandum.

Afghanistan
4. In sum, if those two Soviet motorized divisions located on the
Afghanistan border are now manned at higher states of readiness, as
the evidence suggests they may be, the Soviets would be able, within
about a 48 hour period, to insert an airborne division (the 105th at
Fergana) into Kabul, a motorized rifle division into Kandahar, and at
least major elements of a motorized rifle division into Mazar-i-Sharif.
A major ground force intervention along these lines would not need
to be preceded by much if any visible mobilization of army and front
level support elements. [classification marking not declassified].
5. At the time the IIM Soviet Options in Afghanistan was being
drafted the consensus of community analysts was that the Soviets could
insert an airborne division and possibly some individual combat units
of battalion or regimental size while affording us little warning but
that any major military action beyond that probably would have to be
the kind of multi-division action that would be clearly indicated well
in advance. While that judgement may have been consistent with the
situation at the time, we do not believe it remains valid. [classification
marking not declassified]
6. Adding to our concern in this regard is information we recently
obtained [less than 1 line not declassified] indicating that activity seen in
imagery of Kushka and Termez, in the spring of this year, and which
was interpreted to be exercise activity of the units normally garrisoned
there, actually was an augmentation—albeit apparently of a temporary
nature—with additional forces originally located several hundred kil-
ometers from the Afghanistan border. This evidence points to the diffi-
culty of interpreting [1½ lines not declassified] the significance of activities
of ground force units in and around major garrisons. [classification
marking and codeword not declassified]
7. Another factor that bears on the Soviet ability to quickly move
larger forces into Afghanistan is the extent to which major terminals
in Afghanistan, particularly the air terminals, have been improved. We
do not know, in fact, the full extent of what has taken place in the two
months that the Pavlovskiy mission has been in Afghanistan. Recent
imagery, however, does show that at Bagram airbase parking areas
are being blacktopped and a new heightfinder radar now is operational
there. Both of these improvements raise the traffic handling capacity
of the airfields. We also have unconfirmed information [less than 1 line
not declassified] that the Soviets have virtually “taken over” Kandahar
airport, which already has been the best equipped in Afghanistan in
terms of air traffic capacity. According to [less than 1 line not declassified]
the cargo of much of the extensive airlift that has been underway
in the last two months has been construction materials. [classification
marking and codeword not declassified]
8. Adding to the ominous nature of these military developments
are:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
a. The recent mutiny of at least elements of an Afghan army division
near Kabul. Based on reports of the duration and scale of the measures
to suppress it, this latest mutiny appears to be the most serious break
yet in the cohesiveness of the Afghan army. Whether and where another
uprising might take place must concern the Soviets. The worst case
they probably envisage is a defection (as opposed to a mutiny) of one
or two whole divisions to the Muslim insurgency. A military coup
could be accommodated by the Soviets, but a major defection could
cause the entire situation to become unravelled, making the Soviet
options even more unpleasant than they are at present. [classification
marking not declassified]
b. Information that on 17 October, shortly after the mutiny, a meet-
ing of the highest [less than 1 line not declassified] was held to discuss
Afghanistan. [classification marking and codeword not declassified]
c. Information that Pavlovskiy was still in Afghanistan on 19 Octo-
ber apparently awaiting some decision or orders. [classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified]
Activity at Kushka and Termez
9. Beginning in [less than 1 line not declassified] imagery of the Kushka
ground force installation began to show substantial amounts of ground
force equipment in the nearby rail transshipment area. Initially, it was
difficult to ascertain whether equipment was coming in or going out.
By early September, however, it appeared that the entire garrison had
been vacated. While a full interpretation must await a detailed imagery
analysis, the types and amounts of equipment suggest that at a mini-
mum a motorized rifle regiment, an artillery unit, an anti-aircraft unit,
and some combat support units had moved out. The destination was
unknown at the time, but later evidence indicated that a major field
training exercise was underway. About [less than 1 line not declassified]
later, the same types of units appeared to have begun returning to the
garrison. By [less than 1 line not declassified] all units apparently were
back. [classification marking and codeword not declassified]
10. [1 line not declassified] SWS cannot make any firm judgements
as to what transpired. While the activity appears to be only exercise-
related, we also believe the evidence suggests the forces at Kushka
may have been augmented. [classification marking and codeword not
declassified]
11. In any event, the units at Kushka were believed to be in a
Category III (or Cadre) manning status prior to the recent activity. To
undergo a field training exercise of the scale and duration of what
appears to have taken place in the last month would have required
the call-up of a substantial number of reservists. In a sense, the units
were in a “mobilized” status at least for the past month. We believe a

Afghanistan
detailed study of imagery should be undertaken in an effort to see if
the overall status of the division has been upgraded on a permanent
basis. [classification marking and codeword not declassified]
12. At Termez, a motorized rifle regiment appeared to be vacating
its garrison on [less than 1 line not declassified] in a convoy headed
towards a railroad loading area. [less than 1 line not declassified] the
activity at the garrison seemed normal, with the vehicles apparently
returned to their sheds. However, a camp of 110 tents was still set up
in a training area some seven kilometers away. As is the case with the
units at Kushka, a major field training exercise probably would require
some call-up of reservists. Moreover, we cannot determine whether
the tent camp belongs to the motorized rifle regiment that apparently
came out of the Termez garrison on [less than 1 line, classification, and
codeword not declassified]
Evidence of Previous Augmentation of Border Divisions
13. [3 lines not declassified] After one week, the regiment was trans-
ferred by railroad via Alma Ata to Termez where it remained for about
two weeks, then transferred to a tent camp in Kushka. The reasons
for the mobilization type call-up and move, according to [1 line not
declassified] was the unsettled situation in Iran and Afghanistan. [classifi-
cation marking not declassified]
14. From information furnished [less than 1 line not declassified], the
MR was at Termez during the period 13–27 March and at Kushka from
Barracks installation during this timeframe revealed a high level of
activity at the installation and in the surrounding training areas. Equip-
ment was observed in four bivouac areas north, south, east and west
of the installation from [less than 1 line, classification marking, and code-
word not declassified]
15. There was no reason on the basis only of imagery to identify
this activity as involving elements that were not drawn from the motor-
ized rifle division normally based in the Kushka area. [1 line, classifica-
tion marking, and codeword not declassified]
16. We believe this information also is significant in that it reveals
that divisional combat units were fleshed out with reservists and moved
several hundred kilometers to the Afghanistan border in one week
with no clear indication of what had transpired. [classification marking
not declassified]
Douglas J. MacEachin3
Director
3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
78.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary. Except for the expression of a strong interest in U.S.
development assistance, I did not succeed in soliciting from President
Amin any specific suggestions of steps the DRA or the USG might
take in the interest of improving our bilateral relationship. Amin did,
however, emphasize his personal desire for an improvement of U.S.-
Afghan relations and in this connection referred to the DRA’s fore-
bearance in not making any public criticism of the U.S. He claimed the
DRA’s foreign policy decisions, e.g., rupture of relations with South
Korea, had been taken completely on its own, without any consultation
with the Soviets; maintained that aid from the Soviet Union was given
without strings or preconditions; and disavowed any intention of
aggression against neighboring countries. Amin defended the DRA on
human rights grounds by attacking the record of the Zahir and Daoud
regimes. I left with the impression that Amin welcomed the current,
less confrontational relationship with the U.S.; that he was not seriously
pressing for any early concrete steps by the USG, as in economic assist-
ance; and that he would be content for the time being with a polite
but limited relationship which both countries would refrain from exac-
erbating by word or action. End summary.
3. U.S.-Afghan relations. I had forty minutes alone with President
Hafizullah Amin on the morning of Oct. 27. After the photographs
were taken, we got down speedily to business. Following the talking
points proposed in reftel, I mentioned those recent areas (Ariana DC–
10, narcotics control, etc.) where we had found we could work coopera-
tively with the DRA in our mutual interest and with a view to improv-
ing our bilateral relationship. Amin did not comment on any of the
examples I cited, but merely nodded his assent. He then went on,
with considerable eloquence, to stress his personal commitment to
improving U.S.-Afghan relations, expressing his affection for the U.S.
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Archer Blood was serving as Acting Deputy Chief of
Mission.
from the Department on the topics to cover during Blood’s proposed meeting with

Afghanistan
acquired during his residence in our country.3 Amin made a particular
point of drawing my attention to the DRA’s forebearance in refraining
from public attacks on the U.S. Even when Afghanistan is attacked by
VOA, he said, we have deliberately resisted the temptation to respond
in kind. The DRA does not want to do anything to “blacken the name
or fame of the U.S.” He said that each country must act in in its own
interest but was confident that the U.S. and Afghanistan could continue
to find ways and means that could serve their own interests but be of
mutual benefit.
4. The DRA customarily publicizes the courtesy calls of foreign
diplomats on Amin. My call was the first item on the English and Dari
TV newscasts Oct. 27.
5. Development assistance. Amin made a strong pitch for U.S.
“material assistance.” Afghanistan, he said, is in desperate need of
foreign aid. Even a small portion of the development assistance which
the U.S. provides worldwide would be of very great help to Afghani-
stan. The DRA would be grateful for any assistance, no matter how
small. Amin said he would be happy to publicize U.S. aid to Afghani-
stan, adding that he would like to see more buildings in Afghanistan
with plaques denoting that they had been built through U.S. aid. He
allowed as how “your philosophy” can make it difficult for the U.S.
to help in some areas and “our philosophy” makes it difficult for
Afghanistan to accept some kinds of aid. Still, he said, we could doubt-
less find areas where we could work together.
6. Amin pretended to express bewilderment as to why more U.S.
aid is not forthcoming. Referring to U.S. commercial investment in the
Soviet Union, he said that surely the U.S. has more problems with the
Soviet Union than with Afghanistan. Somewhat slyly he said the U.S.
Congress is prepared to give ten million dollars to so-called Afghan
refugees in Pakistan but is not willing to contribute to alleviating the
root cause of the problem, poverty and underdevelopment in Afghani-
stan itself.
7. When I noted the practical barrier posed by the Pell-Stone
Amendment to the continuation of U.S. development assistance, Amin
said he had felt great animosity on the part of the Americans with
whom he had talked in the days after Ambassador Dubs’s death.4 It
was unfortunate, he said, how much misunderstanding had arisen,
3 Amin’s desire to improve U.S.-Afghan relations was also conveyed to Peck during
a meeting with Victor Trifonov, Political Counselor of the Soviet Embassy, October 25,
in Washington. This meeting was reported in telegram 277944 to Kabul, October 25.
Oct 79)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
implying that the misunderstanding was primarily on the U.S. side.
Neither Amin’s words nor demeanor suggested that he was prepared
to consider any formula which would recognize DRA responsibility
for the Ambassador’s death. As for the security of U.S. personnel in
Afghanistan, said Amin, you have nothing to fear. “Nobody is out to
kill Americans.”
8. Non-alignment. After saying that the USG hoped to be able to
maintain a frank and open dialogue about the differences between our
countries, I noted our concern that Afghanistan’s previous genuine
non-alignment now appears to have gone by the board and merged
into positions which to us seem virtually indistinguishable from those
of the Soviet Union and Cuba. As examples, I cited the DRA’s rupture
of relations with South Korea and the DRA position on Puerto Rico.5
In reply, Amin said that the DRA’s decisions with respect to South
Korea, its suspension of relations with Egypt and its recognition of the
Polisario had been taken without consultation with any country. In
fact, Amin said, the Soviet Union had been taken unawares by these
decisions.
9. Following up on the mention of South Korea, I asked Amin if
he heard the news that President Park had been killed the previous
night. Amin said he had not heard of it. I described the shooting in a
way to suggest to him a parallel between the shoot-out in Kabul on
Sept. 14 which had left him the undisputed ruler of the Saur revolution.
If Amin felt any collegial association with Park, he did not show it.
He merely said that “terrorism is to be deplored wherever it occurs.”
10. Amin said Soviet aid to Afghanistan was given without strings
or preconditions. The Soviet Union has never asked Afghanistan to
take any action which would adversely affect Afghan relations with
any other country, whether it be the U.S., India, Pakistan, Iran or China.
If Brezhnev himself should ask him to take any action against Afghan
independence, said Amin, he would not hesitate “to sacrifice even one
second of his life” in opposition to such a request.
11. Extent of Soviet involvement in Afghanistan. When I said that
another of our concerns was the growing Soviet involvement in Afghan-
istan, Amin replied that Soviet aid was increasing and necessary
Government’s decision to sever its relations with South Korea in protest of the ongoing
presence of foreign troops in South Korea and out of a desire to see the reunification
of Korea under the control of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. (National
September 28, 1978, the Embassy noted that Afghanistan was “firmly wedded” to the
Iraqi-Cuban resolution on Puerto Rico at the United Nations Committee of 24 session
of 1978, which called for the independence of Puerto Rico. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780395–1068)

Afghanistan
because the DRA could not maintain itself very long against foreign
interference without this Soviet aid. He did not challenge my assertion
that the USG was not aiding the insurgents.
12. Human rights.6 In response to my citation of the DRA’s record
on human rights as one of the problems impacting on U.S.-Afghan
relations, Amin attacked the human rights record of the previous Zahir
and Daoud regimes. The Saur revolution, he said, had overthrown a
regime which had existed for the profit and well-being of one family.
Ninety-eight percent of the people had been sacrificed for this one
family. Under Mohammedzai rule many people had been imprisoned,
tortured and executed, but not once had the VOA raised its voice in
protest. Amin said he could categorically assert that not one person
would be imprisoned or executed if foreign interference in Afghanistan
would cease. With a twisted grin, he said he found it surprising that
the U.S., a staunch believer in religious freedom, would be concerned
about the so-called non-Islamic nature of the Afghan regime which
was only trying for the first time in history to permit all Afghans to
practice any religion or non-religion they chose.
13. Impressions. The man is impressive. His survival to date is by
itself impressive, as is the air of quiet self-confidence he exudes. Clearly,
he is aware of the mortality rate of Afghan leaders; several times he
said “even if I am killed tomorrow.” He masks his ruthlessness and
toughness quite well by his soft-spoken manner. In remarkable contrast
to his turgid public speeches, his private discourse is refreshingly free
from Marxist cant and cliche´s. His English is quite good and very easy
to understand. Only once did he seem to have difficulty in expressing
himself and that was when, perhaps in an attempt to convey great
sincerity, he was declaiming how he could never sacrifice Afghan
independence to any foreign demands, including from the Soviets.
14. I think he wants an improvement in U.S.-Afghan relations. His
reasons could be varied: Soviet coaching; a long-range hedge against
over-dependence on the Soviet Union; concern over the trouble which
open U.S. animosity can create for his regime; conversely, an interest in
bringing about the doubts and confusion which friendlier U.S. relations
could sow among the supporters of the insurgency, the Pakistanis,
Iranians and Saudis; a genuinely felt need for economic assistance.
6 The Embassy’s draft of the 1979 Annual Country Report on Human Rights Practices
for Afghanistan was relayed in telegram 5923 from Kabul, October 9. The report painted
a grim picture of the state of human rights in Afghanistan, noting the commonplace
practice of torture and atrocities visited upon Afghan villagers by the Afghan military.
Oct 79))

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
15. I do not think that in the near future Amin realistically expects
any substantial forward movement in U.S.-Afghan relations, such as
the resumption of aid. My guess is that he will be content for the
time being with the less rancorous discourse we are having with his
government, agreeing to avoid confrontational actions provided we
do the same. In this connection he seconded with some alacrity my
observations that sometimes two countries can work toward a better
relationship simply by refraining from doing each other mischief. Per-
haps, this is all we should strive for, as we assess Amin’s staying power
both vis-à-vis the Soviets and the insurgents and as we try to maintain
a limited presence toward the time when there might once again be
some scope for a larger and more active U.S. role in Afghanistan.
Blood
79.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
25153. Subj: (C) Démarche to Soviets on Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Ref: (A) State 285130.2
1. (S—Entire text.)
2. I made the démarche on Pakistan and Afghanistan, using the
talking points in para 3 of reftel, when I called on First Deputy Foreign
Minister Korniyenko this morning (November 2).
3. In responding, Korniyenko first said that the Soviets favored
normal and improving relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan
and had in fact said so to the leaders of both countries. For their
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Islamabad, Kabul, and New Delhi.
and Shahi October 16–17. Vance pledged: “in the event of aggression from Afghanistan
against Pakistan the United States would consider the 1959 bilateral agreement to be
relevant.” Shahi in turn requested that the United States “assert to the Soviet Union our
interest in Pakistan’s security and our concern that the USSR not interfere in other
countries’ internal affairs.” The telegram further reported that Shahi suggested that the
U.S. assertion refer to the 1959 agreement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign

Afghanistan
part, the leadership of Afghanistan, as is known, had also expressed
readiness to improve relations with Pakistan and had taken concrete
steps in that direction; he had in mind the visit to Pakistan by Deputy
Foreign Minister Dost and the invitation for the President of Pakistan to
visit Afghanistan. From the other side, however, although the Pakistani
leadership had earlier expressed interest in a high level meeting, it
subsequently was avoiding such a meeting.
4. Korniyenko did not directly address the question of charges of
Pakistani interference in Afghanistan’s internal affairs, but spoke
instead of the use of Pakistani territory for hostile actions against
Afghanistan. That this was going on was not something invented by
the media. It was openly admitted by leaders of the insurgents, who
made public statements about their activities and made no secret of
the fact that they were operating against Afghanistan from Pakistan
territory.
5. As for the question of the “involvement” of the USSR in Afghani-
stan, Korniyenko continued, the Soviet Union had even earlier pro-
vided aid—and was now doing so on an even larger scale—to the
Afghanistan people and state; all forms of aid were included—eco-
nomic and scientific and technological, and other forms, including
military. But all this assistance, regardless of type, was being given at
the request of the Government of Afghanistan, and there were no
political conditions attached. It did not constitute interference in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan. The questions which the U.S. was raising
about this aid, by referring to the presence of Soviet specialists and
advisers as though this raised concerns on the part of the U.S., were
not legitimate questions. In essence, this amounted to interference in
the relations between two sovereign states, since Soviet aid was given
at the request of the legitimate Afghan Government.
6. Picking up the reference to the nuclear issue, Korniyenko said
he could confirm what had been previously said by the Soviet side,
that Pakistan activity toward the development of a nuclear device was
also of concern to the Soviet Union. The Soviets had put questions to
the Pakistani leadership on this score, and they would be prepared to
continue to cooperate with the U.S. in this matter, on the basis of our
mutual interest in preventing proliferation.
Watson

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
80.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Saudi Arabian and Pakistani Views on the Afghan Insurgency
On 30 October you directed me to take soundings with Pakistani
and Saudi intelligence agencies on their intentions for covert action in
Afghanistan. I understood that you wanted to know what the degree
of their commitment would be were we to join with them in such
endeavors. We have taken such soundings. The results are summa-
rized below:
Pakistan:
There is no question that Pakistan—without waiting for us—is
already supporting the Afghan tribesmen. The head of Pakistani mili-
tary intelligence has made it clear that President Zia holds the continua-
tion of the tribal insurgency to be vital to his country’s security and
that support in the way of weapons, ammunition and explosives is
essential to sustain the insurgency. (The Pakistanis have been pressing
us for weapons and ammunition since early August.)
Our relations with Pakistan are not warm enough for us to elicit
details on what type and how much support they are providing or
would provide in a joint effort. Clearly they do not have large financial
resources for such an undertaking.
Opinion: Pakistan will cooperate in covert action against Afghani-
stan. It will be anxious that U.S. involvement not invite strong Soviet
responses. It will be nervous that U.S. cooperation might be terminated
abruptly if U.S.-Pakistan relations should deteriorate over other issues.
Overall, Pakistan can be counted on for operational support for joint
efforts, but cannot be looked upon to take the lead or to supply
resources.
Saudi Arabia:
The Saudi chief of intelligence states that his government is commit-
ted to assisting the Afghan insurgents and that some monies have been
disbursed to refugees resident in Pakistan. The Saudis, however, are
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
Carter initialed “C” in the top right corner.

Afghanistan
confused as to the relative merits of the various tribal groups and have
requested a briefing from CIA so that they can gauge the field situation
and make a judgment as to the strengths and weaknesses of the
tribesmen.
On three separate occasions the intelligence chief said that his
government would react positively to secret CIA proposals on support
to the insurgents. The Saudis, however, are concerned about what they
perceive as a lack of U.S. will to engage in political action and they
are not sanguine that we will become involved to any significant extent.
As a result of this attitude we were unable to obtain an estimate of
how much money the Saudis would likely commit to such a program.
Opinion: I think we have pushed the Saudis as far as we can push
them at this point. The Saudis lack general intelligence capability, so
their confusion is understandable. As in many other areas, it will be
necessary for us to lead the Saudis by the hand in getting them to
make a firm decision. Nevertheless, the Saudis appear willing to put
up resources once we make a firm commitment. I therefore suggest
that the finding be signed and that we be authorized to tell the Saudis
we will put up [amount not declassified] (less the amount for communica-
tions equipment) and expect them to put up at least as much.2 We will
then work with them and the Paks in assessing the capabilities of the
various groups and the degree of support which should be given
to each.
Should the Saudi’s delay too long or back off for one reason or
another, we can then reconsider whether to continue our unilateral
program.
Stansfield Turner3
3 Turner signed “Stan” above his typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
81.
Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense
for Policy Planning (Slocombe) to the Deputy Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy (Murphy)1
Washington, November 21, 1979
SUBJECT
Afghanistan
I appreciate your asking my views on this issue. I don’t share Bob
Komer’s reservations:
1. It is, I think, very much in our interest that we keep the Afghani-
stan insurgency going. It would be a major blow if heavier Soviet
involvement led to a clear Kabul victory and the petering out of the
resistance. Indeed, it would mean that the Soviets had been able to do
for Amin what no one had ever been able to do for a Kabul government.
On the plus side, if the insurgency keeps going, the various rebel
factions may be persuaded to get together. Clearly they won’t if things
go badly. Even if they don’t, they may be able to make life difficult
for Moscow’s Kabul clients even disunited if they have reasonable
outside support.2
2. It is the Soviet backyard, but it is also an area where the status
quo ante is not having a puppet regime. Our objective is certainly not
the unattainable one of installing people in Kabul we can control, but
of continuing a situation in which the Soviets, having installed (or
more likely connived at installing) a friendly regime find it’s not much
more than the Kabul garrison instead of a strong central government.
3. I’m all for saving assets for promising opportunities, and that
would be decisive against larger scale actions, but I think a modest US
investment of funds (and some arms) would be more likely to pay off
here than elsewhere (see para 4 below). (Having written that, it occurs
to me that Bob may mean the SecDef should save his assets for more
1 Source: Library of Congress, Donated Material of Secretary of Defense Harold
Brown, Box 82, Afghanistan. Secret; Sensitive. A copy was sent to Komer. Attached but
not printed is a November 20 memorandum from Sullivan to Murphy that contained
comments on a Department of Defense paper characterized by Sullivan as “calling for
a more aggressive covert action policy on Afghanistan.” Sullivan defended the paper,
in response to Komer’s comments, noting that the paper’s objective was not to “win”
in Afghanistan by attempting to “install a pro-U.S. western style democracy,” but to
“ensure that the Soviets do not win and to ensure the fall of the Amin regime” by
increasing monetary aid to the insurgents to $5 million. Sullivan recommended that the
paper go forward “even if we do not succeed in overcoming opposition at the SCC
level.” The DOD paper with Komer’s comments was not found.
2 In the left margin beside this paragraph, an unknown hand, likely Murphy’s,
wrote: “All true but . . . question is whether [illegible].”

Afghanistan
promising interventions with the White House. Since I don’t know
why the SCC (I) turned down the original proposal, I can’t assess
how much of a reopening the issue requires.3 I think he could raise it
noncommittally at a BVB lunch, without risking much.)
4. The fact that the Paks and the Iranians are already helping seems
to me an argument for some modestly increased US effort, rather than
the reverse. We have learned over the years that we can’t easily affect
complicated distant local conflicts operating from here—but that we
can have some impact when we can reinforce local concerns. (In current
circumstances, being on the same side as the Ayatollah seems strange,
but someday we may want to be able to remind them that the Shah
wasn’t opposed to the Soviets as a way of being nice to the US but
because the US can be a helpful ally against Soviet adventures.) In the
current state of our relations with Pakistan, being able to cooperate in
this is a useful way of making clear that we have—and can follow
through on—some common security concerns. In fact, in my view a
principal argument for somewhat increased US support is the beneficial impact
on other countries (Iran, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, even China) rather than
our impact on events in Afghanistan itself.4
In short, I think we should adhere to the policy that I believe
was adopted some months ago: Do what is appropriate to keep the
insurrection going, working with others in the region. I can’t comment
on specific plans because I don’t know enough about what’s been
proposed, but if it’s feasible, I’d favor funds for arms and facilitating
services to locate them and get them there.
Walter Slocombe5
Deputy Under Secretary of Defense
(Policy Planning)
3 See Document 76. The Presidential Finding did not include a provision to support
the Afghan insurgents with military supplies. In the left margin beside this paragraph
an unknown hand, likely Murphy’s, wrote: “Also my points.”
4 In the left margin beside this paragraph, an unknown hand, likely Murphy’s,
wrote: “True.”
5 Slocombe signed “Walt” above his typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
82.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
8271. Subj: (S) Party Document Suggests Real Strains in Soviet-
Amin Relationship May Have Flowed From September 14 Shootout.
1. (S—Entire text.)
2. Summary: The leadership of the People’s Democratic Party of
Afghanistan (PDPA) has been circulating an “official” version of the
events of September 14 for use in briefing party cadre. We have no
doubt concerning the document’s authenticity, and its contents, there-
fore, should be regarded as current strongman Hafizullah Amin’s view
of the “truth” surrounding September 14. The document’s clear con-
demnation of the Soviet role—in the person of now departed Ambassa-
dor Puzanov—in the affair tends to confirm widespread rumors here
that there may be strains in the Soviet-Amin relationship resulting
from the September 14 shootout. Moreover, the fact that Amin is vir-
tually openly circulating the document among his party cadre suggests
he wants to get a message to his Soviet mentors that he is wary of
their past (and presumably future) intentions toward him.
3. On the domestic scene, various themes within the document
echo theses which the current leadership has repeated often since Sep-
tember 14, most notably that it was the late President Taraki and his
henchmen, and not Hafizullah Amin, who were primarily responsible
for the repressive policies of this revolutionary government. Few
Afghans appear to swallow this particular line, however, and Amin
remains the generally perceived villain and despot. In fact, the picture
of the Khalqi leadership which emerges from this party document
resembles a group of thugs who could shame the Mafia, rather than
an enlightened leadership attempting to establish “security, legality,
and justice” in Afghanistan. End of summary.
4. The extraordinary and lengthy document (almost thirty pages
in translation) essentially recounts the background leading up to the
September 14, 1979, shootout between supporters of current President
Hafizullah Amin and the late Noor Mohammad Taraki, as well as
some details surrounding that event itself. Beyond this, however, the
document’s direct charges that now departed Soviet Ambassador Alex-
ander Puzanov (and his senior advisors) was instrumental in luring
Secret; Priority; Noforn. Sent for information to Ankara, Beijing, London, Moscow, New
Delhi, USNATO, and CINCPAC.

Afghanistan
Amin into a potentially fatal trap, that the Soviet envoy was at the
scene of the gunfight, and that the men allegedly plotting Amin’s death
found a safe haven in the Soviet Embassy at one point during the
drama, underscore why any existing tensions in the Amin-Moscow
relationship may need some time to be dissipated.
5. Highlights of the document’s remarkable tale are:
—Taraki and his group of “henchmen” (former Defense Minister
Mohammad Aslam Watanjar, former Interior Minister Sher Jan Maz-
dooryar, former Communications Minister Sayed Mohammad Gulab-
zoi, and former secret police chief Assadullah Sarwari; all military men
now either dead, incarcerated, or at large) had hatched a plot to kill
Amin. Ostensible reasons behind the plot were that Amin, from the
beginning of the revolution, had resisted their plan to build a “massive
cult of personality” around Taraki, and because the late Afghan Presi-
dent had become upset at Amin’s “growing popularity” among the
people;
—Amin’s “repeated warnings” to Taraki about the anti-revolution-
ary machinations of the “Watanjar gang” went unheeded because Tar-
aki wanted Amin eliminated permanently;
—Amin loyalists among the PDPA cadre learned of the plot to kill
him, and Amin began arguing within the party that Taraki’s plots,
spying, and repression were having adverse effects on the progress of
the revolution;
—Amin was supposed to be killed at Kabul’s airport upon Taraki’s
return from the nonaligned summit in Havana in early September, but
an Amin informer, Aziz Ahmad Akbari (recently appointed Ambassa-
dor to Iraq) was a member of the Taraki entourage, and Amin, notified
of the danger, was able to avoid the supposed assassins;
—a Taraki-Amin confrontation on September 12 led to heated
exchanges, with Amin calling for a Central Committee plenum to
mediate matters, and Taraki claiming that Amin had made a mess of
the revolution;
—by September 13, Amin was afraid to go to Taraki’s office, since
he believed the Watanjar gang and Taraki would kill him. On the
evening of September 13, Amin received word that the Watanjar “gang
of four” had been sent by Taraki to seek refuge in the Soviet Embassy,
and Amin, with his heavily armed bodyguards, went to Taraki’s office
where further accusations and threats were exchanged;
—Soviet Ambassador Puzanov and “three high-ranking advisors”
arrived at the September 13 evening shouting match bringing an “oral
message” from President Brezhnev stressing that “unity among Afghan
leaders was in the interest of the revolution”;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—after Puzanov and his entourage left the meeting, Watanjar
ordered the army to move against Amin in order to protect Taraki,
but unit commanders refused to obey such orders;
—on the morning of September 14, Taraki and Amin engaged in
another shouting match, this one by phone, over who controlled the
military, Taraki as Commander-in-Chief, or Amin as Minister of
Defense. Taraki ordered Amin to come to the President’s office, but
Amin’s closest advisors (the “martyred” Seyed Daoud Taroon, then
police commandant, and Lt. Col. Yaqoub, now Chief of the General
Staff) warned Amin it was not safe for him to go to Taraki’s office;
—on the fateful afternoon of September 14, Puzanov and his three
advisors arrived in Taraki’s office and Taraki told Amin by phone that
our “Soviet comrades” wanted Amin to come to the Palace for talks.
Taroon advised Amin that the presence of the Soviets in Taraki’s office
precluded Taraki and his men from opening fire on Amin;
—shortly thereafter, Amin, accompanied by his own guards,
arrived at the Palace, was met by Taroon, and they proceeded up a
staircase toward Taraki’s office. Taraki’s guards immediately opened
fire killing Taroon, who was in front of Amin, instantly, while Amin
rolled out of the line of fire leading Taraki’s men to think he had been
hit. Amin and some of his guards successfully made their escape;
—on September 15th, Amin convened meetings of the party’s Polit-
buro and the Cabinet, and on the 16th meetings of the party Central
Committee and the Revolutionary Council. These meetings took the
“necessary decisions” expelling Taraki from the party for hatching the
plot to kill Amin and for other “unprincipled acts.” Watanjar, et al.,
were also expelled and Amin was elected to Taraki’s posts;
—the above decisions ended the era of “one-man rule and personal-
ity cult,” and opened a new chapter in the development of the party
and the revolution.
6. Comment: Aside from giving some fascinating insights into the
bloody ways “democracy” operates in the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan, this party document possesses other nuggets of potential
political value. The fact that it is being circulated among party leaders
with instructions to brief their cadre about its contents, indicates clearly
that this version is the officially-sanctioned Amin version of what hap-
pened on September 14, and why. In this regard, the allegations that
Puzanov and his senior advisors indirectly summoned Amin to Taraki’s
lair in order to be gunned down, that the Soviets were unable or
unwilling to prevent Taraki’s men from opening fire, and that the
Soviet Embassy sheltered the men who were leading the plot aimed
at Amin, tend to substantiate widespread post-September 14 rumors
here that definite strains exist in Amin’s relations with the USSR, and
that these strains will not be easily dispelled. Amin’s willingness to

Afghanistan
circulate a document containing charges along these lines strongly
suggests that he wants Moscow to get the message that he is wary of
their past (and presumably future) intentions toward him. Whether
those strains led directly to Puzanov’s transfer is not yet known, but
that possibility should not be discarded. Whatever the case, Puzanov’s
newly-arrived successor, for several reasons, will have his hands full.
7. On the domestic front, the general themes of the story track with
Amin’s overall theses he has espoused since his accession to power.
For example, Taraki’s cult of personality and abuses of office had
brought the revolution to the brink of collapse, Taraki’s excessive
repression was in direct contrast to Amin’s alleged desire to adopt a
legal constitution in order to guarantee “security, legality, and justice,”
and the end of one-man rule paved the way for a “golden revolutionary
future” in Afghanistan. Although Amin and his closest cohorts have
played these themes repeatedly since September 14, few Afghans
apparently discern much substantive difference between the goals and
tactics of Taraki and Amin, and the latter, despite his loudest protesta-
tions, is still viewed by most as a cruel despot who has been the
principal architect of this repressive regime. In fact, the picture of the
Khalqi leadership that emerges from this particular party document
resembles a group of political thugs using tactics that would shame
Chicago of the 1920s in their high-stakes struggle for political survival.
8. For complete text of party document, see [1 line not declassified].
This document parallels in many ways the version of the September
14 affair which Foreign Minister Shah Wali reportedly gave to Eastern
European Chiefs of Mission, and which this Embassy reported some
six weeks or so ago. Having eliminated most of our files, we cannot
give a reference number.
Amstutz

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
83.
Intelligence Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[paper number not declassified]
Washington, December 4, 1979
AFGHANISTAN: Opposition to Amin
President Amin’s hold on power remains tenuous nearly 12 weeks after
he seized control. ([classification marking not declassified])
Amin has skillfully outmaneuvered ruling party members who
had supported the ousted President Taraki. His political enemies are
numerous, however, and some may be desperate. Amin is vulnerable
to an assassination attempt, perhaps by relatives or friends of the
several thousand victims of the regime’s firing squads. ([classification
marking not declassified])
More important, signs continue that the loyalty of the military, the
regime’s mainstay, is weakening. The uprising of the 7th Division in
Kabul in mid-October has been followed by more arrests of officers
suspected of plotting against Amin. Military units in the field, mired
in a seemingly hopeless counterinsurgency campaign, are susceptible
to more mutinies. The Army’s drive against rebels in eastern Afghani-
stan is hampered by breakdowns in discipline and supply problems.
It seems to be making no headway, and Army casualties appear to
be fairly heavy. ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
[4 lines not declassified], Moscow seems resigned to working with
Amin as it supplies the Army with as many arms as it can absorb.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Pre-Invasion Reporting. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified].

Afghanistan
84.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, December 13, 1979
COUNTRY
Afghanistan/USSR
SUBJECT
Appraisal of Situation in Afghanistan (12 December 1979)
SOURCE
This is a field appraisal. It presents the views of this Agency’s senior officer on
the scene. It is an interpretation based on previously reported information.
Prepared primarily for internal Agency use, it is disseminated in the belief that
it may be useful to others in their own assessment of the situation.
1. We believe the current buildup of Soviet forces reflects a continu-
ing deterioration in the situation for the Afghan military and Govern-
ment. The Afghan military has suffered a series of reverses in the
last several weeks. Additionally, the government’s successful October
offensive in Paktia has largely now been negated by recent events
there. Badakhshan is in a precarious position. The situation elsewhere
between Kabul and the northeast border is deteriorating. The rebels
are again active in Paktia and Qandahar areas. Nightly, both Herat
and Qandahar cities are the scenes of rebel activity and assassinations
and the fighting is creeping closer to Kabul. Additionally, the DRA is
no longer able to meet its manpower requirements and continues to
experience desertions from its forces. We would assume that, given
the above, there is a note of desperation at the People’s House and a
general fear among the Khalqis and their Soviet supporters that the
DRA military position could quickly crumble, leaving Kabul exposed
to a successful insurgent attack and/or a general breakdown in the
law-and-order situation.
2. Another possibility and only partially connected to the above is
that the Soviets are getting ready to remove Amin.
3. It seems evident that the Soviets are committed to supporting
the revolution here. Our sources tell us that they will forward whatever
supplies are needed to do this. Increasingly, we are receiving rumors
that the Soviets are directly engaged in combat operations. On 11
December, a third-country diplomat told us that he has a senior Khalqi
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
source who says that Soviet combat troops are involved in combat
operations. Previous reporting from Paktia Province during the October
offensive supports the premise that Soviet troops were involved.
4. It is clear that the Soviets are actively, aggressively engaged in
suppressing the insurgency; that they will take whatever steps are
necessary to do this. While we do not know whether they will be
successful, we do know that the insurgents, in the past, have been
unable to exploit favorable opportunities their successes have presented
to them.
5. We believe the Soviets have undertaken the resupply of Afghan
troops by air because they perceive that they are in an emergency
situation.2 The road connecting the Soviet port of Termez to Kabul,
while occasionally interdicted, is open. The road system from the Soviet
border to Herat is open. Therefore, if there were no emergency, the
Soviets could augment and resupply forces here by road. We believe
the Soviet decision to send troops in by air and to resupply Afghan
forces by air is a reflection of their evaluation that the situation is
deteriorating. The number of resupply flights to Kabul and Bagram
pounds of cargo.) Subsequent to this, additional AN–22 and AN–12
flights have arrived in Afghanistan. The exact number is unknown at
this time. Also, there has been an increase in the TU–154 flights into
Kabul. We are witnessing a major Soviet military/civilian airlift into
and out of Afghanistan.
6. Chargé’s comment:3 Given the importance of the comments made
in this appraisal, I have asked the Defense Attaché, and A/DCM, and
POL/ECON section officer Taylor to add their own views to the above
report. My own comments follow theirs.
A. DATT [less than 1 line not declassified] comment: I share the
view that the present insurgency situation in-country gives grounds
for Soviet alarm. The Afghan Army has been unable to successfully
2 The Soviet airlift was first reported in [text not declassified] December 7. The report
surmised that the airlift “may have been prompted by a major rebel offensive in the
valley north of Kabul,” and would “probably be viewed by many as an intervention”
and “provide a focus for religious outrage over a perceived Soviet move against brother
Muslims, perhaps led by Iran,” or even the Afghan military. The airlift constituted a
“serious escalation” in Soviet involvement in Afghanistan and it demonstrated that the
situation was more dire than current intelligence reporting suggested. “Most impor-
tantly,” the report concluded, the airlift “demonstrates Moscow’s resolve in pursuing
its interests in Afghanistan despite the obvious pitfalls and at a time when the Kremlin
might consider the U.S. preoccupied with events in Tehran.” (Department of Defense,
Afghan War Collection, Box 4, Afghan Situation Folder, Start 14 Sep)
3 The Chargé was Amstutz.

Afghanistan
achieve its objectives in its recent large counterinsurgency operations,
and it now appears to be struggling to maintain the status quo. Were
DRA forces to experience a significant setback, such as the fall of
Feyzabad (capital of Badakhshan Province), this could well trigger
large-scale desertions and unit defections, not only in the north, but
elsewhere. The Soviets are most certainly aware of the poor state and
low morale of Afghan troops. Actual troop strength in many units
appears to be below that of three months ago. Thus, I believe the recent
action to augment the airlift of cargo and personnel to Afghanistan is
a reflection of their concern about this worsened situation.
B. A/DCM and POL/ECON section chief (Freres) comment: I agree
that the Soviets are probably worried about the Amin regime’s ability
to cope with the insurgency, notwithstanding all of the Soviet logistic
and advisory support given heretofore. I do not believe, though, that
the buildup of Soviet forces in Afghanistan reflects a Soviet estimate
that the Amin regime is about to fall, nor do any of those commenting
here believe that the regime’s collapse is imminent. Rather, in my
view, the Soviets’ objective is primarily to safeguard its interests in
Afghanistan by enabling themselves to intervene promptly and physi-
cally with troops should they perceive that this is required. Secondarily,
the Soviets may be looking beyond Afghan borders for targets of oppor-
tunity, such as in Iranian and Pakistani Baluchistan. If so, it would
seem prudent for them to strengthen their position in Afghanistan now.
C. POL/ECON section (Taylor) comment: In the short run, the
recent upsurge of direct Soviet involvement could be designed to insure
the survival of the regime in Kabul and other key areas until the arrival
of winter. Cold weather and heavy snows will presumably dampen
military activities in general, and could provide a respite for the regime
to prepare for next spring’s campaign. A crucial unknown factor, how-
ever, will be the magnitude of Soviet “emergency support” necessary
to buy the DRA some breathing space.
D. Chargé’s comment: I don’t fully share the Agency senior officer’s
and DATT’s conclusion that the current buildup of Soviet forces reflects
a recent deterioration in the position of the DRA military and Govern-
ment. I appreciate, however, that this is the most plausible reason
for the buildup. I also appreciate that there has recently been some
evacuation of Soviet dependents from Kabul, and that Soviet UN per-
sonnel have evinced nervousness about their dependents. On the other
hand, the insurgents have in recent weeks not scored any dramatic
success in the field except in the sense that they have held DRA forces
at bay in several areas, turned back DRA forces near Bamian and
relieving columns approaching Feyzabad (Badakhshan) and Taqab
(Parwan), and reestablished their previous countryside dominance in
Paktia. But the overall situation does not seem much different from

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
that of three months ago except in DRA Army unit strengths. Further-
more, there has been no real military threat posed yet to Kabul, the
political heart of the country. My own surmise about the Soviet buildup
is that it was decided upon a month or so ago as a precautionary
contingency measure to bolster the regime and protect Soviet personnel
in Kabul should there be a major DRA military force collapse in the
field.
I don’t share the Agency senior officer’s surmise that the buildup
is related to possible Soviet plans to remove Hafizullah Amin. The
Soviets must appreciate that there is no Afghan Communist waiting
in the wings who seemingly can match Amin’s abilities, and that Amin
ostensibly fully supports the Soviets special position in Afghanistan
and Soviet foreign policy.
As to the A/DCM’s surmise that the Soviet troop buildup in coun-
try may be related to events in Iran, Baluchistan, etc., I am not sure. I
believe it is solely related to events in Afghanistan itself.
Whatever the case, we are in the midst of an interesting and poten-
tially critical stage of the insurgency. Were the insurgents to bring
about the surrender of a provincial capital or major town, this would
be a major psychological blow to the DRA. This bears on what could
well be the Achilles Heel of the DRA: lack of military manpower.
Most DRA units are already far understrength. Since 85 percent of the
country’s population is rural, were the regime to lose control of almost
all of that countryside (which is now mostly the case), they will be
hard-pressed to overcome the insurgency. End Chargé’s comment.
declassified]

Afghanistan
85.
Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Warning
Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (MacEachin) to the
National Intelligence Officer for Warning, Central
Intelligence Agency (Lehman)1
S–0086/SWS
Washington, December 13, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Actions in Afghanistan
1. I left the meeting on Afghanistan yesterday with the feeling
that we had not accomplished much in the way of sharpening the
Community perception of what the Soviets may be about in Afghani-
stan.2 Other than myself, most of those present seemed to continue to
hold the view that the Soviets are moving tentatively with regard to
their options in Afghanistan. E.g.,
—They are setting up an enclave at Bagram to ensure that they
have a base through which to either evacuate their advisors or insert
more troops and material, whichever move is dictated by the evolution
of a situation which is now uncertain.
—They have decided to bolster the defenses of Bagram in response
to increased insurgent probes.
—They need some troops to protect their people against a massacre
if the situation suddenly deteriorates.
—Etc.
2. None of these actions, however, is likely to change the course
of events in Afghanistan that is causing the Soviets grief. Yet there
seemed to be a glimmer of consensus among those at the meeting that
the act of sending their own combat units into another country in the
midst of an insurgency reflects a significant political decision on the
part of the Soviets. Why then should we shrink from believing that
the Soviets—having crossed this threshold—will employ these troops
in some way to tangibly impact on the situation that caused the thresh-
old to be crossed.
3. The decision in this case was made with the benefit of a thorough
(60 plus days) on-the-scene study of all aspects of the situation by a
mission of high level authorities. (The Pavlovskiy mission.)3 We know
from the composition of the study group and the activities in which
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job
2 The meeting was not further identified and no record of it was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
they were engaged while in Afghanistan that their review went into
the logistics of the situation, the effectiveness of such organs as the
police, intelligence, the ministerial level offices, and communications
security. A main feature of this study certainly must have been an
assessment of the course of the insurgency and the ability of the DRA
forces—military and political—to deal with it.
4. Our own assessment shows an Afghan army which is having
great difficulty in maintaining its manpower strength, experiencing
erosion of morale leading to desertions, mutinies, and outright defec-
tions. The DRA forces have produced no lasting gains against the
insurgents. They have been able to win most pitched battles—when
the insurgents permit a pitched battle to occur—but cannot consolidate
gains. Among the reasons for this inability are (a) the shrinking strength
of the armed forces, which forces them to be constantly shifting forces
to meet the various outbreaks and thus allowing rebel forces to seep
back into areas from which they had been driven, and (b) the deteriora-
tion of morale in DRA forces left to hold the positions gained by military
action. At the heart of the problem is a regime rent by factionalism,
for which mutiny is a constant problem, and which is demonstrably
unable to promote the kind of cohesion and efficiency in its own mili-
tary and political machinery that would be needed to deal effectively
with the insurgency. What all this adds up to is a situation that could
fly apart at any time, with a revolt of the armed forces being the most
serious potential problem.
5. Moreover, the prognosis is that things will continue to go down-
hill. During last winter, a mild one, the insurgency gained strength.
This summer, analysts both in Embassy Kabul and here in Washington
forecast that if the regime could survive until winter the insurgents
would have to pull back and the DRA forces could pull themselves
together. The reverse appears to be happening. It is the DRA forces
that seem to be pulling back and the insurgents who are gaining. The
largest DRA offensive of the insurgency has recently been completed,
yet the DRA forces ultimately pulled back and the rebels seeped back
into the areas from which they had been driven by the offensive. The
action must clearly be seen as proof that advisors and technicians,
logistical support, and tactical guidance is not going to turn the situa-
tion around.
6. The Pavlovskiy mission had ample opportunity to study the
situation first hand, and in all likelihood came to the same conclusion.
The decision which led to the actions we are beginning to see would
have been made on the basis of a dismal assessment of the present
situation and of its likely course if something were not done about it,
together with an evaluation by a team of high level authorities as to
what would have to be done if the USSR wanted to solidify its politico-
strategic objectives in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan
7. We believe that the Soviet actions since Pavlovskiy’s departure
indicate that Moscow decided to act to save its position. Steps such as
securing an enclave against future contingencies for evacuation and
providing protection to Soviet citizens could not be perceived by the
Soviets as “doing” anything about the situation. Indeed, such actions
are more consistent with a lack of decision. In view of the prognosis,
they amount to conceding to the probability of losing out and merely
covering the exit. Even if the enclave were for the purpose of ensuring
an entrance point for troops, merely holding an enclave would not
change the deteriorating situation which created the potential need for
troops. In effect, doing nothing more than holding an enclave against
the potential need to land troops would make it likely that sooner or
later the enclave would have to be used for just that purpose. “Wait
and see” does not appear to be the objective of the course indicated
by the recent Soviet actions.
8. “Doing something” about the situation means, in effect, ensuring
that the next time the DRA forces, with Soviet help, undertake a large
offensive against the insurgents they will not be forced to give back
their winnings. This requires more military forces than the DRA can
muster at present. Someone must hold the cities, main centers, airfields,
and keep the roads open. Military forces are required to ensure the
security of Kabul, both from revolts from within and from attacks by
the insurgents. One of the reasons for the military failure and eroding
morale of the Afghan armed forces to date is that they cannot accom-
plish all these things and to the Afghan troops there must appear little
prospect that they ever will.
9. Another step toward rectifying the situation would be to produce
a more effective, cohesive regime in Kabul. If nothing else, this would
alleviate somewhat the drain on Afghan military strength in the coun-
tryside caused by the need to keep a large “Praetorean Guard” in Kabul.
This suggests that ultimately Amin will have to go. His replacement,
however, is unlikely to be chosen on the basis of his acceptability to
the insurgents. He would still be “Russian-installed.” What the Soviets
are likely to seek is someone who can pull together the Marxist factions
and various groups among the political and military leadership. This
would enable the Afghan Marxists and their Soviet allies to concentrate
on the insurgency.
10. For undertaking these objectives, the immediate need is efficient
military forces. By their actions, the Soviets have indicated they are
willing to take the large political step of putting their own combat
units into a foreign country. Why should we shrink from estimating
that they would be willing, once having taken this step, to use their
troops in a way and in an amount that could benefit their long
range position?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
11. [1 line not declassified]
Douglas J. MacEachin4
4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
86.
Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Adviser
on Soviet Affairs (Shulman) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, December 14, 1979
SUBJECT
Possible Conclusions of a Soviet Policy Review
Assuming that the primary purpose of Dobrynin’s return to Mos-
cow is to participate in a high level review covering foreign policy,
defense and economic planning with emphasis on US-Soviet relations,
I want to give you some thoughts on how such a review may come
out.2 Our conclusion is that Dobrynin will return prepared for a further
limited deterioration in US-Soviet relations.
What follows is our best effort to delineate the picture from Mos-
cow’s standpoint.
General Outlook
The “holding pattern” Moscow had expected to follow Vienna
pending SALT ratification has been eroded by a series of bilateral
controversies for which the Soviet leadership does not consider itself
primarily responsible. The sheer number of these controversies has
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
79 (MDS re U.S.-Sov rel.). Secret. Printed from an uninitialed copy. Drafted by Parris
and cleared by Barry.
2 Dobrynin informed Vance during a meeting, December 5, that he would depart
for Moscow later that day and expected to return to Washington 10 days later. (Telegram
P840131–1897) In his memoirs, Dobrynin refers briefly to his trip to Moscow for high-
level consultations that, according to his account, were dominated by concerns over the
deployment of Pershing II missiles by NATO and SS–20 missiles by the Soviet Union.
(Dobrynin, In Confidence, pp. 432–433)

Afghanistan
had a multiplier effect, each magnifying the significance of the other,
and causing both sides to react with greater stridency and rigidity than
might otherwise be the case. Heightened tension has affected each side’s
media treatment of the other. The Soviets probably see themselves
as victims of officially-inspired US press accusations—just as we see
ourselves as the injured party in an escalating public dialogue.
Faced with these trends, the Soviets are concerned that US-Soviet
relations are moving inexorably toward a continuing downslide, in
which the whole range of our cooperative activities, including arms
control, would come into question. We believe the Soviets would see
such a development as contrary to their interests, and that they would
hope to avoid it. Developments since Vienna have given them cause
to doubt this will be possible, however, and there is a good chance
that the review now under way is designed to develop concrete policy
options for dealing with a bilateral relationship they may conclude
will continue to deteriorate. This would be reflected in their approach
to the following specific issues.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
87.
Editorial Note
By mid-December 1979, U.S. intelligence reporting indicated that
the military buildup on the Soviet-Afghan border and in Afghanistan
was quickly intensifying. This prompted Secretary of State Vance to
order both Marshall Shulman, his Adviser on Soviet Affairs, and the
Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Thomas J. Watson, Jr., to seek an
explanation from Soviet diplomats regarding the ultimate Soviet objec-
tives in Afghanistan.
Analysis [text not declassified] detailed the military buildup in sev-
eral reports and memoranda. The Strategic Warning Staff of the CIA
issued memorandum [text not declassified] December 14, which reported
on military activity involving air transport, ground forces, [text not
declassified] which [text not declassified] indicated “Soviet intent to deploy
additional combat forces to Afghanistan.” [text not declassified] these
developments included an increase in the number of aircraft and air-
fields involved in airlift operations to Afghanistan; significant move-
ment of heavy ground equipment, including convoys of cargo trucks,
armored personnel carriers, anti-aircraft guns, howitzers, and tanks:
[text not declassified]. The report concluded by noting that a recent TASS
commentary marking the anniversary of the Soviet-Afghan Treaty of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Friendship and Cooperation referred to the military aspect of the treaty,
which called for “conducting joint measures to insure the security,
independence and territorial integrity of both countries.” (Central Intel-
ligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job 94T00046R,
Box 2, SWS Products on Afghanistan)
[text not declassified] reported on developments over the past 24
hours, which “suggest that the USSR is rapidly expanding the size of its
military force in Afghanistan,” including the operational deployment
of the [text not declassified] to the Soviet-Afghan border at Termez;
movement of approximately 45 aircraft to Afghanistan or the Afghan
border; and the arrival of 34 armored vehicles, 47 helicopters, and “a
large number of personnel and tents” at an airfield north of Termez.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables
This information was brought to Brzezinski’s attention by NSC Staff
member Stephen Larrabee on December 15. Referring to the comments
made by the Deputy Chief of Mission in Kabul, quoted in Document
84, Larrabee disagreed that the escalating Soviet presence in Afghani-
stan was “a direct response to targets of opportunity the Soviets see
elsewhere, i.e., Iran, Baluchistan, etc., but rather is related primarily to
the situation in Afghanistan itself.” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 1, Afghanistan:
That same day, [text not declassified] issued an intelligence cable
that noted many of the military movements described above and
reported that imagery analysis “provides the first indication that the
Soviets are setting up a communications network in that country.”
The cable concluded that “establishment of a Soviet communications
network in Afghanistan would facilitate combined Soviet-Afghan oper-
ations if they should become necessary.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Box 1, Afghanistan:
In telegram 323556 to Moscow, December 15, Vance directed Wat-
son to “seek an urgent appointment with Gromyko or highest available
MFA official and ask for an explanation of the significant continuing
deployment of Soviet military units outside the borders of the USSR
into Afghanistan which has come to our attention.” Vance further
directed that this request, which would also be presented to the Soviet
Embassy in Washington, should be made “in the context of the 1972
Principles of U.S.-Soviet Relations and commitment therein to consult
so that conflict situations will not arise which would serve to increase
international tensions.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Mar-
shall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet Affairs,

Afghanistan
of Relations Between the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics” was signed May 29, 1972, in Moscow by President Richard
Nixon and General Secretary of the Communist Party Leonid Brezhnev.
The second article of the agreement states: “The USA and the USSR
attach major importance to preventing the development of situations
capable of causing a dangerous exacerbation of their relations” and
“both sides recognize that efforts to obtain unilateral advantage at the
expense of the other, directly or indirectly, are inconsistent with these
objectives.” The full text of the agreement is printed in Public Papers:
Watson responded in telegram 27491 from Moscow, December 15,
that the request for an “urgent appointment” with Gromyko or one of
his deputies had been made. (National Archives, RG 59, Office Files
of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet
on Afghanistan, Dec. 17, 1979) Following Vance’s directive, Shulman
met with Vladillen Vasev, Chargé of the Soviet Embassy, December
15. Vasev agreed to request further instructions from Moscow, but
stated that his personal opinion was that the Soviet leadership would
be “disturbed” by the request because they might interpret it as a ploy
to divert Soviet attention from “planned U.S. action against Iran.”
Telegram 323581 to Moscow, December 15, reported on the meeting
and is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol VI, Soviet Union,
Document 240.
The Embassy reported in telegram 27530 from Moscow, December
17, that the Soviets had not responded to Vance’s request; moreover,
their response to the request “was essentially a rebuff.” Watson summa-
rized his conversation with First Deputy Foreign Minister Mal’tsev,
during which Mal’tsev reported that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
was “puzzled” by Vance’s request; that Soviet-Afghan relations were
“not subject to interference from third states; and that the Basic Princi-
ples agreement of 1972 “had no relationship to this situation.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor
Mal’tsev Meeting in Moscow on Afghanistan, Dec. 17, 1979)
[1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
88.
Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Director of the
Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Mark) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, December 16, 1979
SUBJECT
Internal Situation in Afghanistan
Overall Situation and Outlook
The Amin Government (DRA), because of factional feuding and
disillusionment within party ranks of both civilian and military person-
nel, rests on an even smaller and shakier basis than its predecessor,
the Taraki-Amin regime. Furthermore, despite its total dependence on
the Soviet Union’s military assistance for its existence—which should
have implied, but has not brought, extensive subservience, rumors
persist of Soviet intentions to replace Amin, perhaps with leaders of
the rival Marxist group, the Parchamists, in order to get a more pliant
and effective regime.
The country-wide insurgency has confronted the government with
a steadily increasing threat throughout this year. Although split geo-
graphically, factionalized, and thus unable to mount a major coordi-
nated offensive against a large city, the cumulative effect of the pres-
sures
of
the
many
insurgent
groupings
has
caused
a
steady
deterioration of the DRA’s military strength and of its capability to
exert its authority.
The Soviets have clearly hoped that an incremental build-up of
military advisory personnel and materiel could turn the tide in favor
of the government. But they have been unable to compensate for the
major military problem, an increasingly acute manpower shortage.
Because of casualties, large-scale defections, desertions, and recruit-
ment problems, the army is, by some estimates, down to a force of
It has seemed almost inevitable that, because of the critical military
manpower shortage, the USSR would eventually be faced with the
choice of bringing in its own troops or of retiring from the scene. The
present build-up of a Soviet combat force in Afghanistan may indicate
that the Soviets have concluded that that point has now been reached.
The very serious situation in northeastern Badakhshan, where rebels
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR
Nocontract; Orcon. Drafted by Van Hollen (INR). A copy was sent to Packman (INR).

Afghanistan
threaten to gain control over a province on the USSR’s border, may
contribute to the making of such a decision at this particular moment.
However, given the tens of thousands of Soviet troops who would be
necessary to bring about broad pacification of the country as a whole,
the present Soviet build-up seems likely to be an attempt to insure the
security of the capital region and perhaps to improve the safety of land
transport from the Soviet border to Kabul.
There is also, however, the possibility that the newly introduced
troops have a limited function for a limited time span. If the Soviets
were to attempt to oust Amin and install a Parchamist government,
they would have to contend with resistance from the present military
leadership and the possibility that a Soviet-backed coup attempt could
back-fire and become also directed against Soviet military advisory
personnel. Thus preparations for such a move could consist of bringing
in sufficient military force to guarantee its successful execution.
The Internal Political Situation
The Amin government is politically very insecure. Not only is it
opposed by the population at large, which is conservative and funda-
mentally Islamic, but its enemies include former leftist collaborators,
the Parchamists, and most recently the supporters of former Presi-
dent Taraki.
Amin has arrested and/or removed from key positions many Tar-
aki loyalists but, according to clandestine reports, many remain in the
army in important positions. If given another secular and leftist choice,
this group might well move against Amin.
The top Parchamist leadership, headed by Babrak Karmal has been
in exile (reportedly in Eastern Europe) since the fall of 1978. Recently
several thousand Parchamists were, reportedly, arrested throughout
Afghanistan and large numbers were executed. This followed rumors
that the Soviets were planning to remove Amin and replace him with
Parchamists. Earlier there were reports that Taraki had been in touch
with the Parchamists and was planning, with Soviet support, to bring
them back into the government, ousting Amin in the process. Rumors
that the Soviets would like to replace the DRA leadership first surfaced
in June 1979 and still persist.
The Soviets are known to believe that Amin’s ruthless and hasty
implementation of Marxist “reforms” in Afghanistan was a major mis-
take, provoking the country-wide insurgency. Most of these reform
programs have been halted by the expediency of declaring them “com-
pleted.” Since the inauguration of the new Amin government, the
emphasis has been on “legality, security and justice” and the drafting
of a constitution. In this connection, Amin has tried to shift the blame
to Taraki for the large numbers of political arrests and executions in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
the preceding months. However, Amin is widely regarded to have
been the strong man in the Taraki regime and the one responsible for
its ruthless policies.
State of the Insurgency and Military Efforts to Contain It
While the insurgency remains uncoordinated and locally led, the
number of active rebels has multiplied throughout the year. The rebels’
military capabilities have steadily increased owing to captured equip-
ment and the participation of officers and recruits defecting from the
DRA forces. Insurgents now control most of the countryside throughout
Afghanistan. They have made travel on the major roads extremely
hazardous even in heavily armed convoys and have successfully iso-
lated military outposts.
In October, the government was able by assembling massive
armored force and air support under Soviet control and direction to
mount a successful campaign against the rebels in Paktia province, on
the border with Pakistan. However, the actual and psychological effects
of this victory appear to have been negated by the subsequent reappear-
ance of the insurgents as the DRA was forced to withdraw its armor
for redeployment.
The DRA had apparently been counting on a winter lull to reorga-
nize its forces and train new recruits. However, the lull has failed to
materialize as the insurgents continue to press and government forces
have suffered a number of recent set backs, particularly in areas sur-
rounding Kabul and in northeastern Badakhshan province.
There are reports that the rebels intend to step up terrorist activities
in urban centers during the winter. The situation in Qandahar indicates
this is already in progress in Afghanistan’s second largest city. Report-
edly, the government is preparing for an expected rebel attack on the
city. There were reports in October that Soviet military personnel had
taken over the control of both military and civilian government of
Qandahar.
The most serious problem affecting the government’s military capa-
bility to contain the insurgency appears to be the manpower shortage
and the disaffection among both recruits and officers. Throughout
the year, there have been constant reports of defections, occasionally
involving complete military units. Troop disloyalty is reportedly ramp-
ant in the Badakhshan area.
The extent of the influence of exile insurgent organizations based
in Pakistan is unclear. They undoubtedly have played a supportive
role in the provinces bordering on Pakistan, while western and centrally
located insurgents may be receiving assistance from groups in Iran.
The Pakistan-based groups have been plagued by rivalries and have
been unable to unite in a common effort. One important role these

Afghanistan
groups can play is acquiring funds and armaments from outside
sources. A major Soviet intervention might bring in more funds, thus
increasing the importance of the exiles.
Reaction to the Soviet Role
The Soviet presence and role in keeping the present government
afloat have become one of the major provocations of the insurgency
and a unifying factor for all rebel groups. While insurgents may be
fighting, in large part, for local goals, they are united by a desire to
get rid of both the “godless” communist regime and the Russians.
As the Soviet role has increased throughout the civilian and military
establishment, it has provoked a nationalist reaction, even from sup-
porters of Taraki and Amin. Recently, an Afghan pilot, probably flying
a mission against Badakhshan insurgents, “accidentally” dropped his
bombs on the Soviet side of the border, causing several casualties. [less
than 1 line not declassified] this incident was a great tonic to the otherwise
abysmal morale in the DRA’s Ministry of Defense.2
Amin has recently stated publicly that his government is dependent
on Soviet support.3 However, there has been no indication of an attempt
by Amin to prepare the public for a large-scale introduction of troops.
If the Soviets were to intervene to replace Amin or to fight directly
against the rebels, they would be opening a new level of anti-Soviet
feelings and actions. That would greatly complicate achieving Soviet
goals. Achieving these goals under such circumstances would require
a major Soviet effort.
2 The report was not found.
telegram quoted two portions of an interview Amin gave to the Soviet news agency
TASS: “We are convinced that if there were no vast economic and military aid from the
Soviet Union, we could not resist the aggression and conspiracies of imperialism, its
leftist looking allies and international reaction, and could not move our country towards
the construction of a socialist society.” Amin further asserted “there is no limit” to Soviet
support of the DRA, and the Soviet assistance level “completely depends on our capacity
to absorb and utilize it.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790546–

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
89.
Alert Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[memorandum number not declassified] Washington, December 19, 1979
USSR-AFGHANISTAN2
The Soviets [2 lines not declassified] are building up other forces [1 line
not declassified] near the Soviet-Afghan border. This indicates the USSR has
significantly changed the nature of its military commitment in Afghanistan
[1½ lines not declassified].
The buildup [2 lines not declassified] suggests that further augmentation
there is likely soon, and that preparations for a much more substantial rein-
forcement may also be under way.3 ([classification marking and codeword not
declassified]).
[1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]
Concurrent with the upgrading of Soviet forces at Bagram the
Soviets began building up forces near the Afghan border. [1 paragraph
(16½ lines) and 1 footnote in the original not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job
(19 Dec 79). Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. Attached but
not printed is a distribution list indicating the memorandum was sent to the President
and Vice President, the Secretaries and Deputy Secretaries of State and Defense, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the President’s Assistant and Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs, the Directors of INR, [text not declassified], NSA, and the
Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury.
2 The Alert Memorandum is an interagency publication issued by the Director of
Central Intelligence on behalf of the Intelligence Community. Its purpose is to ensure that
senior policymakers are aware of the serious implications for US interests of impending
potential developments. It is not a prediction that these developments will occur. This
memorandum has been coordinated at the working level by CIA, [less than 1 line not
declassified] NSA, State/INR, Army, Navy, and Air Force. ([classification marking not
declassified]) [Footnote is in the original.]
3 [less than 1 line not declassified] believes it is important to add that these latest
actions serve to underline the depth of the Soviet commitment to ensure the preservation
of a pro-Soviet regime in Afghanistan. ([classification marking not declassified]) [Footnote
is in the original.]

Afghanistan
The pace of Soviet deployments in recent weeks does not suggest
that the Soviets are responding to what they perceive as a time-urgent
contingency, but rather that they are reacting to the continuing deterio-
ration of the security situation in Afghanistan. The deployments and
buildups may reflect the recommendations of the August-October 1979
mission of Soviet General Pavlovskiy to Kabul implemented in the
light of an updated assessment of the situation. ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
At a minimum the Soviets have now established a capability to
defend Bagram as an airhead. They could hold other key points, engage
insurgents in selected provinces, or free Afghan Army units for opera-
tions elsewhere if they introduced forces of the size now being built
up near the border. To conduct extensive anti-insurgent operations on
a countrywide scale would require mobilization and commitment of
much larger numbers of regular ground forces drawn from other mili-
tary districts in a potentially open-ended operation. ([classification mark-
ing not declassified])
Collection Summary
Overall US intelligence collection capability against Soviet involve-
ment in Afghanistan is considered only fair. [6 lines not declassified] But
competition for scarce collection resources, particularly for coverage
of neighboring Iran, has placed some constraints on overall capabilities.
[5 lines, classification marking, and codeword not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
90.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
8566. Subj: (LOU) Possible Motivations Behind Arrival of Soviet
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary: The recent arrival of three battalions of Soviet combat
troops at Bagram Air Force Base has raised many questions here, espe-
cially since the insurgency does not appear to have dramatically wors-
ened to the point that it threatens the regime of President Hafizullah
Amin. To the much asked question of, “Why did the Soviets send the
troops in now?”, I can suggest a few answers: Moscow and Amin hope
to “preempt” the growth of any direct threat to the regime by injecting
an immediate “stiffener” of Soviet troops, particularly should any DRA
corps or division disintegrate; the troops are here to protect the safety
of Soviet citizens should the security of Kabul collapse; the troops can
play a key role in domestic politics should further splits in the leader-
ship occur; and, the troops are merely the vanguard of a larger interven-
tion which will eventually lead to a direct combat role by Soviet forces,
a thesis I consider unlikely based on evidence available so far. Motiva-
tions behind this move by Kabul and Moscow could well be a combina-
tion of these and others, but whatever the case, Afghan claims to
“independence” have been further eroded by this development. More-
over, the presence of Soviet troops will undoubtedly heighten domestic
opposition to the Amin regime and his Soviet mentors, and in the long-
run further destabilize the region. My NATO colleagues here generally
accept our assurances that the Soviets have installed combat troops at
Bagram Air Base, but they are as puzzled as we, if not more so, as to
why the Soviets have taken this step now. End of summary.
3. Why did Soviet troops arrive now? Eight months ago (reftel A),
we concluded here that an Afghan SOS to Moscow for direct military
help would probably be sent only in face of a seriously deteriorating
security situation. We believed at that time that lack of control of most
D790585–0980. Secret; Immediate. Sent for information to Ankara, Athens, Beijing, Islama-
bad, Jidda, London, Moscow, New Delhi, USNATO, Paris, Athens, CINCPAC (also for
POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD). A copy of this telegram was found in the
Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, folder 1.
Foreign Policy File, D790164–0676)
3 See Document 72.

Afghanistan
of the countryside would probably not prompt a DRA cry for Soviet
help, because political power here resides in Kabul and the major cities,
and because insurgent control of the rural areas would not necessarily
constitute a direct threat to the survival of the regime. Moreover, we
concluded that for domestic and foreign political reasons, that neither
Moscow nor Kabul would want to face the “Soviet troops” decision
until other, less dramatic, means to counter the insurgents had been
exhausted. Finally, should Soviet troops arrive, we believed they would
be used to establish the security of Kabul and the major cities, and
would probably not be deployed into the countryside where they could
become bogged down in endless fighting over extremely rough terrain.
4. The arrival now of several battalions of Soviet airborne and
motorized rifle troops raises a number of questions, especially since
the domestic situation here does not quite fit the scenario we envisaged
earlier this year. Despite the many headaches and political upheavals
of the past few months, there have been no urban uprisings or garrison
mutinies in any of the major cities similar to those which occurred in
Herat in March or Kabul in August and October. Kabul, by far the key
to political control of the country, has remained generally untouched
by the fighting in the countryside, although there has recently been a
dramatic upsurge in urban terrorism aimed at Khalqi officials and
Soviet citizens. The key military units in and around Kabul appear to
remain loyal to the regime. Moscow would appear, therefore, to have
responded to an Afghan appeal for direct military help in a situation
which seems not to include an imminent threat to the revolution or
even to the Amin regime in Kabul, and I can arrive at only a few
reasons for this development.
5. Kabul and Moscow hope to “preempt” the development of any
serious threat to the regime. In my opinion, the regime’s overall security
situation has gradually deteriorated over the past few weeks, caused
primarily by a growing military manpower shortage (e.g., the draft age
has been lowered from 22 to 20 years), an increase in urban terrorism
in Kandahar and Kabul, indications that morale in the military officer
corps may be eroding, and persistent reports that alienations within
the PDPA resulting from the Taraki-Amin schism may be worsening.
In this situation of gradual, rather than sudden, deterioration, the DRA
leadership and Moscow may have decided that an infusion of Soviet
combat troops now may provide the necessary “stiffener” for the
Afghan military, in order to avoid any abrupt collapse or to protect
the key northern approaches to Kabul should DRA units fighting in
Samangan and Badakhshan Provinces disintegrate. In this regard, they
may have believed that a shot in the arm at this point would be sufficient
to bolster the regime until winter weather dampens activities on both
sides, something which has not yet taken place.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
6. Security for Soviet citizens primary but probably not only con-
cern. Security for the hundreds of Soviet citizens—especially in Kabul
where they have been targeted for elimination—was most probably a
major consideration in the decision to send troops, although I suspect
the move has several goals. This particular thesis, however, would be
buttressed should the Soviet troops eventually be sent to Kabul to
protect the Soviet housing area and Embassy. So far, we have not
detected any of the just arrived Soviet combat units in the capital,
although Bagram Air Base is only about 40 miles away, and the Soviet
decision-makers may elect to leave the troops there, rather than raising
their visibility dramatically.
7. The troops may eventually play a role in domestic Afghan poli-
tics. I assume that the Soviets are very aware that Amin is widely
perceived as the cause of much of this country’s woes, and it is conceiv-
able they may have concluded that his departure may be necessary to
save the revolution. I don’t think so. Most of us here are agreed that
Moscow’s fundamental commitment is to the revolution (and party)
and not to specific individuals. Whether or not Moscow may have a
hand in any anti-Amin move, there are probably many individuals or
small groups gunning for him, and Amin-Soviet tensions flowing from
the Taraki affair are widely believed to be serious. By stationing Soviet
troops near the capital, Moscow may want to be ready to intervene to
back a specific contending faction in the event of intraparty civil war—
to preserve the special position of the Soviet Union in the country. I
should point out too that these troops represent an impressive argu-
ment should the Soviets decide to try and “convince” Amin to leave
the scene “voluntarily” for the sake of the revolution’s survival, and
in favor of a less “tainted” leftist leader—perhaps a currently unknown
military man. At this point, however, I cannot identify any Khalqi
leader who could come close to filling Amin’s shoes, and the exiled
Parchamists appear not to hold out much promise as alternate
leadership.
8. Direct Soviet combat role strikes me as unlikely, but cannot be
ruled out. I doubt that the Soviet troops here will actually take the
field against the insurgents, unless some key DRA military corps or
division collapses and Kabul is threatened. At most they might man
a roadblock to safeguard one of the approaches to the capital—until
loyal DRA relief forces arrived.
9. Winter is approaching fast, the countryside is extremely rugged,
and, were Soviet units to get spread thin, and engage in search and
destroy missions, Soviet combat casualties could well become signifi-
cant, especially since the guerrilla warfare being waged by the insur-
gents is not necessarily vulnerable to sophisticated armies. Nonetheless,
General Pavlovskiy, Commander of Soviet Ground Forces, may have

Afghanistan
concluded during his two-month stay in Kabul from mid-August to
mid-October, 1979, that a military solution to this domestic conflict is
feasible, and that a certain number of Soviet troops can turn the trick.
Pavlovskiy may also have concluded, of course, that a limited number
of troops in non-combat roles would be enough to buck-up the Afghans
in their own efforts.
10. Afghan independence eroded even further. As I pointed out
two months ago in reftel B, growing Soviet influence here, and increas-
ing DRA adherence to Moscow’s politics on the world stage, cast doubt
on Kabul’s protestations that it is master in its own house. The infusion
of Soviet troops adds considerably to this doubt, especially if they
actually deploy in the field and begin killing Afghans. Even a more
passive Soviet role, however, will undoubtedly heighten opposition to
the Amin regime among the Afghan masses who generally hate Rus-
sians and Communists. In this regard, if I can point to one thing which
might unify the heretofore disjointed opposition, it is the arrival of
regular Soviet troops. The long-term implications of direct Soviet mili-
tary involvement here could thus be far-reaching, despite the presumed
legality of the move under the 1978 Soviet-Afghan bilateral treaty.
11. Local reaction remains muted. In spite of the international media
attention being devoted to this development, there has not yet been
any observed reaction among Kabul’s residents, excluding the urban
terrorism campaign which is probably unrelated. My NATO Ambassa-
dorial colleagues generally accept our word that the Soviet military
presence has risen at Bagram, and are even more puzzled than we as
to why it should occur now.
Amstutz

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
91.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, December 21, 1979
SUBJECT
The Soviets and Afghanistan
It is hard to exaggerate the importance of what the Soviets are now
poised to do in Afghanistan. Essentially, they seem to have made a
decision to risk whatever is necessary, including major involvement
in armed combat, to maintain a Communist government in Kabul.
Given their military capabilities, the terrain and the division of the
insurgents, they will almost certainly have considerable initial success
if they pull out all stops (as we learned in Viet Nam, the helicopter
gunship can be a very successful “pacification” tool). The real military
question boils down to the staying power of the insurgents and the
attitude of the Pakistanis, and we can play a key role on both counts.
This was not an easy decision for the Kremlin, which realizes that
its own “counter-insurgency” effort will inevitably be compared to
what we did in Viet Nam. As such, they will be doubly determined
to succeed where we failed. They are also far more experienced in this
area than we are, and their ruthlessness will not hurt them either.
Equally important is the fact that this is the first time since World War
II that the Soviets are using their own forces in a combat situation
outside the borders of the USSR and Eastern Europe. This therefore
seems to complete a chain of events which began in Angola in 1975,
was continued in Ethiopia (where a Soviet General assumed command
of the operation), and now culminates in Afghanistan. If the Soviets
manage a successful counter-insurgency effort, it will lead almost inev-
itably to further “adventurism” in the years ahead.
What is to be done?
Given the current situation, we are not in a position to ignore what
is happening in Afghanistan. It is necessary for us to develop both a
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
Gregg, Griffith, Henze, Oksenberg, Sick, Thornton, and Odom.

Afghanistan
public stance and a series of concrete actions in order to deal with this
situation. I recommend that we consider taking at least some of the
following specific steps:
1. Use all the means at our disposal to publicize what the Soviets
are doing in Afghanistan. Major themes in this campaign should be
as follows:
a. This is the first use by the Soviets of their armed forces in a
combat situation outside the Soviet bloc since the Second World War.
b. Afghanistan has been a buffer state—in fact, the classic buffer
state—for the past 150 years. The Soviets have no legitimate national
interest in taking such action.
c. The United States has never made a commitment to the military
defense of Afghanistan, which has been outside our defense perimeter
for the past 25 years.
d. Nevertheless, we are extremely concerned at this unjustifiable
Soviet action, especially in that it might become an unwelcome prece-
dent in other areas. What are the limits to the Brezhnev Doctrine?2
e. We are also extremely concerned at the human toll which this
Soviet-supported combat is taking. There are 300,000 refugees now in
Pakistan, and we would not be surprised to see that number rise to
half a million in the near future.
f. Thus, as in Cambodia and in so many other countries since World
War II, the Soviets are creating another enormous refugee problem, this
time in South Asia and among an overwhelmingly Muslim population.
g. The United States is prepared to do its utmost to assist the
Afghan refugees with humanitarian aid.
h. The Soviet Union is atheistic by doctrine and has published
enormous amounts of anti-religious and anti-Muslim literature. (The
exhibition at the Museum of Religion and Atheism in Leningrad, for
example, would strike any Muslim as the epitome of sacrilege.) The US,
on the other hand, firmly believes in religious freedom, and enshrines
it in our Constitution. Three million Muslims practice their religion
freely in the US. In Soviet Azerbaijan, on the other hand, there are only
24 officially recognized Mosques now operating, whereas before the
revolution of 1917 there were several thousand in operation.
2 In a speech in November 1968, Brezhnev declared that a threat to socialist rule
in any state constituted a theat to all and therefore “must engage the attention of all the
socialist states,” including the use of military force.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
i. In sum, the US deplores the Soviet action in Afghanistan, regards
it as reckless adventurism, feels that superpowers should not behave
in this manner, is deeply concerned at the human suffering among the
Afghan population, and will do everything in its power to deal with
this problem in a constructive, statesmanlike manner. It calls on all
nations, and particularly nations with significant Muslim populations,
to appeal to the Soviet Union to allow the Afghan people to settle its
own problems in line with the principle of no interference in the internal
affairs of other nations. Hands off Afghanistan!
2. Dispatch a mission to Pakistan to investigate conditions in the
Afghan refugee camps there.
a. In line with the mission’s (undoubted) shock at the abysmal
conditions within the refugee camp, issue a statement publicizing those
conditions.
b. Turn loose our refugee apparatus on the problem and call for
assistance both from the American public and from other countries
and international organizations.
c. Place the blame for this human catastrophe on the Soviets, where
it belongs.
3. Explore, directly or indirectly, with the Saudis, the Libyans, the
Chinese, and other potential sympathizers with the Afghan Muslim
cause, the possibility of stepping up covert assistance to the insurgents
and the use of bases and refugee camps inside Pakistan to support the
insurgency.
4. Call an SCC to examine our policy toward both Pakistan and
Afghanistan. One aim of such an SCC should be to find the correct
mix of incentives and guarantees that we would need to stiffen the
spine of the Pakistanis to resist Moscow’s and Kabul’s pressure to help
destroy the insurgency. This is an immediate goal and an important
one, which might become more important to the President as the elec-
tion period wears on. (As a Government, we must be in a position to
defend ourselves against charges that we are sitting back and allowing
the Soviets to add another country to the Communist camp without
doing anything about it, as well as charges from the other direction
that we are not doing enough to relieve the human misery caused by
Soviet action in Afghanistan.)
In sum, major Soviet combat involvement in a long-term insur-
gency in Afghanistan is something which the US Government must
respond to in a concrete way and with both a public position and a
private action plan. We should be ready to move on this as soon as
possible, but first we need clear-cut overall guidance.

Afghanistan
RECOMMENDATION
That you convene an SCC to deal with Afghanistan and with US
policy toward Pakistan in the light of events in Afghanistan.3
Unless you indicate otherwise, I would plan to work with Thornton,
Henze, Sick and Gregg on this overall subject.
3 Brzezinski and Aaron did not indicate their approval or disapproval on the memo-
randum. Brement’s desire to convene an SCC meeting was echoed in a memorandum
from Claytor to Brzezinski, December 21. Claytor questioned whether the current level
of U.S. support was sufficient in light of increased Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.
Citing a need to “keep the Afghan insurgency going,” Claytor argued that the United
States should “frustrate the Soviets” and demonstrate “U.S. resolve to Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, and others in the area.” Claytor called for an SCC meeting because “the situation
calls for more than just throwing more money at the problem.” (Memorandum from
Claytor to Brzezinski, December 21; National Security Council, Carter Administration
a meeting on Afghanistan on December 26; see Document 95.
92.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
Washington, December 24, 1979
SITUATION REPORTS
AFGHANISTAN-USSR
[7 lines not declassified] In Afghanistan, a new rash of desertions and
the need to reinforce several endangered provincial capitals have further
strained the Afghan Army’s ability to handle the insurgency. [classification
marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]
[2 paragraphs (23 lines) not declassified]
[3 lines not declassified] A TU–134 aircraft that is equipped with a
satellite communications capability and is normally associated with
high-level Soviet military officials was seen at Balkhash on Friday with
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, NIDs. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified].
2 Friday was December 21.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
There were at least 22 additional Soviet military cargo transport flights
on Friday into the Central Asian Military District, primarily into the
Balkhash and Taldy-Kurgan areas. [classification marking and codeword
not declassified]
[2 paragraphs (19 lines) not declassified]
Bad weather has dominated the border area for more than a week,
and the Soviets may be waiting for it to clear before they undertake
further operations. [classification marking not declassified]
Soviet Press Statement
Moscow denied Western reports that Soviet combat units have
been introduced into Afghanistan in a Pravda article yesterday, dismiss-
ing them as “pure fabrications” designed to “sow poisonous seeds of
mistrust in relations between the Afghan and Soviet peoples.” The
article also accuses the US and China of training Afghan insurgents at
bases in Pakistan. [classification marking not declassified]
Military Situation in Afghanistan
The situation in the northeastern province of Badakshan remains
critical, with only the capital under firm government control. [1 line
not declassified] a number of soldiers had deserted with their equipment
and many others could not be trusted. [classification marking not
declassified]
The rebels evidently are also threatening provincial capitals in
western and central Afghanistan. Fighting has been moving closer to
the capital of Badghist Province, and most of Ghowr and Oruzgan
provinces reportedly are controlled by the insurgents. A shortage of
transport helicopters has evidently hampered reinforcement of critical
areas. [classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]
The government evidently is trying to stem desertions and to
increase the manpower pool from which the Army can draw. [1 line
not declassified] ordered Army units throughout the country to provide
information on the families of deserters, presumably so that action can
be taken against them. The Army has also transferred some troops out
of their home districts to keep them from returning to their villages.
[classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]
Earlier this month, the government reportedly lowered the draft
age from 22 to 20 and stopped issuing passports to draft-aged males.
Kabul has also begun to offer good salaries to discharged servicemen
to protect their own villages. This program apparently is designed to
free regular Army units for combat elsewhere and to discourage former
soldiers from joining the rebels. [classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified]

Afghanistan
Pakistani Visit
Pakistani Foreign Affairs Adviser Agha Shahi has postponed his
visit to Kabul until 30–31 December, ostensibly because of bad flying
weather. The excuse may have some validity, but the decision to delay
a week because of Shahi’s other commitments may reflect a lack of
enthusiasm for the trip stemming from the poor prospects for any sig-
nificant improvement in relations between Kabul and Islamabad. [less
than 1 line, classification marking, and handling restriction not declassified]
[Omitted here is a map.]
93.
Intelligence Summary Cable Prepared in the Department of
Defense1
No. JSI–7
[less than 1 line not declassified] Please pass to SecDef eyes only for
Current Intelligence Summary for the [less than 1 line not declassified]
(Supplement). (U). Ref: [less than 1 line not declassified].2 Current Intelli-
gence Summary Nr Six. (U)
A. (S [codeword not declassified]) USSR-Afghanistan Update: Since
the referenced message was transmitted several developments have
occurred in the Soviet-Afghanistan situation.
—[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified]
Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. Sent for immediate night delivery
eyes only for the Secretary of Defense. Drafted by [text not declassified].
2 The referenced message was not found. An Alert Memorandum prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency, December 25, from Carlucci to Vance, Brown, Jones, and
Brzezinski reads: “As you know, we have been closely monitoring Soviet military activi-
ties in Afghanistan and in the USSR itself in the last few days. On 19 December we
issued an alert memorandum warning that the USSR appeared to be building up for a
major move into Afghanistan. Intelligence received in the last 12 hours convinces me
that [preparations?] for that operation have essentially been completed and that it proba-
bly has begun. If so, it will mark the first significant use of Soviet ground forces outside
the USSR and Eastern Europe since the end of World War II.” (Central Intelligence
[additional memorandum number not declassified] Alert Memo USSR-Afghanistan (27 Decem-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
2. (TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Additional
ground force activity also seems to indicate continuing Soviet prepara-
tions for operations in or near Afghanistan.
—[less than 1 line not declassified] provided the initial identification
of an airborne unit at Balkhash airfield located some 650 km northeast
of the Afghanistan border. At least 14 BMD airborne assault vehicles
and other airborne associated equipment were [less than 1 line not
declassified] at the airfield and may have been there as early as the 24th.
—Additional fuel storage equipment [less than 1 line not declassified]
near Termez and Kushka both located on the Afghanistan border. These
locations are areas where the 360th Motorized Rifle Division and the
5th Guards Motorized Rifle Division have probably been deployed
since 19 December. Stockage of fuel supplies would indicate further
preparations for operations by these units.
—Finally, a convoy of at least 60 trucks [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] near Termez, probably indicating that Soviet resupply activity into
Afghanistan by motor convoy is continuing. Frequent activity of this
nature has been [less than 1 line not declassified] near Termez.
3. (S [codeword not declassified]) From the above evidence, it appears
the Soviets are nearing the completion of preparations for a major
introduction of new combat units into Afghanistan. [6½ lines not declassi-
fied] some facets of operations in or near Afghanistan. [2 lines not
declassified]
94.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
8592. Subj: (LOU) Massive Soviet Air Operations Into Kabul
Continue.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary: Massive Soviet air operations into Kabul began Christ-
mas morning and have not stopped yet. AN–22s, heavy jets, and AS–
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
tion to Ankara, Athens, Beijing, Islamabad, London, Moscow, New Delhi, USNATO,
Paris, CINCPAC (also for POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD). Printed from a
copy received in the White House Situation Room.

Afghanistan
12s have been observed in large numbers, and the total flights may
now exceed one hundred fifty to two hundred. (Most of these aircraft
have had Soviet Air Force markings.) No information is available as
yet regarding what was on those planes, but we have not yet seen
any Soviet troops on the streets of Kabul, nor have we observed any
significant increase in the Afghan military’s alert status in the capital.
End of summary.
3. The first of three phases of intensive operations began at about
0400 Christmas morning and continued until just before 0700. These
flights are probably all AN–22s, since they were the only aircraft seen
after dawn broke at about 0600. Numbers of aircraft involved is very
difficult to pin down, but at one point an Embassy officer (a former
Air Force intelligence officer) could see five AN–22s stacked over the
city, despite his limited field of view caused by nearby buildings and
trees. Given this density of traffic, we would estimate that a minimum
of twenty AN–22s arrived and/or departed Kabul during this first
phase, although the number could have been much higher. Some of
these aircraft departed the city beginning at about 1100, while at least
four were observed still on the ground at 1500.
4. These operations were just the preliminary, however, as more
action appeared to get underway at about 1800 Christmas evening.
Heavy jet aircraft were heard arriving in fairly quick succession, but
by that hour darkness had fallen and, combined with a low ceiling, it
was impossible to determine the exact type of plane. These were defi-
nitely heavy jets, however, possibly IL–76 or something somewhat
smaller. Again, the numbers of aircraft involved is impossible for us
to determine with any certainty but we estimate that about twenty jet
transports may have been operating during this second phase.
5. Finally, at about 2200 Christmas evening, operations switched
to turbo-prop aircraft (most probably AN–12s, but possibly AN–22s
as well). These seemingly unending flights continued throughout the
night and have not stopped as yet. One officer counted more than one
hundred and thirty flights between 2200 and about 0600 this morning.
Since daybreak, we have seen AN–12s and AN–22s in the skies over
Kabul.
6. We have no firm information as yet regarding what was on these
aircraft, although some credible reports contend that heavy equipment
and ammunition was on yesterday morning’s AN–22 contingent. We
have not seen anything resembling mass movements of any Soviet
troops who may have been on these planes, but there are routes leaving
the airport which the regime could use which would not be visible to
innocent observers. It strikes us that this massive sky train could easily
have brought in thousands of personnel, and we will report immedi-
ately if any Soviet troops are seen in or around the capital.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
7. After the above was written, a State officer arriving from New
Delhi this morning saw about 200 Soviet Army troops around some
of the planes at Kabul Airport. He also saw a group of APCs deployed
at the east end of the runway. This leads us to believe that the Soviet
troops are probably being deployed directly from the aircraft to waiting
transportation, thereby bypassing the main highway into Kabul.
Amstutz
95.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordinating
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Summary of Conclusions: SCC Meeting on Soviet Moves in Afghanistan (S)
PARTICIPANTS
STATE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Admiral Stansfield Turner,
Warren Christopher, Deputy
Director
Secretary
Frank Carlucci, Deputy
David Newsom, Under Secretary for
Director
Political Affairs
Arnold Horelick, NIO for
Harold Saunders, Ass’t. Secretary for
Soviet Union
Near Eastern & South Asian
[name not declassified],
Affairs
Military Analyst
DEFENSE
WHITE HOUSE
W. Graham Claytor, Jr., Deputy
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Secretary
David Aaron
Robert W. Komer, Under Secretary
NSC
for Policy Affairs
Thomas Thornton
JCS
Col. William Odom
General David Jones
Lt. General John Pustay
The CIA briefed the SCC on Soviet military actions in Afghanistan
over the past two days. As many as 215 transports, including AN–22s,
AN–12s, and IL–76s, arrived in Afghanistan from the Soviet Union
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General
the White House Situation Room.

Afghanistan
during December 25th. Kabul airport appears to be a major reception
point. Activity at Bagram airport is not known. This size airlift, it is
speculated, could raise the Soviet combat force level in Afghanistan to
somewhere between two-thirds and one and one-half divisions. No
ground forces at Termez or Kushka have yet crossed the border into
Afghanistan. Thus we have an unusually large air movement but no
ground re-enforcement. There is command and control intelligence
indicating direct politburo supervision of parts of this operation. (S)
The greatest risk that we face is a quick, effective Soviet operation
to pacify Afghanistan. This would be extremely costly to our image in
the region and to your position here at home.2 Our objective, then,
should be to make the operation as costly as possible for the Soviets.
The covert actions that you authorized have been very slow in getting
off the ground. CIA will submit a full status report tomorrow. (S)
There will be a PRC tomorrow to discuss the broad regional impact
of the events in Iran and Afghanistan. By that time we should have a
more definitive picture of the scope of Soviet activity. At the PRC we
will develop options for dealing with the issue, including possible
recourse to the UN. In terms of immediate actions, we decided this
morning:
1. We will permit information of the newest Soviet actions to reach
the media on its own and maintain our current public posture.
2. The new developments will be briefed promptly to concerned
countries in the region as well as other interested parties.
3. State will brief the Congressional leadership today in connection
with planned briefings on Iran.
4. You should not become personally involved in a further
demarche to the Soviets at this time. We will have Tom Watson reiterate
our concerns and press for an explanation of recent troop movements;
the Soviets have probably passed the point of no return. (S)
2 These comments are presumably addressed to Carter.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
96.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
331394. Subject: Soviet Troop Movements Into Afghanistan. Refer-
ence: Kabul 8592.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. You should seek appointment with Gromyko or highest available
level as soon as possible on question of Soviet troop deployments into
Afghanistan (reftel). Talking points are as follows.
3. —The United States is fully aware that the Soviet Union has
begun introducing large numbers of Soviet military forces into Afghani-
stan in recent days, with large numbers of flights landing at Kabul
Airport.
—The introduction of large numbers of Soviet combat-equipped
units into Afghanistan on December 25–26 can only be considered as
direct, deliberate intervention in the internal affairs of that country,
with obvious consequences for the peace and stability of the region as
a whole.
—The U.S. side asks the Soviet Government for immediate clarifica-
tion of its actions and intentions with regard to the situation in Afghani-
stan. It is obvious that the U.S. interest is real, legitimate, and urgent,
involving not only our interest in the independence of Afghanistan, as
a sovereign country, but posing clear implications for the international
community as a whole.
4. You should add orally that the United States has the firm expecta-
tion that the introduction of Soviet forces into Kabul and elsewhere in
Afghanistan will in no way lead to any situation which places the
safety of American personnel in Afghanistan in jeopardy.
Vance
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to the White House. Drafted
by G.L. Matthews (EUR/SOV); cleared by Shulman and in EUR, NEA, S/S, and S/S–
O; and approved by Vance.
2 See Document 94.

Afghanistan
97.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 26, 1979
SUBJECT
Reflections on Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan
I will be sending you separately a proposed agenda for the NSC
meeting on Friday, and it will focus on both Afghanistan and Iran.2
In the meantime, you are receiving today’s SCC minutes on both sub-
jects.3 This memorandum is meant merely to provide some stimulus
to your thinking on this subject.
As I mentioned to you a week or so ago, we are now facing a
regional crisis. Both Iran and Afghanistan are in turmoil, and Pakistan
is both unstable internally and extremely apprehensive externally.4 If
the Soviets succeed in Afghanistan, and if Pakistan acquiesces, the age-
long dream of Moscow to have direct access to the Indian Ocean will
have been fulfilled.
Historically, the British provided the barrier to that drive and
Afghanistan was their buffer state. We assumed that role in 1945, but
the Iranian crisis has led to the collapse of the balance of power in
Southwest Asia, and it could produce Soviet presence right down on
the edge of the Arabian and Oman Gulfs.
Accordingly, the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan poses for us
an extremely grave challenge, both internationally and domestically.
While it could become a Soviet Vietnam, the initial effects of the inter-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
for the NSC meeting on December 28; see Document 107.
2 The proposed agenda was not found.
3 See Document 95 for the Summary of Conclusions of the SCC meeting on Afghani-
stan. The minutes of that meeting were not found. The Summary of Conclusions of the
SCC meeting on Iran on that date is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–
4 The implications of the region-wide crisis were examined more fully in a memoran-
dum prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, December 26, entitled “The Troubles
of Southwest Asia.” Characterizing the entire region as in “turmoil, albeit from a variety
of causes,” the memorandum argued that this trend constituted a “net gain” for the
Soviet Union. The memorandum further argued that both superpowers were being
pushed by forces they could not control: for the United States it was the hostage crisis
in Iran; for the Soviet Union it was the insurgency in Afghanistan. (Central Intelligence
Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support Services, Job 82T00267R: Production
Case Files, Box 2, The Troubles in Southwest Asia)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
vention are likely to be adverse for us for the following domestic and
international reasons:
Domestic
A. The Soviet intervention is likely to stimulate calls for more
immediate U.S. military action in Iran. Soviet “decisiveness” will be
contrasted with our restraint, which will no longer be labeled as pru-
dent but increasingly as timid;
B. At the same time, regional instability may make a resolution of
the Iranian problem more difficult for us, and it could bring us into a
head to head confrontation with the Soviets;
C. SALT is likely to be damaged, perhaps irreparably, because
Soviet military aggressiveness will have been so naked;
D. More generally, our handling of Soviet affairs will be attacked
by both the Right and the Left.
International
A. Pakistan, unless we somehow manage to project both confidence
and power into the region, is likely to be intimidated, and it could
eventually even acquiesce to some form of external Soviet domination.
B. With Iran destabilized, there will be no firm bulwark in South-
west Asia against the Soviet drive to the Indian Ocean;
C. The Chinese will certainly note that Soviet assertiveness in
Afghanistan and in Cambodia is not effectively restrained by the
United States.
Compensating Factors
There will be, to be sure, some compensating factors:
A. World public opinion may be outraged at the Soviet interven-
tion. Certainly, Moslem countries will be concerned, and we might be
in a position to exploit this.
B. There are already 300,000 refugees from Afghanistan in Pakistan
and we will be in a position to indict the Soviets for causing massive
human suffering. That figure will certainly grow, and Soviet-sponsored
actions in Cambodia have already taken their toll as well.
C. There will be greater awareness among our allies for the need
to do more for their own defense.
A Soviet Vietnam?
However, we should not be too sanguine about Afghanistan
becoming a Soviet Vietnam:
A. The guerrillas are badly organized and poorly led;
B. They have no sanctuary, no organized army, and no central
government—all of which North Vietnam had;

Afghanistan
C. They have limited foreign support, in contrast to the enormous
amount of arms that flowed to the Vietnamese from both the Soviet
Union and China;
D. The Soviets are likely to act decisively, unlike the U.S., which
pursued in Vietnam a policy of “inoculating” the enemy.
As a consequence, the Soviets might be able to assert themselves
effectively, and in world politics nothing succeeds like success, what-
ever the moral aspects.
What is to be Done?
What follows are some preliminary thoughts, which need to be
discussed more fully:
A. It is essential that Afghanistani resistance continues. This means
more money as well as arms shipments to the rebels, and some techni-
cal advice;
B. To make the above possible we must both reassure Pakistan
and encourage it to help the rebels. This will require a review of our
policy toward Pakistan, more guarantees to it, more arms aid, and,
alas, a decision that our security policy toward Pakistan cannot be
dictated by our nonproliferation policy;
C. We should encourage the Chinese to help the rebels also;
D. We should concert with Islamic countries both in a propaganda
campaign and in a covert action campaign to help the rebels;
E. We should inform the Soviets that their actions are placing SALT
in jeopardy and that will also influence the substance of the Brown
visit to China,5 since the Chinese are doubtless going to be most con-
cerned about implications for themselves of such Soviet assertiveness
so close to their border. Unless we tell the Soviets directly and very
clearly that our relations will suffer, I fear the Soviets will not take
our “expressions of concern” very seriously, with the effect that our
relations will suffer, without the Soviets ever having been confronted
with the need to ask the question whether such local adventurism is
worth the long-term damage to the U.S.-Soviet relationship;
F. Finally, we should consider taking Soviet actions in Afghanistan
to the UN as a threat to peace.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
98.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
8623. Subj: (LOU) Soviet Airlift Could Have Repercussions Beyond
Afghan Borders. Ref: Kabul 8566.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary: The unprecedented Christmas airlift of Soviet combat
units into Kabul underscores the qualitative change in political develop-
ments here. The ramifications of the Soviet move are chilling, both as
regards the future of Afghanistan itself and the region as a whole.
Internally, we may soon see Soviet divisions operating side by side with
loyal DRA troops to suppress the insurgency—despite the likelihood
of widespread genocide. Externally, the success of the Soviets will have
an unsettling effect on the region, more likely to lead to a general
posture of accommodation than of defiance.
3. On the local scene, the airlift is likely to have as much political
as strictly military objectives. Moscow now has its own forces close to
the political heart of the country, thereby perhaps insuring that it will
have a loud voice should further internal tensions tear the Khalqis’
political fabric.
4. Any semblance of Afghan political independence has virtually
been eliminated by this massive airlift, and it could well be years, if
ever, before a Communist revolutionary regime is sufficiently secure
that Soviet troops can be withdrawn. Reaction of those Afghans willing
to express their views has been one of despair, as they believe Soviet
troops will now guarantee the survival of the hated Amin regime. Even
if inaccurate in some respects, one Afghan merchant sadly claimed
that “Afghanistan has now become a second Czechoslovakia.” End
of summary.
5. Massive airlift underscores the qualitative change in events that
has taken place here. The injection of Soviet combat forces into Afghani-
stan to prop up a regime that may not have survived without such
help, and the unabashedly public manner in which these forces were
deployed, underscore the depth of the qualitative change which has
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
Athens, Islamabad, Beijing, Jidda, London, Moscow, USNATO, New Delhi, Paris, CINC-
PAC (also for POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD). Printed from a copy received
in the White House Situation Room. In the top right corner of the telegram, Carter wrote:
“Cy—Get our allies & others to complain officially—J.” See footnote 3, Document 99.
2 See Document 90.

Afghanistan
occurred. The Afghan Government has yet to mention the event pub-
licly, and Moscow has also remained mute regarding the despatch of
perhaps two hundred Soviet Air Force planes and possibly thousands
of Soviet combat troops to a neighboring country. Whether the USSR
will formally invoke the “Brezhnev Doctrine” to justify its action
remains to be seen. If so, it will be difficult to avoid the conclusion
that the Khalqi regime in Kabul is considered a full-fledged member
of the “socialist community of states.” On the other hand, the two
governments may rely on the December 5, 1978, Treaty of Friendship
as justification for “cooperation” between two sovereign states. This
would strike us as potentially ominous for other countries with similar
treaties, since Moscow has decided to send combat forces to a non-
Warsaw Pact country at the request of a clearly unpopular Communist
regime hanging on to power by its fingernails and dependent princi-
pally on the zeal of a small cadre of dedicated party members, and the
loyalty of a few key military units in and around the capital.
6. This particular phase of Soviet military activity may now be
completed, and it is unknown if additional forces will be sent to Kabul
or to other Afghan cities or military bases. Our guess is they will. The
dimensions of the Christmas airlift to Kabul, however, are apparent to
all observers here, and it is now clear even to those who downplayed
the importance of the three battalions of Soviet troops at Bagram Air
Base that political developments have entered a new phase with the
arrival of Soviet units in Afghanistan’s capital. In this context, we
would like to reexamine the analysis in our reftel to set forth the added
dimensions which we see flowing from recent events.
7. The impact of the airlift will in time have repercussions beyond
Afghanistan’s borders. In addition to the effect these events will have
within this country, there is sure to be a major impact on regional and
international relationships well beyond Afghanistan’s borders. In the
wake of high-level expressions of U.S. concern at the arrival of the
three battalions of Soviet troops at Bagram Air Base, the massive and
blatant airlift to Kabul strikes us as a distinct and overt disregard of
U.S. interests on the part of the Kremlin. Despite whatever “legality” the
move may have under the 1978 bilateral treaty, Moscow has apparently
elected to underpin with military force a despotic regime which came
to power 20 months ago through a classic military coup d’état, whose
human rights record is among the worst in the world, and whose
“legitimacy” as the genuine representative of the will of the Afghan
people can be seriously questioned, if not completely discarded.
8. Afghanistan’s regional neighbors are also likely to take some
sobering second looks at the ramifications of Soviet Army forces sitting
in Kabul and some probably elsewhere around the country. Pakistan,
of course, will probably feel itself most threatened by this development,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
and some of our Pakistani colleagues here have already expressed
genuine fears that this airlift is merely the initial stage of a larger Soviet
“occupation” aimed at dominance in the region. India as well may not
welcome a massive Soviet military presence here, despite constant DRA
assertions that Indian-Afghan relations rate in importance only behind
Afghanistan’s fraternal relations with the Socialist countries. We pre-
sume that the chaos in Iran will greatly diffuse whatever concern that
government would normally have over this development.
9. In sum, not only may the Soviet military airlift—which may by
no means be over—have potentially damaging ramifications on our
relations with the USSR and with the DRA, but it adds one more
seriously destabilizing factor to a region already rife with instability
and potential chaos.
10. Within Afghanistan, the airlift is likely to have both political
and military goals. Several of the points discussed in our reftel remain
valid in the wake of the airlift. These newly arrived forces could clearly
provide security for the hundreds of Soviet citizens in and around
Kabul, although the forces which have been sent to the capital appear
excessive to this particular role. Likewise, these units now deployed
at the political heart of the country could constitute the “stiffener” for
the Afghan Army in its counterinsurgency fight. The Soviet units may,
moreover, take on the added responsibility for the security of the
capital, in order to free certain of the apparently loyal and more heavily
armed Afghan units for active deployment against the insurgents oper-
ating near Kabul. The prospect, however, that is most sobering is that
in the year ahead Soviet forces (Army and Air Force) will undertake
a direct role in the fighting, side by side with loyal DRA forces.
11. At this point, political considerations rather than strictly military
concerns may be at the root of the Soviet move. The mid-December
gunfight at the “People’s House” in Kabul, which resulted in the proba-
ble death of Assadullah Amin (Second Deputy Foreign Minister, a top
party official and President Hafizullah Amin’s son-in-law) and perhaps
Politburo member Abdul Hakim Sahrayee Jauzjani, highlights the
instability of the Khalqi leadership. Moscow may, therefore, have
decided to move now in order to have its own forces on the scene in
the event that the fragile political leadership were to suddenly shatter
as a result of an assassin’s bullet, or following another intramural
gunfight. Since Soviet advice to the Afghans last summer to form a
broader political base was apparently ignored by the Khalqis, the Sovi-
ets may feel that locally available “muscle” to back up future “advice”
is mandatory to protect Moscow’s interests and investment in this
country. An integral element here, of course, is the flexibility the Soviet
forces provide to Moscow should the Afghan political leadership split
into contending factions, or should some Afghan military contingent

Afghanistan
attempt to replace the Khalqis. In the bigger picture, the Soviet move
underscores Moscow’s commitment to the revolution, a commitment
the Soviets may have wanted to highlight for the benefit of other
fraternal parties and regimes.
12. Afghan independence now virtually non-existent. As pointed
out in our reftel, the arrival of a few Soviet battalions at Bagram Air Base
cast further doubt on Afghanistan’s ability to pursue any independent
course on the international scene. In our view, the airlift virtually
eliminates any question on this issue. Hafizullah Amin has apparently
elected to place the security of his revolution in Moscow’s hands for
the sake of retaining his power. Given the current forces at work on
Afghanistan’s political scene, it could be years before a Communist
regime is sufficiently secure that a Soviet withdrawal would be feasible.
13. Local reaction to the airlift—and what may follow—has been
mostly despair. Those few Afghans who have been willing to voice
their reactions to these events (a risky step these days) have generally
despaired at what the airlift portends for their country. Most believe
that the arrival of Soviet combat forces means there is now little, if
any, chance of unseating the Khalqis, and that Amin and his followers
will now embark on an even more repressive policy of stamping out
all perceived opposition. A Kabul flower vendor was not all that wide
of the mark when he remarked sadly to an Embassy officer yesterday
that “Afghanistan has now become a second Czechoslovakia.”
Amstutz

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
99.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
8624. Subj: Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan: What To Do About
It. Ref: Kabul 8623.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary: The arrival of Soviet battalions at Bagram Air Base
and now in Kabul significantly changes the Afghan political picture,
and points to a need for a new policy review. The intervention not
only suggests an extension of the Brezhnev Doctrine to Afghanistan,
but it also raises the related question of whether the Amin regime has
not now lost its legitimacy. Hence, I recommend a new policy review
of Afghanistan/USSR by a group of countries, such as the NATO
powers, Pakistan, India and China, to try to bring about a Soviet with-
drawal; or the U.S. raising the issue of Soviet intervention in the UN
Security Council, and our urging the termination of UNDP and World
Bank aid to the Soviet satellite; and/or our giving massive assistance
to the Afghan insurgents. Were either or both of the latter two options
adopted, we would have to break our relations with this puppet regime
and withdraw all official American personnel from the country. Our
SALT monitoring capability would thereby also suffer. End summary.
3. Whether you call it a “qualitative change” or a new ball game,
we have now a different political situation in Afghanistan. By reftel,
we have just reexamined the question of why the Soviets chose to bring
in troops at this time. We concluded that the reasons were probably
multi-purpose, but at heart were to try to make sure the Khalqi party
remained in power and the country within the Soviet orbit.
4. The fact that the Soviets, with presumably Hafizullah Amin’s
consent and/or invitation, were impelled to introduce combat troops
suggests too that both parties had concluded that the Khalqi regime
could not otherwise long survive. Counter-insurgency efforts were
having mixed results, urban terrorism was increasing, dissatisfaction
in the Khalqi party was widespread, and the Soviets were probably
painfully conscious that they were expected to meet all the expensive
bills for hardware and the ever growing numbers of Soviet advisors.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Immediate; Nodis.
2 See Document 98.

Afghanistan
They must have concluded that an intervention of Soviet forces was
necessary to save the regime and for Soviet prestige.
5. I suspect that Soviet intervention in Afghanistan is the first
occasion since World War II of the Soviets entering a non-Warsaw Pact
country to maintain the special Soviet position. In Eastern Europe,
when uprisings occurred in Poland and the GDR, Soviet troops were
already in place, and in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, Soviet troops
intervened to reestablish those governments’ “traditional” and proper
position within the Soviet sphere. Thus, the introduction of Soviet
troops into Afghanistan would appear to represent a blatant power
move by Moscow to expand its sphere of influence in the world.
6. What should the USG do? Whether or not the Dept’s planned
IG meeting on Afghanistan has already convened,3 I think it would be
timely for the Dept to consider the implications of the new develop-
ments in Afghanistan, I also believe the time has come for us to take
some new policy initiatives. The fact that the Soviets have disregarded
our verbal warnings of the recent past suggests that they have been
ineffective and shrugged off by the Soviets as being all bark but no bite.
7. I would thus like to propose two possible courses of action, the
second of which could follow on the first.
8. The first course, this would be to try to mobilize the NATO
countries, together with India, Pakistan, PRC, Saudi Arabia, Japan (and
perhaps Iran through a third country), to make a harmonized if not
joint démarche to the Soviet Union.4 The démarche would consist of
a proposal that regional stability required two things: the establishment
of a new, broader-based government in Afghanistan, which would
include non-Khalqi and oppositionist elements; and the withdrawal of
Soviet forces. The Soviets, by their military presence now in Kabul,
can now probably influence the shape of any Afghan government;
Hafizullah Amin would probably have to go, but the Soviets probably
have the power to make him do so. The alternative for the Soviets is
prolongation of the expensive civil war, which could drag on for years.
9. This idea of a harmonized joint démarche originates with the
FRG Ambassador, Karl Berninger. While I see formidable obstacles to
trying to galvanize any kind of harmonized démarche to the Soviets,
and little chance of its succeeding, I see little harm in its being attempted
and some advantages to our consulting with the mentioned countries.
10. The second alternative. This course would see us take a tougher
stand. It would be based on the reality that Afghanistan is no longer
3 No record of a meeting was found.
4 The idea to send out telegrams to U.S. Allies on policy toward Afghanistan was
taken up at the NSC meeting the next day. See footnote 4, Document 107.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
truly independent and has become a puppet of the Soviet Union. Since
most Afghans despise the regime, and the government has at best
tenuous control of urban centers, its legitimacy can now be questioned.
The fact that Soviet troops have had to intervene to keep it from
collapsing makes too its legitimacy moot. A tough anti-Khalqi stand
by the U.S. would be widely welcomed by Afghans. I thus wonder
whether, were the first option to fail, we should not consider labeling
the present regime illegitimate and taking certain follow-up measures.
I appreciate that such a course would require our cutting diplomatic
relations with the Khalqi govt, and the withdrawal of our official pres-
ence in the country. This I realize would end our capability to help
monitor Soviet SALT compliance. Follow-up actions which we might
take might include raising in the UN Security Council the charge of
Soviet intervention and to appeal for Soviet withdrawal. It would also
be proper for us to try to terminate World Bank and UNDP aid to this
country, which together now comes to $100 million per year.
11. Last, but by no means least, we should then address the ques-
tion of whether the time has not come to assist the insurgents on a
large scale. I realize the last cannot be done without Pakistani concur-
rence, and that this would have difficult policy ramifications for the
whole unsettled world of U.S.-Pakistan relations (and the Glenn
Amendment).5
12. I am also not unmindful of other competing considerations,
which complicate the Afghanistan situation, such as our attempts to
get USSR cooperation to free our Tehran hostages, and to achieve SALT
Two. The Dept is in a better position than I to weigh these other factors.
In looking though at the big picture, what disturbs me is that almost
annually the USSR is succeeding in expanding its power around the
globe, and that here in the subcontinent the possible extension of the
Brezhnev Doctrine is likely in the long run to be detrimental to regional
stability and our interests.
13. In sum, I think the arrival of Soviet troops calls for new initia-
tives and new thinking about the U.S. posture towards this government.
Amstutz
5 Under the Glenn Amendment to the Arms Export Control Act (Section 102), the
President can apply sanctions against a non-nuclear state that detonates a nuclear device.
The status of non-nuclear states is defined by the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act, which
Carter signed into law March 10, 1978.

Afghanistan
100.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
8627. Sitrept No. 1. Subj: Heavy Fighting Erupts Between Soviet
and Afghan Forces in Kabul.
involving the units of the Soviet forces brought into this city over the
past two days. There has been heavy fighting at Radio Afghanistan
(RA) next to the Embassy, and two tanks have been knocked out and
are burning behind RA. The Soviet forces were seen moving quickly
to secure RA, and it appears initially that they caught the Afghan units
by surprise. It remains unclear, however, whether all Afghan military
units are resisting the Soviet forces. There have been signs that fighting
may be taking place in or around some of the military bases on the
outskirts of the capital. There has as yet been no air activity of any
kind over the city. Afghans have been seen as prisoners of Soviet troops
at RA. Our preliminary assessment is that although it is possible that
the Afghan military has split into pro and anti-Soviet elements as a
reaction to the recent massive airlift, we may also be looking at a Soviet
attempt to overthrow the present Afghan regime by force.
2. We are in a phase three alert and all Americans have been
advised to remain where they are for the night. No Americans have
been reported injured in the fighting. The Mission is manned by a
skeleton staff, and we are in communication with the community by
radio. The city’s phone system is dead. The Embassy building has been
hit by small arms fire, but no significant damage has been caused.
3. At about 2215, someone broke in to the heretofore regular Radio
Afghanistan programming and announced that “Amin is finished,
Amin was no good, we support all Afghans and Mullahs.” This particu-
lar and very brief transmission was not of high quality, but that could
indicate that it did in fact emanate from the embattled Radio Afghani-
stan building next door. The speaker did not identify himself, nor did
he apparently extend his wrath to the party or the revolution.
4. We have no idea of the present fate of Hafizullah Amin nor his
supporters. What is clear is that the Soviet units control the Radio
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
tion Niact Immediate to Moscow. Also sent for information Immediate to New Delhi,
Islamabad, Karachi, CINCPAC (also for POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD).
Printed from a copy received in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Afghanistan compound, although they may not fully control access to
all microphones. Dance music has now returned to the airwaves.
5. As of 2230, fighting has died down near the Embassy, but sounds
of distant firing in various directions continue. Tracer rounds have
been seen in the direction of Kabul Airport, and at about 2200 a [garble]
turboprop aircraft was heard over the city. It is not sure that it attempted
to land.
Amstutz
101.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
28030. Subject: Soviet Military Buildup in Afghanistan. Ref: State
1. (S—Entire text).
2. Per instructions reftel I called on First Deputy Minister V.F.
wide-scale introduction of Soviet military units into Afghanistan and
to ask for immediate clarification of Soviet Government’s actions
and intentions. Soviets had obviously anticipated our démarche and
Mal’tsev was prepared with a written statement which he said he was
instructed to convey to the USG and to President Carter personally.
The statement acknowledged that “limited” Soviet forces have gone
into Afghanistan at Afghan Government request to repel “external”
aggression in accordance with Article 51 of the UN Charter.3 The state-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Niact Immediate; Nodis.
2 See Document 96.
3 Article 51 of the UN Charter reads: “Nothing in the present Charter shall impair
the inherent right of individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs against
a Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures necessary
to maintain international peace and security. Measures taken by Members in the exercise
of this right of self-defense shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and
shall not in any way affect the authority and responsibility of the Security Council under
the present Charter to take at any time such action as it deems necessary in order to
maintain or restore international peace and security.” For the text of the Charter, see A

Afghanistan
ment said Soviet forces would be withdrawn when the reasons for
their being sent no longer exist. The text of the statement follows.
3. Begin text:
I am authorized to transmit confidentially for the Government of
the United States of America and personally for the President the
following:
As is well-known everywhere in the world, including to the Gov-
ernment of the United States of America, for a long time there has been
interference from abroad in internal Afghan affairs, including direct
use of armed force. It is completely obvious that the aim of this interfer-
ence is the overthrow of the democratic structure established as a result
of the victory of the April revolution in 1978. The Afghan people and
its armed forces actively rebuffed these aggressive acts and repelled
encroachments against the democratic achievements, sovereignty and
national dignity of the new Afghanistan. However, the acts of external
aggression continue on an increasingly wider scale; even now, armed
units and weapons are being sent in from abroad.
In these circumstances the leadership of the State of Afghanistan
turned to the Soviet Union for help and assistance in the struggle
against external aggression. The Soviet Union, proceeding from the
common interests of Afghanistan and our country in security matters—
as set forth also in the Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighborliness and
Cooperation of 1978—and in the interest of preserving peace in this
region, responded positively to this request by the leadership of
Afghanistan and adopted a decision to send to Afghanistan limited
military contingents to carry out the tasks requested by the leadership
of Afghanistan. In doing this the Soviet Union also proceeds on the
basis of the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular Article 51, which provides for the right of states to individ-
ual and collective self-defense in repelling aggression and restoring
the peace.
The Soviet Government, in informing the Government of the U.S.A
about this, considers it necessary also to state that when the reasons
evoking this action of the Soviet Union cease to exist, it intends to
withdraw its military contingents from the territory of Afghanistan.
The Soviet Union again emphasizes that, as before, its only desire
is to see Afghanistan an independent sovereign state carrying out a
policy of good-neighborliness and peace, firmly respecting and fulfill-
ing its international obligations, including those under the Charter of
the United Nations. End text.
4. After hearing Mal’tsev out I proceeded to make the points per
reftel and left a non-paper.4 In making the oral point concerning the
4 Not further identified and not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
safety of American personnel in Afghanistan, I referred to the loss of
Ambassador Spike Dubs in Kabul.
5. Mal’tsev initially refused to address any of the questions I raised
and merely stated that the Soviet statement covered all the questions
we had asked. He stressed the confidential nature of the information
conveyed to the USG and personally to the President. After I pressed
him further, Mal’tsev made the following comments. First, my reference
to the introduction of “large numbers” of Soviet forces was in contrast
to the Soviet statement which refers to “limited” military contingents.
Second, the allegation that these actions constitute direct intervention
in internal affairs and a threat to the peace does not correspond to the
actual situation because Soviet actions are in response to the legal
request of the Afghan Government in order to preserve peace in that
area. Mal’tsev concluded with the hope that, when I had studied the
text carefully, I would find all the answers to the questions we had
raised. He then said abruptly this was all he could say on the matter
and that he was under instructions only to convey the basic statement
he had handed me.
6. I told Mal’tsev I would convey the statement to my government
and to the President, but made clear that the Soviet statement did not
answer the questions we had raised, specifically regarding the size and
suddenness of Soviet troop movements and military equipment to
Afghanistan. Also, it did not explain the substantive change in Soviet
intentions toward Afghanistan which all these military actions implied.
I also made it clear that if I could have had an opportunity to discuss
with him the serious issues these actions raise, I would have asked
who are these outsiders interfering in Afghanistan’s affairs? Mal’tsev
repeated that he believed the Soviet statement was responsive and
fully covered our questions. I repeated that I considered the Soviet
response inadequate.
Watson

Afghanistan
102.
Minutes of a Presidential Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Southwest Asia
PARTICIPANTS
STATE
JCS
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Admiral Thomas Hayward
Warren Christopher, Deputy
Lt. Gen. John Pustay
Secretary
Central Intelligence
David Newsom, Under Secretary for
Admiral Stansfield Turner,
Political Affairs
Director
Harold Saunders, Ass’t. Secretary for
Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director
Near Eastern & South Asian
WHITE HOUSE
Affairs
Dr. Brzezinski
DEFENSE
David Aaron
Secretary Harold Brown
NSC
W. Graham Claytor, Jr. Deputy
Thomas P. Thornton
Secretary
Marshall Brement
Turner: One unknown at this point is the extent of Soviet activity
and their full intentions. They have brought in perhaps an additional
4–5,000 troops. We know that Babrak is a Parchamist who has been in
Prague as Ambassador. After his dismissal he remained in Eastern
Europe. His father was a Mullah and this is being used to his advantage.
Resistance in Kabul has died out for the night.
Brown: Was the Soviet movement designed primarily to force a
change in government?
Newsom: Or do they think perhaps that the insurgents can be better
dealt with by Babrak?
Brown: The insurgents are not going to buy that.
Turner: They probably felt that they had to replace Amin; we don’t
know whether they have made a broader commitment. The forces in
the Turkestan military district may just be to support this move.
Brzezinski: Who is in charge of the Afghan Army?
Turner: Watanjar was purged and Amin kept the defense portfolio.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Thornton, Country File, Box 102, Policy Review Committee (PRC): Afghanistan, Iran,
took place in the White House Situation Room. For the Summary of Conclusions of this
meeting, see Document 103.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Brzezinski: The Soviets have been directly engaged.
Turner: Yes. In Kabul they are engaging in combat. We do not
know what is going on in the countryside. There are reports of Soviet
flights in Herat and Kandahar.
Brzezinski: What is Radio Afghanistan outside of Kabul broad-
casting?
Turner: We don’t know.
Vice President: What is the number of Soviet military there now?
Turner: We do not know exactly—perhaps 10,000 men.
Vice President: What are the reactions of other Islamic countries?
Saunders: We have not got them yet.
Newsom: We sent a message last night to the Islamic posts.2
Vance: Let’s go to the State paper now.3 Are there any substantial
problems with the “objectives?”
Brown: Do we have a long-term interest in the unity of Iran? Is
that an agreed objective? I don’t think we are ready to judge that yet.
A unified pro-Soviet Iran is not necessarily in our interest.
Vance: That is true enough.
Brzezinski: But we still have an interest in avoiding the disintegra-
tion of Iran. That would benefit the Soviets.
Brown: Not necessarily—for instance if the Iraqis were to take over
Khuzestan.
Brzezinski: But disintegrating Iran is not in our interest.
Vice President: Incipient disintegration is something that we might
be able to use as a handle on Iran.
Brown: Perhaps the paper should say “at this time.”
Carlucci: Our covert activity, working with the tribals, could con-
tribute to disintegration.
Vance: That is why it is in our interest to look closely at this as we
agreed this morning.
Brzezinski: The fear of disintegration would favor us, not the Soviets.
Perhaps we could exploit that.
Aaron: But the fear of disintegration must not immobilize us
from acting.
Brzezinski: Perhaps the best formulation is that the use of the fear
of disintegration could be useful but disintegration itself would not be
wise unless the country were coming under Soviet control.
2 Not further identified and not found
3 Not further identified and not found.

Afghanistan
Aaron: The paper seems to write off Pakistan.
Vance: That is a key issue. We have to get down to that. The
paper doesn’t suggest writing it off but following a middle course. We
recognize however that Zia may not last.
Christopher: Perhaps the point is overstated.
Aaron: The alternative, getting close to India, is extremely difficult.
Brown: What will the Indians say about the Soviet activities in
Afghanistan?
Saunders: They would be very concerned but they are in the midst
of an election campaign and are not likely to do or say much.
Brown: What if Afghanistan becomes another Czechoslovakia? Will
that affect Indian attitudes towards the Soviets and the United States?
Saunders: It will be a cause for concern for them but . . .
Christopher: We think that the Indians won’t like it but are not
likely to say much.
Turner: We agree with that. They will be concerned but it won’t
change their policies much nor will it lead to a warming of relations
with us. The paper makes the prospect of Pakistan more pessimistic
than is warranted. We could probably maintain relations with a post
Zia military regime or even with the PPP.
Vance: True enough but that would not last long. There would be
an election, then the PPP which would be more hostile.
Newsom: I agree that it is badly written.
Claytor: It becomes clearer later on.
Vance: Let us turn to the “alternate frameworks.” Should we go
all out with the major program in Pakistan, write them off, or take an
in-between position? Some discussion of this would help.
Brown: There are many nuances in the in-between position. For
instance we could untie aid from nuclear policy. Then we could have
a bigger or smaller program. Under the present framework there is
very little that we can do.
Vance: You are wrong. It depends on the kind of equipment that
we can offer, as Agha Shahi told us.4
Brown: Would or can we sell to them outside of FMS?
Vance: We can sell whatever we want.
Aaron: But what would the Congressional reaction be?
Documentation on the visit is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
vol. XIX, South Asia.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Vance: At this time Congress will not raise any objections if we can
claim that we will be stabilizing the area.
Aaron: What exactly does the non-proliferation problem preclude?
Vance: We can make no military credit sales, no economic assistance
except for PL–480.5 Let’s now discuss the options for Pakistan. We can
negotiate promptly with the PL–480 and I think we should.
Vice President: Do we need to open up a fundamental dialogue
with Pakistan?
Vance: We did that last fall.
Vice President: But our bag was empty then.
Vance: We could go back with more offers, particularly in the area
of military sales. That way we could engage them.
Claytor: Their military was very interested when we talked to them.
Aaron: Is there nothing we can do on nuclear policy?
Brown: We can make a distinction between their present program
and testing.
Vance: We tried this. We were told that Zia would not test—at least
for six months—that he cannot bind a successor. They also told us that
they would continue developing their facilities. They did agree not to
transfer sensitive technology or to develop a weapon.
Aaron: Does that relate to India somehow? If they made a commit-
ment would the Indians?
Vance: Bilateral exchanges have always fallen through on this.
Newsom: We haven’t asked each side not to test as long as the other
didn’t. Anyway the legislation, absent of waiver, demands a stop to
the enrichment program, not just testing. Some of us have thought
about the “Dimona formula.” (I.e. not testing but purely having the
capability to do so.)
Turner: My Chief of Station in Pakistan says that in all of his
discussions with the military they suggest a quiet deal to turn off the
enrichment facility. It would be unpopular however if that leaked. We
could however justify to Congress moving ahead in cooperation with
Pakistan on grounds of the Afghan problem.
Vance: We could also ask for a revision of the Symington Amend-
ment but the President wouldn’t want to.
5 Public Law 480, signed into law by President Eisenhower as the Agricultural
Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, provides U.S. Government financing
of sales or donation of U.S. agricultural products to developing countries and/or private
entities though congressional credits. Title I of the law provides for government-to-
government sales to developing countries on a grant program. Title II provides for
direct donation of food by the U.S. Government. Title III provides for government-to-
government grants through the sales of donated food in the recipient country.

Afghanistan
Vice President: We have poisoned the atmosphere for two years
and our policy just isn’t working. Shouldn’t we review this with the goal
of enhancing our chances through a broader cooperative relationship?
They obviously cannot buckle under to us for political reasons.
Brown: I agree.
Vance: Do you want to ask for a repeal of the Symington and Glenn
Amendments?
Vice President: No. Let us concentrate on this issue.
Aaron: We could try to get an international security waiver written
into the Symington Amendment parallel to the one in the Glenn
Amendment.6
Vice President: Let’s tell Congress that it is preferable to use Glenn’s
formulation. That way at least we will have Glenn on our side.
Brzezinski: How much time would that take however?
Vice President: Perhaps now we could move very fast.
Vance: I think you can go ahead faster by selling material to them
outright and asking the Saudis to pay.
Brown: In my experience you can get Congress to act faster than
the Saudis.
Vance: We could pursue both tracks.
Brown: What kind of sales would that be?
Vance: There are two ways. First we could sell them sophisticated
equipment and just accept the fact that we are going to irritate the
Indians. Secondly, we could give them a package related only to fron-
tier defense.
Brown: But what is the threat from Afghanistan?
Vance: Agha-Shahi raised this repeatedly and asked what we would
be willing to do.
Brown: But they are worried about the Soviets and machine guns
are not going to help them there.
Vance: They are very worried about their tribal troubles.
Brown: Are they really assuming that the Pathans will turn
against them?
Brzezinski: Isn’t the point one of generating more confidence in
Pakistan so that they do not feel they are alone in a deteriorating
situation? This means moving ahead on the non-proliferation issue.
We should supply them arms. It doesn’t matter all that much what the
arms are. We should talk to them about covert action to support the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Afghan rebels. We share an interest there. This would be our mini-
mum program.
Vance: We should go ahead with the PL–480, provide more help
for refugees through the UNHCR, and we should open military sales
channel, starting with the Gearing Destroyers.
Brzezinski: We need another top level political dialogue. Somebody
should go to see Zia—perhaps Graham Claytor.7
Vance: Do we all agree on the general posture?
Vice President: Won’t the sale of military equipment bother the
Indians?
Vance: I am talking about 155mm Howitzers, Mortars, Vulcans,
I-Hawks. They would also be interested in the Hughes 500 Attack
Helicopter.
Brown: That package should meet their psychological needs, but
it is unclear whether it is useful militarily.
Vance: They also need transportation equipment.
Brown: We will take a look at the list you are giving us. This raises
the question of the Saudis. Can we engage them and the Chinese?
Vance: You should talk to the Chinese about that.
Brown: The question is what I should say.
Brzezinski: To recapitulate, we will have a military package; we
will seek a waiver in the Symington Amendment language; we will
increase money for the refugees and move ahead on PL–480; and we
will open up a high-level security dialogue concerning Afghanistan.
Christopher: The waiver is going to be tough on the Hill. Also, we
don’t have much money.
Brzezinski: What about their no test pledge?
Vance: We should try but we are not going to get it.
Aaron: Couldn’t we get a reciprocal pledge with India?
Vance: We can try but it won’t work. Pakistan won’t buy it in
any case.
Christopher: Zia is too weak for that kind of a commitment.
Newsom: But if the new Indian Government pledged not to test,
we could make an attempt.
Christopher: That will cool, not warm the atmosphere.
Vance: We should settle for what we have. In practical terms, they
are not going to be able to test.
7 No record of a visit was found.

Afghanistan
Vance: Let us turn to India. I recommend approval of the pending
fuel license.
Brzezinski: I have to take note of the fact that ACDA is not here today
and we cannot make a recommendation without them. We should have
a separate meeting. State should check with them.
Vance: I see no alternative course of action.
Claytor: I agree.
Vance: At least this will maintain the status quo. The NRC has not
acted yet; the President can take the pending license from the NRC.
Christopher: We can offer it as an opener with the new government.
Brzezinski: What will we do about selling military equipment to
India?
Brown: Let’s go to the new Indian Government and point out the
problem of the Soviets in Afghanistan in relationship to their role to
India as an arms supplier.
Vance: What they want is high technology material from us—guid-
ance systems for the Jaguar, etc.—the kinds of things we have been
unwilling to sell under current policy.
Brown: There is a need to revise our arms sales policy for the whole
subcontinent.
Vance: Pakistan and India have different needs. (At this point Secre-
tary Vance passed out a list.)8
Brown: We have to worry about leakage from India.
Christopher: Will this not cause us trouble for [with?] the Chinese?
Vice President: They think that anybody who helps the Indians are
pro-Soviet.
Vance: I propose that we go forward on the first Tarapur sale and
open the dialogue with the Indians leading to a possible sale of
advanced military equipment.
Christopher: Can’t we send the second sale to the NRC?
Vance: Yes. Let’s start the clock running.
Newsom: Should we not send a high-level emissary to the Indi-
ans also?
Aaron: We have a need to go to the Pakistanis immediately. Let’s
go to the Indians after the election.
Turner: The following is the status of our covert operations in
Afghanistan. We had two Presidential findings, one on August 3 and
8 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
one on November 7.9 With regard to the first one, we have formed
a psychological operations team in Washington which is generating
material for covert broadcasting in Afghanistan. A clandestine radio
was established in Afghanistan in November and indeed the Amin
Government had already complained to the Pakistanis about it. We
have also placed 150 articles in the world press. We have spent [amount
not declassified] under this finding and have [amount not declassified] left.
In the field of non-military support, we have disbursed $620,000 of
the $695,000 available. Some of this went through Pakistan and some
unilaterally. Under the second finding we have to work with the Saudis.
We were doing fairly well with them until the attack on the Mosque
in Mecca.10 I spoke to Prince Turki last week and he seemed less
enthusiastic than he had before. Apparently, Prince Fahd wants to see
the color of our money before he does anything. Perhaps he wants to
see us buy arms for the rebels as well as do it himself. We can go back
to Turki and Fahd on the basis of the original understanding that we
would supply all facilities short of weapons. Alternatively, we could
ask for a different finding. Under this we would be able to move
appropriate materiel out of our storehouses [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] within a week and get it to Saudi Arabia for further forwarding
to Pakistan. The Pakistanis would probably prefer that. We would at
that point tell the Saudis that it is up to them to pay for the next load
of arms although we would of course help them find it. This is certainly
the quickest way to get things moving.
Vice President: What kind of material do you have available?
Turner: [less than 1 line not declassified] anti-aircraft guns, [less than 1
line not declassified] anti-tank weapons, AK–47 rifles and 82mm mortars.
Vice President: That sounds good to me.
Brzezinski: We will need a new finding.
Vice President: Is that a lightweight anti-aircraft gun?
Turner: It would be effective against a helicopter but not against
aircraft. But we cannot deliver any of this material without Pakistani
assistance.
Brzezinski: We will have to discuss this in the high-level mission
we send to Pakistan.
Brown: Good. We should ask something from the Pakistanis.
Hayward: (Expresses agreement.)
10 A reference to the seizure of the Grand Mosque by Islamic dissidents on November
20. Documentation on this incident is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.

Afghanistan
Turner: Actually I like the terms of the last finding which meant
getting the Saudis out in front.
Vance: They will still be in on it as you described the present
proposal. We will take note of what you say.
You are going to have to have the Attorney General here to sign
off on the recommendation for a finding.
Brzezinski: Let us do that at the SCC tomorrow morning.
Turner: We would have to give training on the RPG–7 anti-tank
weapon. The way we would do it would be to train Pakistanis who
then in turn could train Afghans. We also could provide SA7 anti-
aircraft missiles but these are not used in Afghanistan and we are
trying to restrict ourselves to equipment that the rebels could have
taken from the Afghan Army. We have also set aside [amount not
declassified] for communications equipment.
Newsom: Is there any sign of greater cohesion among the guer-
rilla forces?
Turner: No.
Christopher: Where would you provide the equipment?
Turner: Inside Pakistan. That would keep us out of it.
Newsom: Would this program give us more leverage in dealing
with these amorphous rebel groups?
Carlucci: That depends on what your goal is. These weapons won’t
enable them to take over the country; they will just be making life
more difficult for the Soviets.
Turner: One more thing: We can work this first delivery into the
money available under the November finding. We have [amount not
declassified] remaining. Over the next six or eight months, however, we
are going to need $10 million. We can’t go back to Congress and ask
for more money until we get a significant Saudi contribution.
Brzezinski: But won’t this smoke the Saudis out?
Carlucci: This, plus our Iran program, will clearly exhaust [less than
1 line not declassified]. We will have to ask for a larger [less than 1 line
not declassified] and that will mean a debate in Congress.
Vice President: Are we doing enough on broadcasting?
Brzezinski: A recent SCC meeting mandated several steps. OMB is
causing trouble however and I hope that you could weigh in with
them. I will send a report over to you.
Vice President: Yes, send some information to me.
Turner: Shouldn’t we lift the anti-Soviet propaganda prohibition
that was laid on us at a recent meeting by Lloyd Cutler?11
11 No record of this meeting was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Vance: Let’s consider that changed.
Brzezinski: You do not get your instructions from comments made
at meetings.
Vance: I want to emphasize that there absolutely must be no leaks
from this meeting. There should be no backgrounding without
approval at the highest levels.
What do you think about approaching the Security Council con-
cerning Afghanistan?
Brzezinski: The President wants other countries to lead in the
protest.
Vance: We will try to see to that. But at the UN we want to keep
our focus on the hostage question. We can consider taking the Afghan
question there later but I want to urge you now in the strongest terms
not to do so at this time.
Brown: Some countries might even welcome the diversion at the
UN.
Brzezinski: Maybe other countries will raise it.
Vance: (Secretary Vance invited comments on the draft cable
appended to the discussion paper. This cable was to go to Moscow.
There was some general critical discussion.) We will send revised
instructions to Watson in Moscow.12
Brzezinski: Concerning the Soviet talking points, we should remind
them of the 1972 Joint Declaration of Principles.13
Brown:
Shouldn’t
we
draw
a
parallel
between
Iran
and
Afghanistan?
Brzezinski: The other proposed cable should ask our allies and other
countries to raise the issue with the Soviets. What are we doing in our
own broadcasting?
Newsom: VOA says its main problem is finding pegs from which
they can develop themes in their broadcasts. We should all remember
to get appropriate themes into our public statements. We will circulate
a list of themes tomorrow.
Brzezinski: Are we sure that we are doing enough in this case? This
is the first use of Soviet forces outside the Bloc.
Vice President: Wouldn’t it be a good idea to have Bob Byrd summon
the Soviet Chargé and point out to them the danger to SALT? Byrd
12 Neither found.
13 A reference to one of the basic statements of détente, or relaxation of tensions,
forged between the United States and the Soviet Union, and declared during the 1972
Moscow Summit. See Document 87.

Afghanistan
seemed to be on good terms with the Soviets and he could point out
to them that they are about to lose a friend.
Aaron: What would we want to get them to do?
Brzezinski: We could talk to them along these lines, and convey to
them that there would be far-reaching implications for our relationship.
This could be similar to the problem that President Johnson faced as
a result of the invasion of Czechoslovakia. It completely ruled out for
a long period of time any progress in arms limitations. I am not sure
how we want to communicate this. Harold Brown is going to China
and we do not want to make a threat out of that to the Soviets but
they should have to think about the US-Chinese relationship.14
Vice President: What do we think that the Soviets have decided
to do?
Vance: I think they made a decision during the Pavlovsky visit that
they had to act or lose out in Afghanistan. They doubt the prospects
for SALT anyways; thus, they are willing to take larger risks.
Brzezinski: We also have to keep in mind the Soviet sponsorship
of aggression in Cambodia and perhaps Angola and now Afghani-
stan—and we may also encounter increasing bad Soviet behavior in
Iran. This is all going to result in us receiving intense domestic pressure
from both the right and the left. We have to get this across to the
Soviets most forcefully.
Vance: Your staff has a paper I’ve sent over on the subject.
Brzezinski: Maybe the Soviets haven’t thought all of this through.
There is an aging leadership there and they may not have drawn all
of the conclusions.
Newsom: Could we send somebody to Yugoslavia and Romania—
perhaps also to Poland—for “political discussions?”
Brzezinski: No, we should talk to the Soviets.
Vice President: Brezhnev has sent us a very sweet message on SALT
but a very bad one on Iran. Maybe they think we are so desperate for
Brown: The Administration is going to go ahead on the SALT but
the Soviets may underestimate the sense of national revulsion.
Aaron: The President will have to decide whether to push SALT.
Maybe we should invoke Senator Byrd.
Brzezinski: Perhaps we should send a Hot Line message to Brezh-
nev. Maybe they would agree to pull out after overthrowing Amin. The
President is going to be very loath to give up on his non-proliferation

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
objectives and also to get excessively close to the Chinese. There could
be a lasting chill in our relations and the Soviets may not be aware of
the impact.
Vance: I think our position has been made clear.
Brzezinski: They may see some of Watson’s protests as purely
pro forma.
Vance: We should make fewer protests to the Soviets. We protest
too many things too often.
Brzezinski: Let’s consider these things overnight for the NSC Meet-
ing tomorrow.
Brown: What about Iraq? This is an important country where atti-
tudes might be changed. Shouldn’t we approach them?
Vance: The paper calls for that.
Brown: Is this fast enough? It all seems too long term.
Newsom: The Iraqis will worry but not worry in our direction.
Brown: Maybe. But why not offer them a military dialogue explain-
ing our regional goals?
Vance: We tried that and we were rebuffed. But it is worth pursuing.
There is not much progress on the political side but on the military
side we might find a basis for consultation.
Brown: Should we perhaps send somebody to Iran?
Vance: Somebody is going there. Perhaps for discussions more in
the Defense area. It is a private sort of visit.
Brzezinski: What about with the Chinese?
Brown: We will have to issue a communique at the end of the
meeting and we will say that we discussed the international security
situation including in South Asia.
Vance: I talked to Chai(?) the other day. He offered no new ideas.
Thereupon the meeting ended.

Afghanistan
103.
Summary of Conclusions of a Presidential Review
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Southwest Asia
PARTICIPANTS
STATE
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Mr. David Newsom, Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Mr. Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
OSD
Secretary Harold Brown
Deputy Secretary W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
JCS
Admiral Thomas Hayward
Lt. General John Pustay
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Deputy Director Frank Carlucci
WHITE HOUSE
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Mr. David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs
NSC
Mr. Thomas Thornton, Staff Member
Mr. Marshall Brement, Staff Member
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The PRC met to discuss the situation in Southern Asia, especially
in light of recent events in Afghanistan. Admiral Turner briefed on the
fast-moving situation in Kabul, noting that the Soviet military presence
in the country was as high as perhaps 10,000. (S)
[Omitted here is discussion related to India and Pakistan.]
With regard to Afghanistan:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Thornton, Country File, Box 102, Policy Review Committee (PRC): Afghanistan, Iran,
in the White House Situation Room. For the minutes of the meeting, see Document 102.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—The PRC was briefed by CIA on certain covert action programs
and discussed these. Official action was postponed until a later SCC
meeting. (S)
—Dr. Brzezinski noted that OMB was causing difficulties in imple-
menting a more aggressive broadcasting program to cover the Afghan
and related situations. The Vice President asked for additional informa-
tion so that he could talk to OMB. It was also noted that a recent
comment made in the course of a PRC meeting, on the need not to
take propaganda initiatives that might cause problems for SALT ratifi-
cation, did not constitute guidance for the operating agencies. (S)
—Secretary Vance urged strongly that the Afghan situation not be
raised in the UN at this moment, lest it distract attention from our
efforts to free the hostages in Iran. There was general support. (S)
It was agreed that the possibility of a dialogue with Iraq be explored,
based on security factors in order to avoid the sterility of political
discussions. It was noted that an American emissary was already sched-
uled to visit Iraq. (S)
The meeting concluded with a discussion of how we should deal
with the Soviets concerning Afghanistan. There was widespread con-
cern that the Soviets may not appreciate the impact that their actions in
Afghanistan, Cambodia, and perhaps Angola, are having on American
opinion. A further demarche by Ambassador Watson was authorized
on the basis of revisions made in the draft instructions tabled by State.2
Beyond that, however, it was felt that the Soviets had to be dealt with
more forcefully. The Vice President suggested that Majority Leader
Byrd might be asked to read the riot act to the Soviet Chargé; the
possibility of a hotline message to Brezhnev was also discussed.3 No
decisions were made, pending the outcome of the NSC meeting on
December 28. (S)4
Secretary Brown will include all of these subjects in his discussions
with the Chinese.5 It will be announced following his trip that security
issues of Southwest Asia had been discussed between the two sides. (S)
Secretary Vance emphasized the danger of any leaks from this
meeting and said no backgrounding should be done without the highest
level authorization. (S)
2 For Watson’s first de´marche, see Document 101. No record of a second was found.
3 No record of a discussion between Byrd and the Soviet Chargé was found. For
the hotline message from Carter to Brezhnev, see Document 113.
4 See Document 107.

Afghanistan
104.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
15303. For the Secretary. Subject: Afghanistan: Reassuring Pakistan.
1. (S)—Entire text. This is an action message.
2. Like the rest of us, the Pakistanis are still in the process of
assessing the implications of the latest events in Kabul. FonSec Shahna-
waz this morning gave me preliminary GOP reaction about as follows:
the Soviet troops came in during last few days at request of Amin, but
Sovs then doublecrossed Amin. Sovs have now thrown into the political
arena the last elements of alternative (leftist) leadership, and it remains
to be seen whether these Parchamists can maintain the loyalty of the
army, despite their use of the label “true Khalq” to describe themselves.
It is “inevitable” that the army will suffer severe splits despite Sov
milit pressures.
It is [clear?] the new Parchamists are even more puppets of the
Sovs than previous leaders, and will be obedient servants of Moscow.
There will likely be an initial period of moderation, as after takeovers
by Taraki and Amin, but later on Babrak and co. will revert to their
natural Communist extremism. The Pushtoonistan issue, on which
Babrak earlier was more militant than Taraki or Amin, will later on
become even more of an issue than it has been, and Pakistan expects
severe pressures along border and Afghan subversion in NWFP and
Baluchistan.
Kabul by Fon Advisor Shahi will be scrubbed.
4. USG policy makers should consider advisability very quick mes-
sage to Paks, in next few days. Obviously broader and longer-term
reactions will have to await fundamental USG decisions, but now is
the time for giving the Paks whatever can be given to reassure them
of U.S. concern and U.S. determination to prevent further Soviet expan-
sion in this, or other, regions.
5. Obviously from my limited perspective I cannot make firm judge-
ments on the elements that might be included in any message, but
here are my suggestions.
6. Several avenues are open for us. One would be for me to be
authorized, specifically, to reaffirm to the Government of Pakistan, at
the highest levels, our continuing commitment to Pakistan’s integrity
N800001–0001. Secret; Nodis; Niact Immediate.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
and sovereignty. I could put teeth in this by reaffirming—in response
to Agha Shahi’s now three-month-old query—the applicability of our
1959 bilateral to the present situation in Afghanistan. We have really
dithered on this matter far too long, in my judgement—the Iran hostage
situation, elections in India, and the 21 November events here
notwithstanding.2
7. I could be authorized, perhaps, to take this a step further by
formally requesting, on behalf of my government, a consultation as
envisaged under the 1959 bilateral; events in Kabul over the last 72
hours would seem to me to merit no less a reaction than this. For the
request to originate with us (instead of with Pakistan) demonstrates
both concern and initiative on our part to a Pakistani leadership made
ever-more anxious about the ominous Soviet presence and blatant
“occupation” of a neighboring Islamic country, at a time when they
have reason to question the prospects for effective USG support.
8. Such a démarche on my part would have even greater impact
if at least a portion of what I would be instructed to say could be cast
in the form of a letter to President Zia from President Carter, expressing
concern about the 25–28 Dec. developments in Kabul and soliciting
Pakistan’s views about the meaning of these developments.
9. I could envision a Presidential text that would include the
following thoughts: Quote: Dear President Zia: I am deeply distressed
at the blatant exercise of Soviet power we have seen in Kabul during
the past several days. It is a cruel and brutal violation of the norms of
international discourse and relations, and it must not be allowed to go
unchallenged by the world community, most especially Afghanistan’s
fellow Islamic nations. For my part, I want to convey to you my own
sense of deep concern about the events taking place in Afghanistan
and to solicit earnestly your appreciation of developments there as we
assess in Washington and with our friends what precisely should be
the nature and character of the American and free world response. I
want also to reassure you, at this difficult moment for Pakistan, of
the continuing American commitment to the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Finally, I wish to assure
you of my desire for the closest of consultations between our two
friendly governments as we assess how best to cope with the new threat
to the region posed by the Soviet actions in Afghanistan. Unquote.
10. While not attempting to get into longer-range matters for deci-
sion within the USG as we come to grips with the USSR’s power grab
in Kabul, I nonetheless want to add that we have exhausted the efficacy
of oral diplomatic assurances. We have been reassuring the Pakistanis

Afghanistan
verbally ever since the April 1978 Communist takeover in Kabul. As
the waves of 27/28 Dec. events in Kabul wash down the Kabul River
into the Indus Valley, Pakistani paranoia and anxiety will naturally
rise. Words alone—in the absence of tangible follow-up actions which
demonstrate that our interest in the security of the region is matched
by a capability to respond to threats—will fall on deaf ears. At bare
minimum, we must look for practical steps in the security assistance
area which we can somehow pursue despite, and without torpedoing,
our non-proliferation policies. (FYI Paks are already aware from Wash
leak that we have put a temporary hold on any new military sales, an
action I believe was ill-advised when it was taken in early Dec and
which now appears ludicrous, as I wrote in a letter to Hal Saunders
that should reach him tomorrow. End FYI)
11. Failure to use Pakistan, as one vehicle in our response to Soviet
actions in Kabul—will produce a new set of pressures for further dilu-
tion of ties with a seemingly helpless United States and for further
accommodation with Soviet power, not just here but through the region
as a whole.
12. Dept. repeat as desired.
Hummel
105.
Situation Report Prepared in the Department of Defense1
[report number not declassified]
Washington, December 28, 1979
Afghanistan: Situation Report (U)
(S/[handling restriction not declassified]) Although sporadic shooting
continued on 28 December, Kabul is generally quiet following yester-
day’s violent overthrow of the Amin government by Soviet combat
troops and Afghan allies. The city is securely in the hands of Soviet
forces and armed civilians associated with the new regime of Babrak
Karmal, a longtime pro-Soviet extreme Marxist. The government has
wasted no time in projecting a moderate image in public statements.
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, DINS & PROD,
Aug–Dec 79. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified; text not declassified]. A note indi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Although limited Soviet flight activity occurred late on 27 December,
no significant change in Soviet military forces in Afghanistan has
been reported.
(S/[handling restriction not declassified]) Soviet troops and airborne
combat vehicles in company with armed civilians remain on guard at
key intersections and buildings in Kabul. Additionally, four MIG–21/
Fishbeds have been oberved repeatedly overflying the city in a show
of force. This is the first air involvement during the past two days.
Civilian traffic is light but moving freely in the city.
(S/[handling restriction not declassified]) Within hours of the Soviet
takeover of the Radio Afghanistan building, the radio broadcast Amin’s
overthrow and replacement by Babrak Karmal. It subsequently
announced Amin’s conviction by a revolutionary tribunal of crimes
against the Afghan people and his execution as a “fascist” and “agent
of U.S. imperialism.” Consistent with the excellent planning and execu-
tion of the coup, Babrak has hastened to announce a new government
and a series of conciliatory statements projecting a moderate image
and announcing yet another “new phase” of the revolution. Military
officers dominate the new government lineup and include the three
military Cabinet members purged by Amin in his September takeover
of government. Several have been promoted to colonel and general
ranks. Other military members are victims of past purges under the
Amin and Taraki governments and are considered popular with the
armed forces. All the members identified so far are leftists of varying
persuasions.
(C) Among the other statements issued by the government are
promises to release all political prisoners, to negotiate solutions to the
tribal insurgency, to bring offenders of the past regime to justice, and
an appeal for assistance to the USSR, which was almost immediately
accepted. Its foreign policy is announced as nonaligned, but with an
obvious tilt toward more radical international issues.
(S/[handling restriction not declassified]) Although the coup repre-
sents a Soviet-inspired attempt to broaden the base of the government
so as to nurture a return to stability, the government faces severe
obstacles already. Babrak’s past reputation as an extreme Marxist, his
installation by Soviet troops and ready identification with the USSR
are likely to reinforce rather than allay opposition to the Marxist gov-
ernment and the now expanded Soviet presence. Despite the obvious
bid for military allegiance, reports of Soviets killing or capturing
Afghan troops in the fighting may yet stir military dissidence or opposi-
tion, especially in the countryside. A series of purges and arrests with
mass rotations of military commanders will be a high priority of the
new government. Overall the survival of Babrak’s government will
hinge indefinitely on the presence of Soviet Military forces, which alone
will reinforce his image as a Soviet puppet.

Afghanistan
106.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, December 28, 1979
AFGHANISTAN-USSR: Situation report
The Soviets have replaced President Amin with a rival Marxist
leader, Babrak Karmal, and appear to be in control of Kabul today.2
Some Soviet troops were engaged in fighting yesterday, but major
Afghan units stationed outside of Kabul appeared to have stayed out
of fighting in the city.
The new government has announced that Amin has been tried and
executed, and it has invited additional Soviet assistance.3
The new government is somewhat broader based than Amin’s, but
all cabinet members and most ruling council members announced so
far were ministers in the government formed after the Marxists seized
power in April 1978. In addition to serving as Prime Minister, Babrak
will head the ruling party and the Revolutionary Council; President
Sultan Ali Kishtmand—who like Babrak is a member of the Parchamist
faction of the party—will probably be largely a figurehead.
Included in both the cabinet and the Council are two leftist military
officers, Abdul Qader—who was jailed by former President Taraki and
Amin in August 1978—and Mohammed Aslam Watanjar—who has
been in hiding since Amin overthrew Taraki in September. Both are
more nationalist and less doctrinaire than Babrak.
There is little prospect that the government as now constituted can
win significant popular support. Even if the new rulers are able to
convince the people that Amin and not the party was responsible for
the most unpopular Marxist policies, they will still be regarded as
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only.
The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The
article printed here was found in this form.
2 An annex to the December 28 President’s Daily Brief, attached but not printed,
noted: “there is no reason to doubt that the coup was engineered by Moscow” following
a Soviet military buildup that Amin believed “was aimed at bolstering his regime.” The
annex further noted that Soviet dissatisfaction with Amin became apparent following
the coup against Taraki, and that Amin “launched his coup because of Soviet maneuvers
to replace him.” According to the annex, the Soviet Union had long favored Parcham
rule in Afghanistan: [text not declassified].
According to the report, the announcement was made over Soviet-controlled Radio
File, D800003–0425)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Communists and atheists. Babrak’s call for Soviet military assistance
may give the appearance of legality to Soviet military moves, but for
most Afghans it will only confirm that he is a Soviet puppet.
[less than 1 line not declassified] suggests that the Soviets may be
preparing to move forces by air into Shindand and Qandahar. The
Soviet airlift to Kabul is continuing. As many as 3,800 Soviet airborne
troops equipped with armored personnel carriers and assault guns
may have arrived in Kabul since Monday.
107.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
SUBJECT
Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan
PARTICIPANTS
The President
JCS
The Vice President
General David Jones
White House
State
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Jody Powell
Defense
David Aaron
Secretary Harold Brown
NSC
CIA
Gary Sick (joined at 10:50 a.m.)
Admiral Stansfield Turner
MINUTES
The President convened the National Security Council and it was
agreed that we would begin by discussing the situation in Afghanistan
since it would be important to communicate today with our Euro-
pean Allies.
Dr. Brzezinski set forth five issues: (1) our possible response; (2)
how to encourage others to speak out against the Soviet intervention;
ing took place in the White House Cabinet Room.

Afghanistan
(3) the question of raising this issue at the United Nations. He said the
United States might not wish to do so because we are pursuing the
hostage issue at the Security Council, but perhaps the UK or China
would raise the issue at the UN; (4) the question of our support for
the Afghan resistance. Dr. Brzezinski said that we have a revised Presi-
dential Finding which will be presented to the President shortly; and
(5) the question of our cooperation with Pakistan which is directly
related to the situation brought about by the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan.
The President said that he had read the message from the German
Government regarding Allied consultation and agreed that the North
Atlantic Council would be a better forum for us to pursue this issue
in the first instance than the United Nations.2
Secretary Vance agreed and said that George Vest would be talking
to the NATO Ambassadors here in Washington emphasizing the impor-
tance of our Allies speaking out publicly and to the Soviets on this
matter.
The President asked on what basis the North Atlantic Council
might be convened. Harold Brown replied that it met on an emergency
basis upon the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia. He added that it
would also be important to consult on a broader basis than just with
the NATO Alliance in this particular instance.
2 The message from the West German Government was not found. The North
Atlantic Council, chaired by NATO Secretary General Luns, met in a special session in
Brussels on December 29 to discuss Afghanistan. During the meeting, Luns appealed
for solidarity among the NATO Allies in the wake of the Soviet intervention. (Telegram
Foreign Ministers of Great Britain, the FRG, France, Italy, and Canada. The participants
reaffirmed Luns’s call for Allied solidarity and a global response designed to “discourage
further adventurism” by the Soviet Union. The representatives agreed that each of their
respective countries needed to review bilateral relations with the Soviet Union, although
“most felt that institutional elements of détente such as CSCE, disarmament negotiations,
etc., which are in interest of West should not be disturbed.” (Telegram 8988 from
2153) In a memorandum to Brzezinski and Aaron, January 2, Brement characterized the
London consultations as “useful,” and stated: “with exception of the French, who stuck
to the line that this should be a Soviet-world community issue rather than an East-West
issue, all other allies are looking to us for guidance and seem to be planning to follow
our lead.” Brement further noted that the NAC meeting “took a considerably tougher
line” than the London consultations regarding the question of how to deal with the
Soviets and how to support Pakistan following the Soviet intervention. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 1, Afghanistan:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The President said he had in mind making personal calls to Chan-
cellor Schmidt, Prime Minister Thatcher, President Giscard, Premier
Cossiga and President Zia.3 He would suggest to our European Allies
that the North Atlantic Council meet on this issue. He was reluctant
to push this into the UN when we were dealing with Iran at the Security
Council, but he thought the rest of the world will be reluctant to
condemn the Soviets.
Secretary Brown thought that more countries might be prepared
to act than in the case of Iran, since Afghanistan had no oil. The
President pointed out, however, that we have been warning the world
for several weeks that there has been a buildup of an imminent threat,
and there has been no reaction from anyone.
The President noted that the Germans had been told by the Soviets
this morning that they intervened to stop an invasion of Afghanistan,
but when asked, the Soviets would not identify which country was
committing the “external aggression.”
The Secretary of State endorsed the idea of calling the four Euro-
pean leaders.
Mr. Aaron suggested that, if the North Atlantic Council were to
be called into session, it should be done at a high political level since the
Council was already planning to meet at the Permanent Representatives
level. The President agreed, and the Secretary of State said we could
work out the arrangements later. It was also agreed that the President
would call the Italian President.
Secretary Brown suggested that we will need to be able to indicate
what we want our Allies to do when we talk to them. The President
said that we could not go through the night without a public response
and contact with the Allies. Otherwise, the Soviets will be out persuad-
ing everyone that their action was legitimate, and there would be no
response from us.
It was therefore agreed that we should send messages to give
groups of countries identified by Dr. Brzezinski—our NATO Allies;
the Non-Aligned Movement leaders; other key countries around the
world such as China; and key United Nations members. It was agreed
that messages should be prepared immediately by a working group
3 Carter’s calls to European leaders are summarized in Document 109. For Carter’s
call to Zia, see Document 111.

Afghanistan
of State and NSC and to arrange the telephone calls to the Allied leaders
and President Zia.4
Dr. Brzezinski then recommended that we examine the question of
covert assistance to Afghanistan. Stan Turner reported on the proposed
Finding approved earlier in the day by the SCC.5 It would enable us
to accelerate shipment of arms to the Afghan rebels via Saudi Arabia.
The President inquired regarding the likely response of the Saudis and
Pakistanis, and Turner replied that he expects it will be very positive.
Secretary Brown said that we were all agreed that greater support
to the Afghan rebels makes sense. His only question was whether it
was enough.
Mr. Powell asked if there were any possibility the rebels could take
over the government. Secretary Brown said they would not have any
prospect of being able to take over the government. Secretary Vance
said they can hang on and make it costly for the Soviet Union. Dr.
Brzezinski said the key variables in the success of the Afghan resistance
is Pakistani support and our attitude.
The President noted that news analyses said the Soviets would
have little hope of putting down the rebellion even if they moved in
the 50,000 troops on the Soviet border. Dr. Brzezinski said he had a
different view. If we do nothing to help the rebels, then the psychologi-
cal impact—both on the Pakistanis and on the Afghans—of isolation
could be quite adverse and dry up support for their insurgency. More-
over, the Soviets are likely to try to garrison the cities and free the
4 The Department sent two telegrams to all NATO capitals and other diplomatic
and consular posts, December 28. The first, telegram 333161, described the events of the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan detailing the airlift, the military occupation of Kabul, the
execution of Amin, and the elevation of Karmal as the new President in order to brief
host governments. The second, telegram 333359, cited “first-hand evidence of a direct
Soviet role” in the execution of Amin and replacement with Karmal. The telegram also
described the Soviet action as a “subject of grave concern for the entire international
community and not just those in South Asia.” The telegram asked all addressees to share
any available information regarding the crisis in Afghanistan and instructed the posts
to encourage host governments “to make their profound concern about the Soviet role
in Afghanistan clear immediately to the Soviet Union both in Moscow and in capitals
and through their public statements.” In a concluding section for “Moslem and non-
aligned countries,” the Department asked the Embassies to reaffirm to their host govern-
ments that the United States had long respected Afghanistan’s non-alignment; the Soviet
invasion limited Afghanistan’s independence, that the action raised “grave questions”
for the Non-Aligned Movement; and that “we appreciate that Moslem nations in particu-
lar would be deeply concerned about Soviet efforts to impose a regime with an alien
ideology upon an unwilling Moslem populace, irrespective of the professions of such a
regime to respect Islam.” Finally, anticipating host governments would cite Soviet insist-
ence that the Afghan Government invited the Soviet intervention, the Department
instructed Embassies that the United States has “no evidence” to support that claim.
1447, respectively)
5 Neither minutes nor a summary of conclusions of the SCC meeting was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
regular Afghan armies to pursue the rebels in the field, and that might
be more effective.
The President said he supported the Finding.6
The Vice President said that the new group installed by the Soviets
may be as unpopular or even more so than the former one. The Secretary
of Defense noted, however, that if only isolated pockets of resistance
remain, they may be successful.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that the Soviet Union had been reasonably
successful at counter-insurgency efforts. They had had success in Lat-
via, Lithuania and the Ukraine, with their strategy being primarily the
holding of the cities.
Admiral Turner noted in this connection that the more elite Afghan
army units now guarding the cities may be released to fight the insur-
gents. This would provide forces with better morale which are less
likely to desert and turn over their weapons to the insurgents. This,
in turn, makes our aid all the more important.
On the question of the Presidential Finding, the President said that
he hoped that these Findings would be drawn with an eye toward the
greatest possible flexibility and generality emphasizing the positive
goals we hope to achieve in the most constructive terms.
Dr. Brzezinski then indicated that we should discuss the question
of U.S. approaches to the Soviet Union directly. The President indicated
that he wishes a very strong message, with no holds barred, sent from
him to Brezhnev and an equally tough public statement made.
The President said that this issue transcends SALT. He would not
acquiesce to the Soviet action just because it might give comfort and
assistance to SALT opponents in the Congress. He said that the message
to Brezhnev should point out that their action was a “threat to the
peace” which casts “grave doubts upon our relationship” and which
was “a direct violation of the principles agreed to in 1972.”7
Mr. Powell asked what our ultimate aim was in the Afghan situa-
tion. The President replied to get the Soviets to withdraw. The Secre-
taries of State and Defense and Dr. Brzezinski said it was to make it
as costly as possible for the Soviets. Secretary Brown added that we
want to use the issue as a rallying point for our policies in the area.
6 The Presidential Finding, signed by Carter on December 28, listed Afghanistan
as the scope, with the description: “Provide lethal military equipment either directly or
through third countries to the Afghan opponents of the Soviet intervention in Afghani-
stan. Provide selective training, conducted outside of Afghanistan, in the use of such
equipment either directly or via third country intermediaries.” (National Security Coun-
Jul 1980)
7 See Document 113.

Afghanistan
The President concluded that our maximum goal, however, was to get
the Soviets out. Mr. Powell noted that this, however, was not likely to
be successful.
The Vice President said that the Soviets had created a traditional
buffer state into a satellite. Dr. Brzezinski agreed and noted that it was
a buffer state that protected a tier of three states along the Indian Ocean.
Thus, their action was a very dangerous step strategically, and we
must send them a message which reflects this broader concern.
As for SALT, Dr. Brzezinski said that we do not link the intervention
with SALT, but we are not going to be silenced by the possible domestic
reaction and its impact on SALT. The President agreed.
Mr. Powell said that a private message to Brezhnev would not be
adequate from the standpoint of our public position. It was agreed
that we would develop a brief public statement for the President’s use
as well as a more formal statement that could be released by the White
House. (Subsequently, the President decided to make only his own
statement.)8
The Vice President suggested the Soviets were trying to hurt the
President’s reelection chances with this move. General Jones said that
Afghanistan itself is a loss and of no particular help to the Soviets
strategically. In his judgment, they were obviously looking beyond it
and to cause perceptions of their willingness to use power and are
seeking a stepping stone. Secretary Brown said, on the other hand, the
Soviets were faced with a hostile Islamic state on their border. Secretary
Vance agreed with that view. He said that the Soviets were unwilling
to face the political damage if Afghanistan went down the drain.
The President concluded by saying we should push this issue
vigorously and be prepared to go all the way with the UN if necessary.
Returning to the question of support for the Afghan insurgents,
Admiral Turner said we should be clear that the objective of getting
the Soviets out is unachievable and much beyond the program of
support he was recommending. That program will ultimately cost only
$10 million and will barely keep the insurgency going.
Turning to Pakistan, the Secretary of State outlined the steps recom-
mended by the SCC: first, a high-level mission to consult with the
Pakistanis; second, to resume military sales; third, because we cannot
sell on credit to Pakistan because of the Symington Amendment, it
and the situation in Afghanistan. For the text of his remarks, see Public Papers: Carter,
1979, Book II, p. 2287. He also addressed the nation on the crisis in Afghanistan in a
live speech from the Oval Office at 9 p.m., January 4. Text of the speech is printed in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
would be necessary to work with the Saudis to help finance Pakistani
purchases.9 In this connection, the sale of Gerring destroyers to the
Pakistanis would not particularly help them against the Soviets but
would be of enormous political help in Pakistan.
Secretary Brown said that the House has said that these destroyers
should be saved for our naval reserve, but he thought he could get
around the problem. The President noted that Sadat was anxious for
some destroyers. The Secretary of State noted that these Gerring
destroyers were offered to him but, because of their condition, he didn’t
want them.
On the economic side, the Secretary spelled out the other recom-
mendation: an increase in PL 480 assistance and more relief for the
Afghan refugees. On nuclear policy, the Secretary stressed we should
reaffirm our present position and seek a reaffirmation of their present
position; specifically, that they would not build nuclear weapons, they
would not transfer sensitive technology, and there would be no nuclear
tests during Zia’s regime.
The President asked who would head the mission to Pakistan. The
Secretary suggested Deputy Secretary Christopher and someone from
the Defense Department.
The President said our emissary should tell Zia that we are bound
by law on the non-proliferation issue and can’t change it, but let’s try
to get together on Afghanistan and work out the non-proliferation
issue later.
In this connection, Secretary Vance said Pakistani Adviser to the
President for Foreign Affairs, Agha Shahi, had asked him whether we
would sell military equipment to Pakistan if the situation in Afghani-
stan deteriorated. Secretary Vance had already assured him we
would.10
Harold Brown noted that the Pakistanis are going to want to buy
some equipment, such as A-7 aircraft, which we do not wish to sell
pher and Brzezinski. See Document 193. The Symington Amendment to the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961, passed June 1976, gave Congress authority “to deny U.S. assistance
to governments involved in the sale and purchase of nuclear reprocessing material unless
such transactions are subject to adequate multilateral safeguards against diversion to
weapons use.” (International Security Assistance and Arms Control Act of 1976, P.L.
Amendment and cut off economic and military aid, save food assistance, in April 1979.
On the decision of how to support Pakistan in light of the Symington Amendment, see
Document 151.
See footnote 2, Document 79.

Afghanistan
them because of India. It was agreed, however, that this issue should
not arise in the near term.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
108.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
8665. Subj: (LOU) Preliminary Thoughts on Why Moscow Forcibly
Imposed a New Government in Afghanistan.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary: Most observers have consistently downplayed the
possibility that Moscow would support—much less back militarily—
the overthrow of the Khalqi regime in favor of one led by the former
Parcham wing of the Afghan leftist movement. This skepticism flowed
from a conclusion that Babrak Karmal and his Parchamists were really
no different from their Khalqi rivals, that the great mass of the Afghan
population considered both groups equally evil Communists and athe-
ists, and that Babrak himself was probably too pro-Soviet in Afghan
eyes to be credible as a genuine nationalist. Thus, the general feeling
was that a “Babrak alternative” would not be able to solve any of the
problems which the Khalqis themselves had been unable to solve,
and that Babrak’s apparent pro-Soviet views would result in an even
narrower political base for the Parchamists than the Khalqis had in
their worst days.
3. Persuasive reasons for Moscow’s decision to overthrow Hafizul-
lah Amin and install Babrak are, therefore, difficult to discern, since we
presume that the Soviets are also aware of the handicaps a Parchamist
regime would encounter, especially its total lack of legitimacy in view
of the Soviet military action installing them in power. The Soviets may
have concluded that a policy of risking potential disaster but also
potential success was preferable to the disaster they could see looming
if they had continued to back Amin. A demonstration of support for
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
tion Immediate to Moscow. Also sent for information to Beijing, Athens, Islamabad,
Jidda, London, New Delhi, Paris, USNATO, CINCPAC (also for POLAD), and CINCEUR
(also for POLAD). Printed from a copy received in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ideological brethren, and a willingness to run risks in order to preclude
the demise of a Socialist revolution may also have played a part in
Moscow’s decision. Whatever the case, an active Soviet military pres-
ence here would seem to be a long-term prospect, and we consider it
likely that the Soviets will expand their occupation throughout the
country. End of summary.
4. In considering future political developments here, one scenario
we have consistently considered as plausible yet unlikely has been a
Soviet supported (perhaps with direct military force) seizure of power
from the Taraki-Amin led Khalqis by some group of “alternate” leftist
leadership. Because it was presumed that such a Soviet-supported
group would necessarily be ideologically and politically acceptable to
Moscow, the exiled Parcham wing of the Afghan leftist movement—
including its long-time number one, Babrak Karmal—was viewed as
a prime contender for this role. During the years before the Afghan
Left seized power in April 1978, the Parcham wing was generally
believed to have a larger following among Afghan intelligentsia, and
was supposed to be popular among leftist university students. The
Khalqi faction, on the other hand, focussed its recruitment on the
military, a background which explains why the Khalqis under Taraki-
Amin prevailed in their struggle against the Parcham in the first few
months following the April 1978 revolution. Moreover, Babrak Karmal
and some of his followers were also generally believed to be more pro-
Soviet than were the Khalqi leaders, although information on this point
was difficult to verify. Thus, some observers had believed that Moscow
would quite readily throw its weight behind the Parchamists should
the Khalqis falter seriously in their efforts to build a revolutionary
Afghanistan.
5. Most observers, however, downplayed the possibility of the
foregoing scenario, principally because it appeared to hold little prom-
ise for solving any of the serious difficulties being confronted by the
leftist party in power. Most Afghans, certainly the mass of the popula-
tion, see no difference between the two leftist groups, and consider
them as equally evil, Communists and atheists. Informed Afghans and
foreigners also believed that past differences between the two factions
were based more on personal animosities than on opposing doctrinal
views, revolutionary zeal, etc. Babrak’s perceived pro-Soviet ardor
added to doubts that he would represent an any more viable or popular
alternative should the Khalqi position become drastically eroded. Thus,
this particular analysis, to which we adhered, concluded that the acces-
sion of Babrak and the Parcham would have virtually no ameliorating
impact on the hostility of the insurgents fighting for the overthrow of
a Communist regime in Kabul, nor would it present any broader appeal
to the Afghan middle or upper class, with the possible exception of a

Afghanistan
small group of university students. This particular advantage, however,
would perhaps be counterbalanced by the loss of support within the
Khalqi-leaning military which a Parcham accession would entail.
Despite the events of the past eighteen hours, we see no reason to alter
this analysis, and can only conclude that Babrak will have no better
chance to advance the revolution than did his predecessors, and that
his base of support could even be much narrower than Amin’s in his
last days.
6. The means by which Babrak came to power virtually guarantees
instability, strife, and bloodshed here. By having ridden to power on
the guns of the Soviet Army, Babrak will hardly have many admirers
among Afghans, and this episode could conceivably provide the cata-
lyst the various insurgent groups need to form their own united front
against the “new” central government. A delayed reaction against the
Soviet forces may still explode. The cohesion of what remains of the
Afghan Army in the field is also questionable, as we anticipate that
many individuals and units may wonder why they should continue
fighting fellow Afghans for the sake of a leadership forcibly imposed
by Moscow. A collapse of the army cannot be ruled out.
7. Because we must presume that the Soviets are aware of the risks
of the “Parchamist option,” we have difficulty discerning convincing
reasons for Moscow’s decision to intervene militarily to overthrow one
regime and impose another, a move which hardly enhances Soviet
prestige around the world and, in Afghanistan would appear a blunder
of great magnitude. It could be, of course, that the Soviets were in a
desperate quandary: for example, to continue with Amin represented
likely disaster, while forcing a change in the Afghan regime may have
been viewed as at least holding out the possibility of improving the
chances of the revolution, despite the real potential disaster outlined
above. At the same time, the episode may well underscore Moscow’s
commitment that the world’s “correlation of forces” now favors the
USSR, thereby demonstrating to the world the risks the Kremlin is
willing to run in order to preclude reversal of a socialist revolution,
especially on the USSR’s borders. Whether or not the Soviet action
was designed as some sort of “signal” related to the Iranian or other
international situation is for others to assess, but we think it was not,
primarily because beating up on the Afghan Army does not necessarily
represent a feat of arms that would [garble—concern?] major or even
medium powers.
8. Despite the uncertainties surrounding Moscow’s decision to
undertake this aggressive action—and we assume Hafizullah Amin
believed the thousands of Soviet troops airlifted into Kabul were des-
tined to assist him, not put him in his grave—an active Soviet military
role in Afghanistan in support of the puppet government of Babrak

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Karmal is probably a long-term prospect. In view of last night’s ac-
tions, we sadly anticipate Soviet troops will now overrun all important
cities and strategic areas and will directly enter the fray against the
insurgents.
Amstutz
109.
Memorandum From Robert Blackwill of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, December 28, 1979
SUBJECT
The President’s December 28 Telephone Calls to European Leaders (C)
I will do a full record tomorrow of the President’s calls to Thatcher,
Schmidt, Cossiga and Giscard d’Estaing, but I wanted you to have a
quick summary now.2 (C)
The President used the talking points at Tab A almost verbatim
except for #4, the one on SALT.3 He put that issue in the following
way: “We are going ahead with SALT independently of what happens
in Afghanistan, but we are not going to allow our concern about SALT
Afghanistan/China. Confidential. Sent for information.
2 Blackwill’s full record was not found. The memoranda of conversation of Carter’s
calls to Thatcher and Giscard are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–
1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
3 Attached but not printed. The talking points are as follows: “1. We regard the
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan as an extremely grave development. 2. It has profound
consequences for the stability of the entire region. 3. We believe that it is essential that
we make this action as politically costly as possible to the Soviet Union and to that end
will be approaching a number of governments, particularly the non-aligned and the
Muslim countries, to speak out. 4. We are not going to be deterred from making an issue
of this because of SALT. The Soviets have clearly made a decision that this intervention
is more important than SALT. 5. We also are prepared to carry it all the way to the
United Nations; however, because of our own efforts in the UN with regard to the
hostages, we would appreciate it if others could take the initiative there. 6. We also
believe the North Atlantic Council should meet immediately at a high political level to
assess the matter and coordinate allied strategy. (For France: I hope that France can
work within the North Atlantic Council and show solidarity on this issue.)” For the

Afghanistan
to interfere with our strong condemnation of Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan.” (Schmidt’s response to this line was “I think that is
appropriate.”) The President also told each of the leaders that he was
going to send a very strong message to Brezhnev on Afghanistan, and
he invited Mrs. Thatcher, but none of the others, to do the same. (C)
As you know, Thatcher, Schmidt and Cossiga all immediately
agreed to a meeting of deputy foreign ministers this weekend under
NATO auspices, but Giscard said “no.” He did not favor the NATO
structure for this meeting because Afghanistan was not in the NATO
Treaty area. Thus, it was not proper to use the NATO instrument in
this case. A meeting in London of the NATO members, but not under
NATO sponsorship, was the compromise.4 (C)
Incidentally, Giscard made the important point that we must take
the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan seriously because of its impact
on Pakistan, Iran and the the Gulf States. The latter, said Giscard, would
certainly feel threatened if there were no Western reaction to the situa-
tion in Afghanistan. (C)
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Cossiga will say that the Government of Italy is gravely worried
about the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan which is contrary to the
policies of detente and which bears the risk of creating a far worse
situation in the region and beyond. (C)
In sum, none of these leaders showed the slightest hesitation in
agreeing with the President’s analysis of the strategic importance of
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. We have yet to see what they will
be willing to do about it. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
110.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
8668. Subj: (LOU) Some Thoughts on Whether To Recognize the
Babrak Karmal Regime.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. As the Department considers the question of recognizing the
new regime in Afghanistan, I would like to add some thoughts for
your consideration. First, it seems to me that the paramount factor in
this [garble—equation?] is the means by which the Babrak Karmal
regime came to power. Based on the views of our Mission officers, and
those too of the French and Italian Embassies who have consulted us,
the Soviet forces which had been airlifted into Kabul over the past two
days, launched last night a surprise attack on the Afghan Army units
guarding DRA installations in the city, and spared no force in destroy-
ing them. The struggle was strictly one of Soviet military vs. Afghan
units. Thus, Babrak now holds his position solely [due] to the might
of the Soviet Army, a consideration which casts doubt on whether this
regime has actual or ethical legitimacy or can ever really rule this
country. Though the Soviets got away with such tactics in Eastern
Europe after World War II, I doubt they can duplicate it here in
Afghanistan.
3. Secondly, following the April 1978 revolution, there was some
discussion—in the context of “recognition”—of whether the overthrow
of Daoud had been launched by Afghans or by connivance of the
USSR.2 After examination of available evidence, we and the Dept.
generally agreed that the Khalqi regime did appear to have organized
and launched its own revolution, although the USSR undoubtedly had
helped the conspirators clandestinely over the years with advice on
subversion and secret training. That conclusion of an indigenous revo-
lution, I think played some part in our decision to carry on business
with the Khalqis. That argument hardly holds now with a regime which
was brought to power only because of Soviet military intervention.
4. Thirdly, I recall that generally it is U.S. practice with respect to
recognition to consider the key factor to be whether the new govern-
ment exercises effective control over the country. If it does, the U.S.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room. Carter
initialed “C” in the top right corner of the cable.
2 See Document 11.

Afghanistan
Government generally extends recognition and issues a diplomatic
note with the appropriate language. As I mentioned in a cable sent
two days ago,3 on the eve of the “Babrak Soviet coup,” we here had
doubts regarding the Amin regime’s effective control over the country-
side, and particularly its legitimacy in the light of its action of permitting
Soviet troops to enter the country, presumably to keep itself in power.
After viewing the USSR’s deplorable action of yesterday, [we] harbor
even greater doubts about the new regime’s legitimacy. Moreover, it
is by no means clear that the Babrak/Soviet hold on power is firm
anywhere beyond Kabul.
5. Finally, as regards the new regime’s attitude towards the U.S.,
we have only skimpy information so far. Babrak’s initial speech con-
tained the accusation that the “traitor” Amin was an agent of the CIA
and of “fascist American imperialism.” Not surprisingly, Babrak threw
the usual bouquets at the Soviet Union and other Socialist countries.
Babrak also requested further “economic and military” assistance from
the USSR. Based on my assessment that there really is little to choose
substantively between the Khalqis and their Parchamist successors, I
have no reason to believe at this point that the new regime will be
any more kindly disposed to U.S. interests and programs than its
predecessor.
6. On balance, therefore, I come down on the side of breaking or
suspending diplomatic relations with Afghanistan. I think that we may
have more to lose in U.S. prestige globally and internally too, were we
to maintain a Mission here than withdrawing it. I favor however no
hasty action on our part, and would counsel discreet prior consultation
with our NATO allies. My surmise is that this regime will not be
looking for “recognition” from anybody, as it will probably allege that
what has happened merely represents an internal tiff within the party
in power and in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.
7. By septel, I have recommend a temporary modest phasedown
of Amcit personnel.4 Were we to decide to suspend or break relations,
I must ask that this decision be closely held, and be implemented
without fanfare, until almost all personnel and our personal effects are
gone. None of us here relishes the prospect of losing our effects as a
result of an angry reaction by a fickle, hostile government.
Amstutz
3 Not found.
closure of USAID and USICA offices at the Embassy. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800001–0186)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
111.
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
President Zia of Pakistan
The President opened the call with an exchange of holiday
greetings.
President Carter expressed concern about the latest development in
Afghanistan and stressed the importance of strengthening U.S.-Paki-
stani relations. We should consult at various levels and the U.S. should
expedite delivery of the military equipment that Pakistan has ordered.
We should put aside differences that have caused concern in the past
and move expeditiously to strengthen our mutual resolve against fur-
ther Soviet intrusions into Southern Asia.
President Carter reported that European leaders had said this is one
of the most serious Soviet actions since the take-over of Czechoslovakia.
He solicited President Zia’s reaction and asked what the U.S. could do
to help Pakistan.
President Zia expressed his gratitude for U.S. concern for Pakistan
which is now about to face the Soviet onslaught. He confirmed Presi-
dent Carter’s assessment of the situation. President Zia had recently
completed a detailed discussion of the situation which concluded that,
beyond the intrusion of Soviet troops, the overthrow of the Amin
regime is a direct involvement of the Soviet Union in a country border-
ing Pakistan.
President Carter reassured Zia that he has a friend here and we are
eager to help in any way possible.2 The U.S. wants to continue detente
and progress on SALT. But we cannot afford to stand mute and let the
Soviets take this very serious action with impunity and without political
consequences. We will take our case concerning the hostages in Iran
to the UNSC tomorrow. Other countries—Pakistan or others—should
raise this issue of Soviet intrusion publicly or even, later on, in the UN.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
2 In an undated memorandum to Brzezinski regarding the United States–Pakistan
Defense Agreement of 1959, Thornton noted that Carter “implicitly affirmed” the agree-
ment during his phone conversation with Zia. (Carter Library, National Security Council
pher/Brown, Pakistan/Afghanistan/China)

Afghanistan
We will probably meet this weekend with our NATO allies to discuss
the Afghan situation.
President Zia said it is right to think on those lines. Pakistan consid-
ers itself an ally and a great friend of the United States. Our past
association contains many instances of mutual respect and assistance
according to our capabilities. It is encouraging that the U.S. is still the
torchbearer of the free world. We consider ourselves members of the
free world and look to the U.S. as a beacon. What has happened in
Afghanistan is delicate, tragic and most significant in this part of the
world. Tomorrow it could be Pakistan.
President Carter suggested that Warren Christopher could come to
Pakistan in the next few days to talk with Zia, if that were desirable.
President Zia recalled the pleasure of meeting Christopher, an old
friend, and promised to give his reaction to the idea tomorrow through
Ambassador Hummel.3
President Carter invited President Zia to come to visit to discuss
matters of mutual concern. When Zia decides that would be advanta-
geous our foreign ministers could work out arrangements.
President Zia expressed his appreciation and said it would be a
great honor to meet the President of the U.S. He promised to arrange
mutually convenient dates.
President Carter said he would have Secretary Vance tell Hummel
to expect an answer on the Christopher trip.
The conversation concluded with best wishes on both sides.
of a conversation between Hummel and Shahi during which Shahi stated that Pakistan
wanted to delay a visit by Christopher for long enough to determine if the Muslim
world, following the lead of Iran and Pakistan, would coalesce to condemn the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan. According to the telegram, Shahi believed “a visit by Christopher
would undermine prospects for Islamic condemnation of Soviets and would provide
ammunition to Soviets and pro-Soviet Muslim countries to accuse Pakistan and others
of acting at behest of USG in collusion with NATO powers.” (National Archives, RG

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
112.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, December 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Response to the Soviets Regarding Afghanistan: A Menu of Possible Actions
To emphasize the outrageous and unprecedented nature of the
Soviet coup in Afghanistan would be to belabor the obvious. Any
failure to respond adequately on our part would be perceived as glaring
weakness by our Allies, by the non-aligned, and especially in the Per-
sian Gulf. The domestic near-consensus on Iran could evaporate over
Afghanistan. It is therefore imperative that we not only act to counter
what the Soviets have done in Afghanistan, but that we are perceived
as having done so.
The speciousness and bald-faced arrogance of the Soviet action can
hardly be exaggerated. There was no need, for example, to announce
Amin’s immediate execution, which gives the lie to the Soviet assertion
that they were invited in by the Amin government. Furthermore, the
use of the recently-signed Friendship Treaty with Afghanistan as the
juridical basis for their actions creates a logical implication that the
Soviets could equally undertake the overthrow of any of the ten govern-
ments with whom they now have such treaties, e.g. India. Equally to the
point, would Sadat and Siad have thrown out the Soviets so cavalierly
if they had felt that one serious Soviet option was to fly in an army
and set up their rivals in power?
I. The Public Posture
We have no real option of downplaying the significance of the
Soviet action. We need a clear, sharp and unequivocal response, which
should be given full play by all our communications media. The themes
we should stress are as follows:
a. The fact that Amin was assassinated within two days of the
Soviet invasion makes a mockery of Moscow’s claims that it was invited
in by the Amin Government. That Amin’s family was killed along with
him shows the kind of people we are dealing with.
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezin-
1/80: Soviet Union. Secret; Sensitive; Outside the System.

Afghanistan
b. The fact that the Soviets cite their Friendship Treaty with Afghan-
istan as the basis for interference in the Afghans’ internal affairs implies
that the Soviets have a similar right in all other countries with whom
they have friendship treaties.
c. This is the first use by the Soviets of their armed forces in a
combat situation outside the Soviet Bloc since the Second World War
and is therefore an extremely ominous precedent. Do the Soviets claim
such universal rights in all other areas? How can this be squared with
the UN Charter?
d. Afghanistan had been the classic buffer state for the past 150
years. The Soviets had no legitimate national interest in taking such
actions. The fact of the matter was that the Amin Government was, by
any reasonable standard, pro-Soviet, as was the Taraki Government
which preceded it. Furthermore, the Afghan Government which existed
before the April 1978 coup was not anti-Soviet in nature and maintained
cordial state-to-state relations with Moscow. All the military needs of
that regime, for example, were supplied by the Soviets.
e. Does the Brezhnev doctrine apply to the entire Third World?
What are the limits to the Brezhnev doctrine? As Soviet force projection
capabilities increase over the coming decades, they will have the capa-
bility to mount such an action anywhere in the world. Is this a tolerable
situation for the international community?
f. We are extremely concerned at the human toll which the Soviet-
supported combat is taking. There are 350,000 refugees now in Pakistan,
and we would not be surprised to see that number rise to half a million
in the near future. Thus, as in Cambodia and in so many other countries
since World War II, the Soviets are creating another enormous refugee
problem, this time in South Asia and among an overwhelmingly Mus-
lim population. The United States is prepared to do its utmost to assist
the Afghan refugees with humanitarian aid.
g. The Soviet Union is atheistic by doctrine and has published
enormous amounts of anti-religious and anti-Muslim literature. The
US, on the other hand, firmly believes in religious freedom and
enshrines it in our Constitution. Three million Muslims practice their
religion freely in the US. In the USSR, Muslims have been persecuted,
mosques have been closed, and religion has been discouraged. In Soviet
Azerbaijan, for example, there are only 24 officially recognized mosques
now operating, whereas before the Revolution of 1917 there were sev-
eral thousand in operation.
h. In sum, replacement of one government by another through the
use of armed force, as done by the Soviets in Afghanistan, is an egre-
gious violation of normal international standards of behavior, sets a
very dangerous precedent, and is regarded by the US as reckless adven-
turism. We call on all nations, and particularly nations with significant

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Muslim populations, to appeal to the Soviet Union to allow the Afghan
people to settle its own problems in line with the principle of no
interference in the internal affairs of other nations.
II. Other Possible Actions
1. Dispatch a high-level mission to give the Pakistanis the kind of
assurance they need to bolster their confidence and to assist us in our
support of the Afghan insurgents.
2. Dispatch a mission to investigate conditions in the refugee camps
in Pakistan, which would presumably result in additional US and
international assistance to support the refugees.
3. Explore with all pertinent governments the stepping up of covert
assistance to the insurgents and in the process commit ourselves to
maximizing such assistance.
4. Form a special committee in NATO to examine threats to the
peace outside the Treaty area.
5. Liberalize our arms sale policy to the sub-Continent.
III. Other Possible Actions in the US-Soviet Context
The above actions might be enough domestically and in world
opinion if the Soviets are basically unsuccessful in tamping down the
insurgency and thus become mired in a Vietnam-type situation. But if
they are successful, these actions will not be sufficient and we will look
weak and ineffectual. In any case, the Soviet action in Afghanistan
almost demands that we take specific bilateral steps to indicate our
abhorrence. Among those steps which the President might consider
(and it is too early to make definite decisions on this score) are the
following:
1. Withdrawal of SALT. If, after consultation with Byrd and others,
it is determined that SALT no longer has a chance of early passage,
the Administration could consider withdrawing it unilaterally, while
waiting for a better climate, although still committed to the fact that
the Treaty is in our basic interest and still favoring ratification by
the Senate.
2. Grain Sales. The Administration could suspend the US-Soviet
Grain Agreement2 or simply suspend all sales of grain to the USSR for
the indeterminate future. This would require Congressional authoriza-
tion to purchase and store the excess grain.
3. Technology Transfer and Licensing. We could announce a much
tougher policy regarding technology transfer to the USSR and a closer
look at licenses for petroleum-related exports.

Afghanistan
4. MFN. We could announce that we do not intend to introduce
legislation giving MFN to the Soviet Union during the current session
of Congress.
5. Postponement of US-Soviet Trade Council. We could announce
the postponement of the next session of the US-Soviet Trade Council,
scheduled to meet in Washington April 16.
6. Tighten Up COCOM Procedures. We could announce that we are
undertaking with our Allies a review of current COCOM procedures
with a view to tightening them.
7. Expulsion of a Large Group of Soviet Agents. We could identify and
arrest 50 to 100 Soviet KGB agents in the US, making clear to the Soviets
that any retaliatory action on their part would mean further expulsions
by us at a rate of two Soviets for one American, i.e. the current ratio
of Soviet Embassy personnel in the US to Americans in the USSR,
leaving out the 550 Soviets at the UN (which makes one-for-one expul-
sion entirely unsatisfactory and unreciprocal to us).
8. Withdrawal of Ambassador. We could (and probably should) recall
Watson for consultations. (Dobrynin’s absence is obviously not entirely
medical in nature.)
9. Broaden Security Relationships. The US could undertake new secu-
rity relationships with Oman, Somalia, and Turkey, i.e. three Mus-
lim countries.
10. Broadcasting. The US could announce increased broadcasts to
Western Asia and to the Muslim portions of the USSR.
11. China. In conjunction with the Brown visit, the US could let it
be known that we have agreed not only to the sale of certain high
technology items to China, but to the sale of over-the-horizon radar
and anti-tank missiles—clearly defensive weapons—as well. We could
explain that this was done explicitly in light of the Soviet action in
Afghanistan.3 Future arms sale to China, we could add, would be on
a case-by-case basis.
12. Removal of Inhibitions on Covert Actions. The US could ask for
revision of all of the legislative inhibitions on our ability to conduct
covert actions anywhere in the world.
In sum, Soviet negative reaction to various protests and expostula-
tions, including ours, is completely predictable. These were taken into
consideration by the Soviets before they made their move. This is an
event of such importance that a strong and vivid US response must
be made to it, and not just in terms of Soviet action in Afghanistan
itself, but in terms of overall US-Soviet relations. The Soviets must be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
made to understand that this was a very expensive invasion and that
it should not set a precedent for future action. The American people
and the Congress should be sympathetic to tough responses by the
President, especially if the Soviet actions in Afghanistan are cast in the
proper light, i.e. the Soviets have kicked us while we were down, and
we do not intend to stand for it.
113.
Hotline Message From President Carter to General Secretary
Brezhnev1
Washington, December 28, 1979
Dear President Brezhnev:
I want to insure that you have fully weighed the ramifications of
the Soviet actions in Afghanistan, which we regard as a clear threat to
the peace. You should understand that these actions could mark a
fundamental and long-lasting turning point in our relations. Taken
without any previous discussion with us, they constitute in our view
a clear violation of the Basic Principles on Relations, which you signed
My Government can in no way accept the Soviet Government’s
explanation, conveyed to Ambassador Watson on December 27, that
Soviet military forces were sent into Afghanistan at the request of the
leadership of that country.3 The facts of the matter clearly show that
these same Soviet forces were employed to overthrow that established
government of Afghanistan and to impose a new government, which
has brutally executed the former President and, reportedly, his family.
Large-scale movements of military units into a sovereign country
are always a legitimate matter of concern to the international commu-
nity. When such military forces are those of a superpower, and are
then used to depose an existing government and impose another, there
are obvious adverse implications both for the region and for the world
at large. We note with the utmost seriousness that this is the first time
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
This message was sent via the Direct Communications Link between Washington and
Moscow. In the top right corner, Brzezinski wrote: “Sent 12–28, received by Moscow
2 See Document 87.
3 See Document 101.

Afghanistan
since the invasions of Hungary and Czechoslovakia that the Soviet
Union has taken direct military action against another country. In the
present instance, the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan—a
previously non-aligned country—obviously represents an unsettling,
dangerous and new stage in your use of military force, which raises
deep apprehension about the general trend of Soviet policy.
We are both pledged to each other not to exacerbate conflict-fraught
situations and to consult when threats to the peace arise. If these mutual
obligations are to have any meaning, then they must obviously include
a refusal by the superpowers to engage in armed combat except as a
very last resort and then only in legitimate self-defense. Because our
interests are global, we must recognize that actions taken in one area
have a spill-over effect in other seemingly unrelated areas, as well as
in that area itself.
Neither superpower can arrogate to itself the right to displace or
overturn a legally constituted government in another country by force
of arms. Such a precedent is a dangerous one; it flouts all the accepted
norms of international conduct. Unless you draw back from your pres-
ent course of action, this will inevitably jeopardize the course of US-
Soviet relations throughout the world. I urge you to take prompt con-
structive action to withdraw your forces and cease interference in
Afghanistan’s internal affairs. Many years of promoting more stable
and productive relations between our two countries could well be
undermined if this situation is not resolved promptly. With proper
action by your government, it is still not too late to avoid lasting damage
to US-Soviet relations.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
114.
Hotline Message From General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter1
Moscow, December 29, 1979
Dear Mister President,
In answer to your message of 29 December I consider it necessary
to inform you of the following.
It is impossible to [One can in no way] agree with your evaluation
of what is occurring in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. We
have already sent through your Ambassador to Moscow in a confiden-
tial manner to the American side and to you personally a clarification
[an explanation] based on facts of what is actually occurring there, as
well as the reasons which caused us to respond favorably to the request
of the Government of Afghanistan for the introduction of limited Soviet
Military contingents.2
The attempt taken in your message to cast doubt on the very fact
of the request itself of the government of Afghanistan for sending our
forces to that country seems strange. I am compelled to note that it is
certainly not a question of anyone’s perception or lack of perception
of this fact, or agreement or disagreement with it which determines
the actual state of affairs, which consists of the following.3
The Government of Afghanistan during the course of nearly two
years has numerous times turned to us with this request. In point of
fact one of these requests was sent to us on 26 December of this year.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Staff of the JCS. This message was sent via the Direct Communications Link between
Washington and Moscow. Unless otherwise noted, bracketed insertions in the text and
footnotes below reflect alternate translations written on the copy by an unknown hand.
Attached but not printed is a covering memorandum from Shulman to Vance, December
31, in which Shulman characterized the Department of Defense translation of Brezhnev’s
message as a “quick, rough initial translation,” which carried the risk “that the President
will misinterpret a high-level Soviet communication and respond inappropriately.” Not-
ing the importance of Brezhnev’s message, Shulman advised Vance: “We also need to
sensitize the White House to the importance of having qualified Department Russian
language speakers review the translation of all future incoming hotline messages.” Also
attached but not printed is Brezhnev’s message in the original Russian.
2 In the left margin at the end of the paragraph, Carter wrote: “The leaders who
‘requested’ SU presence were assassinated.”
3 The alternate translation of the last sentence reads: “I am compelled to note that
is certainly not anyone’s perception or lack of perception of this fact, or agreement or
disagreement with it, which determines the actual situation. The situation consists of
the following.”

Afghanistan
This is equally known by us and by the Afghanistani Government
which sent us these requests.4
I want to once more stress that the purpose of the limited Soviet
contingent in Afghanistan has only one goal—to provide assistance in
repulsing the acts of external aggression, which have been taking place
for a prolonged time and have now taken on even greater scale.5
It is absolutely impermissible, [Also entirely unacceptable] and not
in conformance with actuality, is the claim (accusation) [assertion],
which appears in your message that the Soviet Union allegedly did
something to overthrow the Government of Afghanistan. I must with
all certainty [definiteness] stress that the change in the Afghanistani
government was the result of [carried out by] the Afghanistanis them-
selves and only by them. Ask the Afghanistani Government itself
[about this].6
Also not corresponding to reality is that which is said in your
message in relation to the fate of the families of the former leaders
of Afghanistan.7 We have at our disposal information contradicting
[Information at our disposal refutes] the information you have received.
I must further clearly state to you that the Soviet military contin-
gents did not take any military action against Afghanistan and we
clearly do not intend to do so.8
You have reproached us in your message that we did not consult
with the USA Government in reference to the Afghanistani matter
before introducing our military contingents into Afghanistan.9 Permit
us to ask you—did you consult with us prior to beginning the massive
concentration of naval forces near Iran and in the region of the Persian
4 The alternate translation of the last sentence reads: “We, the Soviet Union, know
this; it is known in equal measure by the Afghanistani side, which sent us such requests.”
5 The alternate translation of this paragraph reads: “I want to once more stress that
the sending of limited Soviet contingents to Afghanistan has only one goal—to provide
help and assistance in repulsing acts of external aggresion, which have been taking place
for a prolonged time and have now taken on even greater scale.” In the left margin
beside this paragraph, Carter wrote: “from where?”
6 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “SU brought in [illegible] invasion force, the new
puppet leader.”
7 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “They’re dead or they’re new SU puppets.”
8 The alternate translation of this paragraph reads: “I must further clearly inform
you that the Soviet military contingents have not taken any military action against the
Afghanistan side and we of course do not intend to take such action.”
9 The alternate translation of this sentence reads: “You have reproached us in your
message for our not consulting with the USA Government on Afghanistani matters,
prior to introducing our military contingents into Afghanistan.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Gulf, about which it would have been necessary as a minimum to
notify us?10
In connection with the content and spirit of your message I consider
it essential to again clarify the point [explain that] that the request of
the Afghanistani Government and the satisfaction of this request by
the Soviet Union are exclusively a matter for the USSR and Afghanistan,
which regulate their mutual relations themselves, by mutual agree-
ment, and naturally cannot permit any sort of interference from without
in their [these] mutual relations. They, as any member states of the
UN, enjoy [have] the right not only to individual self-defense, but to
collective defense as well, which is envisioned by Article 51 of the UN
Charter, which the USSR and USA formulated themselves. And this
was approved by all member states of the UN.
There is, of course, no basis for your assertion that our actions in
Afghanistan allegedly threaten the peace.
In light of all of this, the immoderate tone of certain formulations
in your message hit us squarely between the eyes [is striking]. What
is the purpose of it? Would it not be better to evaluate the situation
more calmly, keeping in mind the supreme [higher] interests of the
world [peace] rather than, ultimately, the mutual relations of our
two powers.
Concerning your “advice”, we already informed you, and here I
repeat again, that as soon as the reasons which prompted the Afghani-
stani request to the Soviet Union disappear, we fully intend to withdraw
the Soviet military contingents from Afghanistani territory.
And here is our advice to you: the American side could make its
contribution toward ending the armed incursion from without into
Afghanistani territory.11
I do not believe that the work to create more stable and productive
relations between the USSR and USA can be in vain. Unless, of course,
the American side wants this to be. We do not. I think it would not
be to the benefit of the United States of America itself, either.12 It is
10 The alternative translation of this sentence reads: But permit us to ask you—did
you consult with us prior to the beginning of the massive concentration of naval forces
near Iran and in the region of the Persian Gulf, as well as in many other cases about
which you should, as a minimum, have informed us. Carter wrote in the margin next
to this paragraph: “We’ve sent in no invasion forces.”
11 The alternate translation of this paragraph reads: “And here is our advice to you:
the American side could make its contribution to cessation of armed incursions from
without into Afghanistani territory.” In the left margin, Carter wrote: “The only incursion
is from the SU.”
12 The alternate translation of these sentences reads: “I do not believe that work to
create more stable and productive relations between the USSR and USA can turn out
to have been in vain, if, of course, the American side does not want this to be the case.
We do not. I think that this would not, indeed, be to the benefit of the United States of
America itself.”

Afghanistan
our conviction that the way relations develop between the USSR and
the USA is a joint matter. We believe that they must not be subject to
vacillations under the influence of some kink of attendant [chance]
factors or events.
Despite disagreements on a number of issues in [of] World and
European politics, which we understand quite clearly [accord clear
account], the Soviet Union is an advocate of conducting affairs in the
spirit of those understandings and documents which were adopted by
our countries in the interests of peace, equal cooperation, and interna-
tional security.
L. Brezhnev
115.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 29, 1979
SUBJECT
Daily Report
Information
Watson on Soviets in Afghanistan: Ambassador Watson sees the
Soviet move into Afghanistan as marking a major watershed in Soviet
policy and constituting an unacceptable extension of the Brezhnev
doctrine. Watson speculates that the Soviets opted for Amin’s removal
in order to broaden domestic political support for the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan and hoped to facilitate this with the introduc-
tion of Soviet combat troops. Any disadvantages of a military move
into Afghanistan at this time, Watson asserts, were minimized by the
current slump in U.S.-Soviet relations, and the deterioration of U.S.
relations with Iran and, to a lesser extent, with Pakistan. Ambassador
Watson expresses his hope that a way can be found to bring pressure
on the Soviets and to make the political costs to them so high that they
will find a way to withdraw their troops. If the price has been suffi-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
right corner.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ciently painful for them, they may think again before undertaking
another such adventure.2 (S)
NSC Activity
Follow-up on the NSC Meeting3
State has transmitted messages on your behalf to the Heads of
Government of Muslim countries, key non-aligned countries, key Afri-
can countries and the Chinese as agreed at the NSC meeting.4 (C)
The messages to Muslim countries stress the threat to Islam from
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. (C)
The messages to the non-aligned countries urge that they must
stand up for one of their own in the face of a Soviet takeover. (C)
The messages to the African countries emphasize that Afghani-
stan’s peace and friendship treaty is being used as justification for
Soviet intervention and notes that several African countries also have
such treaties. (C)
The message to Hua concludes by noting that we have parallel
interests in the security of Pakistan and calls for close consultation on
our policies, stating that Harold Brown will be prepared to discuss this
issue during his visit.5 (C)
In all of these messages we urge the leaders to speak out and take
appropriate action individually or with like-minded countries with
which they are associated. (C)
2 Brzezinski is apparently summarizing telegram 28119 from Moscow, December
28. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]; printed in
from Moscow, December 29, Watson argued that the United States’s “principal objectives
should be to (a) undo the Soviet action to the extent it can be done, which would mean
the withdrawal of Soviet troops—probably not immediately attainable—and (b) exacting
a political price for the Soviet action sufficient to dissuade the Soviets from undertaking
other such adventures in the future.” He also outlined a number of possible steps
including: unilateral actions such as increasing U.S. military alert status, launching a
major propaganda program, bolstering the U.S. military presence in the Persian Gulf
and Indian Ocean; multilateral actions such as consultations with friends and allies,
“demonstrative consultations with the Chinese,” action in the Security Council, strength-
ening security ties with key countries in Southwest Asia such as Turkey and Pakistan,
working “with the Pakistanis and Chinese to support the insurgency in Afghanistan,”
leading a global effort to boycott the Olympics; and bilateral actions with the Soviet Union
including withdrawal of the SALT treaty from the Senate, “limitation or cancellation of
grain sales to the Soviet Union,” tightening export controls, reviewing extant trade deals,
and cancelling “visits and exchanges” between the United States and USSR. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West, Brement,
3 See Document 107.
5 The message to Hua was not found.

Afghanistan
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the White House6
1. Amstutz Views on Recognition of the Babrak Karmal Regime: Charge
Amstutz believes U.S. interests would be best served in Afghanistan
by breaking or suspending diplomatic recognition. In considering
whether to extend recognition, his primary consideration is the illegiti-
mate use of Soviet military force in bringing the Babrak regime into
power. Unlike the indigenous Khalqi revolution that occurred in 1978,
the present coup resulted only through the blatant intervention of the
Soviet military. Additionally, a general U.S. practice in deciding on
recognition has been whether the government exercises effective con-
trol of the country, a dubious proposition with Amin’s regime and of
even greater doubt with the present regime. Finally, though only mini-
mal information is available, Babrak’s press conference gives Amstutz
little reason to believe any change has occurred with respect to U.S.
interests or programs. While no “hasty action” should be taken in order
to prevent any precipitous action against mission personnel by the
Babrak regime, Amstutz believes that “we may have more to lose in
U.S. prestige globally and internally too were we to maintain a mis-
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
3. Chinese Reaction to Soviet-Afghan Situation: In discussions with
DCM Roy today, the deputy director of the Asian Affairs department
expressed China’s vigorous opposition to what the Soviet Union had
perpetrated in Afghanistan and urged the U.S. to offer its assistance
to the Pakistanis and the other threatened countries of the area. The
Chinese official stressed that the reaction of the U.S. and Western
Europe would impact significantly on whether the countries of the
region stood up to the Soviet threat or adopted a more accommodating
6 Secret. The author of the paper is not identified. In the top right corner of the
page, Carter wrote: “Zbig. C.”
7 See Document 110. In the left margin beside this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Do
not recognize—Have Warren pursue this? In London.” See footnote 2, Document 107.
Central Foreign Policy File, P840150–2539)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
116.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
8680. Subj: Sitrep No. 12: Soviet Occupation of Kabul.
1. (C—Entire text.)
2. As the second full day of the Soviet occupation of Kabul draws
to a close, there is one overwhelming fact evident to all observers here.
All meaningful authority in this city is exercised by the Soviet Army,
with Afghan participation limited to the traffic police, and a diminish-
ing number of machine-gun toting civilians with white arm bands who
apparently are supposed to give the current situation some semblance
of legitimacy. We hesitate to risk belaboring this point, but we think it
is worth emphasizing that heavily armed Soviet troopers and armored
equipment are stationed at every important point throughout the city,
they control traffic around the important arteries and crossroads, and
they continue to move at will individually and in large units to various
destinations. In short, the Afghans do not exercise even a modicum of
real control over their own capital.
3. Embassy personnel late today observed an almost uninterrupted
stream of Soviet armored equipment and troops moving into Kabul
from the north over the only paved road heading to the Salang Pass
and the USSR. At this point, we are unable to say whether these forces
were flown into Bagram Air Base about 25 miles north on the same
highway, or whether they came overland all the way from Central
Asia. At about 1615 a contingent of twenty-one BMDs, some with towed
artillery, and supporting equipment passed the Embassy heading into
the center of the city. At 1800, at least twenty BMPs and fifteen BMDs,
each with about 6–8 Soviet troopers riding on top, passed the Embassy,
also heading in the direction of downtown Kabul. We doubt that these
units are ultimately destined for deployment in the city, and presume
that they may be on their way to some position on the outskirts to
augment the Soviet perimeter now encircling the capital. These move-
ments, however, give some feel for the magnitude of the Soviet Army’s
activity today as it apparently reinforces and repositions its forces in
order to ensure its grip on Kabul.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
tion Priority to Ankara, Beijing, Islamabad, London, Moscow, New Delhi, USNATO,
CINCPAC (also for POLAD), CINCEUR (also for POLAD), and USICA. Printed from a
copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.

Afghanistan
3. One interesting detail is that Embassy officers have seen certain
Soviet units digging in on the perimeter around the city, apparently
in an effort to safeguard against any attack from the insurgents or from
hostile Afghan Army units. Armored vehicles, including tanks, have
been seen in makeshift bunkers. Although it is more likely that the
Afghan Army in the field that was fighting for Hafizullah Amin will
simply vanish into the hills, rather than take on elite units of the Soviet
Army, we cannot rule out the possibility that some army units or
individuals may attempt to vent their anti-Russian feelings by kamikaze
raids or infiltration into the city in hopes of zapping a few of the
“Russian invaders.”
4. One wrinkle on the political front is that we have no firm evidence
as yet that Babrak Karmal and his colleagues are actually in Kabul
trying to forge their new government. Babrak’s recorded statement
first heard the night of the Soviet attack continues to be played intermit-
tently, but there has been no other broadcast by him or any other
member of the new leadership.2 Under “normal” coup situations, such
as April 1978, the new leader usually broadcasts his success as soon
as that takeover is apparent. Since Kabul also has a generally function-
ing TV station, we find it curious that Babrak has not yet trumpeted
in person his accession to power.
5. On the operational front, Kabul Airport opened to a couple of
civilian flights this afternoon, including an Indian Airlines flight and
one from Ariana. We have also heard the story, from a reliable source,
that the telephone lines, which have been out since the first minutes
of the takeover due to satchel charges or grenades planted at Kabul’s
PTT, may be dead for another month.
6. Finally, we note the East German news agency statement
reported in FBIS Trends (28 December 79 USSR-Afghanistan) that the
Soviet units will be withdrawn “as soon as the causes for this action
no longer exist.” Since the Soviet action was taken to impose a different
but still Communist regime on Afghanistan, we anticipate that these
Soviet military units and their successors may be in Kabul and the rest
of Afghanistan for an extended duration.
7. A late item is that the Intercontinental Hotel is providing 200
preheated meals to Radio Afghanistan for the “old government and
the new government.” This report is sketchy, but it appears that some
officials of the Amin regime are being held next door to us, while some
2 Karmal’s statement was quoted in telegram 332986 to all diplomatic and consular
posts, December 28. In the statement, carried by Radio Kabul, Karmal pledged that his
government would guarantee “democratic rights of all classes of society and respect the
holy faith of Islam and the clergy.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790595–1188)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
unidentified members of the Babrak government may also be biding
their time in the Radio Afghanistan complex.
8. This will be the last sitrep for tonight unless events warrant
further reporting.
Amstutz
117.
Briefing Memorandum From the Acting Director of the
Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Mark) to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, December 29, 1979
SUBJECT
The Impact of Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan on the Afghan Civil War, the
Region, and the USSR’s Standing
SUMMARY In the current Afghan situation, the USSR has a bear
by the tail. It became entangled in an opportunistic and ideologically
attractive grab to take advantage of the probably fortuitous emergence
of a Marxist regime in Kabul in the revolutionary coup of April 1978.
It cannot now let go without suffering damage to its image as a Marxist
superpower that poses as a reliable ally of socialist and would-be
socialist regimes. It also wants to avoid the risk that a hostile state will
appear on yet another—and sensitive—stretch of the Soviet frontier.
Yet, as it holds on, it becomes ever more deeply enmeshed in an Afghan
civil war, which pits a highly unpopular, fractious, and factionalized
minority grouping of leftists against the great rural tribal majority,
who hate all that the leftists stand for.
Given this unattractive prospect, Moscow has now begun to esca-
late its intervention in Afghan affairs in the hope that this will improve
its chances to reduce the just mentioned negative aspects of the situa-
tion. It is trying to insure that it will gain reliable control over its client
regime (which it did not have under Amin) and that Afghanistan
will neither sink into anarchy (thus increasing the risk of external
intervention) nor become a hostile neighbor to the USSR. Moscow is
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR
by Mark, Howells, Baraz, and Harris. Presumably prepared for Christopher prior to his
trip to London and Brussels.

Afghanistan
willing to pay the international costs for its actions, but it probably
calculates that its losses will be short-lived. Besides, it may assume
that eventual success will bring exploitable dividends in the form of
a more respected image as a decisive and powerful actor on the
world scene.
To reduce the insurgency, as a follow-up to their drastic moves of
this week, the Soviet leadership will heighten military pressures against
the insurgents, including some Soviet combat involvement. Thus far,
the USSR has brought to bear in Afghanistan a large airborne force,
sizable numbers of additional fighter aircraft, helicopters, military air
transport, and two motorized rifle divisions. Several other ground force
divisions are being readied at least as a backup reserve. These deployed
forces can assure the security of Kabul, of the three other largest cities,
of several strategically located towns, of roads near the Soviet frontier,
and of the land lines of communication from the USSR to Kabul and
Herat. If the Soviets were to plan general and large-scale combat actions
of their own against insurgent positions throughout Afghanistan, they
would need ten to fifteen divisions and major logistical bases. Up to
now, we can see nothing initiated in the USSR on that scale.
Accompanying the military moves, it must be expected that Mos-
cow will now start experimenting with new political approaches to
lure a respectable proportion of the dissidents away from the insurgent
camp. However, we judge that Babrak Karmal’s chances of gaining
substantial popular support are as poor as Amin’s and Taraki’s. His
words are meant to sound promising to disaffected Afghans, but his
predecessors used almost identical language without result. Tribal
groups detest the Marxist trappings of the regime, which seems
doomed to a very narrow base of followers—and these almost exclu-
sively in urban areas. Political gains for Babrak would require major
political concessions and a reduction of the Soviet presence, but neither
he nor the Soviets can afford to go far enough to satisfy the opposition.
We do not yet know how the USSR plans to use the Afghan army
in the future. For one thing, the army’s loyalty to the new regime is
highly suspect. For another, it is demoralized and understrength, while
its recruitment prospects are poor. Still, if it manages now to hold
together as a viable institution after Babrak’s further purges, Soviet
intervention, together with new training and equipment, could help
to rebuild it to a point where, in the spring, it may be able to score
some initial successes against the insurgents, provided that there were
some Soviet combat involvement alongside.
Regional reaction to the Soviet intervention will be overwhelmingly
disapproving. Iran will be very alarmed, but it will remain wrapped
up in its own troubles, and will not be distracted from continuing to
give priority attention to its confrontation with the U.S. Pakistan will

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
now feel very exposed to Soviet pressures and will urge America and
China to give it political and military support, lest it be obliged to
kowtow to the Soviet Union. India will also be negative, but its policy
reaction will depend on how the repercussions play themselves out
around Pakistan. China will denounce the USSR once again and be
ready for closer cooperation with the U.S. The Arab states of the Persian
Gulf will show great anxiety at what they interpret as further evidence
of a Soviet expansionist plan that envisages Moscow’s eventual control
over them. Iraq’s strong opposition to the Soviet action will lead it to
try to bring about greater mutual security coordination among the Gulf
Arab states, but without reliance on Washington. END SUMMARY
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]
118.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
Afghanistan/Pakistan
SUBJECT
Reaction of the Hezbe-i-Islami Afghanistan to the Soviet-Backed Government of
Babrak Karmal [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[2 lines not declassified]
(HI) Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, was making every effort to make known
the HI’s opposition to the Soviet-backed government of Babrak Karmal
and to emphasize that there are no changes in their policy of armed
opposition to the new regime in Kabul. (Source comment: Other Pe-
shawar based Afghan exile groups also appear to be following suit
and the general feeling among exile leaders is that “Babrak is more
cruel than Amin.”) To reinforce their determination, the HI clandestine
radio station operated the entire day of 29 December broadcasting in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
not declassified]. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.

Afghanistan
Dari, Pushtu and Baluchi languages condemning the Soviet interven-
tion in Afghanistan and calling for the overthrow of the Babrak regime.
2. According to reports reaching HI headquarters in Peshawar, by
the evening of 28 December, there has been little military action in the
southern and eastern parts of Afghanistan except for a report that a
large convoy of tanks and armored vehicles was sighted heading from
Kabul towards Jalalabad. (Source comment: The information on the
convoy was imprecise and could not be confirmed.) In the countryside
the HI describes the situation among the general populace as restive
with anti-Soviet sentiment increasing to a new high.
3. On 30 December, HI leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar along with
a member of the HI’s political committee traveled from Peshawar to
Islamabad where they intended to deliver communiqués to various
foreign missions asking these governments to withhold diplomatic
recognition of the Babrak regime and to ask for immediate material
support.2 (Source comment: It is not known which missions will receive
the communiqué nor how long Gulbuddin will stay in Islamabad;
however, it is possible that he might be seeking meetings with Govern-
ment of Pakistan (GOP) officials in addition to delivering the commu-
niqués. It is the hope of the HI that the GOP will make a realistic
appraisal of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and will rally to
the HI with immediate material support.) There is definite concern
within the HI leadership that as soon as it is practical for them to do
so, Soviet ground troops will be introduced into the fighting on a large
scale and they are concerned about their ability to defend against
massive Soviet military action. However, at the present time the HI
plans to keep their mujahiddin in the field and to defend the “liberated
areas” wherever possible.
4. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
2 Hekmatyar met with officials at the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad. No record of this
meeting was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
119.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, December 1979
[Omitted here are a cover page and a dissemination page.]
Afghanistan: The Babrak Government ([classification marking and
handling restriction not declassified])
Summary
The Soviet-installed government of Prime Minister Babrak Karmal
is dominated by members of his Parcham faction of the People’s Demo-
cratic Party of Afghanistan, but leftist military officers who overthrew
President Daoud in April 1978 and installed the first PDPA government
are also important participants. Many of the Cabinet members and the
Parchamists who are helping with security in Kabul have been hiding
in the Soviet Embassy in Afghanistan for up to a year. Included in this
category are Sherjan Mazduryar, Minister of Transport, and Revolu-
tionary Council member Mohammad Aslam Watanjar, who reportedly
fled to the Soviet Embassy after the mid-September coup in which
Amin deposed Taraki. ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
There are also several men in the Cabinet who have not been closely
tied to either Parcham or the military leftists in the past, and a few
who seem to have been closer to the party’s Khalq faction—headed by
the late Presidents Taraki and Amin—than to Parcham. Almost all,
however, seem to have had a good reason to hate Amin and to have
cooperated in his overthrow. ([classification marking not declassified])
So far the Babrak government has announced a partial list of the
Cabinet and some members of the Revolutionary Council (in theory
a supervisory, quasi-legislative body) and publicly designated three
individuals as “party members,” a term possibly intended to recognize
their importance without granting them any authority. ([classification
marking not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
December 31, 1979, Afghanistan: The Babrak Government. Secret; [handling restriction
not declassified]. A typed note at the bottom of the page reads: “The author of this paper
is [name not declassified] of the North East-South Asia Division, Office of Political Analysis.
It was coordinated with the Offices of Central Reference and Strategic Research and the
National Intelligence Officer for the Near East and South Asia. Comments and queries
are welcome and may be directed to the Chief, Afghanistan Task Force [less than 1 line
not declassified]. Research was completed on 30 December 1979. ([classification marking
not declassified])”

Afghanistan
The most important Cabinet positions appear to have been given
to some of the least important men. The two Deputy Prime Ministers
and the Defense, Interior, Finance, and Foreign Ministers.2 [2 lines not
declassified]. Abdul Qader, Nur Ahmad Nur, and Mohammad Aslam
Watanjar have not been included in the Cabinet, although they are
members of the Revolutionary Council. [classification not declassified]
[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]
2 The memorandum identifies the Deputy Prime Ministers as Assadullah Sarwari
and Soltan Ali Keshtmand; the Minister of National Defense as Colonel Mohammad
Rafi; the Minister of Interior as Sayed Mohammed Gulabzoi; and the Foreign Minister as
Shah Mohammed Dost. The Minister of Finance was not identified in this memorandum.
Telegram 8730 from Kabul, December 31, identified the Minister of Finance as Abdul
120.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, December 31, 1979
USSR-Afghanistan: Situation report
The USSR may now have more than 30,000 troops in Afghanistan,
and the total could go even higher.
Elements of a motorized rifle division that began arriving on Friday
in the Kabul area from the USSR—probably Termez—are camping at
the base of the mountains just north of the capital. The rest of the
division evidently is on the way. [1 line not declassified] a regimental-
sized unit with over 500 vehicles on the highway between Termez
and Kabul.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only.
The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The
article printed here was found in this form.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
There is also a report that in the west a convoy of Soviet equipment
crossed into Afghanistan from the Kushka area on Saturday. The con-
voy consisted of more than 500 vehicles, including tanks, and was
reportedly moving through Herat. Aerial reconnaissance was reported
south of that city, and helicopters were evacuating casualties, indicating
the Soviets had encountered resistance. At the same time, [1 line not
declassified] a motorized rifle division headquartered at Kizyl-Arvat
vacating its garrisons and traveling by road and rail in the direction
of Kushka.
If the Soviet motorized rifle divisions from Termez and Kushka
and the additional airborne unit from Kokayty have indeed all moved
into Afghanistan, there are now more than 30,000 Soviet combat troops
in the country. If the division from Kizyl-Arvat also crosses the border,
the total could jump to between 40,000 and 45,000.
The Kabul area
Soviet forces in Kabul appear to be adopting a less conspicuous
profile. Armed Afghan irregulars are guarding many government
buildings, but the Soviets have secured key facilities and have set up
a defensive ring around the perimeter of the city.
Soviet military flights to Afghanistan are continuing but at reduced
levels. Most of the remaining flights are probably transporting supplies.
On Thursday and Saturday, several Soviet transports apparently car-
ried Soviet casualties to the USSR. [1 line not declassified] 250 Soviets
have been killed or injured in the fighting so far.
Afghan Army units in the capital reportedly have virtually disinte-
grated and other units southeast of Kabul apparently have turned on
Soviet forces. The U.S. Embassy in Kabul reports that there are also
rumors of growing resistance to the Soviet presence in other areas of
the country.
We have been unable to confirm Pakistani press reports that the
Soviets have been involved in counterinsurgency operations in north-
eastern Afghanistan. Insurgent activity throughout the country appears
to be at a low level.
Soviet commentary
The first major Soviet media commentary on events in Afghanistan,
which was carried by TASS yesterday, represents a significant escala-
tion of Soviet rhetoric against the US.
The TASS release, which previewed an article in today’s Pravda by
A. Petrov—a pseudonym indicating high-level government approval—
alleges that a “limited Soviet military contingent” has been sent to

Afghanistan
Afghanistan at the request of Kabul to help repel “armed interference
from the outside.”2
Elaborating on this theme, the article states that the regime in Kabul
was threatened by insurgents based in Pakistan who have received
“unlimited backing” from the US and China. It even claims that Egyp-
tian “specialists” have joined Chinese and American instructors in
training the insurgents.
US involvement with the insurgents, the article alleges, reflects the
efforts of “figures in Washington” to shore up a “strategic arc” in the
region, which was “cracked” by the Shah’s ouster.
2 Text of the December 30 TASS release is excerpted in Current Digest of the Soviet
It Sent a Limited Force to Help Afghans Repel Aggression,” New York Times, December
in Afghanistan, it was also the Soviets’ first acknowledgement of the invasion in Afghani-
stan. The Embassy in Kabul received the first diplomatic note from the new regime on
December 31, as reported in telegram 8730. The note read: “The Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan presents its compliments to the U.S.
Embassy in Kabul and has the honor to state: ‘On the evening of Jadi 6, 1358 (December
27, 1979), the usurping and tyrannical regime of Hafizullah Amin collapsed as a result
of corruption and anti-Khalq actions. In this sensitive moment, comprehending its grave
national and historic responsibility, the Revolutionary Council of the DRA took over
the ruling power of government and appointed Babrak Karmal as the General Secretary
of the Central Committee of the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA).”
The note stated that Karmal had declared Amin’s rule “obliterated forever” and identified
the 11 members of the new Presidium of the Revolutionary Council. (Carter Library,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
121.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 31, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Policy in Afghanistan (U)
There is an increasing tendency in the news media and around
town generally to make an analogy between Afghanistan and Vietnam.
In my view, this is simplistic and dangerous. While the situations do
share some similar characteristics—the danger of a protracted involve-
ment, for instance—there are important differences:
—logistics and transport: The US had to transport troops and materiel
over 5000 miles; the Soviets can move troops and materiel quickly over
short distances and across open borders.
—organization: The North Vietnamese had been fighting the war
for 25 years before the US became heavily involved. They had a well
organized, well disciplined army and underground; the Afghan tribes
have a history of insurgency, but they are not well organized and many
of their actions are uncoordinated—or at least have been until now.
—leadership: The North Vietnamese were led by a leader who was
generally regarded as a national hero, even in the South; at present no
such national leader has emerged in Afghanistan who can rally the
disparate tribes and provide cohesive, inspirational leadership.
—weapons and supplies: The North Vietnamese could count on out-
side aid and weapons in large quantities; this is not (yet) the case in
Afghanistan.
—political constraints: US was constrained by (1) disunity over its
goals; (2) its unwillingness to commit the forces needed to “win” the
war militarily; (3) a desire to accommodate its South Vietnamese ally.
The Soviet Union is under no such constraints. Having overthrown
Amin and installed their own puppet, who is completely beholden to
them, the Soviets are likely to commit the resources needed to neutral-
ize, if not defeat the insurgents, rapidly and in large number.
—role of the media: Vietnam was a “media event” and this had a
major impact on US domestic and international opinion, turning much
of it against the war and US involvement. This will not be the case in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General
sent to Brement, Thornton, Odom, Ermarth, Griffith, and Henze.

Afghanistan
Afghanistan. The Soviets will restrict access to the war by the press,
and there will be few film clips of Soviet soldiers setting fire to Afghan
huts or mopping up Moslem villages being flashed across TV screens
into Soviet living rooms—or for that matter across TV screens any-
where. This will minimize Soviet domestic and international criticism,
after the initial furor dies down. (C)
Nonetheless, the Soviets will not have an easy time in Afghanistan.
While Moscow will probably attempt to broaden the support for the
new government, Karmal is not likely to prove to be any more popular
than Amin was; indeed in the eyes of many Afghans he may be
regarded as worse, since he is clearly a creature of the Soviets. More-
over, the Soviets
—will face a hostile climate and terrain, which will make wiping
out the insurgents difficult;
—have difficulty transporting supplies once inside the country; this
too will hamper their efforts;
—lack experience in guerrilla warfare;
—will probably need to “Sovietize” the war because the regular
Afghan army is in no shape to defeat the guerrillas. (C)
The basic point is that, while the Soviets confront significant prob-
lems in Afghanistan and the prospect of deepening involvement, they
are not likely to face many of the constraints that the US faced in
Vietnam. They can be expected to move rapidly and in force to carry
out their goals, with little of the vacillation characterized by US efforts
in Southeast Asia. This will be a critical advantage. Whether it will be
enough remains to be seen and will depend to a large extent on
—the ability of the Afghan insurgents to coordinate their activities;
—our ability to work effectively with Pakistan and other countries
to aid the insurgents;
—our ability to keep up public awareness of Soviet actions and to
mobilize pressure against them within the Nonaligned and Moslem

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
122.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, December 31, 1979
SUBJECT
Pakistan and Afghanistan (U)
The attached cable from Hummel makes some very important
points.2 They are similar to the ones that I made in my memo to you
for last week’s PRC3 and need to be borne in mind. I would restate
the situation as follows: (C)
1. Whether we like it or not, the Paks do not see the situation as
we do. They think that they are doing us a favor in helping with covert
action or criticizing the Soviets about Afghanistan. In their view, we
are conducting superpower rivalry and they don’t think that we really
care about them. (S)
2. Certainly up until now, the only way that we could get them
mobilized in directions that we think are important has been by provid-
ing military equipment and (probably) security guarantees at a level
far beyond anything that I think is feasible here. That is why I had
hoped the PRC would look very hard at what would be involved. It
didn’t, and neither, apparently, did the NSC. What Vance offered—
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezin-
tion. In the top right corner, Brzezinski wrote to Thornton: “TT, we need to know what
Pakistan will need in terms of aid—and what it will take to get them to do what is
needed. ZB”
telegram, Hummel relayed the substance of his discussion with Shahi, December 29.
Shahi again rejected an immediate visit by Christopher (see footnote 3, Document 111)
and told Hummel that, in light of the Soviet intervention, Pakistan “needs indication”
of the extent to which the United States was willing to support Pakistan through political,
economic, and military means. Hummel reported Shahi was “very anxious” that the
United States not publicize the Pakistani response to Soviet troops in Afghanistan, and
was upset that Carter’s conversation with Zia (see Document 111) was publicized. (For
example, the conversation was reported by Don Oberdorfer in his article, “U.S. Affirms
mented that the amount of support Shahi would consider sufficient to mitigate risks
associated with perceived “collusion” with the United States would be too high; still,
Hummel advocated, “I hope we can have Wash decisions that put us in position of
offering substantial assistance so that we are seen to have offered support rather than
ignored Pak needs.”
3 See Document 102.

Afghanistan
and what we are still thinking about—is simply inadequate to motivate
the Paks.4 (S)
3. It is barely possible that the implications of the new situation
may sink in and the Paks will start changing their attitudes. But I don’t
think it is likely. (S)
4. There may be some possibility of getting better results by dealing
directly with Zia. This, however, is very hard to do. Even when the
President called him, he equivocated until he could consult with his
advisers. That means Agha Shahi who, I believe, has permanently
written the US off. He will undermine at every step whatever we hope
to accomplish with Zia. (S)
5. The main implication of all of this is that our chances of getting
Pakistani cooperation in a CIA program are really quite poor. This has
major implications for our objectives vis-a-vis the Soviets in Afghani-
stan, for there is no present alternative to cooperation with Pakistan.
Obviously a prime Soviet objective will be to cut off support coming
to the rebels from Pakistan. Here, again, if we have any chance, it is
through a strong private message from the President to Zia. (S)
6. The only way of getting to Zia directly and forcing him to give
his own answers is probably by a visit here. Even then, however, the
odds are against us. On foreign policy matters Zia seems to rely on
Shahi completely. And that is going to lead him to an accommodation
with the USSR. (S)
7. That off-chance would be the one positive value of the visit.
Aside from that, I wish the invitation had not been tendered. It is not
good for us to be identified too much with Zia, who is in bad trouble
politically at home. We may think that we are simply showing our
support for Pakistan. In Pakistan, however, it will be interpreted as
support for the unpopular Zia. Thus, on balance, I hope that we don’t
push this question of a visit. The ball is in his court, let it stay there. (S)
4 An apparent reference to Vance’s suggestion to increase P.L.–480 aid to Pakistan,
which he made during the National Security Council meeting on December 28. See
Document 107.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
123.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
28134. USSALTTWO. Subject: Afghanistan: Assessment of Soviet
Motives.
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Begin summary. This report, which elaborates the initial thoughts
on the Soviet move into Afghanistan which we reported in more
restricted channels, attempts to analyze both the immediate objectives
and the possible longer-range purposes behind the action.2 The obvious
immediate aim was to replace Amin with a ruler who might stand a
better chance of gaining popular support for the Marxist regime, thus
bringing the insurgency to an end. But this objective would not, in our
view, in and of itself have justified the Soviet move, given the seeming
risk to other Soviet foreign policy interests. We assume, then, that
other factors also heavily influenced the decision. Among these, in
descending order of probability, would be:
—fear that hatred of Amin and growing insurgency might eventu-
ally produce the collapse of the Marxist regime—a development to be
prevented at whatever cost because of its potential impact on East-
ern Europe;
—similarly, a concern that defeat of the regime by forces of Islamic
fundamentalism, which if combined with similar forces in Iran and
Pakistan would have potentially dangerous implications for the Soviet
Union’s own Moslem population;
—a desire to construct a “cordon sanitaire” around China—based
on Soviet control over Mongolia, Indochina, and Afghanistan and con-
tinuing good relations with India; and
—at a later point in time, the beginning of a drive toward the
Indian Ocean through Pakistan, or possibly toward the Persian Gulf
through the Baluchi area of Iran.
Secret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to London and USNATO.
Also sent for information to Warsaw, Amman, Baghdad, Beijing, Belgrade, Berlin, Bonn,
Bucharest, Cairo, Damascus, Islamabad, Jidda, Kabul, Leningrad, New Delhi, Paris,
Prague, Rome, Sofia, Tel Aviv, Tokyo, Beirut, U.S. Mission Geneva, U.S. Mission Berlin,
and USDel MBFR Vienna.
ment 101.

Afghanistan
We find no credible evidence of a split within the Soviet leadership
on the decision to move into Afghanistan. They must have agreed that
many outside factors combined to make the time propitious for the
move: increasing doubt about the SALT treaty, the NATO theater
nuclear force decision, the crisis in U.S.-Iranian relations, and the termi-
nation of U.S. military aid to Pakistan, among others. While we are not
prepared to conclude that the Afghan decision represents a permanent
turning away from the policy of détente, we believe that, given the
present slump in U.S.-Soviet relations, the Soviets concluded that no
real progress was to be expected in any case in the months ahead.
End summary.
3. There is much which argued against the Soviet armed interven-
tion into Afghanistan. The move seems likely to worsen Moscow’s
relations with Pakistan, Iran, and other Muslim states, not to mention
China. It will seriously strain the very fabric of the policies of détente
with the West and especially with the U.S., jeopardizing in the process
the SALT treaty. There is even the danger of becoming bogged down
in an Indochina-type guerilla war (though we recognize that parallels
with Vietnam are very imperfect).
4. Why, then, did they do it, when the potential damage to Soviet
foreign policy interests was so great? We do not pretend to have the
answer, other than to make the perhaps obvious observation that the
Soviets must have considered all these risks and concluded that the
potential benefits outweighed them.
Soviet objectives
5. The Soviets apparently have multiple objectives. The most imme-
diate one would be related to the situation within Afghanistan itself,
with Moscow moving to remove Amin and carry out its long-held
plans for broadening the regime’s base, installing a leader who can
gain more popular support for the DRA in hopes of quelling the insur-
gency. Their massive troop support suggests that they are prepared to
launch a major offensive themselves against the insurgents if Babrak
is unable to gain that needed support from the population.
6. Beyond the immediate situation, however, we would imagine
several ideological and geopolitical considerations which entered into
the decision. While some of them are in the worst-case category, they
are perhaps worth mentioning as an aid to analysis:
—Amin’s lack of popular support and inability to come to terms
with the Muslim insurgency risked the eventual fall of a Marxist-
oriented government from power. Once installed in an area contiguous
to the Soviet Union, no “Socialist” regime has fallen from power in
recent times; the Soviets may have determined not to allow Afghanistan
to become the exception, fearing the impact of such an “ideological”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
defeat on the nationalist aspirations of the other Communist countries
in the Socialist Bloc.
—Potentially more dangerous than a simple defeat of the DRA
would have been its defeat by forces of Islamic fundamentalism, which
pose a threat to the Soviets not only in ideological terms but also in
geopolitical terms. The outcome of the present turmoil in Iran is far
from clear, and despite the loss of U.S. influence in that country the
present trends are not necessarily favorable for the Soviet Union. The
move into Afghanistan could have been intended to forestall similar
chaos there. A prevailing tide of Muslim fundamentalism on the Soviet
Union’s southern borders could well be perceived by the Soviet leader-
ship as providing the catalyst for arousing at some future time national-
istic aspirations in the six Soviet Central Asian republics with their
population of some 50 million Muslims.
—The China factor must also be considered, given Soviet paranoia
about the long-term threat from China. It seems to us that Chinese fears
of a Soviet encirclement strategy are overdrawn, yet the concurrent
strengthening of Moscow’s position in Indochina with the fresh move
into Afghanistan will no doubt strengthen Chinese concerns. Taken
together with the existing Soviet military presence in Mongolia and
the continued wooing of India, the makings of a “cordon sanitaire”
around China are present. We would see the Afghan move, if it is
directed against China, as basically defensive, but we cannot exclude
the possibility that the Afghan operation is a dry run for an eventual
move into Sinkiang. At the moment, however, we would place this as
very low on the scale of probabilities.
—A key question is whether the Soviet action will be self-contained
in Afghanistan, or whether there are broader objectives. There may be
only a plan to help the Afghanis seal off the border with Pakistan, to
prevent use of Pak territory by rebel reinforcements. But some Pakistani
officials have long feared the revival of historic Russian ambitions to
move toward the Arabian Sea through Afghanistan and Pakistan.
—The turmoil in Iran, as well as the crisis in U.S.-Iranian relations
might even tempt the Soviets to move through Afghanistan and Iranian
Baluchistan to the Straits of Hormuz, thus establishing a controlling
position on access to the Persian Gulf and Iranian oil. Should Iran
begin to disintegrate into autonomous regions, a Soviet move into the
Kurdish areas, thereby extending Soviet Azerbaijan, might also be
tempting. Again, we consider such moves improbable in the near term,
but we are unable to dismiss the possibility altogether.
Timing, decision-making and the leadership factor
7. We assume that the Soviet leadership, in preparing the Afghan
operation, considered the overall shape of their foreign relations. We
assume further that, while contingency plans may have existed earlier,

Afghanistan
planning for the operation began in earnest about a month before it
was carried out—i.e., during the latter part of November. At that time,
the Soviets may have perceived:
—That SALT II was at death’s door anyway.
—That prospects for obtaining MFN treatment from the U.S. in
the near future were non-existent.
—That NATO was not going to heed Soviet warnings about the
dangers of the impending decision on long-range theater nuclear forces.
—That the U.S. administration was committed to a defense build-
up, whether or not SALT was ratified.
—That the U.S. was actively expanding its military presence in the
region and, if it succeeded in obtaining basing for the Rapid Deploy-
ment Force, would be in a better position later to oppose something
like the Afghan invasion than it is right now.3
—That the present slump in U.S.-Soviet relations would last at
least until after U.S. elections, with or without Afghanistan.
—That the just-ended first round of Sino-Soviet negotiations
showed that relations with China were no better, but also no worse.
—That the crisis in U.S.-Iranian relations would tend to minimize
the impact of Iran’s negative reaction and, at a minimum, prevent Iran
from turning to closer relations with the U.S. in reaction to the move
into Afghanistan.
—That the U.S. cut-off of military aid to Pakistan would leave
Pakistan little alternative but to accommodate to the Soviet move.
—That the weakness of India’s caretaker government would mini-
mize the likelihood of a sharp shift in Indian foreign policy as a result
of the Soviet move, while the good prospects for Mrs. Gandhi’s return
to power give the Soviets hope for continued good relations with India
over the longer run.
8. In sum, the world scene as viewed from the Kremlin offered no
overriding deterrent to moving now. Action would stave off future
dangers, and circumstances combined to minimize the losses. Yet tak-
ing this major step still would have been a hard-fought decision, and
it is tempting to speculate that one or another constellation of leaders
in the Politburo gained the upper hand and decided to move on their
own. There is, in fact, speculation in Moscow that runs along the lines
that Brezhnev would not have concurred had he been in the thick of
3 Carter established the Rapid Deployment Force under PD/NSC–18, “U.S. National
Nation, that he would direct the Secretary of Defense to “enhance the capacity” of the
Rapid Deployment Force. (Public Papers: Carter 1979, Book II, p. 1804)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
decision-making in recent weeks, given his presumed concern with
U.S.-Soviet relations and SALT.
9. We have no credible evidence, however, that this was not a
collective decision wholeheartedly adopted by the entire Politburo.
Brezhnev has been active at least on-and-off of late, and so far as we
know the ailing Kosygin is the only member of the top leadership who
would have been unable to take part in planning for the Afghan
operation.
10. If our theory is correct, then along with the Afghan decision
the leadership must also have taken some basic decisions on such
matters as détente and the shape of U.S.-Soviet relations in the immedi-
ate future. While we are not prepared as yet to conclude that this
represents a permanent Soviet turn away from the policy of détente,
it rather plainly suggests that Moscow does not expect any real progress
in relations with the U.S. in the months ahead.
Watson
124.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, a cover page, and a security informa-
tion page.]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
attached to the cover page reads: “Information as of 16 October 1979 has been used in
preparing the major part of this report. Information concerning the recent coup is reflected
but does not change the basic judgments. The author of this paper is [name not declassified],
Center for the Analysis of Personality and Political Behavior, Office of Scientific Intelli-
gence. It has been coordinated with the Offices of Political Analysis, Geographic and
Cartographic Research, and Central Reference, the Directorate of Operations, and the
National Intelligence Officer for the Near East and South Asia.” Also attached to the
cover page is a handwritten note that reads: “[name not declassified]: This is super—I
want to get it to Pres., etc., ASAP,” signed “Stan Turner.” Turner forwarded the assess-
ment under a January 3 covering memorandum to Carter, Mondale, Vance, Brown, and
Brzezinski, in which he wrote: “I believe it provides excellent background perspective
to political events in Afghanistan today.” (Ibid.)

Afghanistan
Tribalism Versus Communism in Afghanistan:
The Cultural Roots of Instability
([classification marking not declassified])
Overview
The execution of Hafizullah Amin and the installation of the more
pliable Babrak Karmal as President of Afghanistan, will not signifi-
cantly alter the prospects for prolonged insurgency. Despite increased
Soviet aid, the new regime will be a government under siege, contin-
ually attacked by fiercely independent, but poorly organized, Pashtun
tribesmen. ([classification marking not declassified])
The Communist regime in Afghanistan and the Afghan tribesmen
have been in conflict since the Communist seizure of power in 1978.
Although the tribesmen are not unified, they will continue to keep the
countryside in a state of instability. The regime, despite only a thin
layer of public support, probably will maintain control of the major
cities. Indeed, the Soviets and their puppet regime are likely to face
the same long resistance that an earlier generation experienced when
the Soviets required a decade to subdue the Muslim populations of
Central Asia. ([classification marking not declassified])
For thousands of years, the topography and Afghan cultural mores
militated against the formation of a strong central government and even
against a strong union of the tribes themselves. The only characteristics
common to the tribesmen are martial values, an egalitarian tradition,
a theologically unsophisticated version of Islam, and a distrust for
authority. ([classification marking not declassified])
Successful Afghan monarchs mustered popular support by draw-
ing upon the people’s fears of invasion by a foreign power with an
alien religion and bent tradition to their side through the skillful exploi-
tation of such traditional values as defense of personal and tribal honor,
attachment to religion, and intense dislike of foreigners. ([classification
marking not declassified])
In contrast, the Communist revolutionaries have tried to overturn
tradition rather than adapt it, to eliminate local autonomy, to destroy
the elite class by confiscating its land, and to undermine the authority
of the Muslim religious establishment. These actions have aroused the
resistance of the fiercely independent Afghans. The present no-win
situation—persistent insurgency and fragile Communist control of
urban areas—is expected to continue. ([classification marking not
declassified])
[Omitted here are a table of contents, a map, and the body of the
assessment.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
125.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, January, 1980
[Omitted here are a cover page and a security information page.]
Iran: Views on Afghanistan ([classification marking not declassified])
Summary
The Soviet-supported coup in Afghanistan has further damaged
the already badly strained relations between Tehran and Kabul. After
a two-month hiatus, Iran has resumed its propaganda attacks on the
Kabul government, which it sees as a puppet of the Soviets and an
anti-Islamic force in the region. Soviet efforts to allay Iranian concern
about the coup apparently have failed; the Iranians have formally
condemned the Soviet military intervention.2 ([classification marking not
declassified])
Iran’s pro-Soviet Communist Tudeh Party, on the other hand, is
pleased by the changes in Kabul and hopes that the Soviets and Afghans
will give greater support to the Tudeh. ([classification marking not
declassified])
The secular leadership of the Iranian Government is unlikely in
the near term to shift from its policy of not supporting the Afghan
insurgents. Over time, however, it will be pressed to give more support
to the insurgents by Iran’s religious leadership. The religious leadership
is already providing some training and arms support for the rebels,
and this is likely to increase. ([classification marking not declassified])
The Soviet-inspired coup and the Soviet military intervention will
increase Iran’s concern about Soviet activities and intentions in Iran.
Tehran will avoid a serious strain in relations, however, because it
needs Soviet support in the UN. ([classification marking not declassified])
It is unlikely that the recent events in Afghanistan will encourage
Iran to be more forthcoming with the United States on the hostage
stan; An Intelligence Memorandum, PA 80–10003C. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. A typed note at the bottom of the page reads: “This paper
was prepared by [name not declassified] of the Office of Political Analysis. It was coordi-
nated with the National Intelligence Officer for the Near East and South Asia. Comments
and queries are welcome and may be addressed to the Chief, Iran Task Force, on [less
than 1 line and classification marking not declassified].
2 On December 29, the Iranian Government released an official statement declaring
the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan “a hostile act against Iran and all the Muslims
of the world.” (Doyle McManus, “Iran Protests, Tells Soviets to Pull Out Troops,” Los

Afghanistan
issue.3 Although some of Ayatollah Khomeini’s advisers may be
inclined to find a face-saving way out of the crisis because of the Soviet
action, Khomeini views both superpowers as anti-Islamic, expansionist
forces and will probably see little reason why the coup in Afghanistan
should require him to be less hostile to the United States. ([classification
marking not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]
3 For a contemporary analysis of the impact of the Soviet Union’s intervention in
Afghanistan on U.S. policy and the Iran hostage crisis, see, for example, Barry Rubin,
“American Relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran, 1979–1981,” Iranian Studies, vol.
126.
Letter From the Former Afghan Ambassador to the United
States (Malikyar) to President Carter1
Silver Spring, Maryland, January 2, 1980
Mr. President,
As former Afghanistan Ambassador to the United States for more
than a decade, I have been troubled a great deal as have the rest of
the world over the recent invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union.2
I can certainly appreciate the dilemma you are in Mr. President, but
as an Afghan, I can assure you sir that only strong retaliatory measures
could have any significant effect in stopping further Soviet aggression
in that vulnerable region of the world.
If the United States does not act decisively and immediately, there
is almost nothing to prevent the Russians from advancing into Iran,
Pakistan, India and ultimately the Persian Gulf. I, therefore, Mr. Presi-
dent humbly urge you to take the necessary strong action needed to
classification marking. Attached but not printed is a January 2 covering memorandum
from Malikyar to Brzezinski. Malikyar wrote: “Your support of this cause which has
worldwide implications would be greatly appreciated by the people of Afghanistan. My
prayers and thoughts are with the American people for the quick and safe release of
the American hostages.”
2 An unknown hand underlined the first portion of this sentence. Malikyar was

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
force a Soviet withdrawal and a return of independence, neutrality
and integrity to Afghanistan.
And if I may also suggest to you sir, it would be altogether proper
to form a task force consisting of former prominent Afghan officials
now residing in the United States as well as private American citizens
who are well acquainted with Afghanistan to assist you in evaluating
the current events in Afghanistan.3
Mr. President, I, for one, find it very difficult to idly sit by and not
be able to contribute to my country’s cause. It is also unimaginable for
me to see Afghanistan become another part of the Soviet block. It is
this very fear of loss of identity that has forced hundreds of thousands
of Afghans to seek refuge in neighboring Pakistan, there to regroup
and organize a counter force against the communist regime in their
homeland. But now their hopes of success against direct Russian army
have diminished, unless they receive substantial assistance and support
from the United States.
Mr. President, my prayers are with you and for the quick release
of the American hostages in Iran.
Respectfully,
Abdullah Malikyar4
3 No record of a task force, per Malikyar’s suggestion, was found.
4 Malikyar wrote by hand “Former Afghanistan Amb. to the U.S.” beneath his
signature.

Afghanistan
127.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Relevance of the Truman Doctrine to Current Situation (U)
As you consider options regarding the situation in Southwest Asia,
I would like to recall for you an earlier crisis which in my judgment
has some striking parallels with the present challenge we face in
Afghanistan, in that region and globally. I have in mind the events
which led up to the promulgation of the Truman Doctrine, announced
Truman’s message responded to what he perceived to be a clear and
present danger. It was the threatened collapse under Soviet pressure
of two countries which at the time were at the outer limits of American
consciousness—Greece and Turkey. Communist governments had
been established with the aid of Soviet troops throughout the Balkans.
Greece was in the midst of a civil war, instigated in the main by
communist-led insurgents. Concurrently, Moscow was putting pres-
sure on Ankara to revise the Montreaux Convention to prevent access
of non-Black Sea powers into the Black Sea, and had raised claims of
sovereignty against two areas in Turkey. (C)
All this in a region which prior to 1947 had been a British sphere
of influence of little or no strategic interest to the United States. Within
this country there was strong sentiment for a rapid U.S. disengagement
from all of Europe and a return to isolationism. Truman was also under
considerable pressure from a number of politicians, especially Henry
Wallace, who argued that the U.S. should undertake more strenuous
efforts to cooperate with Moscow. (C)
Against this background, the United States received an urgent
message in late February 1947 that the British intended to cease aid to
Greece and Turkey within six weeks.3 The issue, as Truman, Acheson
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1980. Confidential. Sent for information. Carter
initialed “C” in the top right corner. The memorandum was attached as Tab I to a
January 2 memorandum from Blackwill and Larrabee to Brzezinski recommending that
memo to Pres,” at the bottom of the page.
2 For the text of Truman’s address to Congress, see Public Papers: Truman, 1947, pp.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
and Marshall prophetically realized was not simply the question of
aiding Greece and Turkey, although that was a startling enough idea
at the time. They also were among the first in the post World War II
period to recognize the importance of buttressing regional security and
sending Moscow an unmistakable signal that the United States was
determined to protect not only old vital interests but new ones as well,
and to resist Soviet pressure. (U)
Truman’s message was a turning point in U.S. foreign policy. Spe-
cifically he:
—announced that it was the policy of the United States to support
free peoples who were resisting attempted subjugation by armed
minorities or by outside pressures;
—requested Congress to provide authority for assistance to Greece
and Turkey in the amount of $400 million;
—asked Congress to authorize the detail of American civilian and
military personnel to Greece and Turkey to assist in the task of recon-
struction and to help supervise the use of U.S. financial and material
support;
—asked Congress for authority to provide for the instruction and
training of select Greek and Turkish personnel; and
—asked Congress to provide authority to permit the rapid and
effective use in terms of needed commodities, supplies and equipment,
of any funds that they authorized. (U)
(The relevant excerpt from Truman’s speech is at Tab A.)4
This speech marked the beginning of one of the most creative
periods of U.S. diplomacy. Most importantly, it signalled the intention
of the U.S. to abandon its past hesitancy and to assume a more activist
role internationally. Without this rapid and resolute action on our part,
the Soviet Union would have continued to increase its pressure on
Turkey and in Greece, and the evolution of Southern Europe and the
Middle East would undoubtedly have been quite different. (U)
Today we face a Soviet challenge in an area of the world which is
only a little more unfamiliar to most Americans than were Greece and
Turkey in 1947. As in 1947, the West looks to us because only we can
provide the necessary leadership and resources to turn back the Soviet
threat to our interests in the region and beyond. As in 1947, a U.S. public
formerly weary of war and international responsibility is increasingly
ready to respond to a call for a more active American role in the world
to protect our vital interests, as the President defines them. There are,
however, two sharp differences between the present Soviet challenge
4 Attached but not printed.

Afghanistan
in South Asia and the threat in 1947. The Soviet intervention in the
present case is both more blatant and more brutal than in 1947, and
the Gulf is unquestionably more vital to Western interests today than
were Greece and Turkey 30 years ago. (C)
128.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Presidential Decisions on Pakistan, Afghanistan and India (S)
The following decisions were made by the President as a result of
the PRC Meeting of December 27 and the NSC Meeting of December
28 and should be implemented:2
Afghanistan
1. Our ultimate goal is the withdrawal of Soviet troops from
Afghanistan. Even if this is not attainable, we should make Soviet
involvement as costly as possible and should use the events in Afghani-
stan as a rallying point for our policies in the area.
2. We should push these objectives vigorously, going to the United
Nations if necessary. It would be preferable, however, for other coun-
tries to take the lead in the UN.
3. Messages should be sent to our NATO Allies, China and key
leaders in the UN and Non-Aligned Movement, drawing their attention
to the events in Afghanistan and calling for appropriate responses.
4. We will not link the Soviet action in Afghanistan to SALT. At
the same time, however, we will not permit our interest in SALT to
deter us from speaking and acting forcefully.
5. We will send public and private messages to the Soviets, citing
the unacceptability of their behavior, the threat to the peace posed by
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
were sent to Brown and Turner.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
their actions, and their violation of the principles of behavior we agreed
Pakistan
1. We are prepared to send a high-level mission to Pakistan, headed
by Deputy Secretary Christopher, to consult on the new situation in
the region.
2. Military sales will be resumed and facilitated.
3. We shall ask the Saudis to assist on financing military purchases
by Pakistan.
4. Two GEARING-class destroyers will be provided to Pakistan
expeditiously.
assistance.
6. Additional assistance will be provided to help Pakistan deal
with the Afghan refugee problem.
7. We will reaffirm our nuclear policy towards Pakistan and make
clear the legislative restrictions. We will, however, urge the Pakistanis
to put the problem aside for solution later while we deal with the
Soviet-Afghan problem. (S)
India
1. A high-level mission will be sent to India following the Indian
elections.
2. Ambassador Gerard Smith should provide a memorandum to
the President before we move to approve the pending license for supply
of fuel to the Tarapur reactor or submit the second Indian request to
Zbigniew Brzezinski

Afghanistan
129.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, January 2, 1980
USSR-AFGHANISTAN: Situation report
We estimate that as many as 40,000 Soviet troops were in Afghanistan
as of yesterday.
It now appears that units from two airborne divisions based in western
USSR participated in the coup in Kabul and that a third airborne division at
Fergana sent units to the Salang Pass, Bagram, and to major provisional
[provincial] capitals in central and western Afghanistan. The motorized rifle
division from Termez is still deployed in and around Kabul and elements of
the motorized rifle division from Kushka were observed in yesterday’s [less
than 1 line not declassified] of Shindand Airfield, south of Herat.
On Monday, a motorized rifle division located in the Central Asian
Military District was in the early stages of preparations for leaving its garri-
sons.2 This division is normally in a high degree of readiness and could be
preparing for deployment to the Afghan border. The motorized rifle division
at Kizyl-Arvat that began vacating its garrison on Friday is now probably
at Kushka.
[1 line not declassified] yesterday showed Soviet tactical fighter aircraft
at two Afghan airfields; a MIG–21 Fishbed squadron was at Bagram and two
SU–17 Fitter squadrons were at Shindand.
Meanwhile, about 25 Long Range Aviation TU–16 Badger medium bomb-
ers may have flown from the western USSR to Mary Northeast Airfield last
Friday, bringing to at least five the number of regiments that have sent aircraft
to the Turkestan Military District since early December. A bomber deployment
of this magnitude to the southern USSR is unusual and appears related to
developments in Afghanistan.
Occupation forces
The government and the Soviets are clearly concerned about the loyalty
of Afghanistan’s armed forces.
Soviet forces have apparently completely disarmed Afghan soldiers in
Kabul, and some Afghan political officers stationed at Bagram Airbase have
been ordered arrested.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The
full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The article
printed here was found in this form.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
The Soviets have sustained some additional casualties in clashes with
Afghan Army forces. Over the weekend, Soviet helicopters evacuated wounded
from Shindand back to the USSR.
Some anti-Soviet incidents have also occurred among the civilian popula-
tion. On Monday, large groups of armed residents burned shops in Qandahar
and demonstrated against the government. The Afghan commander there used
tanks to disperse the crowds.
Sporadic fighting between the insurgents and the Afghan Army has
continued throughout the country, with the rebels exerting heavy pressure
on government forces in the northeast and initiating new fighting in the
southwest. Soviet forces may have conducted some clearing operations north
of Kabul on Monday, but contact between the Soviets and the rebels has
apparently been limited.
Foreign commentary
The new Afghan Government has been trying to justify the Soviet
intervention by echoing Moscow’s charges of US interference in Afghan
internal affairs.
Moscow, for its part, has been saying that US offers of military
assistance to Pakistan demonstrate Washington’s intention to continue
supporting Afghan insurgents, but it has issued no additional authori-
tative statements.
Conservative Persian Gulf states, with Saudi Arabia in the lead,
have issued strong condemnations of the Soviet action. Several states
have underscored their sympathy for the Afghan insurgents as fel-
low Muslims.
Although Iraq has not issued any formal response, Baghdad is
clearly uneasy over the latest Soviet use of force. One senior Baath official
compared the Soviet action to US involvement in Vietnam and said that
ultimately Afghan resistance would lead the USSR to withdraw. Baghdad’s
reaction, however, is likely to be colored by its deep suspicion of US
intentions in the region and its preoccupation with its deteriorating
relations with Iran.
Reactions elsewhere in the Middle East have been along generally
predictable lines. Syria, Lebanon, and the PLO have not commented,
while Egypt and other moderate states have denounced the Soviets.
China on 30 December issued a government statement—used only
infrequently by Beijing—that called the Soviet action a threat to “peace
and security in Asia and throughout the world,” and a Vice Foreign
Minister told the Soviet Ambassador that the intervention posed “a

Afghanistan
threat to China’s security.”3 The Chinese are probably most concerned
about the effect the Soviet action will have on Pakistan, China’s ally.
India’s acting Prime Minister has expressed “deep concern” about
the situation in Kabul but has also voiced “grave concern” over possible
new US arms deliveries to Pakistan.4 Indira Gandhi, a leading candidate
to become prime minister again following elections this week, was
even less critical of the Soviets. More authoritative statements can be
expected from New Delhi once a new government is installed.
3 The full text of the Chinese statement was relayed in telegram 9483 from Beijing,
Indian Prime Minister Charan Singh’s meeting with the Soviet Ambassador, December
31, during which Singh asked that the Soviet Union withdraw its troops from Afghanistan.
meeting with Coon in Washington, the Chargé of the Indian Embassy delivered an
official Indian statement registering India’s grave concern over the U.S. decision to lift
its arms embargo against Pakistan. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
130.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
SCC Meeting on Soviet Forces in Afghanistan (S)
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Deputy Secretary Warren
David Aaron
Christopher
NSC
Defense
William E. Odom
Secretary Harold Brown
Marshall Brement
Deputy Secretary W. Graham
Claytor
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
took place in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
CIA
Deputy Director Frank Carlucci
JCS
Admiral Thomas Hayward
Lt. General John Pustay
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
CIA reported that about 40,000 Soviet troops are now in Afghani-
stan. They are encountering some resistance. The Afghan army is
shrinking rapidly through desertions. The rebel tribes will retreat in the
mountains and continue resistance, probably increasing in the spring.
Thus, the insurgency will continue, and Soviet forces will be the main
source of the counterinsurgency effort. (S)
CIA also reported that Egypt is sending equipment to Pakistan to
be supplied to the Afghanistan insurgents, and Saudi Arabia has agreed
to contribute $4 million. (S)
It was asserted in the discussion that the degree of resistance in
Afghanistan will depend upon two factors: first, the size of the support
received covertly through Pakistan, and second, the degree of Soviet
pressure on Pakistan to block this supply. (S)
CIA Resources—It was agreed that [less than 1 line not declassified]
is far too small and needs rapid expansion. CIA was directed to present
its request for an increase and also obtain OMB’s written objections
which may then be forwarded to the President for a decision.2 (S)
Aid to Pakistan—Pakistan’s ability to support the insurgency and
to resist Soviet pressures, it was agreed, will be highly dependent on
U.S. assistance and commitment. It was argued that the small support
we can now promise Pakistan will be more confusing than reassuring
because of the publicity about changing U.S. policy. It is essential,
therefore, to address the non-proliferation issue with the Congress and
find a satisfactory way to make an exception in the Pakistani case. It
was agreed that this matter should be discussed at the National Security
Council meeting today and a decision taken on whether to seek an
amendment to the law or to seek Pakistani assurances sufficient to
certify Pakistan’s intentions on nuclear proliferation to the Con-
Christopher’s Trip to the NAC—Warren Christopher gave a brief
report on his impressions from the NAC meeting.4 He added that
Japanese participation would be useful. He also argued that we need
2 See Document 151.
3 See Document 135.

Afghanistan
a standing mechanism for coordinating any joint actions with the Allies
which may be taken in response to the Soviet intervention in Afghani-
stan. States are more likely to support actions as a group than alone
without the reassuring presence of other states in the group. (S)
NSC on the larger Strategic Questions Posed by Soviet Intervention in
Afghanistan—It was agreed to seek a meeting of the NSC later this
week to discuss the larger regional issues arising from Soviet actions
in Afghanistan as well as issues concerning our Allies in Europe and
131.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Czechoslovakia Revisited: Patterns and Lessons (U)
While there are obvious differences between the Soviet intervention
in Czechoslovakia in 1968 and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, in
assessing the risks the Soviets were probably influenced at least in part
by their experience in Czechoslovakia, particularly world reaction. It
may be useful, therefore, to briefly review developments in the post-
invasion period for insights into Soviet attitudes and possible diplo-
matic moves in the future.2 (C)
In my view there are several aspects of the post-invasion period
which are important in the present context:
1. The sobering impact on Eastern Europe. The invasion not only halted
the deterioration of the situation in Czechoslovakia but had a sobering
impact on all of East Europe. This was particularly true of Romania
and Yugoslavia. While they condemned the invasion, they also were
more cautious for several years thereafter in undertaking initiatives
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Outside
the System File, Box 45, Afghanistan Invasion: U.S./Allied Relations, Olympics, Grain
Embargo: 1/80. Confidential; Outside System. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote:
“agree, ZB” in the top right corner, and drew an arrow pointing to the edge of the page.
See footnote 7, below.
2 For documentation on the U.S. response to the Soviet intervention in Czechoslova-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
that might irritate the Soviets and showed a distinct interest in fostering
a limited improvement of relations with Moscow. The Soviets probably
calculated that the invasion of Afghanistan would have an analogous
effect, not just in Eastern Europe but in some other countries bordering
on Afghanistan.
2. The rapid dissipation of public indignation in the West. While most
countries reacted with shock to the invasion, it proved difficult to
maintain public indignation over a sustained period of time. “Normal-
ization” and the retention of Soviet troops in Czechoslovakia soon
became a fact of life, and a year after the invasion the West was actively
engaged in detente diplomacy.
3. Moscow’s continued interest in detente with the West. Contrary to
the expectations of many, the invasion of Czechoslovakia did not sound
the death knell of detente, but proved to be, as Michel Debrey accurately
predicted at the time, only “a detour on the road to detente.”3 In fact,
one of the most striking features of the post-invasion period is how
quickly Moscow moved to revive the strands of its detente diplomacy
left dangling at the time of the invasion.
—In his October 3 speech to the UNGA, Gromyko explicitly called
attention to Moscow’s desire for improved relations with the West,
especially the United States, and announced his government’s willing-
ness to resume the renunciation of force talks with the FRG.4
—In November Kosygin signalled Moscow’s interest in an early
start of the SALT talks during a visit to Moscow by former Secretary
of Defense McNamara and Senators Gore and Pell.5
—By mid-spring 1969, with the publication of the communique at
the end of the Warsaw Pact meeting in Budapest (March 17), the Soviet
campaign for detente was in full swing.
—In July in a speech to the Supreme Soviet, Gromyko signalled
Moscow’s desire to
1. Begin SALT Talks
2. Begin discussions on Berlin
this quote was not found.
4 Excerpts from Gromyko’s speech were printed in the New York Times, October 4,
5 The visit, November 18, was reported by Anatole Shub in “Sens. Gore and Pell
Reach Moscow Amid Signs of Shifting Soviet Trends,” Washington Post, November 19,
1968, p. A17. World Bank President and former Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara,
met with Kosygin a week earlier. A report on their meeting is printed in Foreign Relations,

Afghanistan
3. Resume negotiations with the FRG on a renunciation of force
treaty.6
Thereafter, detente was off and running, with the West in hot
pursuit.
In short, the Soviet intervention only temporarily set back Soviet
detente efforts, while at the same time it allowed the Soviet Union to
arrest the deterioration of the situation in Czechoslovakia, which if it
had continued, would have had serious consequences not only for
Soviet interests in Czechoslovakia, but in East Europe as a whole. (U)
In analyzing the diplomatic costs of any intervention in Afghani-
stan, the Soviets probably concluded that, as with Czechoslovakia,
world indignation would be great for a few months, but that this
concern would diminish rapidly and six to eight months later they
would be able to conduct business as usual—especially if they moved
to stamp out the insurgency swiftly and forcefully. At the same time,
they probably calculated that with US-Soviet relations at a low ebb,
SALT in limbo, and an election coming up, they had little to lose, and
that there was no prospect for a significant change in bilateral relations
until after January 1981 anyway. Better to take unpleasant action now,
and get it over with than be forced to intervene later, when such action
might seriously impede chances for an improvement in relations. (C)
In sum, Soviet actions in the period immediately following the
invasion of Czechoslovakia suggest that Moscow will probably not
abandon its detente efforts, but rather resume them after a sufficient
interval has elapsed. However, as Fritz has argued, their incentive to
do this will be greater if we take rapid and resolute action. If we move
swiftly and decisively to meet the Soviet challenge, we may be able to
preserve the basis for a balanced policy toward the USSR over the long
run. If we don’t, Moscow’s appetite is likely to increase with the eating,
regional insecurity is likely to grow to the detriment of US interests,
and the chances of any meaningful cooperation with the USSR will be
destroyed for years to come.7 (C)
Document 65.
7 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this paragraph and
wrote: “agree” beside it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
132.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Will the Soviets Succeed in Afghanistan? (U)
There is a lot of loose talk around the State Department and else-
where, reflected in the Oberdorfer piece this morning, suggesting that
Afghanistan is “the Soviet Vietnam.”2 This is whistling in the dark and
the motivation for at least some of this whistling is to provide a rationale
for tepid action by the US in response to the Soviet invasion. If the
Soviets are going to learn their lesson on the ground in Kabul—so goes
the logic of the argument—then there is no important reason for us to
pay too large a price in terms of overall US-Soviet relations to show
them that this was a wrong decision. (S)
However, unless General Pavlovski does not know his business
(and I strongly doubt this), the Soviets should have the Afghan situation
cleared up in a matter of months. This will require:
a. Control of Kabul and all major population centers;
b. Control of major roads;
c. Control of the major passes between Afghanistan and Paki-
stan; and
d. Effective restriction on the ability of the outside world to obtain
solid information on the insurgency (control of the press is vital). (S)
Given the above, it will be possible for the Babrak regime to declare
the end of the insurgency and to “prove” it by inviting selected outside
observers to see for themselves that the country is secure and that “the
people” support the government. This should be no trick at all for a
major army. It is generally forgotten that the US Army cleared out
South Vietnam. In 1971, for example, the entire country was “pacified,”
and it was possible to visit every one of the 44 provincial capitals—
day or night. If we had shown the ability or inclination to stay in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
Thornton, Sick, Odom, Albright, Schecter, Henze, Griffith, Larrabee, Ermarth, and
Hunter. Brzezinski wrote: “I agree” at the top right of the memorandum. An unknown
2 See Don Oberdorfer, “The Making of a Soviet Coup,” Washington Post, January

Afghanistan
Vietnam with forces roughly the size of that we had there in 1971 for
an indefinite period (a commitment of the kind which the Soviets are
obviously ready to make in Afghanistan), then we would clearly have
“won” in Vietnam. (S)
In sum, the war aims of the Soviets in Afghanistan are clear, limited,
and achievable in short order. All decisions that we make have to be
based on this supposition. My fear is that Afghanistan will not be the
Soviet Vietnam; that it will be the Soviet Entebbe.3 (S)
3 A reference to the successful hostage rescue operation conducted at Entebbe
Airport, Uganda, by the Israel Defense Forces against Palestinian hijackers, July 4, 1976.
Time magazine declared it “one of the most daring, spectacular rescues in modern times.”
133.
Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
NSC on Afghanistan (U)
Despite the obvious strategic and historic importance of the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, there will probably be a tendency to deal with
the event in isolation. This will focus debate on such issues as 1) how
to impose political costs on the USSR, 2) should we increase support
to the Afghan insurgents. (S)
To combat that tendency we need to articulate an understanding
of the broader crisis and a strategy for dealing with it. Because it so
illuminates the weight of Soviet land combat power in the north and
Soviet willingness to use it in the most cynical way, the invasion sharply
increases the prospect of eventual Soviet military domination of the
greater Middle East and US exclusion from the region, except perhaps
from Israel. Next we shall very probably see civil strife in Iran with
direct Soviet involvement, a PDRY take-over of North Yemen, increased
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security,
Ermarth, Box 1, Afghanistan. Secret; Outside the System. Sent for information.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Soviet efforts to destabilize Turkey and Pakistan, and intense Soviet
pressure on other states in the region to line up with Soviet interests. (S)
The result after several years could be a pattern in the Middle East
and South Asia in which most of the region’s states are either Soviet
vassals (on the model of Afghanistan) or willing members of a Soviet-
dominated security system because it seems the safer course (a role
India has come close to playing in the past). (S)
US policy overall must be guided by the realization that this pros-
pect is now a fearsome probability, but not a certainty. We must there-
fore combat the probability as effectively as we can while at the same
time planning against its occurrence, without making it a self-fulfilling
prophecy. (S)
This will require of us a policy of deeply echeloned containment. In
contrast to the situation in the late-1940s and early 1950s, we cannot
credibly draw a defensive perimeter and threaten massive military
action if it is crossed. There are many perimeters, and some will inevita-
bly be crossed. (S)
The first layer, or forward echelon, of our policy must be a system-
atic effort to make Soviet involvement in Afghanistan, Yemen, Ethiopia,
and Indochina as costly and painful as possible. This will require exten-
sive support to Soviet opponents wherever we find them, not on the
basis of their worthiness or chances of winning, but on the basis of
their ability to tax Soviet power. We must proceed in this prepared
politically and psychologically for the certain event that some of these
clients will fail and that our support may after the fact be regarded as
having assured their demise. (S)
The second layer or echelon of policy should be a three-part effort
1) to fortify as best we can the key remaining buffer states of the area,
Turkey and Pakistan, with military and economic aid, 2) to win the
key “swing states” of Syria and Iraq away from Soviet influence, and
3) to increase our permanent military presence in the area, on-shore as
well as off-shore. (S)
With respect to the first two elements—fortifying the buffers and
winning over the “swingers”—the obvious complications of doing
these things become politically tolerable if one simply accepts the neces-
sity of trying to achieve them without a prior guarantee, or even high
likelihood, of success. (S)
We need on-shore military presence now mostly for political rea-
sons, to counter the political weight of Soviet military power in the
north and to show that we have the nerve to push through the evident
political obstacles to get on-shore presence. Over the next year a mini-
mum goal should be a tac air contingent and marine presence in Oman.
The risk of destabilizing Oman will simply have to be taken. Oman is

Afghanistan
no safer in our absence. But we should also start planning for a more
ambitious option of inserting the necessary land, air, and naval forces
into Saudi Arabia and the Gulf to protect Gulf oil against direct attack
or stoppage of oil flow through political side effects of events elsewhere.
All this, incidentally, calls for the prompt creation of the greater Middle
East command we have talked about. (S)
Another element of this second layer of policy we must examine
carefully, but not necessarily decide as yet is: under what conditions
of Soviet involvement in Iran would we be prepared to put US forces
into Iran? (S)
The third echelon of policy should be a composite of actions to
increase the level and tempo of our overall defense effort in the context
of more active measures to restore national economic health. It is prob-
ably not necessary to revisit the President’s FY81 defense budget deci-
sions now. But against the likely picture of the 1980s, the President’s
conception of adequate spending levels in the out years is almost
need now is a major (not a back room, or one-man) planning effort on
how to accomplish this acceleration. Undoubtedly other dimensions
of this “quasi-mobilization” policy will involve stiff oil import taxes,
tax changes to stimulate investment, somewhat looser monetary policy,
and perhaps price controls to manage inflation. (S)
The fourth echelon of policy will involve political efforts on a broad
front to get our NATO allies and Japan to do likewise in defense. (S)
The fifth policy echelon will involve the way we manage our direct
relationship with the USSR. The foregoing may suggest that we will
have foresworn any semblance of detente for the next decade. Quite
the contrary is the case. If we move swiftly to create the necessary
echelons of containment, we may preserve the basis for a balanced
policy toward the USSR in bilateral relations and in Europe. (S)
US resolve and effectiveness in the East-West competition will
actually restore in Moscow an incentive to try to deflect us by political
means, an incentive that has obviously declined in recent years. We
must move to place issues of regional stability at the center of our
bilateral relationship where the Soviets will be forced to deal with
them. Faced with the certainty of stiff competition on all fronts the
Soviets will, in time, at least show an interest in damping that competi-
tion in some regions. In the meantime, there is no reason why the
dialogue on strategic arms stabilization cannot in due course resume.
The Soviets will probably have an interest in it. The main obstacle to
our pursuing a nuanced or balanced policy now is the lack of confidence
at home, e.g., in the Senate, that we are adequately postured for the
competitive side of the relationship. (S)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Even at this late date, I doubt that the Soviets fully appreciate the
depth of the national about-face taking place here. They seem to believe
that US-Soviet relations can be returned to the uncertain mix of the
last several years after the elections, that the competitive elements of
our policy will be ineffective, and that our allies can be coaxed away
from us. Only US actions across all the policy echelons discussed above
will sober their outlook. But the chances for peace in the next five years
would be improved if somebody were to go to Moscow now, not to
negotiate or to debate, but to tell the Soviets exactly how we view
the period of struggle ahead. That person should have the absolute
confidence of the President and labor under no suspicions that his
mission is to rescue detente by acquiescing in Soviet power grabs.
You’re the only candidate with the credibility to do this. (S)
134.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Strategy for Dealing with Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan
You should seek to accomplish four things in response to the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan:
1. In Afghanistan. Make the costs to the Soviets very high, preventing
a successful Soviet consolidation of power there if possible.
2. In the Region. Accelerate a number of measures and take addi-
tional steps to build a security system in the Persian Gulf which can
repel Soviet power projection into the region.2
3. With our Allies. Assert leadership of the NATO Alliance and
Japan which provides a context and a rationale for our allies’ support-
ing actions.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General
unsigned copy.
2 Documentation on U.S. efforts to build a security framework in the Persian Gulf
area in the wake of the fall of the Shah of Iran and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula.

Afghanistan
4. With Broader Groups. Provide a context and rationale for broader
groups, such as the NAM, Moslem states, and the United Nations, to
take as much action as they are willing.
If the United States is clearly understood to be providing this
leadership, you will not only get the backing of our allies and many non-
aligned states, but you will also find an emerging domestic consensus
behind you that will support essential legislative and budgetary meas-
ures. Anything less will cause vacillation and accommodation by our
allies and by states within the Persian Gulf region.
This is not a crisis to be dealt with in a few weeks and with a series
of short-term measures. It is a test of the balance of power between
East and West. Many states will be forced to adjust their foreign policy
to the way in which you exercise the leadership of the West. The major
political problem for world affairs in the 1980s is the projection of
Soviet military power. Our sensitive intelligence indicates that many
political leaders in the world have come to see this clearly. If it appears
that the United States cannot stem Soviet power effectively through
diplomacy, alliances, and military means, then they will continue
accommodating to Moscow.
Afghanistan is not only the first country outside the Soviet bloc
which the Soviet armed forces have invaded since 1945. It is also the
seventh state since 1975 in which communist parties have come to power
with Soviet guns and tanks, with Soviet military advisors and assistance
(Vietnam, Angola, Laos, South Yemen, Cambodia, Ethiopia, and Afghan-
istan). Four of these takeovers have occurred since January 1977. We can
expect the number to rise considerably above the present seven unless
the U.S. can galvanize effective resistance.
The basic decision for you is whether to jeopardize a number of
your present policies (arms transfers, nuclear proliferation, and arms
control) and make a comprehensive and long-term response to check
Soviet power or to treat the Afghanistan affair as a minor episode in
the competitive-cooperative mix of U.S. Soviet Union relations, chastise
the Soviets, take several symbolic measures in retribution, and then
begin adjusting to the reality of Soviet power in Afghanistan and the
destabilization of the Persian Gulf region it portends. I strongly urge
you to make this a turning point at which you begin a sustained
and comprehensive strategy for preventing the expansion of Soviet
power projection.
The context for a major strategic turn is four classes of actions
involving three interrelated regions. The regions are the Persian
Gulf, Europe, and East Asia. We have an alliance system and military
deployments in two of these regions. We are only beginning to
create a significant military posture in the third, the Persian Gulf.
Actions in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan should be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
taken in the context of first, the specific needs of the Persian Gulf re-
gion and second, the interrelation of the three regions. The classes of
actions are:
—those with states in the Persian Gulf region;
—those involving our allies and the PRC;
—those purely bilateral in nature;
—those involving other groups of states (e.g. the NAM, the UN).
I. Actions for the Persian Gulf region.
They should be directed at three objectives: (a) a de facto security
system for the Saudi Arabian peninsula, (b) restoration of the “northern
tier” (Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan), and (c) support of the insurgents in
Afghanistan. They should include at a minimum:
—a direct offer of large military assistance to Pakistan;
—speed up of our acquisition of bases and a new unified military
command structure for the region;
—covert action in South Yemen and Eritrea as well as in Iran and
Afghanistan;
—an aid package for Turkey (funded almost entirely by Bonn and
perhaps other European allies) in exchange for Turkish help in Iran
and with Pakistan.
II. Actions involving our Allies.
These must provide a structure for allied support. Our well-estab-
lished NATO programs, the LTDP, LRTNF, and the commitment to
three percent increases in defense spending offer a military context.
Economic measures toward the Persian Gulf and Moscow offer another
context. Political steps provide a third context. The PRC, of course,
is a separate but important factor. These actions should include as
a minimum:
a. Military
—Belgian and Dutch unequivocal commitment to LRTNF.
—A renewed commitment to increase defense spending by three
percent, perhaps four percent for the next two years.
—Renewed efforts to bring Greece back into the NATO com-
mand system.3
—Military aid to Turkey.4

Afghanistan
b. Economic
—Major German financing for Turkey in exchange for Turkish
cooperation in Iran.5
—An EC review of East-West trade and credit policy.
—Renewed public commitment to COCOM.
—An early economic summit this spring to discuss coordination
of East-West trade and energy policy, particularly Allied support of
U.S. bilateral economic measures toward the USSR.
c. Political
—Ask all NATO states to reduce their level of diplomatic and
cultural relations with the USSR in a demonstrable fashion.6
—NATO and other U.S. military allies withhold participation in
the Moscow Olympics pending Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan.
—Ask the North Atlantic Council to recommend other political
steps for the alliance such as approaches to the neutrals, to Yugoslavia,
tactics in CSCE, and relations with China.
d. The PRC.
Harold Brown’s trip to China, of course, provides a ready basis
for discussing with the Chinese our policy toward Afghanistan. In
addition to the agenda he already has planned, Harold should seek
PRC views on actions that might be useful in connection with Afghani-
stan.7 The key choice with respect to the PRC is how far to go toward
a military relationship with China. I would recommend going no farther
now than to let the communique show that Afghanistan was discussed
as a threat to peace which may require actions by both parties. We
will not be backing off the Vice President’s disclaimer about seeking
a military tie, but we will make more vivid the specter of such a tie.
We can add substance to the specter by degrees later this year.
III. Bilateral Actions
They fall into the following categories: (a) political/diplomatic; (b)
arms control; (c) economic; (d) military. The following actions should
be spread over the next several weeks, maybe months, depending on
Soviet reactions:
a. Political/Diplomatic
—Reduce social participation at Soviet embassy functions world-
wide for the next several months.
—Restrict Soviet diplomatic access in Washington, making it
noticeably less than at present.
6 See Document 146.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—Expel a number of Soviet espionage agents within the next few
weeks or months.
—Reduce Soviet media representation.
b. Arms Control
—Announce that you have directed a major review of arms control
negotiations under the criteria of PD–50 to be completed and submitted
to you by April. This would put the issue of arms control in question
without actually backing away from agreements, as you may be pressed
to do in the case of SALT.
—Break off the Indian Ocean Arms Talks and CAT.
c. Economic
—Suspend indefinitely all U.S.-USSR Joint Economic Commis-
sion meetings.
—Postpone all scientific exchange meetings scheduled this spring.
—Exercise the option you created in 1978 to deny oil production
technology transfers. The administrative process for this is already in
place and regularly followed.
—Initiate a PRM on the sale of wheat to the USSR and make it
public that such a review is in progress. By summer we will be able
to judge the political and economic wisdom of denying wheat sales to
the Soviets. In the interim, the threat is raised.
d. Military
—Re-emphasize to the U.S. public the importance of the FY 1981
defense budget proposal to Congress as essential to prevent Soviet
power projection.8
—If the political and military climate worsens in the next few
months, request that Congress re-instate military registration. Alterna-
tively, your report to the Congress in January on military manpower
could ask the Congress to consider military registration.9
IV. Actions involving other groups of States.
—The Non-Aligned Movement should be called on to boycott the
Moscow Olympic games pending Soviet withdrawal from a member
state.
—The NAM might be moved to take other states under Yugo-
slav prodding.
in his State of the Union Address, January 23. He characterized the increase as “essential
if we are to strengthen our defense capabilities.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I,
p. 119)
9 In response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, President Carter reinstituted

Afghanistan
—Raise Afghanistan in the UN Security Council.10
It is probably unwise to take all of these actions at once, and as
events develop, some might look less attractive. It is wise, I believe,
to select several of them in each of the five categories for immediate
execution and to begin study and consideration of all the others.
Brezhnev will see two great costs for the USSR as these actions are
implemented. First, Moscow will lose the diplomatic attention and
appeal it has enjoyed throughout the 1970s from the West and the
Third World. Second, the Soviet economy, showing signs of entropy
for two decades, has sustained some growth in no small part through
interaction with the West. Your actions, particularly if they threaten
to include the Europeans and Japan, promise sharpening economic
difficulties within the USSR and the Soviet bloc. Brezhnev may not
yield to economic pressures, but in the struggle for succession after
his death, the issue of economic access to the West will play a large
role. The least we can do is make it clear that such access has an
unambiguous price. That should strengthen the hand of those in the
Politburo who argue that foreign military adventures cost far more
than they are worth.
convened in January 1980, but failed to adopt a resolution calling for the withdrawal
of foreign troops stationed in Afghanistan. The United States was one of 52 states to
sign the proposal sent to the Secretary General. The General Assembly convened an
emergency special session that month, and adopted a resolution denouncing foreign
armed intervention in Afghanistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
135.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
SUBJECT
Iran, Christopher Mission to Afghanistan, SALT and Brown Trip to China
PARTICIPANTS
The President
CIA
The Vice President
Deputy Director Carlucci
State
White House
Secretary Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Deputy Secretary Christopher
Hamilton Jordan
Lloyd Cutler
Defense
Jody Powell
Secretary Brown
David Aaron
Deputy Secretary Claytor
MINUTES
The President began by saying that the NSC would first discuss
Iran and Pakistan and then reduce the membership to the statutory
members for a more private session.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
The President then asked Warren Christopher to report on his
meeting with the allies in London and at the North Atlantic Council.2
The Deputy Secretary of State said that he had met in London with
five countries’ representatives and then went on to NATO in Brussels
to meet with the permanent representatives. He said that the people
he met with were serious and in a somber mood. He would like to
cover several points as a backdrop to the specific decisions which the
NSC confronted.
First, everyone recognized that the invasion of Afghanistan was a
new dimension in Soviet policy. No ally challenged the Deputy Secre-
tary’s statement that it was a major departure in Soviet policy.
France apparently toyed with the idea that the invasion of Afghani-
stan was simply an extension of their “surrogate” activities in Ethiopia,
South Yemen and Angola, but they came off this position quickly.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
took place in the White House Cabinet Room. A portion of the summary of conclusions
of this NSC meeting is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union,
Document 251.

Afghanistan
There was general consensus that the Soviets also recognize that this
is a major departure and were prepared to run the risks entailed.
Second, the consequences of Soviet action were related to its scope
and its persistence. Several of the Allied representatives had experience
with the Czech invasion and the Hungarian invasion. They agreed that
our response cannot be modest nor short-lived. The allies are willing
to consider both positive and negative steps. As to the nature of these
steps, the allies were prepared to take “serious steps,” steps that would
lead back from detente, steps that would hurt themselves even as they
signalled to the Soviet Union our displeasure.
Third, the allies emphasized that the TNF decisions reached only
a few weeks ago were clearly necessary decisions. They also expressed
the hope that the qualifications of Belgium and the Netherlands would
now be dropped. However, neither Belgium nor the Netherlands indi-
cated that they would take this step. Nonetheless, there was a concurr-
ence that the U.S. leadership moving ahead on TNF deployments was
all the more valid in the light of subsequent Soviet activities in
Afghanistan.
Finally, the allies were quite prepared to come to the aid of Pakistan
and other countries which might be threatened by these developments.
The President asked whether India was discussed. The Deputy
Secretary replied yes. He said that even if the Indians rationalize the
invasion and downplay it, down deep they will be worried. [2 lines
not declassified]
The Deputy Secretary explained that two groups had been set up:
(1) to consider and discuss retaliatory actions towards the Soviets; and
(2) to coordinate aid to Pakistan. The Deputy Secretary said that these
groups could come under the NATO umbrella or they could be broad-
ened from the six to include Japan. The Deputy Secretary thought that
it was important that both in retaliation to the Soviets and aid to
Pakistan we could use as many participants as possible.
The Secretary of State noted that Ambassador Hummel in Pakistan
said that the aid to Pakistan should not be under NATO. The President
noted that the French also were anxious not to coordinate under NATO.
The Secretary of Defense expressed the hope that the Saudis and
Japanese could join the group. Dr. Brzezinski said that we may wish
to expand it to include Australia. Lloyd Cutler suggested that the
Pakistani aid consortium countries might be used for the economic aid
coordination.
The President asked what countries in the UN might raise the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, absent U.S. leadership. Mr. Christopher
replied that we have had a report that a number of countries want to
do it—several Gulf states, four to five ASEAN countries, as well as

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
several of our allies. Dr. Brzezinski asked whether these countries are
willing to go by themselves. The Secretary of State replied no; leader-
ship had to come from others. The UK is holding a meeting with other
Western countries to consider drafting a letter to the President of the
Security Council.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether there was a possibility that the United
Kingdom, Pakistan and China might co-sponsor an effort to raise this
in the Security Council. The Secretary of State said that he did not
believe the Pakistanis would participate in something like that.
The President again asked whether any country was prepared to
take the initiative apart from the United States. The Secretary of State
replied the United Kingdom, France, Portugal—they are on the Security
Council, but they will want to join with us. Norway would be with us
as a member of the Western group. Dr. Brzezinski asked if the U.S.
has to be a co-sponsor of this effort. The Secretary of State replied yes.
The President said that he had read about the experience in the
UN during the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia.3 It had been a mis-
take going to the Security Council first. They debated it for a long time
and ultimately the Soviet Union vetoed any action. Then, when efforts
were made to go to the General Assembly, so much time had elapsed
that no action was taken.
The Secretary of State noted that the General Assembly was still
in session and that we could go there next week. He said that one
advantage of that would be to single out Cuba and force it to take a
position in the General Assembly. The disadvantage is that the Soviets,
as well as a number of Warsaw Pact nations, will argue that their
actions were consistent with Article 51.4 The Secretary did not believe
that the Warsaw Pact nations would ask to come before the Security
Council on behalf of the Soviet Pact position, although the GDR, which
is on the Security Council, would undoubtedly be supportive of the
Russians.
The Deputy Secretary of State summarized by saying that if we
are prepared to join and appeal to the Security Council President to
put this issue on the agenda, many other countries would join as well.
The President asked whether we should go to the Security Council
when the Soviets would always veto anything we propose there. The
Secretary of State responded that we could go under Chapter VI (peace-
ful settlement of disputes) and since they are involved, they will not
have the right of a veto.

Afghanistan
The President noted that Chapter VI says that an accused state has
no vote, but that there were also no punitive actions which could be
taken under Chapter VI. He wondered whether we shouldn’t go to
the General Assembly as well. The Deputy Secretary of State com-
mented that our allies say that this is a Chapter VII, Article 39 issue—
a threat to the peace, not a simple dispute among countries.5
The President asked what we would get out of a Security Council
session in view of the possibility of a Soviet veto. Mr. Christopher said
that the Soviets would pay a high political price for a veto. We could
then go to the General Assembly. The Secretary of State said that we
could go to both at the same time. The President said that he also
thought of that possibility. He said the Czech example was disappoint-
ing because after a while it was only possible to get NATO support
for our opposition to the Soviet invasion.
The Secretary of Defense said that we are likely to have the same
experience in this instance. We will not get sanctions nor military
action, but we will get a backdrop for individual actions taken by the
allied groups set up by Mr. Christopher.
Dr. Brzezinski asked what forum would be best for a punitive
public relations exercise. He thought that probably the General Assem-
bly, but that would depend on what the members are prepared to do.
In the Security Council, he noted, we can already tell who will support
strong action and who will equivocate. The Secretary of State was of
the opinion that Bangladesh will not vote against the Soviets in the
final analysis.
The Secretary of Defense repeated that, nonetheless, the Security
Council debate would provide a positive backdrop for actions to be
developed in the groups set up by Warren Christopher.
The Secretary of State said that there was a strong desire by Western
nations to take this issue to the Security Council. We do not want to
be in a position of blocking this effort. The question is whether we
should also go to the General Assembly while it is still in session.
The President said his preference would be to go to both the General
Assembly and the Security Council. We should go as far as we can
and try to get others to join us. He concluded by saying he was willing
5 Article 39, Chapter VII of the UN Charter, “Action With Respect to Threats to
Peace, Breaches of the Peace, and Acts of Aggression,” reads: “The Security Council
shall determine the existence of any threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of
aggression and shall make recommendations, or decide what measures shall be taken
in accordance with Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or restore international peace and
security.” Article 41 discusses the non-military measures UN members may take in
protest against aggression as defined in Article 39. Article 42 lists military measures UN
members may take if the non-military measures described in Article 41 prove inadequate.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to accept going only to the Security Council until he had read about
our experience during the Czech invasion.
Dr. Brzezinski endorsed the idea of going both to the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Mr. Powell said he thought it
would make the price of a veto much higher for the Soviet Union.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether Warren could do both. The Secretary
of State thought the answer was yes. He said we will get arguments
against it, but he thought it was possible. The President noted that if
the Soviets are on the verge of vetoing this matter in the Security
Council, it would hurt them in the General Assembly.
The President summarized by saying that he thought we ought to
go all out in the UN and in other respects in regard to the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan. He said he was convinced that we will not
be able to get the Soviets to pull out of Afghanistan, but Soviet actions
over the next ten to twenty years will be colored by our behavior in
this crisis. The President said that if the Gulf states and others are too
timid, we should go with our NATO allies and China to try to do the
maximum, short of a world war, to make the Soviets see that this was
a major mistake.
Lloyd Cutler noted that if we go forward in the Security Council
on Afghanistan at the same time as the Iran discussion, the Soviets
could veto our sanctions resolution.6 He also thought the Soviets would
use the fact that the Security Council would only have 14 members as an
excuse for them to veto any resolution on Iran on procedural grounds.
The Secretary of Defense and others thought that this would be
true in any event, whether or not we pursued Afghanistan in the
Security Council. The President agreed.
The Secretary of State asked whether he could give instructions to
Don McHenry to join a letter to the President of the Security Council
and to urge others to also address this issue in the General Assembly.
The President approved this suggestion but added that Ambassador
McHenry ought to tell others that our preference is to go to the General
Assembly, unless it would violate the UN Charter.
Mr. Powell asked that whatever we do, we ought to do it as a
package. He realized that consultations take time, but if we dribbled
out each of our decisions over several days, we would lose the impact
of Presidential leadership. The Secretary of State responded by saying
6 On January 11, the UN Security Council began consideration of a U.S.-sponsored
draft resolution calling for the release of the American hostages being held in Iran and
the imposition of various sanctions on Iran. See Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, pp.

Afghanistan
that we cannot hold back on going to the Security Council. Otherwise
we will be dragging our feet. There was a meeting today on this issue.
The President said that we should go forward on the Security
Council and should not wait for a package. (The Secretary of State then
left to call Ambassador McHenry.)
Dr. Brzezinski said we should now go through the separate steps
in the paper prepared by the State Department.7
The President agreed and asked that Warren Christopher please
indicate what the allied reaction was to each of the specific measures.
Dr. Brzezinski said the first issue was SALT. The President said
that he had talked to Robert Byrd and the Majority Leader wanted to
keep SALT on the calendar but not bring it up onto the Floor.
The President said that he had been able to persuade Byrd not to
make a statement to that effect when he left the White House. It was
the President’s view that we ought to leave it on the calendar and
maintain our approach of working closely with the Majority Leader
on this issue.
Dr. Brzezinski said that SALT was important regardless of our
relationship to the U.S.S.R., but we will have to accept that at this time
it is not advisable to bring it to a vote. Lloyd Cutler agreed. There was
7 Carter read the December 31 paper, entitled “Afghanistan: Steps in the Framework
of U.S.-Soviet Relations,” in advance of the NSC meeting. A copy with Carter’s marginalia
China. The first paragraph of the paper reads: “There are three kinds of impacts we
hope to achieve vis-à-vis the Soviets in Afghanistan. The first is punitive: we want them
to pay a price for infringing on fundamental principles of international behavior. The
second is coercive: we want them to withdraw their troops and allow Afghanistan to
return to a semblance of sovereignty and neutrality. The third is deterrent: we want to
prevent the Soviets from crossing further thresholds, such as hot pursuit of rebels across
international frontiers or escalation of the fighting with the rebels to a massive scale.”
The second paragraph reads: “We are also interested in the impact of our responses
on other international actors, including European allies, nervous Eastern Europeans,
nonaligned Third World countries, and Islamic governments. Thus, even actions that
may make little impression on the Soviets can be of value for other audiences; some US
actions could cause concern to our allies.” In the right margin beside this paragraph,
Carter wrote: “Maximum initiative & action by others.” The second and third sentences
of the fourth paragraph read: “Soviet reactions may also take the form of countermoves
across a broad spectrum. In choosing one course of action over another, the irrevocability
of the action will be one important factor to consider.” Carter underlined “Soviet reac-
tions,” and in the right margin wrote: “need to assess.” The final sentence of the paper
reads: “Certain steps affecting US-Soviet relations may have the desired effect on other
countries, but the most effective steps in getting our point across to Moscow are likely
to be those that strengthen opposition to the Soviets worldwide.” Carter underlined
“Soviets worldwide,” and wrote: “true” in the right margin. The table of contents of the
December 31 paper, which lists the proposed actions, is printed in Foreign Relations,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
no sense to withdraw it completely since it was in our security interest,
but that we cannot get the requisite [votes?] as long as Iran and Afghani-
stan are unresolved. Therefore, he thought we should defer bringing
it to the Floor but leave it on the calendar. However, if the Soviets veto
sanctions on Iran, we may have to look even at the possibility of
withdrawing it from the calendar.
The President said that Robert Byrd had reminded him that the
Executive Branch has no control over the Senate’s calendar and that
he, the President, could not pull it back by himself. However, he indi-
cated that he would be prepared to consult with us and cooperate.
The Secretary of Defense said the most we can do is to keep SALT
alive. He thought that as part of our rationale we could explain that
SALT was in our global interest, but that since other negotiations,
such as the Indian Ocean talks, were affected by the movement into
Afghanistan, we would terminate them. We would make clear the
Soviets have removed the basis for Indian Ocean arms control which
was to reduce great power rivalry in the region. On the other hand,
the basis for SALT was to lessen the danger of nuclear war and avoid
an arms race in the nuclear area, particularly when our priorities were
to increase our conventional capabilities. Therefore, we were not pull-
ing back the SALT Treaty. We were simply not going forward onto
the Floor with it.
Dr. Brzezinski said he thought that leaving arms control activities
out of the measures of retaliation against the Soviet Union is consistent
with the position that had been adopted with our NATO allies. He
pointed to the continuation of MBFR in this connection. Moreover,
singling out the Indian [Ocean] talks for rejection would be unwise
since the Soviets would exploit this with a new Indian government.
However, given that it is dead already, he would be in favor of simply
leaving it moribund.
Secretary Brown explained that the Indian Ocean negotiations were
not concerned with arms control but rather with arms deployments.
He said he was tempted to say that this was true for the conventional
arms talks as well. Dr. Brzezinski replied that if we are trying to pursue
punitive action, this did not help since the Indian Ocean talks were
already dead. Moreover, it would not enhance our position or embar-
rass them because they could turn cancellation of the Indian Ocean
talks against us with the Indians.
The Secretary of State agreed with Dr. Brzezinski. As for the con-
ventional arms talks, he felt it should be left on the table. But he would
not go forward with the meeting next week between the heads of
delegation. On SALT, he thought it was important to leave it on the
calendar. He reported that Senator Hart and others had heard that
Robert Byrd had urged that we pull it all the way back. The President
said no, Senator Byrd did not want to do that.

Afghanistan
The Deputy Secretary of State said that the Europeans place great
store by SALT. They would like the approach that we are considering.
They want to keep other arms control negotiations going. On MBFR,
the ball is in the Soviet court anyway. Our action to defer SALT would
be widely understood by our European allies.
Turning back to the State Department paper of proposed actions,
it was noted that the proposed Presidential statement on U.S.-Soviet
relations had already been made by the President as had the recall
of Ambassador Watson. The latter would be announced today. The
suggestion to restrict social and official contact with Soviet officials
was described by the Secretary of State as not effective in previous
circumstances and therefore was dropped.
In the discussion of the question of reducing the Soviet diplomatic
staff, the President indicated his desire to make the two staffs equal.
The Secretary of State commented that in retaliation the Soviets will
finger our most important people. Dr. Brzezinski said then we both
go down hill and they get the advantage.
The President noted that the Soviet Union placed limits on the
number of diplomatic personnel that we may have. We place no such
limits on them. He said he was against continuing an unbalanced
approach with the Soviets. Dr. Brzezinski added that some greater
reciprocity was certainly in order.
The Secretary of State pointed to the fact that the imbalance in
representation was due in large measure to the existence of the new
Soviet UN Mission. The Secretary of Defense suggested that we sepa-
rate out the UN Mission as a separate matter. Lloyd Cutler suggested
we might freeze the level of Soviet representation at the UN to keep
that from being a circumvention of a reduction of the embassy in
Washington. Frank Carlucci pointed out that we do not have legal
authority to do this.
The President again repeated that he was in favor of cutting back
the Soviet Embassy representation.
Dr. Brzezinski recalled that when the British expelled the Soviet
intelligence agents, they warned the Soviet Union that if the Soviets
retaliated, they would expel additional Soviet personnel on a propor-
tional basis. That deterred further Soviet expulsions. Frank Carlucci
added that the British, however, regretted this action because they
found that they had a much more difficult time following and identify-
ing the new Soviet agents which were brought back into the country
subsequently.
The Vice President asked what the disparity is in numbers. The
Secretary of State said two to one. Frank Carlucci said it’s 1,240 Soviets
versus 164 U.S. in the Soviet Union, including the United Nations
Mission.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Dr. Brzezinski suggested the State Department come back with a
specific proposal on how to equalize representation. The President
concluded by saying that he was inclined to do it. [3 lines not declassified]
It was agreed to suspend preparation for the opening of Consulates
General in Kiev and New York.
The President was not inclined to raise the level of human rights
criticism which he felt ought to proceed as vigorously as the situation
warranted. However, it was agreed to step up Radio Liberty, Radio
Free Europe and Voice of America broadcasts.
Dr. Brzezinski said we would need a small amount of money from
OMB for this purpose. The President asked what the allies were doing
and the Deputy Secretary of State said that the British were willing to
be very cooperative. In this connection, it was agreed to do all we
could to publicize the Soviet role in Afghanistan.
On the question of recognition, Dr. Brzezinski said that we have
taken the position that we will not resume normal business. But we
have left our personnel there.
The Secretary of State said that he had already taken out all of the
AID and ICA personnel and he wants to cut the rest of the staff to a
minimum.8 He said all we have in Kabul at the present time is the
Charge d’affaires. The President said he agreed with that if we can
fulfill our requirements with a reduced staff. [4 lines not declassified]
[1 paragraph (2½ lines) not declassified]
The Deputy Secretary of State said that the allies were willing to
refrain from political contacts with the new regime. Only two of the
countries have the specific policy of recognizing governments, Great
Britain and Canada. Neither of them would recognize the new regime.
Italy and the Federal Republic of Germany will withdraw their ambas-
sadors. Bilateral aid will be withdrawn or frozen. Multilateral aid
through the World Bank—the allies will be prepared to join with us
in seeking termination. In this connection, the Deputy Secretary of State
noted that the international financial institutions were providing aid
for Afghanistan on the basis that it was a non-aligned country. But
there was now no such basis since Afghanistan was becoming a puppet
of the Soviet Union.
The President was then informed by a message from the Secretary
of Labor that the longshoremen were on the verge of enforcing embargo
on the shipment to the United States of grain.9
9 On January 9, the International Longshoremen’s Association (ILA) unilaterally
declared a boycott on all cargo destined to or arriving from the USSR in ports from
Maine to Texas. An article in Time magazine quoted ILA President Teddy Gleason, who
pledged that the boycott would remain “as long as the Soviets insist on being international
bullyboys.” (“Grain Becomes a Weapon,” Time, January 21, 1980)

Afghanistan
The Secretary of State said that he thought that we will have to
cut back on grain shipments to the 8 million tons required by our
agreement with the Soviet Union from the 25 million tons that were
now projected and for which contracts had been let. Without such an
action, we do not believe our allies would do anything in the way of
economic restrictions or penalties to the Soviet Union. He knew this
would be a high price to pay but it would be necessary.
The President wondered whether the longshoremen were going
to do it, it was not simply up to them. Dr. Brzezinski agreed. He
thought the President could decide later whether the United States
would impose an official embargo.
Jody Powell asked if we would have difficulty selling the grain
elsewhere. The Secretary of State said that we would have to buy and
store the grain. The President noted that this was a considerable amount
of wheat and corn. The Secretary of State reviewed our commitments.
Our agreement with the Soviet Union requires that we sell 8 million
tons. Moreover, we had approved the sale of another 25 million tons.
The Secretary said that the issue was whether we were formally
required by law to sell the additional 25–35 million tons.
The Secretary of Defense noted that this was a considerable amount
of money, approximately $5 billion in foreign exchange earnings for
the United States. The Vice President said that the market would drop
right away. Prices would reflect the fact that the sale had not been
made. Storage of this much wheat by the United States would be
regarded as cash and corn and wheat prices will drop immediately.
Mr. Powell said assuming this is the situation, is there something
we could do to compensate, to buy and store the wheat? The Secretary
of Defense said it was a timing question. If the price breaks at the
announcement of an embargo, then we will only halt the slide by
buying it off the market.
Mr. Jordan said he thought it sounded like the total embargo by
the longshoremen, not simply a wheat embargo.
The Vice President expressed strong concern that labor and farmers
will split on this issue. He said we could not afford being involved,
for we will be dragged into court immediately and we will have to take
a position. Lloyd Cutler said that it would be better for the President
to do it than to be coerced into it by the longshoremen.
Mr. Jordan said that he would feel more comfortable if Bob Berg-
land and Ray Marshall could explain all the details of this issue before
deciding. The President said he thought we should go on to the pro-
posed list of actions by the State Department and consider this issue
separately.
The President then asked about France and what they would do
in regard to relations with the new regime. Warren Christopher said

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
that they would agree on no new contacts. However, it was not a
question of recognition for them. They will follow the lead of others
and not engage in any political contact at this time. They may go so
far as to recall their ambassador. They are prepared to make some
strong signal, but they do not want to close their mission.
The President then called Stuart Eizenstat and asked him to check
on the longshoremen embargo issue and report to the NSC as soon as
he possibly could.
The Deputy Secretary of State concluded by saying that we should
follow up on cancelling loans and on making no new loans by the
World Bank.
Turning to other bilateral measures, the Secretary of State said that
he would stonewall on Consular review talks. They were in recess and
would not be resumed.
The suggestion to reimpose the travel ban on Soviet New York
advance party personnel had been overtaken by events.
It was agreed that we should refuse and delay visas for official
Soviet visitors on a case-by-case basis. The Secretary of Defense specifi-
cally mentioned Gregory Arbatov in this connection.
On the question of reducing Soviet media representation in the
United States, Jody Powell said that he had a mixed reaction. He felt
that like diplomats we should go to the principle of equality but there
may, of course, be retaliation and we could end with no one in Moscow.
[2 lines not declassified] So on balance he felt we could run the risk. The
President approved.
Turning to the question of exchanges, there was a discussion of both
the scientific exchanges and the transfer of the magnetohydrodynamic
channel as well as certain meetings that had been scheduled. The
Secretary of State said that he would urge that Representative Bill
Green not take his congressional delegation to Moscow. Also, he would
propose cancelling the Joint Committee Meeting in Moscow to be
chaired by Hathaway and he would postpone the meeting of the Joint
Committee on Health scheduled for mid-February in Washington. On
the MHD channel, the Secretary said that transport of that piece of
equipment by C–5 aircraft to Moscow would have enormous publicity.
Dr. Brzezinski said we could defer that instead of cancelling it. Secretary
Brown noted that we had a lot of money invested into it, approximately
$10 million.
The Deputy Secretary of State said that they would review for
approval any proposed formal meetings between the Soviet officials
in the United States at the Assistant Secretary level or above. The
President approved review but said that he would be reluctant to
approve such contacts.

Afghanistan
Dr. Brzezinski said the next and most delicate issue was that of
the Olympics. Secretary Christopher said there was strong feeling in
Europe against participating in the Olympics. He said that the West
German representative at NATO said that while it was difficult for the
German representatives to comment on events in Germany in the
1930’s, it was his view that the western nations should not have come to
Berlin in the 1930’s. He felt the same way about the Moscow Olympics.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we could take the position that we will
consider boycotting the Olympics. Mr. Powell said we must strike
while the iron is hot if we are serious about boycotting the Olympics.
If we could get a few large countries such as the FRG to begin to join
us, then we could ask others to go along. But if we are trying to get a
lot of others and have to slog it out, he thought that support for
boycotting would disintegrate. Lloyd Cutler said that we should only
do this if it were combined with other strong measures. It should not
be the major step that we take. He thought that we could control
participation through our control of passports since the Olympics was
a private matter. He also suggested that we organize alternative games
so that participants would have an opportunity to still compete.
The Secretary of State disagreed with the latter point. He said we
should decide as a country whether we are going to participate and
not get involved with the work of the Olympic committees. Mr. Powell
thought we needed to publicly call on our allies to participate. If we
wait to fight toward a broader consensus, the allies won’t be with us.
Deputy Secretary Christopher said that he thought a boycott of
the Olympics would take us too far down the road. Taking that one
non-political contact and using it in this way would be destructive of
international communication and sense of community. And we should
consider the athletes who reach their peak every four years and for
whom this is a once in a lifetime opportunity. He said he thought
boycotting the Olympics would be a very harsh move which the Ameri-
can people will not understand.
The Secretary of State stated that it depended on our decision on
grain sales. If we do that we would not need to take the step in regard
to the Olympics.
Lloyd Cutler took a contrary view. He felt we could only boycott the
Olympics if we took strong economic sanctions; otherwise we would
trivialize our actions by only focussing on the Olympics.
Dr. Brzezinski said our position does depend on the others. If we
go ahead it will be interpreted as business as usual. But with others
we could join them in underscoring the seriousness with which the
world community regards the Soviet Union.
The Vice President said that a move like this could capture the
imagination of the American people.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The President said it sent cold chills down his spine.
Mr. Jordan said we could, as an alternative, organize some alterna-
tive games here.
Dr. Brzezinski said if thirty countries stay out of the Olympics then
we will have accomplished something. If only three stay out, we should
not do it. The President noted that the winter Olympics will take place
here and that they might organize a boycott against us.
Lloyd Cutler repeated that we must not boycott the Olympics
without also taking action on grain. Secretary Brown agreed. He said,
however, that the Soviets are more concerned about the Olympics than
grain. It was designed to show them as acceptable. But he agreed we
could not do the Olympic boycott without a restrictive decision on
grain sales.
The President concluded by saying that we should take the position
that our participation was raised by European countries and we will
assess and review this position. He said we should be prepared to
make it our public posture that others have advanced the idea of non-
participation in the Olympic games and that we are considering it,
taking into account the position of other countries.
Turning to the question of travel control, the President said it
irritated him that the United States was subject to travel controls that
they were not. Dr. Brzezinski said it was not a question of control. We
both have controls. It was a question of enforcement and permissive-
ness on our part.
Deputy Secretary Christopher suggested that their proposals on
the level of representation also ought to include recommendations
concerning travel restrictions and enforcement. Dr. Brzezinski added
that these recommendations point towards more reciprocity.
Turning to military measures, it was agreed that a U.S. military alert
was inappropriate. As far as increasing the United States permanent
military presence in the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf, that was
already underway.
Turning to the economic actions, it was agreed that we would not
do anything about the Soviet MFN. There was concern expressed by
the Vice President and the Secretary of State that the Soviets could
retaliate by cutting Jewish immigration.
Turning to the question of credits, the Secretary of Defense asked
how much help we might expect from our allies on curbing trade and
credit. Deputy Secretary Christopher replied that that depends on what
we do about grain. He said that the allies have major credit agreements
coming up for renewal and he was of the opinion that they were
prepared not to renew them if we were similarly going to take
strong action.

Afghanistan
The President said that he hoped Warren Christopher was correct
and that the French and Japanese would not run in and take advantage
of our restraint. He said that we ought to make a maximum effort to
get our allies behind us. He suggested that a message be prepared
right after the NSC meeting giving the allies a rundown on what we
had decided to do.
The planned joint commercial meeting and business facilitation
talks were discussed and it was agreed that they should be postponed
indefinitely.
It was also agreed to postpone the Civil Aviation Talks. The Presi-
dent also agreed that for the time being Aeroflot would be strictly
restricted to two flights weekly as authorized by our existing
agreement.
Turning to the question of export controls and possible tightening,
the Secretary of State asked what we were talking about in specific
terms. The President said that he favored tightening our export controls
on a case-by-case basis.
The Vice President said that this gets into the problem that we will
have with the farmers if we have a grain embargo. They will feel that
the businessmen are left off the hook if we do not make a similar
tightening in trade in industrial goods.
The President noted under COCOM we would tighten our restric-
tions together with the allies. Harold Brown pointed out, however,
that this only dealt with sensitive exports and technology and did not
deal with lots of other trade.
The President suggested that we send someone to COCOM and
to talk with our allies about tightening up on trade with the Soviet
Union. He said he was in favor of tightening our trade even more than
the allies so long as it did not disadvantage the U.S. businessmen in
comparison with our allies. Dr. Brzezinski said that he would instruct
Commerce and DOD accordingly.
On the issue of limiting Soviet commercial expansion in the United
States, Secretary Vance said that he thought this subject needed addi-
tional study. The President agreed but said that on a case-by-case basis
he would favor limiting Soviet commercial expansion. However, he
agreed that we need a detailed proposal.
On the subject of Soviet fishing in U.S. zones, Secretary Vance was
opposed to suspending such fishing because we also benefitted from
the fishing agreement.
Dr. Brzezinski thought that if we do not do something in grain we
should do something on fishing. The Secretary of State said we could
handle this through the allocation and not cancel the agreement itself.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The President agreed that we should not cancel the fishing agree-
ment but tighten allocations. He said this should be done irrespective
of the decision to be taken on grain.
Lloyd Cutler cautioned that it would depend on the type of fishing
and on the agreement concerned. He said we needed Soviet cooperation
on salmon. The President responded that this should be done on a
case-by-case basis.
Lloyd Cutler also pointed out that he felt he should point out to
the group that the power existed for the President to freeze Soviet assets.
The Council then turned to the question of multilateral actions.
The Council approved the suggestion that we urge the UK, FRG and
France to increase broadcasts to Muslim countries in Soviet Central
Asia.
On the proposal to provide a daily circular to the UN and others
in the status of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, the President
asked whether this could be done in coordination with others. He also
questioned whether we should do it daily but rather periodically. He
thought that the circulars should also go to all the media and that we
should coordinate with the BBC.
The group also confirmed that we should continue worldwide
demarches urging others to take actions complementing our unilat-
eral initiatives.
Turning to the United Nations, the Secretary of State said that
Don McHenry was checking whether the General Assembly has the
jurisdiction for peace and security without Security Council action or
consideration. He said that Ambassador McHenry would call back
shortly.
Turning to the issue of multilateral economic actions and the ques-
tion of COCOM restraints, Dr. Brzezinski said that we were prepared
to pursue the “Belgian formula” in COCOM and this would involve
liberalizing sensitive exports to China on a case-by-case basis thereby
creating a de facto differential. However, we would not announce
formally that COCOM had created such a differential. The President
approved this approach.
On the question of consultations with others to reinforce U.S. eco-
nomic actions, the President said that we should consult particularly
on credits. That we should deny Soviet Union credits and urge others
to do the same. The Secretary of State pointed out that we do not
provide credits to the Soviet Union. The President responded by saying
we should nonetheless urge others not to provide further credit.
Returning to the COCOM issue, the Vice President suggested to
the Secretary of Defense that he use the fact of the China differential
in the discussions with the Chinese next week. The President asked

Afghanistan
what the allied reaction was to the concept of a China differential.
Deputy Secretary Christopher said the reaction was good. The Secretary
of State said that on a case-by-case basis we would look at China
differently. The Secretary of Defense added that he would not explain
to China how we would do this but only the fact that we would do it.
Dr. Brzezinski summarized by saying that we accept the idea of a
differential in practice but do not establish a public principle. Deputy
Secretary Christopher thought that the allies would be prepared to go
even further and Secretary Brown said that this would be fine, but that
he would proceed as indicated with the Chinese.
On the issue of increased economic assistance to countries in the
region, it was agreed that we should seek additional economic support
for Pakistan. It was also agreed that we will urge the international
financial institutions in countries with assistance programs to Afghani-
stan to terminate such assistance. Deputy Secretary Christopher said
that the allies will go along with this.
Turning to arms control, it was noted that the arms control negotia-
tions should generally be left alone to proceed as they can. In particular,
it was agreed that CSCE would go forward and that the MBFR ball
was in the Soviet court. It was also noted that CTB was moving ahead
but slowly and that the chemical warfare negotiations were in our
interest.
Turning to the question of other concerned countries, the President
asked whether Yugoslavia would join us in protesting the Soviet action.
Mr. Aaron pointed out that the Yugoslavs had recently issued strong
statements and that our embassy had noted that they had acted with
unprecedented speed in doing so.10
The Secretary of State noted that Matthew Nimetz would be going
to Yugoslavia shortly.11 He thought that they should have high on
their list an offer to the Yugoslavs in the way of military cooperation.
Lloyd Cutler asked about the legal problem of providing aid to
Pakistan. The President asked what the impediments to our assistance
to Pakistan are.
The Secretary of State explained that under the Symington Amend-
ment we are precluded from providing FMS credits to the Pakistanis.
He then proceeded to read the law. Thus he concluded we cannot give
money under the foreign assistance act.
10 The Yugoslav message denouncing the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was
Central Foreign Policy File, D800004–0075)
11 Nimetz discussed Afghanistan with Yugoslav Foreign Secretary Josip Vrhovec
on January 10. The discussion was reported in telegram 18528 to Belgrade, on January

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The President said he thought Zia had given us assurance that he
would not test nuclear weapons but that he could not bind his successor.
The Secretary of State replied that the Pakistanis have pulled back from
that commitment to saying only that they would not test a nuclear
weapon in the next six months and that was inadequate to provide
the President a waiver under the Symington Amendment. He said our
choices were to either change it to make it like the Glenn Amendment
(changing and to or) but added that if we take this approach we also
confront the whole non-proliferation issue head on.12 Another way
under the circumstances would be to have a special provision that
simply said that notwithstanding any other provision of law we will
go ahead with assistance to Pakistan.
The President then asked what our treaty with Pakistan provided.
The Secretary of State then read it.13
Dr. Brzezinski said that if we had a one-time supplemental to
provide ESF the Congress might support the idea of the “notwithstand-
ing and other provision of law” approach. The Secretary of State then
read such a proposed amendment.
The President asked whether this could be put on the appropria-
tions bill. The Secretary of State said yes or in the defense supplemental.
The Secretary of Defense noted that the latter would take a long time.
Mr. Aaron suggested that it could be put through separately.
The Secretary of State said that we could consult with the Congress
on the best way to do it. Lloyd Culter noted that the provision should
not be a one-time lifting of the Symington Amendment but should be
country specific. The President noted that putting it in the foreign
assistance bill might be one way to get that bill out of committee.
The Secretary of State then [less than 1 line not declassified] indicated
that the Paks do not want to have any mission to Pakistan until they
see what the United States is prepared to do in the way of commit-
ments.14 The President noted this carefully and acknowledged that the
Pakistanis want to know first what we will do before committing
themselves.
Dr. Brzezinski asked that before moving to a smaller meeting
whether we should try to promulgate publicly the decisions that have
been reached in the NSC meeting. The President and the Secretary of
State said that they didn’t believe that that could be done today. Dr.
Brzezinski suggested that it would, however, be important for the
President to play a prominent role and to make a brief statement.

Afghanistan
Jody Powell said that it depends on how we come out on the tough
issues of grain and the Olympics. The issues that had been decided
thus far will sound “mighty iffy.” He then reviewed the sum of them.
He said that restricting further and case-by-case limitations does not
sound like much. He personally was inclined to have the President
play a role and go to the people on this issue. He thought that the
decision to provide additional assistance to Pakistan and lift the Sym-
ington Amendment would be a high profile item and would be an
opportunity for newspapers to focus on it today. He did not know
how much we could do in substance but he thought we should try to
make a statement by tomorrow morning.
The Vice President agreed that the list was not too impressive. He
said the addition of our decisions on Pakistan would help. He said
that the grain embargo would be a major step but he hoped that we
would not do it. Jody Powell noted that we would have to tighten up
other trade or the farmers will say that big business benefits and then
we will have trouble politically.
The Vice President said that trying to curtail food is a loaded
dynamite. If the longshoremen go on strike, the Republicans will say
we are so pro-union that we will hurt the farmers in the midwest just
to go along with the unions.
Mr. Jordan asked whether the government would have to buy the
grain if we impose an embargo. The President replied that Stu Eizenstat
was trying to find out the answer to that question. Lloyd Cutler said
we might want a legislative package to ease the burden on the farmers.
In this connection, the Vice President said that if the grain is in storage
it is the same as if it is on the market as far as the effect on price is
concerned.
Dr. Brzezinski said that if we go forward with the grain embargo,
we should try to make it a bipartisan effort and get others to endorse it.
The Vice President thought the idea of the longshoremen taking
foreign policy into their own hands was outrageous. If we can talk
them out of it before they start it might work. But later there will be
ego involved in the embargo.
Secretary Brown said it was a question of sacrifice. We could intro-
duce the sacrifices elsewhere. Such as gas rationing or a plan for resum-
ing the draft, which the Secretary favors. The Vice President said that
we had decided not to do things that hurt us. He said that selling the
grain was in our interest. It requires the Soviet Union to spend hard
currency. It helps the dollar in our balance of payments.
Secretary Brown said that if we cannot do things that hurt us, we
cannot get our allies to do things that hurt them. Stu Eizenstat then
joined the meeting and explained what our obligations were under the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
law. He said our obligation is not to use the authority of the U.S.
Government to interfere with the 8 million tons to which we are com-
mitted to sell the Soviet Union under the agreement. The President
asked what were our obligations if there were a suit against the long-
shoremen. Secretary Brown asked what were our obligations in regard
to the 13 million tons additional which we had approved. Mr. Eizenstat
said he did not know. Secretary Vance said that there was no obligation
not to interfere above the 8 million. That means that there should be
no control. Mr. Eizenstat questioned that interpretation.
The President said we could wait until we hear from the allies
before deciding our own position of law. Lloyd Cutler noted there are
limits in our ability to control food.
The President said that we ought to explore with our allies the
possible curtailment of both grain and industrial shipments. He asked
that the Vice President, Lloyd Cutler and Stu Eizenstat put together a
paper for him on this issue. The Vice President suggested that we
might turn down the Soviets on the 10 million tons that we were
negotiating about now.15
The President reiterated that he wanted Mr. Eizenstat and the Vice
President to get involved in examining the legislation. He also wanted
to explore the Congressional leaders—their attitudes. He noted that
Robert Dole will shoot at us either way we decide.
Lloyd Cutler noted that we will also need to consult on SALT
because others may beat us to the punch. He was not sure that all of
these items and in particular SALT could be held for a few days for a
package announcement. The President hoped that we could make our
announcement within 24 hours. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the allies
would be able to respond in that time. The President responded that
the allies hope we will get out in front and they will not be involved
in it.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we will be ready to go tomorrow on the
issues that had been decided. The question was whether we defer the
grain decision.
The President said we can decide on how to deliver the package
later. The Secretary of Defense said that without grain and the Olympics
it won’t be much of a package.
The President asked whether the allies are shipping grain to the
Soviet Union. The Secretary of State said yes the Canadians, the Austra-
15 Mondale sent Carter a memorandum the next day, January 3, urging him not to
reduce grain sales to the Soviet Union, due to the beneficial impact of the sales on the
U.S. economy. The memorandum is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet
Union, Document 253.

Afghanistan
lians are shipping it and possibly the Argentines. The President said,
however, we are the only ones with corn. The Vice President said there
are 17 million tons of corn in the sales to the Soviet Union. Mr. Jordan
said he wished we might announce it after the Iowa caucuses.
General Jones said that the Soviet reaction to this package of action
should be assessed. The Secretary of State said we have a list of possible
Soviet reactions which we have considered. The President asked that
they be reviewed.
Lloyd Cutler asked whether it included the possibility that the
Soviets would terminate or curtail oil and gas shipments to Western
Europe. Secretary Brown noted that there was not all that much oil
and gas being shipped to Western Europe.
The Secretary of State said that the worst thing would be if the
Soviets went ahead and tested 14 RVs on the SS–18 and did not abide
by SALT I.
The President asked whether the Soviets might do something on
Berlin as a signal. Dr. Brzezinski said that this would provide a big
security confrontation he thought they would wish to avoid. The Presi-
dent noted that the Federal Republic had been very courageous on
this issue.
The Vice President asked whether we had gone over the list of
crucial imports from the Soviet Union: chrome, platinum and so forth.
He asked whether we were still importing titanium. The President said
no, that the Soviets were not shipping titanium since they are now
building titanium submarines.
Jody Powell asked what would be said about this meeting. The
President said the general line should be to say that things are being
considered; that Ambassador Watson is coming; that we are consulting
with our allies; and that an announcement might be made tomorrow.16
The meeting was then restricted to the statutory members plus Mr.
Aaron. Dr. Brzezinski reviewed the alternatives to strengthen Harold
Brown’s instructions in regard to his China trip. He noted in particular
that we had added the idea that we would be prepared to provide
China with an over-the-horizon radar.
The Secretary of State said that he had not heard of this issue until
this morning. Secretary Brown said that that was true of him as well.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that it was the Vice President’s idea which had
been staffed by CIA and which appeared to be an extremely interest-
ing one.
outlining the President’s decisions, including the recall of Ambassador Watson. See

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The Secretary of Defense said that we could provide them with
something to track and give them an indication of specific actions by
the Soviet Union.
The Secretary of State said that if we do this without Congressional
approval, we will have a very bad reaction. He said he was against it.
The Secretary of Defense said that he does not need it in his instruc-
tions. He felt he had a good package already. The fact that he is going
and able to assure the Chinese of our interests in their security and
that we were prepared to help the Pakistanis would be adequate.
Dr. Brzezinski said the Secretary of State was correct in that hereto-
fore we would not do something like this either for the U.S.S.R. or for
China, but that was before we had an invasion and we now have an
increased sense of vulnerability in Asia and China is an important
deterrent to Soviet activity.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether it was in our interest to stand aside.
He thought there was a difference between offensive and defensive
military equipment, and with Soviet tanks moving towards the Indian
Ocean, our unwillingness to provide anti-tank weapons was not a
contribution to regional stability.
The Secretary of State said that this is not a decision that the
President had to make now and that he should first consult with the
Congress. The President said that he did not have to consult Bob Byrd:
that we should sell weapons to China, including F–16’s.
Dr. Brzezinski thought that the public would not understand why
we were unwilling to be helpful to the Chinese in this kind of a situation.
Secretary Brown said that this issue did not have to be decided before
he left. He could raise the question of intelligence equipment and our
willingness to give them early warning capabilities.
The President said that he did not look upon over-the-horizon
radar as violating what we have said previously concerning providing
arms to China. He thought it was the sort of thing that should be
explored. Our policy is not to sell weapons. We approve of the ally
sale of defensive arms.
The Secretary of State intervened to say that that was not precisely
it. We do not take the position of approving the sale of defensive arms.
We simply say that is our allies’ own concern.
The President said that the situation in Afghanistan and Iran does
add a new dimension. He thought that we should be prepared to
modify our position but how to modify it should be further explored.
Something along the lines of the over-the-horizon radar he thought
should also be explored. In addition, we ought to reexamine COCOM
and our restrictions on sensitive equipment. The most important thing
he concluded is that we give a strong signal of support to the Chinese
and of displeasure to the Soviets.

Afghanistan
Secretary Brown said, however, that we also need to leave some
room on the ladder of escalation, otherwise there is no need for Soviet
restraint. Dr. Brzezinski added that we do need to give enough of a
signal so the Soviets know we are serious.
Dr. Brzezinski said we are facing as acute a dilemma as when the
British came to us to say that Greece and Turkey were our problem.
The President said that he was not sure that what we had decided
today will deter the Soviets from going into Pakistan and into Iran.
Both the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense agreed that it
would not, but that it would provide a signal. Secretary Brown said
that our response must make the Soviets wonder whether the next step
will be worth it.
Turning back to China, the President said that the basic memo
from Harold Brown on his instructions for China was good.17 The
Secretary of State agreed.
The President then said that before Secretary Brown leaves, he
would like to sit down and review his instructions. He suggested that
this be done at the Friday breakfast in order to confirm the Secretary’s
instructions. The Secretary of State noted that there were two other
items suggested to be added to Secretary Brown’s list and two others
that he could not agree with. Dr. Brzezinski said that Secretary Brown’s
instructions were generally agreed among the three of them along the
lines indicated by the Secretary of State. He summarized by saying
that Secretary Brown’s memo was generally acceptable, but that the
final signoff would await the Friday breakfast. The President agreed.
He said that we should continue to explore what further might be done
for the Chinese.18
He then commented that since discussing the issue of the kinds of
signals that need to be sent to the Soviet Union in this crisis, he was
inclined to go ahead on a grain embargo in order to give the Soviets
a signal on their behavior. The President asked that there be a further
discussion of the grain issue tomorrow morning. He said that we need
to get broad-based support for a grain embargo which is what he was
inclined to go with at this stage.
The meeting adjourned.
18 The President approved Brown’s memorandum, as well as additional instructions

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
136.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Vice President Mondale,
Secretary of State Vance, and Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Results of the NSC Meeting, January 2, 1980
The following decisions were reached as a result of the meeting:
1) The SALT II Treaty will be left on the Senate calendar. There
will be no effort to bring it to the Floor for a vote. Our public posture
will be to reaffirm that SALT is important irrespective of the tone of
our relationship with the Soviet Union but, at this time, we do not
believe it is advisable to bring it to a vote.2
2) We will make no announcement concerning other bilateral arms
control negotiations but, if asked, will take the position that they should
proceed. The Indian Ocean talks will remain moribund. We will pro-
ceed with CSCE. In MBFR, we are awaiting a Soviet response to our
initiative. CTB negotiations will continue at a slow pace. CW/RW
negotiations will be pursued since they are in our interest. The proposed
meeting next week of the heads of delegation for the Conventional
Arms talks should be postponed.
3) The recall of Ambassador Watson will be announced today.
4) The Department of State will forward its proposal for reducing
the Soviet diplomatic staff in the U.S., excluding the Soviet UN Mission,
to the level of the United States in the USSR.3 This should include
measures to tighten restrictions on Soviet official travel in the U.S. to
the equivalent of those imposed on the U.S. officials in the USSR.
Afghanistan/China. Secret. Also sent to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Brown,
and Director of Central Intelligence Turner. Also printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 252.
2 Carter’s January 3 letter to Senator Byrd requesting that he delay consideration
of the SALT II treaty is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II,
Document 246. The same day, Jody Powell read a statement to reporters that the President
had asked Senator Byrd to delay consideration in light of the Soviet intervention in
3 Vance sent the proposal, in the form of four backup papers, to the President under
a January 13 memorandum. The proposal, which called for reciprocity in all U.S. and
Soviet diplomatic, media, and commercial personnel, is in the Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 1, Afghanistan: Measures

Afghanistan
5) Preparations for opening the Consultates General in Kiev and
New York will be suspended.
6) Radio Liberty, Radio Free Europe and Voice of America broad-
casts will be stepped up along the lines proposed in the State Depart-
ment’s December 31 paper.4 The necessary funds will be made available
by OMB. Worldwide diplomatic demarches and ICA actions will be
increased to publicize the Soviet role in Afghanistan.
7) Our posture toward the Afghan Government will be not to
conduct any formal business for the time being. The number of Ameri-
can personnel at the Embassy will be reduced to ten. The question of
recognition of the Babrak regime does not arise.
8) The Consular Review Talks which are now in a state of suspen-
sion will not be resumed.
9) On a case-by-case basis, The Department of State will reject and
delay visas for official visits to the United States.
10) Soviet media representation in the United States will be reduced
to the same level as U.S. media representation in the Soviet Union.
11) Shipment by C5A aircraft of the MHD channel will be deferred
indefinitely.
12) Negotiations with the Soviet Union on the General Exchange
Agreement will not be resumed.
13) We will cancel the following:
—The Agriculture Joint Committee Meeting scheduled for January
in the USSR.
—The Health Joint Committee Meeting scheduled for February
in Moscow.
—Representative Green will be urged to cancel his Congressional
Delegation visit to the Soviet Union scheduled for January 11–18.
14) Any meetings at the level of Assistant Secretary or above will
be reviewed on a case-by-case basis with the presumption that they
will be cancelled unless there are overriding reasons not to do so.
15) On the Olympics, we will take the following position which
may be used publicly: “Our European Allies have questioned whether
we should proceed to participate in the Olympic games in Moscow.
We will assess this question and review the position taken by other
countries in reaching our decision.”
16) U.S. travel controls on Soviet officials and the enforcement of
these controls will be reviewed to ensure greater reciprocity with the
treatment accorded our officials in the Soviet Union.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
17) We should postpone the following meetings: the Joint Commer-
cial Committee Meeting scheduled for April 14–15 in Washington; the
Business Facilitation Talks scheduled for January 9 in Moscow; and the
Civil Aviation Talks scheduled for February 13. In addition, Aeroflot’s
scheduled service will be limited to the two weekly flights currently
authorized.
18) The United States export controls on exports to the USSR will
be tightened up on a case-by-case basis. The United States should be
prepared to restrict export licenses to an even greater degree than our
allies if it does not disadvantage U.S. business in comparison with
our allies.5
19) There should be an examination of Soviet commercial expansion
in the United States with a view to restricting it. The Department of
State should forward proposals to this effect within one week.
20) Allocations to the Soviet Union under our Fishing Agreements
should be restricted.
21) The United States should continue to urge our allies to increase
broadcasts to Muslim countries and Soviet Central Asia on develop-
ments in Afghanistan. There should also be prepared in conjunction
with our allies a periodic circular to be distributed at the United Nations
on the status of the Soviet invasion and occupation in Afghanistan.
22) The United States will join in a letter to the President of the
Security Council urging that the Afghanistan situation be placed on the
agenda. Unless it would be a violation of the UN Charter, Ambassador
McHenry will be instructed to tell other nations that it is our preference
to also raise this issue at the current General Assembly.6
23) We will proceed on a case-by-case basis to implement the
“Belgian Formula” for creating a de facto differential in COCOM favor-
ing China in comparison to the Soviet Union. There will be no public
statement of this policy.
24) We will consult with other countries to urge them to deny the
Soviet Union further credit.
25) We will work with our allies to urge the IFI’s and countries
with assistance programs to Afghanistan to terminate such assistance.
Economic Denial Measures on the USSR,” is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
VI, Soviet Union, Document 250.
6 At the request of 52 states, including the United States, the UN Security Council
convened January 5–9 but, due to a Soviet veto, failed to adopt a resolution calling for
the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan. An emergency special session of

Afghanistan
26) We will seek an amendment in the Foreign Assistance Bill to
except Pakistan from the restrictions of the Symington and Glenn Non-
proliferation Amendments so that it will be possible for us to provide
FMS and ESF.
The Department of State should immediately inform our allies
of our intention to take these actions and should urge appropriate
allied support.7
Zbigniew Brzezinski
7 See Document 146.
137.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 3, 1980
SUBJECT
The Stakes in Afghanistan And How We Should React (U)
The events in Afghanistan are a major historical turning point. The
Soviet invasion measurably raises the chances of US armed involve-
ment in an entirely new region of the world. At one stroke, the chances
of such involvement have now become far greater in Southwest Asia
than they are, for example, in Korea, another possible flashpoint. In
this regard we should firmly keep in mind that the two wars we have
fought since the Second World War, both of them against Communist
nations advised by the Kremlin, resulted from fundamental miscalcula-
tions by the other side as to our intentions. (S)
—North Korea would not have attacked South Korea on June 25,
1950, if Acheson had not specifically placed Korea outside the US
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
In the top right corner, Brzezinski wrote: “I agree and am pushing for more items. ZB.”
The memorandum is incorrectly dated January 3, 1979.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
defense perimeter and thereby reinforced the Kremlin’s belief that we
would not become directly involved on the Korean Peninsula. (S)
—The North Vietnamese would not have introduced the 320th and
324th divisions into South Vietnam during the fall of 1964 if they had
anticipated a US introduction of 500,000 American troops to meet the
challenge. It should not be lost sight of that in the autumn of 1964 we
were engaged in a political campaign during which Johnson was tarring
Goldwater as a warmonger and was stating repeatedly that American
soldiers would not be involved in a land war in Asia. The Vietnamese
took Johnson at his word—unfortunately. (S)
Afghanistan points like a dagger at both Iran and Pakistan. Nobody
at this point can predict with certitude that the United States would
not at some future point get drawn into a war which involved either
country. (S)
Furthermore, the Soviets and their Afghan puppets are going to
be extremely unpopular in Afghanistan for years to come. They will
consequently be looking for a means to consolidate the regime and
increase the popularity of Babrak or his successors. One way of doing
this, which will certainly occur to them, is the promotion of Afghan
national aspirations vis-a-vis both Pakistan and Iran. The impetus to
the Kremlin for adopting a high-risk policy will be very great. (S)
The challenge to the United States by the Soviet invasion is a long-
range one. It will be something which we will be facing over at least
the next decade. It is essential in dealing with this challenge, that we
think of it in global terms. We should respond to it by:
a. increasing defense cooperation with the Chinese up to, and
including, supply of defensive weapons, training, and intelligence
exchanges;
b. making life as difficult as we can for the Soviets and their Cuban
and Vietnamese surrogates in such places as Angola, Ethiopia, and
Cambodia;
c. moving ahead with our efforts to establish a viable base structure
throughout the world;
d. expanding the Rapid Deployment Force;
e. establishing a commission to study our manpower needs in the
expectation that the commission will recommend the reinstitution of
the draft (General Odom would be my candidate for executive secretary
of the commission);
f. establishing a firm security commitment to the Pakistanis;
g. shoring up the Turks;
h. using the invasion of Afghanistan as a means to pressure our
NATO Allies to stand firm on TNF, to maintain the three-percent

Afghanistan
commitment, and to establish a working group to deal with threats to
the peace outside the Treaty area;2
i. establishing as the first priority of ICA and our other information
disseminators the exposure of the Soviet, the Soviet/Cuban, and the
Soviet/Vietnamese threats to world peace;
j. removing various Congressional limitations on our ability to
undertake covert action in Africa, South Asia, and elsewhere; and
k. most importantly, increasing the quality of our conventional
forces to the point where neither the Kremlin nor any other government
could have doubts as to our capability to project conventional power
to any portion of the globe. (S)
2 A reference to NATO’s 1977 decision to undertake a long-term defense program
to modernize and standardize conventional and nuclear capabilities. The plan committed
budget increase. See “Final Communiqué” of the NATO Defense Planning Committee,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
138.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
USSR
SUBJECT
Soviet Intentions in Afghanistan [less than 1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[5½ lines not declassified]
1. [2 lines not declassified] discussed the Soviet invasion of Afghani-
stan. During the conversation he referred vaguely to the number of
Soviet divisions involved, but when pressed on the number, [less than
1 line not declassified] stated that the exact number of troops is not now
important because the Soviets will use whatever force is necessary to
crush the resistance and establish complete control. According to [less
than 1 line not declassified] the Soviet forces will then withdraw. (Source
comment: [less than 1 line not declassified] gave the impression that
this will be done quickly, and will not involve protracted military
involvement.)
2. [less than 1 line not declassified] wished to discuss the possible
political and economic losses to the Soviet Union as a result of the
invasion. He responded to comments on possible economic reprisals
by saying the USSR is not concerned about the possibility of trade
sanctions nor of a grain embargo. He stated that there are people in
the Soviet Union who feel a return to the Cold War is better for the
Soviet Union in the long run and Western economic pressures will
strengthen that group. He said that some people in the USSR feel
détente was a mistake and the invasion was a decisive way to end
détente. He pointed to the failure of the efforts to halt the arms race,
which had led to more defense spending instead of less. He noted that
the U.S. had refused to work with the Soviets on any level and that
the U.S. had boxed in the Soviets. (Source comment: [less than 1 line
not declassified] never stated which people felt boxed in, nor which
people wished to end détente.)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
copy received in the White House Situation Room.

Afghanistan
3. He said there are some people in the USSR who wish to act the
role of a super power, which means to be “unpunishable”. According
to [less than 1 line not declassified] the Afganistan invasion is allowing
that group in the Soviet leadership to prove to the world that the Soviet
Union is now truly a super power as the West is powerless to interfere.
4. [less than 1 line not declassified] stated he hoped the U.S. would
recognize the new government and work with it, as the new govern-
ment would bring stability to the region.
5. File [less than 1 line not declassified].
139.
Memorandum From Special Assistant [name not declassified]
to Director of Central Intelligence Turner1
Washington, January 3, 1980
SUBJECT
Support to Afghan Guerrillas
years we started increasing our support to the Meo tribesmen loyal to
Vang Pao.2 Better armed, the Meo did increase their harassment of the
Viet Cong. The increase in activities brought more casualties. We were
able to justify the loss of life on the basis that we were contributing to
the efforts of our allies in Vietnam. By 1975 several generations of Meo
tribesmen in Laos were dead and a substantial part of the tribe had to
go into exile.
2. I do not believe any responsible person in the Intelligence Com-
munity believes the Afghan guerrillas can oust the Soviets from
Afghanistan or even make their stay in the country untenable. At the
most the guerrillas will serve as pin pricks in an elephant’s hide. The
repercussions for them, however, are probably going to be fierce. Pro-
viding them more arms will merely increase the number of casualties
the guerrillas will suffer. Can we justify this to ourselves?
[name not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
restriction not declassified]. Turner initialed at the top of the memorandum on January 15.
2 Major General Vang Pao, Royal Lao Army, was the leader of the Hmong (Meo)
forces in Laos and Vietnam.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
140.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 3, 1980
SUBJECT
Strategic Reaction to the Afghanistan Problem
The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan is the first time since 1945
that the Soviet Union used its military forces directly to expand its
power. This took place even though we warned the Soviet Union of
adverse consequences. Moreover, Afghanistan is the seventh state since
1975 in which communist parties have come to power with Soviet guns
and tanks, with Soviet military power and assistance (Vietnam, Angola,
Laos, South Yemen, Cambodia, Ethiopia, and now probably Afghani-
stan). Four of these takeovers occurred since January 1977.
I think it is clear that the Soviets have discounted our likely reaction
and that they have concluded that our previous expressions of concern
need not be heeded. In effect, because we did not overreact to their
previous acts of assertiveness, they have discounted the likelihood of
a genuinely punitive reaction on our part to this extraordinary applica-
tion of Soviet military power.
In the light of the foregoing, I would like to urge you to consider
altering our formula on arms for China from “we will not sell arms to
China” to “we will not sell offensive arms to China.” This shift in
formulation would enable you to provide the Chinese with the over-
the-horizon radar and perhaps later with anti-tank weaponry. Given
the scale and the boldness of the Soviet move, these reactions are
both needed and hardly excessive. Moreover, they would communicate
tangibly our willingness to support those who are prepared to stand
up to the Soviets, and the Chinese are certainly in that category.
More broadly, we have to move deliberately to fashion a wider
security arrangement for the region, lest Soviet influence spread rapidly
from Afghanistan to Pakistan and Iran. I cannot emphasize strongly
enough the strategic consequences of such a development. It would
place in direct jeopardy our most vital interests in the Middle East.
1 Source: Carter Library, President’s Files, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign
corner. Next to the subject line, Brzezinski wrote: “(This was drafted before your very
eloquent statement this afternoon. But the recommendations still stand.)” This was a
possible reference to the White House statement read by Jody Powell on January 3. See
footnote 2, Document 136.

Afghanistan
The recommended subtle change in terminology, initiating a lim-
ited defense arrangement with China, could be the point of departure
for a wider security effort in the region. You are already moving firmly
on Pakistan, and I believe the Congress will support you. We should
implement rapidly your decisions on new bases in the Indian Ocean/
Gulf of Oman area, and survey teams will now be going out.
Beyond the above, we will need an aid package for Pakistan, and
that could be expensive, though it might be shared with Saudi Arabia.
Also, if we can stiffen Pakistan’s back, we should be in a position to
extend some aid to the Afghani rebels, in order to keep the Soviets
bogged down.
Finally, we need to do something to reassure the Egyptians, the
Saudis, and others on the Arabian peninsula that the U.S. is prepared
to assert its power, and that requires a visible military presence in the
area now. You might consider consulting with Sadat about military
deployment to an Egyptian base of a U.S. brigade for joint maneuvers.
This would be an impressive demonstration of U.S. determination to
contest, if necessary, Soviet military preeminence in the region.
The above recommendations require major decisions by you, but
I believe that a major historical turning point has been reached. You
have the opportunity to do what President Truman did on Greece
and Turkey, and I believe that this is desirable both for domestic and
international reasons.2 The country will respond to a firm call for
measured but also sustained action, and I am sure the Congressional
leadership will support you.
I would recommend that you raise the above issues at the breakfast,
and provide Harold with whatever guidance you think is appropriate
for his trip.3
2 See Document 127.
3 No record was found of the January 4 foreign policy breakfast meeting attended
by Brown, Vance, Brzezinski, Donovan, Jordan, and Cutler in preparation for Brown’s
upcoming trip to China. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
141.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
China1
3285. Military addressees treat as Specat Exclusive. Subject: Consul-
tations With China on the Afghan Situation. Ref: USNATO 8988.2
1. S—Entire text.
Summary
At the personal request of the Deputy Secretary, EUR Assistant
Secretary George Vest and EA Assistant Secretary Dick Holbrooke
called in Chinese Ambassador Chai Zemin Jan 3 afternoon for a detailed
briefing on the results of our consultations with our allies on actions
to be taken in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Vest
outlined options for actions affecting U.S.–USSR relations currently
being considered by the President. Vest and Holbrooke stressed that
we consider this meeting only the beginning of a process by which we
will keep the Chinese closely informed of our actions, and said that
SecDef Harold Brown would be prepared to go into even greater detail
during his visit to Beijing.3 Chai condemned the Soviet Union’s “naked
aggression” in stronger language and with more emotion than we have
heard him use before. He emphasized: the urgent need to awaken
Third World and non-aligned countries to the dangers of close relation-
ships with the Soviets; stressed the essentiality of a campaign to mobi-
lize world opinion to condemn Soviet aggression against Afghanistan;
and underscored the importance of taking concrete steps to strengthen
Afghanistan’s neighbors. Chai also expressed the hope that the U.S.
would not do anything vis-à-vis Iran that might detract from world
attention to the gravity of the Afghanistan situation. He said that the
Chinese were consulting closely with Pakistan on efforts by Islamabad
to persuade Iran to release the American hostages as soon as possible,
so as to lower U.S.-Iran tensions and deprive the USSR of a possible
target of opportunity. End summary.
2. Vest opened the meeting with an exposition of the information
on the Deputy Secretary’s consultations with his British, French, Italian,
German and Canadian counterparts at London contained reftel
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Tokyo, and CINCPAC. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House
Situation Room.
consultations in London. See footnote 2, Document 107.

Afghanistan
(repeated to Beijing Jan. 3). He also gave Chai a copy of the joint
statement to the press issued at the meeting’s conclusion.4 Vest stressed
that all present had agreed that the Soviet actions in Afghanistan could
not be regarded as a localized incident, and that they had serious
implications for the interests of each country. As such, they justified
both special efforts to assist countries on the perimeter of Afghanistan
and adjustments in bilateral relations with the USSR to bring home to
the Soviets the penalties that must attach to such conduct and to deter
further Soviet military adventurism. This sense of urgency, coupled
with resolve to display displeasure in bilateral relationships with the
USSR and to maintain and enhance our common defense capabilities
had been even more greatly in evidence at the NATO Council meeting
held in Brussels on New Year’s Day. Vest noted that eight of the
Ambassadors out of fifteen had cut short vacations to return to Brussels
for this important discussion, rather than leave the matter to their
Chargés. At both the London and Brussels meetings there had been a
sense that the long term behavior of the USSR would be decisively
affected by a serious response to the immediate problem of the events
in Afghanistan.
3. Vest said that at the London meeting, after an initial exchange
of intelligence on the Afghan situation, the participants had moved
quickly to the conclusion that none of their Missions at Kabul should
maintain political contact of any kind with the new puppet regime.
There was a consensus that the new regime was a puppet government,
without any claim to legitimacy. The Italians had already withdrawn
their Ambassador for consultations; the Germans planned to do so.
Both would reduce the size of their Missions at Kabul. The UK, FRG,
Canada and Italy were considering reducing or freezing all bilateral aid
activities; the FRG and Canada were reevaluating aid to Afghanistan
through multilateral agencies as well. At the same time, there was
much discussion of the implications of the events in Afghanistan for
Pakistan, and the participants considered now to coordinate their
respective economic and security programs to reassure Pakistan in face
of the highly destabilizing situation in its neighboring states.
4. With respect to the USSR, all participants agreed on the need
for strong public condemnation. (All had in fact already issued state-
ments of condemnation, which were exchanged.) All considered it
important to encourage attention to and condemnation of the Soviet
from USNATO, the joint statement was “rather bland at French insistence.” The text of
the statement and Christopher’s remarks to the press was transmitted in telegram 25696
File, D800004–0385)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
aggression by other countries, especially Islamic, non-aligned and
Third World nations. This would be especially important in bringing
the matter before the United Nations, which all agreed should be done
urgently, whether before the Security Council or General Assembly.
All agreed on the importance of informing China of their deliberations;
and actions; and, Vest said, he was pleased to be able to do so.
5. Vest said that a wide range of actions in each country’s relations
with the USSR had been thrown out for discussion. In no particular
order of priority or sequence of implementation, these included:
—cancelling all high level visits of political or military significance;
—cancelling many of the extensive social and cultural activities
that have become extensive in West European relations with the USSR;
—increasing the level of restrictions on trade of certain items, espe-
cially those embodying advanced technology;
—reconsidering the extension or renewal of credit arrangements
(a common element of WE-USSR relations);
—considering cancelling or restricting grain sales, or limiting them
to certain levels (a matter primarily concerning the U.S.).
No firm decisions had been made. Rather each country would
consider what it could and should do, and continue the process of
consultation. Détente activities between Western and Eastern Europe
were being revised and the general feeling was to go slow on these,
while not cancelling them. (Vest cited the CSCE Review Conference at
Madrid as an example.) The NATO decision on modernization of the-
ater nuclear forces of December had been confirmed, as had the firm
intention of all to maintain and build-up military forces in the Euro-
pean area.
6. The U.S. had taken these consultations into account in developing
its own actions, said Vest. He noted that Afghanistan had already been
brought to the United Nations, while our Ambassador to the USSR,
Mr. Watson had been recalled for consultations. The President has
asked for delay in consideration of the SALT II treaty on the Senate
floor in light of the Afghan situation so that he and the Congress
could further assess Soviet actions and intentions. The treaty had not,
however been withdrawn. As decided by the NATO Ministerial meet-
ing in December, we would go forward with plans to modernize theater
nuclear forces in Europe, while continuing to make preparations for
the arms control discussions that were integral to the NATO decision.
Holbrooke added that SecDef Brown would brief the Chinese in detail
on this NATO decision.
7. Vest said he wished to outline a series of actions now being
considered by the President on which decisions might be made as early
as Jan. 4, these included (again in no particular order):

Afghanistan
[Omitted here is a list of specific actions; see Document 136.]
8. Some marginal mention had also been made of cancelling partici-
pation in the Olympic Games. Vest personally believed that for sound
reasons this, which he wished to mention only because of the wide
press attention the idea had received, was most unlikely to come about.
9. Chai pointed out that food imports were crucial to the USSR,
which imports 20 million tons of grain per year from the U.S. He asked
whether we would be able to reduce this amount or cancel existing
contracts? Vest replied that this was something at which we were
looking but pointed to the need for agreement of other grain exporters,
such as Canada, France, Australia and Argentina. Chai agreed the
matter was very complicated.
10. In summary, Vest and Holbrooke emphasized the attention
that Afghanistan was receiving from the very highest officials of West
European governments, and the U.S. desire to keep China informed
of these deliberations and their results. SecDef Brown would wish to
continue the discussion and exchange of views begun with Ambassador
Chai in this meeting.
11. Chai thanked Vest and Holbrooke for the detailed briefing and
expressed appreciation for the efforts Western countries were consider-
ing taking to boycott the USSR. The Soviet Union’s naked aggression
in Afghanistan needed to receive the very strongest condemnation
from all countries, he said. What had happened in Afghanistan was
part of a pattern of repeated aggression carried out directly or indirectly
by the USSR through mercenaries or subversion. If this pattern of
behavior is not condemned and halted now, the USSR would continue
it and do to other countries what it had done to Afghanistan. “The
world will then know no peace.” Chai said that unfortunately there
were still some countries who looked on the USSR as a “benefactor,
their best friend” and a “natural ally” and had not yet seen the true
features of the USSR, which was an aggressor nation with hegemonic
ambitions. Instead of condemning the Soviets “criminal acts of suppres-
sion” in Afghanistan, they tried to whitewash them. Some countries
still rested their hopes for peace and security on the signing of “peace
and friendship treaties in exchange for Soviet protection.” Some still
place their hopes of preventing Soviet expansionism in the maintenance
of friendly relations with the USSR and the pursuit of détente. The
Soviet invasion of a sovereign neighboring state shows its true features.
Such behavior could never be justified. No one could possibly imagine
that a small country such as Afghanistan (that had had rather close
relations with the USSR after Daoud’s coup d’état) could possibly
threaten Soviet security. But, not content with what was after all a
rather favorable position in Afghanistan, the USSR had instigated coup
after coup to bring the country fully within its control. Afghanistan

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
had signed a peace and friendship treaty in hopes of securing peaceful
relations with the USSR. It had been surprised when the USSR neverthe-
less invaded it and began carrying out its massacres of the Afghan
population.
12. Chai said that he agreed completely with Vest on the need to
mobilize world opinion to condemn the Soviet action as much as possi-
ble, to discredit the USSR, and to cause all to recognize that the USSR
was no one’s natural ally but rather an international gangster; not peace
loving but hegemonist and expansionist. It was of equal importance
to drive home the point that signing peace and friendship treaties did
not bring the USSR to treat the signatory state in a friendly way. Rather,
to do so was similar to “going to bed with a tiger or a wolf” and to
run a constant risk of being swallowed.
13. Beyond this, however, Chai said it was important to mobilize
all countries to take measures to boycott the USSR. And it was vitally
important to support the nations around Afghanistan and to reinforce
their confidence. For its part, China was taking appropriate measures.
It had issued a strong statement of condemnation and Chinese newspa-
pers and publications were keeping up a steady barrage of criticism.
China was consulting with Afghanistan’s neighbors, with the non-
aligned and with the members of ASEAN on a worldwide campaign
to alert the world to the Soviets southward drive to the Indian Ocean.
The Soviet objective was to encircle the Middle East and eventually
Europe. Chai agreed with Holbrooke that the Afghan situation and its
implications would be a principal issue for discussion during SecDef
Brown’s visit to Beijing. Vest commented that Chai’s analysis and
comments on the meaning of the Soviet move into Afghanistan were
almost identical with ours and those of the five other countries at the
London meeting. All were in agreement that what we did now would
decisively influence the rapidity with which the USSR would move on
to its longer range goals of encirclement, and reaching the Indian Ocean.
14. Chai said that some Third World countries and members of
the Non-Aligned Movement depended on the USSR for money and
foreign aid and so “toed the Soviet line,” but that Afghan developments
will make them see part of the truth. China believed therefore that
while the invasion of Afghanistan was a bad thing, it would also have
some positive effects. By this act, the USSR has “exposed itself” for all
to see, and become, in Chairman Mao’s words, a “teacher by nega-
tive example.”
15. Chai said that, as he had stressed to Secretary Vance at dinner
the previous evening, he hoped the U.S. would continue to adjust its
policies toward Pakistan and Turkey in order to strengthen, support
and assist them, boost their confidence and their capability for resist-
ance. He said the Iranian situation warranted special attention in this

Afghanistan
context. The USSR sought to take advantage of the turmoil in Iran.
Should that country fall into Soviet hands, the USSR’s drive to the
south and push to the Indian Ocean would have succeeded. Vest com-
mented that we hoped that Iran’s leaders would now realize who their
main enemy was and that the U.S. was not their enemy. We hoped a
gradual restoration of dialog might take place as a result of what the
Soviets had done in Afghanistan. But, he stressed it was important that
other countries remind Iran of the perils of having the USSR rather
than the U.S. as a neighbor. Chai said that China was consulting closely
with Pakistan in the hope that Pakistan could work on Iran to release
its American hostages as soon as possible. He expressed the hope that
U.S. relations with Iran would not be made “too tense” and that current
tensions would, in fact, ease. It was important that nothing be done to
distract world attention from the gravity of the Afghan situation. China
hoped that Iran’s attention could be diverted to Afghanistan.
16. In closing, Chai stressed that what had occurred in Afghanistan
was of major strategic importance. It could not be regarded as a local-
ized incident. He hoped the U.S. and China could cooperate effectively
on this issue. Vest responded that we would stay in close contact.
Holbrooke added that Sec Def Brown would have additional informa-
tion on what the U.S. and China should consider doing to achieve our
mutual objectives in this matter, which he would be discussing in detail
with China’s leaders in Beijing the following week.
17. For Tokyo: You may draw on this in briefing Japanese.5
Vance
being considered by the Government of Japan to protest Soviet actions in Afghanistan.
These included cancellation of diplomatic visits and certain restrictions on trade and
business agreements. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800019–
0271)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
142.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
65. Subject: (U) Afghanistan, Pakistan, the USSR, and the United
States.
1. (C) Summary: The Soviet rape of Afghanistan during the last
week of December 1979 has qualitatively changed the geo-political
situation in South Asia. It has made Pakistan’s worst-case analysis
come true and produced a profound sense of unease in a nation already
wanting in sense of purpose and security. Differences in perceptions
in South Asia, fanned by reports of outside military aid for Pakistan,
may exacerbate relations between India and Pakistan as well.
2. (C) South Asia can be a fertile area through which to channel
our regional response to the Soviet grab; Pakistan, in particular, needs
help, and if it is perceived to be adequate, to be funded, and to be
carefully orchestrated—with full consultations—such help as we may
provide should be welcome here. But the regional and world situation
is much more complicated than the environment in which the 1959
bilateral agreement was formulated, and we can be sure that actions
meant to reassure Pakistan are in fact reassuring in Islamabad (and
salutary in Kabul and Moscow) only if we consult closely, fully, and
continuously with Pakistan. Beyond South Asia, the Soviet actions in
Afghanistan pose a critical juncture in U.S.-Soviet relations, and it is
in arenas other than South Asia that the main U.S. response should be
registered. End summary.
3. (U) Background: During all of the last century of the British Raj
in South Asia, a dominant theme in British geo-political policy was to
make safe the Empire’s Indian realm by ensuring that at no time was
a power inimical to British interests permitted to determine the destin-
ies of the Kingdom of Kabul at the head of the best land route into
South Asia from the west and north. As Czarist Russian influence
filled out the vast Central Asian reaches—epitomized by sweeps of
swashbuckling Cossacks—the British fought numerous small and sev-
eral major campaigns in the harsh topography of Afghanistan to under-
line their determination. In 1880, the issues were significant enough to
play a role in the return to power in England of Gladstone.
Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Sent for information to Colombo, Dacca, Kathmandu,
Karachi, Lahore, New Delhi, Moscow, Beijing, London, USNATO, and Kabul.

Afghanistan
4. (U) The British aim was to keep Afghanistan a buffer, in the
classic sense, and so it remained through the end of April 1978 when
a Communist-led, armed forces-mounted coup d’état in Kabul swept
aside the traditional power structure and imposed, for the first time,
a government subservient to the rulers of Moscow. The buffer was
gone, and the heirs to the British Raj in South Asia—Pakistan in particu-
lar, India slightly removed—reflected in varying ways their concern
over its demise.
5. (C) Still there was hope that Afghan nationalism would temper
the Marxism of the new Afghan rulers. The growing strength of a
home-grown Afghan insurgency against the rulers of Kabul gave hope
that in the short run those rulers would be too preoccupied to meddle
farther afield, while in the long run they might even be replaced.
6. (U) All of that has changed with the Soviet invasion of Afghani-
stan on 25–27 December and the subsequent installation in Kabul of a
puppet government whose power rests exclusively on gun barrels of
Soviet armor—the latter-day Cossacks. For Afghanistan, and for the
nations of South Asia generally, the Cossacks have finally arrived, and
nothing will ever be the same again.
7. (C) Implications: For Pakistan, Soviet actions at end of December
1979 are a worst-case analysis come true. Much has been written, in
official and academic circles, about Pakistan’s inherent sense of insecur-
ity and inferiority. Born of a negative—a desire to carve out an area
for Muslims to live their lives free of Hindu dominance—Pakistan has
been dominated by the quest through the 32 years of its existence to
preserve its independence through the manipulation of outside forces.
8. (C) Pakistan has successively chosen patrons in hopes of creating
a constituency outside South Asia which would remain interested in
and committed to Pakistan’s integrity and independence. The relation-
ship with the U.S., dating back to 1954, had the USSR as its focus; this
remains the core of the U.S.-Pakistan relationship despite the disap-
pointments of the Pakistan side about U.S. “failure” to defend Pakistan
against India. The post-1962 Pakistani relationship with China had
India, the USSR, and the U.S. as its focus; it remains a shared Pak-
Chinese perception vis-à-vis both India and the USSR and has weath-
ered successfully the transformation of the U.S.-Chinese relationship
from hostility to friendship.
9. (C) Later Pakistani fascination with the Islamic and non-aligned
worlds reflects both a further effort to diversify support for Pakistan
from beyond its borders and a distrust of a seemingly unreliable USG.
Playing a role on the international Islamic stage gave Bhutto—during
a period of national reconstruction following the 1971 Bangladesh deba-
cle—an opportunity to court Arab and Persian oil money as a way of
compensating for the decline in American assistance levels. The end

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
of the Nehru-Nasser relationship enabled Pakistan to crack through
India’s long blockage of Pakistani efforts to use its Islamic heritage to
forge bonds with the Arabs.
10. (C) The decline into irrelevance, and finally collapse, of CENTO
in 1979 enabled Pakistan to shed the only substantial block against its
entry into the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), a Third World forum
valuable in Pakistan eyes, however lame (and pro-Communist) its
recent deliberations in comparison with the great NAM days of the
early 1960s. A determined multilateralist, with a strong anti-Western
bent, Foreign Advisor Agha Shahi has given these multilateral impulses
renewed vitality during the present martial law government’s 30
months at the helm, adopting for himself the international role—albeit
diminished—that Bhutto had sought and expanding Pakistan’s influ-
ence in the Group of 77, the UN, the Islamic Conference, and the NAM.
11. (C) Pakistan’s role in the non-proliferation field since the explo-
sion of an Indian device ended South Asia’s nuclear virginity in 1974
has also been an important element of its quest for security. This has
featured regular promotion of a South Asia nuclear free zone—opposed
by India but supported by a growing number of UN members, includ-
ing the U.S. In later years, it has also included a decision to develop
Pakistan’s nuclear capabilities to the threshold of a nuclear device—
and consequent nuclear parity with India—as an additional pressure
on India to come to terms on a nuclear-free regime for the region. This
last has brought Pakistan directly into conflict with American non-
proliferation objectives, straining the Pakistan-U.S. tie and depriving
Pakistan of most U.S. assistance.
12. (C) Pakistani isolation and weakness: As Pakistan enters the
1980s, it feels weak, threatened, and isolated, notwithstanding its per-
sistent efforts to enhance its security. Its patrons appear unreliable
or stretched to their maximum utility. The United States seems less
interested in playing a role in the region than it once did, and its
energies seem sapped by a failure of consensus within, by its non-
proliferation concerns, and by the Iranian distraction. The prospect of
an Indira Gandhi government or alternatively continued instability in
India is worrying. Whatever comfort Zia and Agha Shahi may derive
from solidarity with the Iranian revolution, the Ayatollah is no substi-
tute for a strong and friendly Shahinshah in Tehran. And to the north,
the Russian bear gets nastier, more aggressive, and less restrained. In
Islamabad, meanwhile, the Soviet Embassy seems bent on a new activist
campaign to sow dissent and discord.
13. (C) Domestically, Pakistan’s political fabric is fragile, having
once again backed away from popular elections which, without PPP
participation, would doubtless have produced Janata-like instability in
the classic Pakistan pattern. The country has failed to evolve a viable

Afghanistan
compact for the self-government of its disparate and dissimilar regions.
And despite a renewed commitment by this leadership to the language
and spirit of traditional Islam, it has failed to evolve a national ethic
to transform the negativism of its founding impulse into a viable and
enduring nationalism in positive terms.
14. (C) All of this is made worse by the knowledge that Pakistan’s
Armed Forces are not what they ought to be. Weakened by obsolescence
and financial constraints, haunted by a losing record on the battlefield,
and distracted from its military pursuits by its direct involvement in
running the country for nearly half its 32 years, the Pakistan Armed
Forces have lost considerable effectiveness. They march smartly but
appear increasingly afflicted with inefficiency in performing their mili-
tary duties. While it would be perhaps dangerous to over-generalize,
the American Mission’s experience on 21 Nov. in awaiting ‘rescue’ by
a Pakistan Army whose ability to move and to communicate any more
efficiently than Napoleon’s is instructive, and worrying.2
15. (C) A further complication for Pakistan in even responding to
likely Western offers of assistance and support is the variegated nature
of the interests Pakistan pursues abroad in search of security. Asked
on 31 Dec. by a Western journalist how best the U.S. could help Pakistan
in the present time, Agha Shahi unhesitatingly replied, “settle its differ-
ences with Iran.” This would uncomplicate the situation for Pakistan.
On the one hand, Pakistan doubtless welcomes the possible new West-
ern embrace events in Kabul may produce; on the other, it finds the
prospect of too public an embrace embarrassing and counter to its
pursuit of acceptability and support in and from other quarters and
sources. Some indeed fear such an embrace will increase Soviet
bellicosity.
16. (C) Pakistan’s options are limited, however, all talk of accommo-
dation with the Soviet Union notwithstanding. Only the United States,
and to a lesser degree, China can provide the hardware Pakistan needs
and the international support it yearns for at the present time. But
the conservative Islamics—especially the staunchly anti-Communist
Saudis—can provide Islamic legitimacy and the bankroll to fund the
military purchases and the development projects Pakistan so desper-
ately needs.
17. (C) The heart of Pakistan’s problem of insecurity, however, lies
deep at home, not abroad. Thoughtful Pakistanis, even in the immediate
wake of Soviet actions in Kabul, do not really expect Soviet armored
columns to proceed through the Torkham and Chaman checkpoints,
down the Khyber and Bolan Passes and onto the Indus Plain. However,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
the presence of these latter-day Cossacks in Kabul, the ruthless determi-
nation with which they were deployed to topple a government, and
the expectation that they will in fact fan out through the country, are
a source of unease whose full impact has yet to be felt on Pakistan’s
internal divisions and unresolved domestic pressures. It will haunt
the leadership, and it will dominate public attention, forcing much of
Pakistan’s international and policy focus through a one-issue prism.
18. (C) Sense of purpose: Pakistanis as a whole do not have much
faith in their nation or in its rulers. They routinely assume that Pakistan
has little control over its destiny as a nation, and there is wide-spread
acceptance that everything that happens in Pakistan is the result of
maneuvers by forces engaged in a larger game outside the country.
They are prepared to credit or blame the United States for almost every
development, from the rise of the Islamic Jamaat-i-Islami to the fall of
Bhutto and the postponement of elections. Some of this is standard
Third World fare, a legacy of anti-Western independence movements
in which all flaws were blamed on the former ruling power; independ-
ence in this case simply removed the former ruler and replaced his
pressures with diversified pressures associated with regional intrigue
or super power politics. Some of it is simply a mirror of a South Asian
Islamic sense of insecurity in a hostile Hindu world. Some of it is
obviously a flight from responsibility, a “cop-out.” But a large part of
it simply reflects Pakistan’s pre-occupation with the search for outside
support and a tacit acknowledgement—correctly—that Pakistan cannot
go it alone.
19. (C) U.S. response: In our response to the events in Afghanistan,
we need to be aware of the limits of the Pakistan ability to stand up
to the Soviet threat and even to accept our offers of support. The
reserved Pakistani response to our public reaffirmation of the 1959
bilateral agreement and the public hints—unconfirmed by any official
notifications or consultations—that we are prepared to do things in
the arms aid area which would assist Pakistan is illustrative. Most
editorials in the government and the independent press have come
out against acceptance of “unreliable” U.S. military aid, counselling a
cautious approach to any embrace of the USG, and principal reliance
on multilateral organizations including the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Islamic groupings. GOP response thus far has been cautious—
and skeptical. Pakistan is not the same place it was in 1959, when it
would have welcomed warmly such public posturing by the U.S. In
1980, such USG pronouncements, without the benefit of full consulta-
tions with the Pakistanis, mis-judge this Pakistani sensitivity as well
as the new situation in the region.
20. (C) Pakistan is, of course, a useful channel through which
to demonstrate our concern for the situation in the region and our

Afghanistan
determination to stand with our friends, but our actions must be sub-
stantive—they must go beyond what we might have been willing to
do in 1978 or earlier in 1979. Moreover, they must be the result not of
unilateral U.S. decisions, broadcast to the world, but rather of close
consultation with the Pakistanis. The 1959 bilateral rests on a shared
perception of the threat from the USSR, which continues. But we and
Pakistan have drifted far apart on our perceptions of other aspects of
the world situation, notably (but not exclusively) the Iran situation,
nuclear non-proliferation, etc. U.S. actions aimed at reassuring Pakistan
can achieve this purpose only if they are perceived to be reassuring in
both Islamabad and Washington. They are not apt to be reassuring if
they cause alarm in Pakistan or create false expectations here and false
fears in India. Confidence in our efforts to reassure can be guaranteed
only by close and meaningful and continuous consultations, if not by
special emissaries, then by quiet diplomatic exchange.
21. (C) Pakistan and U.S.: As for steps remaining to be done, the
agenda is potentially rich.
—We have already reaffirmed the applicability of the 1959 bilateral
in public; we need to do it formally, either by diplomatic note or, better,
by inclusion of this subject in a letter from President Carter.3 We need
quickly to engage in substantive discussions with the GOP on GOP
needs, and I would add, we must be prepared to go much further than
we have so far indicated if our will is not to be challenged and our
aid discounted. Cash sales do not aid make. What we have said in
public thus far has confused, rather than clarified, and it raises the
prospect of our being wrongly blamed for one thing in Islamabad and
for the reverse in New Delhi—to no one’s advantage except Moscow’s.
—We probably need to consider GOP appeals to support the
Afghan exiles in their continued fight against the Soviet-backed Gov-
ernment of Afghanistan. We should be mindful, however, that the exile
community in Pakistan increasingly represents little more than itself
and controls or is involved in activities only along the border. They
have little relationship with or responsibility for the success of anti-
regime insurgents operating deep inside Afghanistan. Aid to refu-
gees—now nearing 400,000—is another matter.
—We need also to consider the whole of our support relationship
with Pakistan, not just arms sales, however dramatic, symbolic, and
relevant they may be. Our focus should be on arms and the means to
pay for them, on economic assistance and debt rescheduling, as well
as on P.L.–480 and other non-FAA disbursements. And we should not
under-estimate the value of political support through consultations
3 The proposed letter is Document 159.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
and agreed gestures. But we should, more importantly, look beyond
the region to the U.S.-Soviet relationship which it seems to me is
brought into a critical juncture by the Soviet rape of Afghanistan and
should be the principal forum in which the American reaction should
be played out.
Hummel
143.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, January 4, 1980
USSR-AFGHANISTAN: Situation report
Despite press reports of heavy Soviet participation in counter-insurgency
operations [1 line not declassified] the fight against the rebels is still being
left to the deteriorating Afghan Army.2
The Soviets have, however, assumed control of Afghan operations. Soviet
advisers were in charge of the efforts to restore order in Qandahar. The air
supply of units in the field, interrupted during the Soviet intervention, has
been revived under Soviet supervision.
Afghan units in areas such as Herat and Mazar-e Sharif, where Soviet
troops have been present for several days, report no serious difficulties. A
number of units along the Pakistani border, however, remain under siege. In
Konarha Province, a 400-man unit has been wiped out and a regimental
commander in the provincial capital has come out against the new government.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only.
The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The
article printed here was found in this form.
2 Reports to this effect include: “Battles Reported in 3 Provincial Afghan Capitals,”
January 5, surmised that the press reports “probably originate among Afghan exiles,
who tend to exaggerate rebel successes.” [text not declassified] (Central Intelligence Agency,
Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presiden-
1979, PDBs)

Afghanistan
[section heading not declassified]
[1 paragraph (19 lines) not declassified]
Pakistan-US
[1 paragraph (12 lines) not declassified]
144.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
Pakistani Ambassador Sultan Khan
Dr. Brzezinski
Ambassador Sultan Khan called on Dr. Brzezinski on January 4th,
1980. Shaikh and Thornton sat in. Sultan opened with an expression
of gratitude for Brzezinski’s public reaffirmation of the 1959 agreement.
Brzezinski noted that this had been done at the instruction of the Presi-
dent. Sultan went on to stress Pakistan’s sense of isolation and the
questions that Pakistan had about whether the level of interest now
visible in Washington will be durable. (S)
Brzezinski confirmed our view of the Soviet action in Afghanistan
as one of major and lasting importance, carrying with it a threat to
Iran and Pakistan. He emphasized that the Soviet action should not
be cost-free and that the Afghan resistance should get widespread
support. He reassured Sultan that we will act, preferably in concert
with other countries, to meet Pakistan’s security needs and we will
consult with Congress to reduce impediments to security assistance.
Secretary Brown will be discussing the situation fully in Beijing. (S)
Brzezinski stressed that continuation of Pakistani “ambiguity” about
its nuclear intentions poses a difficult problem. While we are not mak-
ing any specific linkage at this point, the Pakistanis must understand
that cooperation, especially for the long haul, once the drama of the
moment subsides, will be much easier if the “ambiguity” is resolved.
The situation has changed in South Asia, and Pakistan should rethink
its position just as we have rethought ours. Sultan reiterated Pak posi-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Brzezinski’s office.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
tions and said that Pakistan could not abandon its nuclear efforts.
Brzezinski responded that we are not asking abandonment, but a greater
Pakistani realization that we must minimize all problems between
On the problem of assistance to the Afghan insurgents, which
Brzezinski again emphasized, Sultan said that Pakistani actions would
depend on their perceptions of US assistance and reliability. Brzezinski
said that we are considering what we can do in military and economic
terms, in addition to public statements. He said that the President
would be stating our initial reaction soon. (S)
Sultan recalled that the Pakistanis had asked Ambassador Hummel
whether the US was prepared to talk in specifics, and what the extent
and nature of US aid would be. Pakistan needs an answer. Brzezinski
agreed that the US and Pakistan should discuss this as well as the
multilateral support that could be generated, and what could jointly
be done for the Afghan rebels. The USG would also continue to consult
with other governments and with Congress, and would fashion a tangi-
ble response to Pakistan’s needs. (S)
Both sides noted that each seemed to be waiting for the other to
take the next step. Thornton stressed that in order to make a realistic
presentation, we need a better general idea of what Pakistan thinks it
needs, even if Pakistan is not ready to make specific requests. Sultan
agreed that a US response that fell far short of Pakistani hopes would
be counterproductive. Brzezinski pointed out that we cannot generate
a massive package instantly, and we will need to talk to others. Sultan
hoped that this process would not take months. (S)

Afghanistan
145.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State and the White House1
79. Dept pls repeat to New Delhi and others as desired. Dept
Subject: (S) Afghanistan Reaction: President Zia’s 5 Jan. Discussion
With Ambassador.
1. (S) Entire text; strictly protect foreign government information.
This is an action message.
January for a chat; with him were Foreign Advisor Agha Shahi, Foreign
Secretary Shahnawaz (both of whom I had seen earlier in the day),
and MFA notetaker Farooq Rana. A/DCM Hagerty accompanied me.
3. Subject was Afghanistan, which Zia said he and his advisors
had been discussing and would be examining further in next few days
when Pak Ambs in Moscow and Kabul would be back in town for
meetings. Events of 27 January [December], he said, constitute a fateful
“moment in history as far as Pakistan is concerned.” And Pakistan
faces “decision which direction to take.” He recapped other major
decisions Pakistan had taken during last 32 years, touching on decision
to sign 1954 agreement with us,2 to enter Baghdad Pact/CENTO, to
join SEATO, then to leave those alliances, and to join with the Non-
Aligned Movement. Most of these decisions related to Pakistan security
considerations, and Pakistan took its decisions to suit its perception of
what circumstances and its best security interests required.
4. Now, he said, Pakistan “stands at threshold of decision with
only two options: it can either toe the Soviet line, or it can again line
up with the Free World. And if the latter, the question is who will
support Pakistan and in what magnitude?”
5. He said he “had been pleasantly surprised” by President Carter’s
very timely telephone call.3 He said he had told Carter that Pakistan
had come to feel that U.S. did not “care for this region . . . that you’d
written us off.” He appreciated President Carter’s assessment that a
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
copy that was received in the White House Situation Room. In the upper right corner,
Carter wrote: “Cy, Zbig: Pak←U.S. Commitments should be spelled out clearly &
approved personally by me. C.”
2 The United States-Pakistan Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement was signed in
3 See Document 111.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
“qualitative change” had taken place in the region with the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan and said he told Carter he would be discussing
with Amb Hummel how to approach Pakistani requirements and how
best to proceed from here in light of events in Afghanistan. Zia said
he was especially encouraged by Carter assurance that he would do
his best “to keep our differences away from this important issue.”
6. He then reviewed recent Afghan-Pakistan events, noting that
short of involving itself physically, all concerned had said the USSR
would go to any lengths to protect the existence of the regime that
overthrew Daoud in April 1978. “But in the end, the Russians have
become involved physically” in massive numbers, with three divisions
in Afghanistan already and 5–7 divisions poised to enter. He had
reports that Soviet troops have been seen no more than ten miles
from Parachinar, on Pak-Afghan border; they already occupy Ghazni,
Jalalabad, and Kandahar. “We will confront them, no doubt,” he said,
“but we must know where we stand.”
7. He recapitulated his discussion with Soviet Amb last week in
which Soviet Amb asked for “understanding” of Soviet position. “What
understanding?” Zia says he asked; “You have committed aggression
against my neighbor. You say the regime invited you in. Who invited
you?” When Amb said Babrak, Zia replied that Babrak was not in
power when troops descended on Kabul. Soviet Amb fudged, stressing
Soviet friendliness for Pakistan and emphasizing gains which could
accrue from cooperation between the two countries. Zia says he
demurred, citing Pakistan principles and the presence of Soviet troops
in Afghanistan. “Will you get someone to call you into Pakistan too?”
he asked.
8. Soviets have not issued “threats against us,” Zia said, but the
line “is clear. If they can enter Afghanistan, they can enter Pakistan
too.” He added his concerns about India to this mix as well, concerns
based on presence of Indira Gandhi as either “king-maker or queen
herself.”4 He noted Soviet relationship with India and Indian noises
about possible arms for Pakistan from Pakistan friends. “India,” he
said, “can forget that we will ever look east after what has happened
in Afghanistan. It would be in India’s interest to share our concern
about that.” But, he concluded, Pakistan must know where it stands
with the U.S. Brzezinski statement says U.S. will stand by 1959 agree-
ment, even to “defending Pakistan, if necessary.” President Carter’s
statement of 4 January “gives impression that nuclear issue need not
4 Indira Gandhi became Prime Minister of India on January 14.

Afghanistan
be an obstacle;” Pakistan needs to know precisely what America pro-
poses to do to help Pakistan.5
9. I described for him in some detail the tough measures in Soviet-
U.S. relations Pres Carter announced 4 January citing them as concrete
evidences of seriousness with which USG views Soviet actions in
Afghanistan. I described for him meetings which have been taking
place in Washington and my expectation that I would shortly have the
kind of information he sought. I also told him of our conversations, in
Delhi and in Washington, with Indian officials in which we told them
flatly we do not accept Indian views on the subject of arms for Pakistan.
10. Zia said he is looking forward to visit to Islamabad of Lord
Carrington on 14th and has been encouraged by what he has seen and
heard of response from other friendly countries in Europe and Asia.6
I briefed him on Christopher conversations in London and at NATO
HQ.7 He also expressed hope that proposed meeting of Islamic Confer-
ence would condemn Afghanistan and possibly aid in easing Iran-
U.S. dispute. I stressed to him our view—as already expressed to Pak
FonAdvisor and FonSec—that Khomeini policy was providing oppor-
tunity for Soviets to meddle. Shahi chimed in to say he had made this
point to both Gotabzadeh and members of the Revolutionary Council,
including Khomeini, but was not sure what effect he had had.
11. Zia reverted to his original point, after a brief discussion of
various theories to explain Soviet actions in Afghanistan. He said he
hoped to hear from Washington “very soon.” He said he did not wish
“to create the impression that we are scared or going down the drain”
. . . but there is an urgent need to “know who is standing by us.”
We need “clear-cut assurances and an idea specifically what will be
provided. If taken literally, President Carter’s statement could mean
everything,” he said; “we need to know for sure.”
12. I said I would convey his message immediately to Washington
and expressed the hope that my instructions would not be long in
coming.
5 In his Oval Office address, January 4, Carter laid out the actions his administration
was taking in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. He pledged: “Along with
other countries, we will provide military equipment, food, and other assistance to help
Pakistan defend its independence and national security against the seriously increased
threat it now faces from the North.” For the text of his address, see Public Papers: Carter,
Foundations of Foreign Policy, Document 136.
from Islamabad, January 16. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
13. Comment: None of us has yet seen account of Brzezinski conver-
sation with Pak Ambassador Sultan reported in Pak press 5 Jan.8 Nor
did Zia seem fully conversant with extent of my continuing conversa-
tions with Shahi and Shahnawaz this week, or even this noon. Zia
made no mention of Shahi proposal (septel) re making 1959 executive
agreement into a treaty—a proposal which gives me concern because
it could be a Shahi creation designed to produce a negative U.S. reaction
which he might then use in arguments against us.
14. There can be no doubt, however, of seriousness of Zia’s interest
in what we will have to say and what we will propose to do [garble—
across] the whole range of assistance—military, economic, and political.
There should be no doubt in Washington that in order to remain
credible with the Pakistanis and to overcome their resistance to too
close a re-identification with us, what we will propose will have to be
substantial in volume and composition.
15. I want to reiterate forcefully my recommendation that in our
own interests we should find ways to lay aside for the time being the
crippling strictures of the Symington Amendment in order to produce
an effective local response to Soviet aggression. Now is the time to
reorder our priorities, and to decide which of our objectives is most
important during the next few months. We obviously cannot pursue
all of our objectives simultaneously because they conflict, and in my
strong view our longer-range nonproliferation actions should be tem-
porarily subordinated to the more immediate necessity of making an
effective response to Soviet aggression.
16. I should add that Zia gave sharp warning—as Agha Shahi had
earlier—against any leaks with Western datelines on plans regarding
proposed meeting of Islamic Conference. In order to have any chance
of success, he said, conference must not be accused of being Western
inspired.
17. Zia was in good form, dressed in uniform for the first time in
a long time—at least during my visits with him. Atmosphere was
friendly but very businesslike.
18. Action requested: Instructions.
Hummel
8 See Document 144.

Afghanistan
146.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
NATO Capitals, the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, and the Embassies in the Soviet Union, New
Zealand, Australia, and Japan1
4074. Subject: U.S. Response to Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. The following is a catalog of the steps which have been decided
upon affecting relations with the Soviet Union. Separate implementing
instructions will be provided to Embassy Moscow and other posts as
appropriate. This message provides a list which can be used in discus-
sion with host governments of the range of actions decided upon so
far. Some additional steps are still under review and may be decided
upon at a later date. These measures are being taken in light of Presi-
dent’s statement that business as usual with the Soviet Union is impossi-
ble in light of their invasion of Afghanistan.2 In briefing host govern-
ments posts should be careful not to give the impression that the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan is primarily a disrupting event in U.S.-Soviet
relations. Rather, it is a subject of deep concern for the entire interna-
tional community as evidenced by the fact that 50 nations have signed
a letter calling for Security Council action.3 Steps which the U.S. has
decided on in its bilateral relations with the USSR are designed to
reinforce multilateral action in the UN and in NATO and to comple-
ment steps which other nations are taking in their bilateral relations
with the Soviet Union. If the international community is to succeed in its
aims of seeking a Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan and preventing
similar Soviet moves in the future against small independent nations,
the Soviet leadership must be fully aware of the costs of action such as
the invasion of Afghanistan in multilateral and bilateral terms. Equally
important, the U.S. and its NATO Allies are continuing plans to
improve defense capabilities so that they can provide a more effective
deterrent to Soviet military moves throughout the world.
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to Belgrade, Bucharest,
Budapest, Prague, Sofia, Warsaw, Riyadh, New Delhi, Islamabad, Jakarta, Beijing, Seoul,
Cairo, Tel Aviv, Buenos Aires, Bangkok, Kabul, and Manila. Drafted by Barry; cleared
in A/O, S/REM, NSC, and S; and approved by Christopher.
2 In his January 4 address, Carter said that “neither the United States nor any other
nation which is committed to world peace and stability can continue to do business as

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
3. Following is a catalog of steps decided upon which are now
being implemented.
[Omitted here is a list of actions; see Document 136.]
11. We will be consulting intensively with our allies in NATO and
COCOM and with other concerned countries bilaterally in order to
insure a strong and coordinated response to the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. We are gratified with the response our consultations to
date have produced and are confident that other countries will be
announcing their own measures, including especially in the field of
technology transfer, grain sales and credit policy in the near future.
12. For USNATO: You may draw upon the above in your SPC
discussions on January 7 and following.4
13. For Ankara: You should make this cable available to Mr. Nimetz
for use in his discussions with Turkish officials.5
Christopher
4 The portion of the Special Political Committee discussion relating to Afghanistan
Central Foreign Policy File, D800012–0939) The Mission reported on the North Atlantic
Council meeting on Afghanistan in telegram 239 from USNATO, January 11. The telegram
noted that the Council endorsed the work of the SPC and the Political Committee on
Afghanistan-related matters, and quoted Secretary General Luns: “The Soviet Union
must be left in no doubt about the extremely serious nature of its actions and about the
possible consequences it will have to face.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800102–0140)

Afghanistan
147.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are the report cover, a security information page,
and a cover page.]
The USSR in Afghanistan: An Interim Appraisal
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
The growing insurgency that threatened to topple a pro-Soviet
Marxist regime and create further instability on Soviet borders was the
major factor behind Moscow’s invasion of Afghanistan and elimination
of Amin. The Soviets thought the Amin regime was incapable of arrest-
ing the disintegration and calculated that Soviet troops were necessary
both to change the Afghan leadership and to ensure that the new
regime held onto power.
The fall of a pro-Soviet government in Afghanistan would have
dealt a major blow to Soviet prestige, slowing the momentum behind
the broad extension of Soviet influence in the Third World. Moscow
probably also thought that dramatic, forceful action would enhance its
role as a major regional actor in the Middle East and South Asia and
that a Soviet military presence in Afghanistan would place pressure
on Iran and Pakistan to accommodate.
From Moscow’s perspective, the time probably seemed propitious
for the invasion. US-Soviet relations were already at an ebb, and Mos-
cow probably discounted adverse political effects on its international
position.
Once they decided to remove Amin, the Soviets acted decisively
to ensure that the new regime would retain control in the face of
opposition from dissident Afghan military and insurgent elements. On
27 December, Soviet airborne troops moved quickly to seize control of
Kabul. Simultaneously, Moscow moved two Ground Forces divisions
into Afghanistan to seize key cities and communication routes.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. A statement on the cover page reads: “This assessment was
written by [less than 1 line not declassified] based on contributions from members of
the NFAC USSR-Afghan Task Force, and the Office of Strategic Research. It has been
coordinated with the Office of Political Analysis, the Office of Strategic Research, and
with the National Intelligence Officers for the USSR and for the Middle East.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
So far, there is no reliable evidence that the Soviet forces now in
Afghanistan have launched a large-scale offensive against the insur-
gents. The USSR may first want to see if the new regime can command
the loyalty of the Afghan Army.
The 50,000 or so Soviet troops now there are considerably below the
number that would be needed to conduct countrywide anti-insurgent
operations. Moscow would need a force upwards of three times that
number and would have to tailor it to the difficult Afghan environment.
The insurgents are likely to conduct continual harassment of the
Soviets, but in view of overwhelming Soviet military superiority, they
will not stand and fight against large units. The insurgents are not well
organized, equipped or led, but they know the country and have a
long history of resistance to foreign domination.
There is little prospect that the Babrak Karmal regime can end the
insurgency on its own. Faced with continual guerrilla harassment,
the Soviets will be under pressure to engage in aggressive military
operations and to commit more troops. It is unlikely that Moscow will
be dissuaded from this by the prospect of even more damage to its
international position.
The Soviets probably can eventually suppress the insurgency with
more troops and ruthless military action. But political costs to the
USSR are likely to mount as Soviet forces engage in prolonged combat
operations in an Islamic, Third World country.
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]

Afghanistan
148.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, January 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Western Europe: Responses to US-Soviet Tension in Wake of Afghan Crisis
Almost from the beginning of the Cold War, detente has been a
powerful aspiration for the Europeans. They pursued it earlier and
more intensely than did the US—because of their proximity to the
Soviets; their individual weakness and hence vulnerability to Soviet
threats; their sense of shared social and cultural destiny with Eastern
Europe, hence hopes for political reconciliation; their uncertainty that
US security guarantees would prove effective in a real crisis; their
discomfiture at the dominant role assumed by the US in the West as
a result of the Cold War.
All these concerns remain alive in Western Europe. The European
stake in detente has grown even larger over time. In particular, since
the Soviet Union achieved strategic parity with the US, the Europeans
have viewed detente not as a product of assured security but rather
as an essential ingredient of it. Chief among the benefits of detente for
Europe have been the relaxation of political tensions on the Continent
and the framework for arms control negotiations that has been estab-
lished. Detente has also become an important condition for the effective
management of domestic politics in European countries where parties
of the left play important roles, because with East-West detente, sharp
polarization between left and right is easier to avoid. Europeans count
on preserving and extending the trade gains and the freedom of move-
ment between East and West that have accompanied detente. (Euro-
pean Community exports to the Soviet Union grew five-fold from 1970
to 1978; and the number of immigrants to West Germany from the
East was over 57,000 in 1978 alone.) The Europeans also hope that in
a climate reasonably free of tension, the Soviets will exercise restraint
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job
note at the bottom of the page reads in part: “This memorandum, requested by the staff
of the National Security Council, was prepared by [name not declassified] in the office of
the National Intelligence Officer for Western Europe. It was coordinated with the NFAC
Office of Political Analysis and takes into account comments received from Robert
Blackwill, NSC; Jenonne Walker, State S/P; Sandra Vogelgesang, State/EUR; and Paul
Cassidy, DOD/ISA.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
not only on the Continent but in the Third World, where the Europeans
must preserve their access to raw materials.
Therefore the prospect of heightened tension between the US and
the Soviet Union creates deep apprehension among the Europeans.
They would necessarily share in that tension and in the uncertainties it
would create. They would see the interests they have pursued through
detente put in jeopardy—their security first of all. The adequacy of
means they have to defend themselves against Soviet pressure would
be again in doubt. At the same time, a clash between the superpowers
would threaten the Europeans’ own freedom of action in relation to
both the US and the Soviets, and compel them again to rely on US
management of the East-West crisis at a time when their doubts about
the adequacy and steadfastness of US leadership are grave.
Because they have so large a stake in East-West harmony, the
Europeans have often been reluctant to support the US when they
believed the issues in question were peripheral rather than central to
the East-West relationship from their particular perspective. This view
was most dramatically reflected in the Europeans’ attitudes toward
the Vietnam and even Korean wars. It was also evident in the European
reservations about the US alert during the 1973 Middle East war.2
It is reflected in Europe’s heavily nuanced approach to Africa—the
argument that although the West should oppose Soviet or Soviet-spon-
sored incursions there, it should do so more by means of economic
and technical aid to the Africans than by challenging the Soviets or
the Cubans directly. Yet the Europeans have firmly stood with the
US in cases where they believed the East-West balance was directly
attacked—in Berlin, for example, or during the Cuban missile crisis.
How the Europeans interpret the events in Afghanistan will
strongly influence their response to the measures the US takes against
the Soviet Union. They are likely to view the Soviets’ actions as
prompted in part by the need to maintain control over the Moslem
population within the Soviet Union, by concerns arising from threats
to the Soviet role in Eastern Europe, and by obscure internal struggles
related to the coming succession. On such an explanation, the Soviet
move into Afghanistan might be thought to have rather limited signifi-
cance in the long run, and to call for only quite restrained reactions
on the part of the West.
2 A reference to the NSC/JCS decision to place the U.S. military on alert at DEFCON
(Defense Condition) III, October 24, 1973, in response to a message from Brezhnev that
suggested the Soviets were prepared to take unilateral action to halt the Israeli military
from advancing to Cairo. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXV, Arab-Israeli Crisis
and War, 1973, Document 269.

Afghanistan
Yet the Europeans also appreciate that Soviet behavior may have
major strategic implications, requiring certain kinds of firm resistance
on the part of the West in order to ward off any further expansion of
Soviet influence in the Third World, to prevent in particular eventual
Soviet dominance in the Middle East oil producing region, to deter the
Soviets from similar behavior in Europe itself (possibly Yugoslavia),
and to discourage Soviet efforts to exert political pressure on the Euro-
peans based on Soviet “successes” elsewhere.
European responses to Soviet behavior in Afghanistan will also be
affected by the course the Soviet intervention takes in the longer term,
and by the threats and inducements the Soviets pose in the European
theater as US-Soviet relations chill. Public opinion will be important
too—it may surprise European governments by pressing for a firm
reaction to the Soviets.
At this stage of the crisis, however, the Europeans emphasize that
the Afghan crisis is primarily a confrontation between the Soviet Union
and the Third World—especially the Moslem nations—and that any
response to the Soviets must include the participation of such countries.
They have stressed that the Western reaction should be directed specifi-
cally to the region of Afghanistan, that it should be restrained in any
case, and that major elements of detente such as SALT should be
preserved as far as possible.
However the Europeans eventually assess the Afghan crisis, the
extent to which they will support US actions depends crucially on their
own special interests and vulnerabilities in relation to the Soviet Union.
The British will probably be most forthcoming. The government of
Prime Minister Thatcher, which is uniquely sensitive to Soviet abuses
of power and to ideological differences that persist between the East
and the West, has already shown a willingness to undertake firm
defense policy measures at considerable cost. Moreover, the British are
less vulnerable to the Soviets than the Continental countries; they are
still protected to a certain extent by a special relationship with the US;
and they have rather less to lose economically by trade restrictions.
The British also have traditional links to South Asia that allow them
to influence events in that region independently of actions the US
may take.
The countries on the Continent, however, are highly dependent
on continuing oil supplies from the Middle East and would find the
prospect of growing Soviet influence on those supplies profoundly
alarming. France, in particular, has championed the idea of a special
link between Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, and has been willing
to intervene in Africa—even militarily—to quell disturbances that
might create opportunities from which the Soviets could profit. Yet
President Giscard, whose government is already under pressure from

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
the Gaullists in view of next year’s presidential elections, cannot afford
to provoke their criticism by taking measures against the Soviets in
obvious deference to US wishes; he must maintain a certain distance
from US policies. Apart from such domestic considerations, the French
government believes that it retains a “special relationship” with the
Soviet Union which it would be extremely reluctant to jeopardize. The
French have worked especially hard to win Soviet support for the
French proposal for a Conference on European Disarmament, and they
are most unlikely to take actions that would undermine that effort.
Italy has an interest in supporting US measures against the Soviet
Union in order to preserve the status it has lately won in the Alliance
for backing theater nuclear force modernization and to enhance its role
as EC President and Venice Summit host in the coming months. But
the government is especially vulnerable to Soviet economic pressures
and inducements—in particular the Soviets are an important natural
gas supplier for Italy—and the Italians would press hard for compensa-
tion for any costs it might incur in supporting US actions. Domestically,
a climate of hostility between the superpowers places the Italian gov-
ernment in an awkward position because of its need for some degree
of political cooperation from the Italian Communist Party. Thus, some
Italians would be tempted to minimize the crisis, but many others
would view it as an opportunity to push the PCI back into a quasi-
illegitimate status.
West Germany clearly has the most to fear from revived US-Soviet
tension. It is most directly vulnerable to Soviet pressures—for example
in Berlin—and it has won, correspondingly, the greatest direct benefits
from detente. Chancellor Schmidt’s own Social Democratic Party initi-
ated West Germany’s reconciliation with the Soviets—the Ostpolitik—
and has pursued and defended it for more than a decade. The Chancel-
lor must demonstrate enough firmness against the Soviets in crisis to
escape unfavorable comparison with his rival in this fall’s elections,
the conservative Franz Josef Strauss. But at the same time he cannot
afford to abandon detente in Europe—and thus the prospects for some
continuing improvement in inner-German relations in particular—
unless he has no other option. To do so would risk splitting his party,
whose vocal left wing prizes detente especially highly. It could also
severely strain his close relationship with French President Giscard.
The West Germans might well contribute to a stronger Western position
in Southwest Asia but they will try to protect their hard-won reconcilia-
tion with the Soviets and Eastern Europe—especially East Germany.
Under these conditions, most Europeans will certainly hesitate to
reinforce East-West tension. They will try instead to limit and confine
it, to ensure that detente in Europe is not damaged at the core. They
may be tempted to view their proper role as that of mediator between

Afghanistan
the superpowers, as often in the past. While recognizing that they
must stand with the US to the extent that broad strategic interests are
involved, they will also be tempted both collectively and individually
to stand apart a certain distance—to preserve and enhance their own
influence over how the crisis evolves.
In any event, their support for US actions against the Soviet Union
following the Afghan invasion will depend especially on their confi-
dence that
—their relations with Eastern Europe, and especially inner-German
relations, can be insulated to some degree from the US-Soviet
confrontation;
—the US intends to preserve the framework of detente in Europe
to the greatest possible extent, and in particular to pursue ratification
of the SALT agreement and negotiation of further arms control agree-
ments focused on Europe;
—the US will not play the China card so strongly as to encourage
an uncontrolled Soviet backlash in Europe or elsewhere;
—the US itself is acting in response to an objectively perceived and
substantial external threat rather than to domestic political imperatives,
and can maintain firm control and steady management of its policy
toward the Soviet Union despite the pressures of an election year;
—such measures will impose real costs on the USSR, outside the
European framework, of a kind that will dissuade it from future such
actions and that will limit the gains it can derive from its Afghan move
(rather than merely signalling the West’s displeasure);
—while some costs may be incurred in their own relationships
with the Soviets, the position of the West in the Middle East may be
improved (by wider base rights, for example) and relations with the
Third World generally will at least not be impaired;
—they will not be asked to take actions that will clearly not com-
mand the necessary domestic political support;
—they will be consulted fully on the implementation of US actions;
—the US will help compensate for any economic costs the Europe-
ans may incur by supporting US actions;
—to the maximum extent possible they can individually avoid the
risk of Soviet reprisals by acting collectively in some multilateral
context;
—US-European cooperation in the current crisis might lead to a
larger European voice in the broad range of East-West issues.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
149.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Meeting between Secretary of Defense Harold Brown and Vice Premier Geng
Biao, People’s Republic of China
PARTICIPANTS
Chinese Side:
Vice Premier Geng Biao
Wu Xiuchuan, Deputy Chief of the General Staff
Zhang Wenjin, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs
Zhang Zhenhuan, Vice Chairman of Defense Science Commission
Zhou Jiahua, Deputy Director, Department of Defense Industries
Chai Chengwen, Director, Foreign Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Defense
Han Xu, Director of Department of American and Oceanic Affairs
Ji Chauzhu, Deputy Director of Department of American and Oceanic Affairs
Ling Ching, Director of Department of International Affairs, Foreign Ministry
Huang Zhengji, Deputy Chief of Intelligence, Department of the General Staff
Secretary Brown
Ambassador Woodcock
Mr. Komer
Mr. Seignious
Mr. McGiffert
Dr. Dinneen
Mr. Holbrooke
Mr. Ross
VADM Hanson
Mr. Armacost
Mr. Platt
BGen Smith
Mr. Oksenberg
Mr. Neuhauser
Mr. Jane
Mr. Stempler
Col Guillilland
[Omission is in the original.]
SECRETARY BROWN: Thank you for this information. It is cer-
tainly true that what happened to the Muslims in the USSR will not
be attractive to the Afghans. However, it is true that over the last ten
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
took place in the Great Hall of the People. The original is an extract of the January 7
memorandum of conversation, the full text of which is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–
1980, vol. XIII, China, Document 290. The omissions in the original are noted in brackets.

Afghanistan
years, the Soviets were able to suppress the religious sentiment among
the Uzbeks, the Tadzucs, and so on. That is because they obtained little
help from the outside. I, myself, visited the area for a few days five
years ago—such places as Tashkent, Samarkand, and Bokhara. It was
clear to me that the Soviets have been successful in “pacification” and
Russification of these Muslim nationalities in the USSR.
Pakistan
Let me follow up on Pakistan. We must also work with others to
provide additional support for Pakistan. One of President Carter’s first
moves was to call Zia and reassure him of our support. We offered to
send Warren Christopher to Islamabad, but the Pakistanis preferred
to postpone this.2
—The Pakistanis’ main concern is what might happen to them if
the Soviets do gain control in Afghanistan—especially if the Soviets
believe that they have grounds for “punishing” the Pakistanis for help-
ing the insurgents. We will do what we can to stiffen the Pakistanis’
resolve to support Afghanistan. What arguments do you think would
be most useful for us to use? What do you think you can say to reinforce
our representations?
—We are in the process of working out the dimensions of our own
assistance to Pakistan. We have decided to seek an amendment in our
Foreign Assistance Bill to exempt Pakistan from current restrictions in
our law which currently prevent us from extending FMS credits and
Economic Support Fund assistance to Pakistan.3 We have already
approached Congressional leaders on the subject. While plans are as
always subject to Congressional concurrence, what we have heard from
Congress is encouraging. We are thinking in terms of providing very
substantial amounts of FMS and ESF over the next five years to the
Pak’s. We are also seeking additional support for [from?] Western and
Moslem countries.
—While we are planning to resume economic and military assist-
ance to Pakistan despite the nuclear problem, it would obviously be
easier for us to secure Congressional support for a large program if
the Paks reassessed their nuclear activities. We don’t want to let this
stand in the way. But what we can do will be influenced by Pakistan’s
nuclear program.
India
—India remains a critical element. A strategy that preserves Paki-
stan but propels India into greater dependence on the USSR is unwise.
2 See Document 111.
3 See Document 151.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The key is to get India to recognize that the new situation in Afghanistan
poses a security problem for the entire subcontinent. It is unfortunate
that there has been no effectively functioning Indian government dur-
ing recent weeks.
—It is important that the most favorable context be created for an
Indian policy reassessment. In particular, the Indians must be brought
to realize that there is no longer a concern about a threat from China.
We think it is important that you renew a dialogue with the new Indian
government and seek a compromise understanding on the border issue
that would permit India to turn its attention elsewhere. We believe
this deserves your serious consideration.
Afghanistan
—The events in Afghanistan are a major historical turning point
which increases the likelihood of a major US military presence in an
entirely new region of the world. Nobody at this point can predict
with certitude what the outcome of these events will be, although the
Soviet reaction to various protests and denunciations, including those
of both the US and China, is completely predictable. These prospects
were taken into consideration by the Soviets before they made their
move in Afghanistan. It is therefore incumbent on both of us to exceed
the Soviet expectation as to what our response would be.4 The Soviets
must be made to understand that this decision (to invade Afghanistan)
will be much more expensive, much more costly, much more damaging
4 In a message to Brzezinski, January 4, Brown noted that in preparatory discussions
on the plane trip to China, a question came up for which Brown needed further guidance
from the White House: “The Chinese will be extremely interested in what tangible
support [less than 1 line not declassified] which might involve the Chinese) we are prepared
to supply the Afghan insurgents. I believe that telling them of our arrangements with
the Saudis, and whatever the Pakistanis have agreed to, would improve the chance that
the PRC will join in or, at a minimum, tell us more about what they are doing along
these lines.” (Message 321 from the Secretary of Defense, January 4; Department of State,
over six months we have been providing modest levels of humanitarian assistance to
the Afghan insurgents. This has taken the form principally of medicines, food and
clothing. Contrary to Soviet allegations, we have not provided any training to the Afghan
insurgents. After the Soviet invasion, our assistance has taken on an increased urgency
and now includes small arms, ammunition, anti-tank and anti-helicopter weapons, and
other military items appropriate to this kind of insurgency. Some of this military equip-
ment is probably already in the hands of the insurgents, if not, it will be soon. We would
welcome Chinese participation in the support of the insurgency and offer to coordinate
what we are doing with them.” Regarding Brown’s question on Saudi Arabia and
Pakistan, Brzezinski answered: “We have no authority from the Saudis or Paks to reveal
their participation and believe that, if their participation were made known without
their knowledge, it could jeopardize both the current program and our credibility.”
(Message 90 from Brzezinski, January 5; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-
zinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 120, Super-Sensitive:

Afghanistan
to them than they had reckoned, and that it should not set a precedent
for similar further actions on their part.
—At the same time, we will be increasing our own ability to project
military power into the Gulf region. Our Indian Ocean naval capabili-
ties are being augmented; we are expanding our facilities at Diego
Garcia; we are undertaking discussions with Oman, Somalia and Kenya
on base access rights to various bases there, and we are broadening
our discussions on security matters with Gulf states—particularly with
Saudi Arabia and Oman.
—By this action, we intend to demonstrate that this region is of
vital importance to us, and that the US Government is pursuing these
interests with a sense of purpose and commitment.
—That is all that I wanted to say about Afghanistan. I would be
interested in hearing what your side has to say on this issue.
[Omission is in the original.]
Pakistan5
The domestic situation in Pakistan is rather difficult. Zia faces a
number of difficulties. If the Soviets’ barbarous aggression goes
unchecked, the next target is Pakistan. Now Pakistan also thinks along
this line. Now Pakistan’s leaders are very worried about the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan.
If the new Indian Government should keep on opposing Pakistan,
even in a more fierce way, Pakistan will be sandwiched between
Afghanistan and India with even more problems on its hands. After
studying this question, we have concluded we must boost Pak determi-
nation to resist the Soviet Union. Now, after the event in Afghanistan,
the US has made a decision to extend military aid to Pakistan. We
think that you have made the right decision. We hope your aid will
arrive in a timely fashion and that there will be plenty of assistance
and that we will not see the restrictions to aid you have placed in
the past.
[Omission is in the original.]
Afghanistan
As for Afghanistan, the Soviet’s massive invasion warrants atten-
tion and concern on our part. In this respect, the Soviet Union’s own
troops are directly involved in undisguised invasion, like the invasion
of Czechoslovakia in 1968. Now the Soviet Union has extended its so-
called theory of limited sovereignty from socialist countries to a non-
aligned, Muslim country of the Third World. If the Soviet Union can
5 This and the next section are comments by Vice Premier Geng Biao.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
do this in Afghanistan today, the likelihood is that they can do it to
Pakistan, or some other country, tomorrow—the first targets would be
Iran and Pakistan. While Afghanistan is the first country, the Soviet
Union mainly has its eyes on Asia, and the action poses a threat to
South Asia and the Gulf area as well. It occurred at a time the US
experienced a tense situation vis-a-vis Iran.6
—The Soviet Union may gain something temporarily, but in the
longer term they will gain the opposite of what they set out to do.
Now a new situation has been created. All the Muslim countries and
peace-loving countries have risen up in opposition to Soviet hege-
monism. Even Iran has registered its protest to the Soviet Union over
its invasion. And these factors may help to bring an early resolution
to the crisis between the US and Iran. It seems to me to a large extent
we should talk to other countries about the matter and do a good job
of it.
[Omission is in the original.]
6 A memorandum from Holbrooke to Vance, January 31, included the following
expanded exchange on Afghanistan between Brown and Geng: “Secretary Brown: I
believe we must take action to provide political and material support to the insurgent
forces in Afghanistan. And in this regard, I have a couple of questions for you: What
support is China currently providing the Afghan insurgents? Do you have plans to
expand that support? Vice Premier Geng: We are very pleased to hear the US Government
has made the decision to provide assistance to the anti-government forces in Afghanistan
and to Pakistan. You know that we have been giving aid to the Pakistanis and they are
satisfied with what we have done. As to Afghanistan, we plan to give assistance to
various organizations, groups, and peoples in Afghanistan in resistance to the Soviet
invasion. We plan to give them assistance via Pakistan. However, our assistance has to
be in limited quantity. While Afghanistan is the first country, the Soviet Union mainly
has its eyes on Asia, and the action poses a threat to South Asia and the Gulf area as
well. It occurred at a time the US experienced a tense situation vis-à-vis Iran.” (Briefing
Memorandum, January 31; Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and
Mar–1980)

Afghanistan
150.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Meeting between Secretary of Defense Brown and Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping
PARTICIPANTS
US Side
Secretary Brown
Ambassador Woodcock
Ambassador Komer
Assistant Secretary McGiffert
Assistant Secretary of State Holbrooke
Deputy Assistant Secretary Armacost
Brigadier General Smith
NSC Staff Member Oksenberg
NSC Staff Member Platt
Colonel Gilliland, Defense Attache to Beijing
Chinese Side:
Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping
Geng Biac
Wu Xiuchen
Zhang Wenjin
Lie Huaching
Chai Chenwen
Han Xu
Ji Chiaozhu
Huang Zhenji
DR. BROWN: That is what we intend to do, but we must keep our
intentions confidential. With regard to Pakistan, aid will be given much
more publicly. We are beginning consultations with the Pakistanis
about this. We will ask Congress to amend the law concerning military
assistance to Pakistan, and we expect Congress to be cooperative. As
soon as we have an agreement with President Zia on the amount of
assistance, we will start our deliveries. [Omission is in the original.]
US and Western Europe countries and how to increase the strength
with Western European countries.2 I also talked about the need to
increase the defense capabilities of the Japanese. On that occasion, I
also said that increasing Chinese defense capability will help maintain
peace and resist Soviet hegemony. I even went to the point of saying
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
took place in the Great Hall of the People. An alternate version of this memorandum
2 Printed as in the original.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to one American friend there are one million Soviet troops in the east
which we don’t think are directed solely against China. But, if they
were solely directed against China and if we could pin down two
million Soviet troops, what harm would that do? You must be aware
of my thoughts.
DR. BROWN: Yes. The question you have raised is in the midst of
being implemented. The United States and Europe are each improving
their strengths and increasing their cooperation. Japan is increasing its
defense expenditure and closely cooperating with the United States.
US/Chinese cooperation is also increasing.
DENG: We, on our part, are satisfied with what Japan, Europe,
and the United States have done—that this is the correct line of action.
If I may say, it would have been better if this could have been done
even earlier. If so, some events could have been avoided. Please don’t
regard this as a critical comment; it is just my analysis.
DR. BROWN: We just should learn from the past to coordinate our
actions now and take visible parallel actions. Regarding Afghanistan,
we have agreed to follow-on talks and parallel actions. For example,
we’ve agreed to aid the Afghanistan rebels whom the Soviets hope to
crush because of their religion and we are also going to help Pakistan.
DENG: As far as Afghanistan is concerned, the only correct
approach to Afghanistan is to give aid to the resistance forces, and we
should work together on this. But, I’d emphasize that this kind of aid
must be more than symbolic. I must note the fact that Soviet aggression
involves the fate of the whole nation. Facts in Afghanistan prove that
most of the Afghan troops have leaned toward the resistance forces,
although some have been disarmed. The Afghan people have been
fighting fiercely against Soviet aggression. We must turn Afghanistan
into a quagmire in which the Soviet Union is bogged down for a long
time in a guerrilla warfare.
Vice Premier Geng earlier assured me that provided aid to Pakistan
was more than symbolic, there would be no difficulty in using Chinese
overflight as one way of delivering supplies.3 It is also important that
the PRC supply the Afghanistan freedom fighters with arms. We would
like to know your plans in that regard.
DENG: Since the southward drive strategy of the Soviet Union is
to seize warm water ports along the Indian Ocean, Pakistan inevitably
becomes the next target on the Soviet list. Personally, I must have said
on no less than ten occasions to my American friends that the United
3 See Document 149.

Afghanistan
States should aid Pakistan.4 With regard to question of South Asia,
there is no other way except giving aid to Pakistan. As you know, it
has always been our view that the US policy giving more attention to
India than Pakistan is not an appropriate policy. Regarding India, we
have always felt that the United States should try to cultivate good
relations, and this has had a good effect. But India is not a stabilizing
factor. Perhaps you already know the general election results.
DR. BROWN: I do not know, but in any case, if no Party gains a
majority, it will take some time to settle. Perhaps you can say how that
will come out.
DENG: Indira Gandhi has gotten 70% of the vote. It is very difficult
to judge at this time how India will go. Even if Indira Gandhi should
follow India’s previous policy; still India is not the most reliable and
stabilizing factor in southern Asia. Let’s not talk about Indira Gandhi.
The present government is thinking of recognizing the Heng Samrin
Regime. Perhaps after Pakistan has been strengthened, India will
become a more stabilizing factor. What one should try to achieve is to
make Pakistan a genuine stabilizing factor in South Asia. We hope the
United States will give earnest and sincere thought to this question. If
one does not keep this clear in one’s mind, then one’s attitude toward
India will make one vacillate in one’s position toward Pakistan. In the
past the United States has refrained from aiding Pakistan. I think in
part this is the work of India, probably because of a fear of offending
India. Since you now have decided to aid Pakistan, I am sure India
will send you one note after another, strongly objecting.
DR. BROWN: There are limits on our ability to aid Pakistan because
of their nuclear explosive program. Although we still object to their
doing so, we will now set that aside for the time being, to facilitate
strengthening Pakistan against potential Soviet action.
DENG: That is a very good approach. Pakistan has its own reasons
for developing a nuclear program. We ourselves oppose the Pakistan
effort on nuclear weapons because we believe it meaningless to spend
money on such a program. Pakistan has its own arguments, i.e., India
has exploded a nuclear device but the world has not seemed to com-
plain about this. So now you have decided to put this aside and solve
the question of military and economic aid to Pakistan. We applaud
4 In a cabled message from Brown to Vance (with the request that Vance pass the
message on to Carter, Brzezinski, and Claytor), January 8, Brown noted: “The Chinese
are obviously pleased at the change in direction that they feel we are embarking on
with regard to Pakistan, although Deng could not resist this morning telling me he had
urged such steps on us for a long time.” (Telegram 207 from Beijing, January 8; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Box 3, Afghanistan:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
this decision. We give large amounts of assistance to Pakistan. One
can say that great amounts of military equipment now in the hands
of Pakistani troops come from China. In order to strengthen our links
with Pakistan, we have built a highway in the most difficult terrain
through the mountains. The question of continuing Chinese aid to
Pakistan does not exist. Moreover, Chinese armaments are rather poor
in quality. While the United States has decided to give aid to Pakistan,
you must now convince Pakistan this is a sincere and genuine US effort
and make them believe that they will benefit from modern US weapons.
I know that the Pakistanis have many grievances against the United
States. This developed to the point that Pakistan withdrew from
CENTO. Have you approached Pakistan on the aid question?
DR. BROWN: We have given them some information and will give
them more. Pakistan has indicated that they did not wish to have a
visit from a survey team until they have received answers to their
questions on the magnitude and type of supplies we have in mind.
DENG: You should directly approach Pakistan to raise this ques-
tion. I would like to cite an episode. It was through the work of Pakistan
that Henry Kissinger came to China to talk about normalization and
to set the trip of President Nixon.5 Since you were able to talk with
them about this, you should be able to talk to them now.
DR. BROWN: I am aware of this Pakistani help, and this will help
put aside some of our reservations.
DENG: You may recall that I raised the question of aid to Pakistan
with President Carter.6 He said the US will give aid in proportion to
the population of the two countries. I said this was not feasible. The
Pakistanis and Indians are afraid of each other. If the population ratio
formula should be used, Pakistan will be in an increasingly inferior
position. We hope that since the United States decided to give aid to
Pakistan, it will really satisfy Pakistan’s requirements. We hope your
aid to Pakistan will not be affected too much by India’s reaction. This
is especially important since Indira Gandhi has come into office. We
hope the US will not mention the Pakistani nuclear program because
India has already said that the United States has supplied them with
enriched uranium.
DR. BROWN: We will continue to maintain our opposition against
Pakistani nuclear development, but we nonetheless will also provide
aid to Pakistan. But we must also remember that Soviet actions are
directed not only at Pakistan but also at Iran. The United States is in
Document 90.

Afghanistan
a very difficult position vis-a-vis Iran. Iran is a very complicated ques-
tion. So long as the hostages are held, we cannot have good relations.
We need Chinese support on the United Nations sanctions because if
there is no vote for sanctions there will be increasing pressure on
the United States to take unilateral action against Iran. That could be
damaging but necessary. In that event US-Sino relations would be
strained. We were grateful for Chinese cooperation in December in the
United Nations Security Council and I hope this will continue. We
need an affirmative Chinese vote in the UN Security Council.
DENG: May I return to Pakistan? I believe it is better if US would
enter direct discussions with Pakistan. Chinese policy with regard to
aid to Pakistan has been consistent for the past twenty years. Regarding
Chinese aid to Afghanistan resistance forces, we are supporting the
refugees through Pakistan. Regarding how the US feels about giving
aid to resistance forces in Afghanistan, you may wish to discuss this
with the Pakistanis. There are perhaps already 400,000 Afghan refugees
living in Pakistan.
151.
Editorial Note
The Soviet intervention in Afghanistan created a new urgency in
the Carter administration to finalize a military and economic assistance
program for Pakistan. This required a balancing act to satisfy several
interrelated objectives of U.S. foreign policy in the region: enhance
Pakistan’s defense capabilities in the event that the insurgency in
Afghanistan spilled into Pakistan; bolster Pakistan’s economic capacity
to manage the swelling Afghan refugee population in Pakistan as a
result of the fighting; find a workaround to the Symington Amend-
ment’s prohibition on military aid to Pakistan so long as it continued
its nuclear enrichment program; and finally, provide military assistance
in a way that did not further aggravate tensions with India. A series
of memoranda, culminating in a memorandum from the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski, to Presi-
dent Carter, January 8, 1980, put the final touches on the assistance
package. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia)
In the memorandum, Brzezinski noted to Carter that, with the
upcoming visit of Agha Shahi, “we need your guidance on a range of
issues so we speak with one voice.” He listed three items for Carter’s

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
decision. The first sought Carter’s approval to take legislative steps to
exempt Pakistan from the Symington Amendment. Carter approved,
and wrote in the right margin: “I would still prefer some mention of
non-prolif. assurance—not exceeding those we have already gotten.”
The second item, with several sub-items, summarized an attached
memorandum from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
regarding the military and economic assistance package to Pakistan.
The issue for Carter’s decision included $100 million in Foreign Military
Sales credit, about which Brzezinski noted: “All agencies agree that
this is required.” Carter approved the sub-item. Next was $100 million
in Economic Support Funds. Brzezinski noted: “All agencies agree in
this sum,” and the only question was if the aid should be conditional.
Brzezinski concurred with the Department of State that the aid package
would not be as effective if it was tied to ongoing Pakistani financial
reform measures, and that the United States should pledge to rejoin
the international aid consortium for Pakistan but not “attach additional
strings” to the economic package. At the end of the sub-item, Brzezinski
handwrote: “This is really important.” Carter neither approved nor
disapproved the sub-item, but wrote in the right margin: “$100 mil
ok—I prefer auth. to waive reform requirement if necessary Paks must
be under constraint to behave economically.”
The next sub-item offered a choice on the level of specificity for
the aid package. Brzezinski noted the Department of State “argues
strongly” that the United States should present a $400 million aid
package, composed of $100 million in both economic and military aid
per annum over two years. OMB, Brzezinski noted, advocated a looser
approach “both for reasons of impact and to concretely demonstrate
the enduring nature of our commitment.” Brzezinski concurred with
the Department of State, and handwrote: “because it indicates a longer-
term political commitment.” Carter approved the OMB approach, but
wrote in the right margin: “I may change. Let me see what Agha Shahi
in additional aid for Afghan refugees; and 4) whether humanitarian
aid should be sent through the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). Brzezinski wrote: “it should be bilateral with
Pakistan” to which Carter responded: “bilateral, at least as option.”
The third item laid out what Brzezinski identified as a “key issue”:
the kind of military hardware the United States should sell to Pakistan.
Brzezinski noted that $100 million “will not go far,” and that a “critical
question” was whether or not Carter was prepared to sell Pakistan
advanced aircraft such as the F–16. Brzezinski did not recommend one
or the other, but counseled that if Carter disapproved of selling the
F–16 to Pakistan “we should let the Paks know soon so that India does

Afghanistan
not mount a campaign against it and Pakistan does not make it a litmus
test of our relationship.” Carter rejected selling the F–16 to Pakistan.
He expounded on his decision in a handwritten note on an undated
memorandum from the Department of Defense with an attached item-
ized list of military hardware for possible transfer to Pakistan. Both
the list and the memorandum were attached at Tab C to Brzezinski’s
January 8 memorandum. The Department of Defense stated: “we need
to keep India in mind as we make military supply decisions for Paki-
stan. India will be concerned in principle about the resumption of a U.S.-
Pakistan supply relationship, and in this sense whatever we supply
will be troublesome for India; none of the items proposed for FMS
funding, however, would in themselves pose a significant threat to
India.” In the left margin, Carter wrote: “I agree,” and at the bottom
of the page he wrote: “we should approve quickly: weapons which
can be used to defend both Afghan & Paks as soon as possible—in
general, however, not to attack India. J.”
On the evening of January 8, Carter briefed Members of Congress
on Iran and on the actions his administration had taken and planned
to take after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, including his decision
to strengthen Pakistan. See Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp.
Agha Shahi met with Carter on January 12. For the memorandum
of conversation, see Document 163.
152.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 9, 1980
SUBJECT
A Long-Term Strategy for Coping with the Consequences of the Soviet Action in
Afghanistan
You have stressed—rightly so—that the Soviet action has created
consequences which cannot be dealt with in only a few weeks or with
a series of short-term measures. The Soviet action poses a test involving
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
the memorandum and wrote: “cc Zbig.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ultimately the balance of power between East and West. Our response
will determine how several key states will adjust their foreign policy
and particularly whether they will accommodate themselves to the
projection of Soviet military power.
Before outlining for you an agenda of possible responses, let me
put the foregoing in a brief historical context, which may also be useful
to you when you comment on the subject. We have, in effect, entered
the fifth decade in the U.S.-Soviet competition. Each of the decades
has had a specific historical character:
1. The 1940’s: consolidation of Soviet gains in the context of U.S.
disarmament after World War II and probes for Western weakness;
2. The 1950’s: lines drawn sharply in the West and in the East (the
Iron Curtain, the Korean buffer);
3. The 1960’s: premature Soviet global challenge; increasing compe-
tition in other areas: economic (we will bury you); space (Sputnik);
with the U.S. then becoming bogged down in Vietnam after the respite
won in Cuba, with massive Soviet investments in defense.
4. The 1970’s: detente and continued buildup of Soviet strength;
5. The 1980’s: the danger of conflict in the context of wider global
turbulence.
It is both symbolic and significant that Soviet action in Afghanistan
occurred in the first week of the new decade of the 1980’s. To respond
to that initiative, we need to generate a wider domestic consensus
behind legislative and budgetary matters. Anything less will cause
vacillation and accommodation by our allies and by states within the
Persian Gulf region.
The context for a major response is provided by the three interde-
pendent central strategic zones of our concern: Western Europe, the
Far East, and the Persian Gulf. We have an alliance system and military
deployments in two of these regions. We are only beginning to create
a significant military posture in the third, the Persian Gulf. Accordingly,
our response to the Soviet Union action ought to deal with the
following aspects:
I. Regional Security
A. Unilateral U.S. Actions
1. Covert Assistance. We have in recent months authorized a num-
ber of new programs of covert assistance. David Aaron, Frank Carlucci
and David Newsom will be reviewing each and recommending neces-
sary additional steps (e.g. YAR, PDRY or Eritrea).2
2 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “We should share more with Spain & other
countries.”

Afghanistan
2. Military Assistance to Pakistan (the subject of a separate paper
to you).3
3. Bases. Survey teams will depart on January 14 to assess the
adequacy of existing facilities for U.S. use.4
4. Military Exercises/Deployments. We will review the planned
U.S. Marine deployment scheduled for late summer and the possibility
of rapidly deploying a brigade to the region in late spring or early
summer as a demonstration of our ability and will to project effective
military power into the region.
5. U.S.-Saudi Security Consultations. The Saudis have agreed to
the deployment of AWACS through Saudi airspace. We will determine
if the Afghanistan situation has changed the Saudi view of security
cooperation with the U.S.5
6. U.S.-Turkish Security Consultations. We will review the possibil-
ity of sending a mission to Ankara to consult with the Turks on the
situation resulting from the Iran and Afghanistan situations.6
7. U.S.-Indian Security Consultations. We will review the possibility
of sending a high-level mission to India to consult on the changed
circumstances in the region.7
B. Multilateral Actions
1. Covert Assistance to Afghan Rebels. We will raise the question
whether our European allies, in addition to the Chinese, should become
involved in support for the Afghan rebels.
2. Security Assistance Consortium. We will pursue this concept
with the allies. We might want to organize along the lines of the old
Berlin Task Force (U.S., France, UK and FRG) to implement the lines
of action agreed upon.
3. PRC. We will follow up on the Harold Brown mission.8
4. ASEAN. We will ask the ASEAN states to talk to the Indians
about the appropriate Indian role in the region.9
3 See Document 151.
4 In the left margin next to this sentence, Carter wrote: “I’m ready to expedite &
take a chance on Somalia.”
Document 207. In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Good.”
Carter underlined “mission” in the second sentence, and in the left margin wrote: “a
person—to explore Turkish attitudes first.”
7 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Goheen assess, then Clifford.” Robert Goheen
was Ambassador to India. Clark Clifford often served as the President’s special emissary.
See Document 190.
8 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “PRC (Huang Hua) should go to India.”
9 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Good.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
5. Refugee Assistance. We must examine the question of how assist-
ance to the Afghan refugees in Pakistan can meet the humanitarian
need as well as serve other objectives. Multilateral assistance provided
outside the UNHCR context (perhaps through Islamic organizations)
could allow us to further the resistance effort more effectively.10
6. Approaching our Allies. We must plan for the desire of our
European allies to set the Afghanistan issue aside as soon as possible
so as not to do permanent damage to European detente. Our strategy
should focus on seeking their assistance in the Persian Gulf region
while deferring further direct European-Soviet initiatives (e.g. Schmidt
mission to Turkey; French approach to the Iraqis).11
II. U.S.-Soviet Relations in the Wider Global Context
—Soviet actions in Afghanistan, regardless of their motives, have
changed the strategic situation in the region; and we must take steps
which will restore a balance. The steps outlined under Regional Security
began to address this balance.
—This development requires two classes of response on our part.
• First, the actions which you have already taken vis-a-vis the
Soviets in the economic and other areas have clearly demonstrated to
the Soviets that their behavior will not be cost-free. I think the Soviets
were surprised by your actions. Thus, further bilateral steps are not
necessary; however, we must follow through with full implementation
of the steps which have already been taken.12
• Second, to counter growing Soviet aggressiveness, a long-term
commitment is required. There are no easy solutions to an increased
willingness on the part of the Soviets to use the military power which
they have built over the past decade at great domestic cost. U.S. strategic
modernization, increased defense spending, improvements in NATO,
and the RDF are all steps which will in time work to deter the Soviets,
if pursued diligently.
—Because the Soviets underestimated the U.S. response as well as
that of the international community, especially the third world, to their
invasion, we should expect that as soon as possible—within several
months—the Soviets will embark on a peace offensive designed to
separate us from our allies and to improve the Soviet image in the
10 In an apparent reversal of decision from the previous day (see Document 151),
Carter wrote: “Paks prefer UNHCR” in the left margin.
11 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “I agree.”
12 Carter underlined “must follow through,” and in the left margin wrote: “I agree.”

Afghanistan
third world. We should anticipate this event and be prepared to counter
efforts to deter us from our required course.13
These are preliminary thoughts. In effect, they add up to three key
propositions:
1. Our response has to be a sustained one and a regional one. Success
or failure will depend on what we do in terms of the longer run in
Southwest Asia. You might want to think of a “Carter doctrine.”14
2. There is no need to freeze the U.S.-Soviet relationship any further,
but by the same token we should have no illusions about an early
improvement—nor should we strive for one. Any alteration, of course,
would look like a zig zag, and it would make the attainment of our first
objective more difficult, while undercutting your domestic support.15
3. Whatever we do in the region, it will be costly. The more we can
do with our allies, the better, but the major initiative will have to come
from us.
These are painful and difficult issues. We will never know whether
any of this could have been averted, but we do know one thing: if we
do not respond in a timely fashion, the consequences of an inadequate
response will be even more horrendous because our vital interest in
the Middle East will soon be directly affected.
I will be chairing an SCC meeting on this in the next several days.16
I will also be discussing these issues with my European colleagues at
the Tuesday meeting17—though, naturally, in a very tentative fashion,
without any commitments.18 Any guidance you could give me for
either meeting would be very helpful.
13 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Let’s do it then (see a) below).”
14 Carter underlined “Carter doctrine” and wrote in the left margin: “No name.”
15 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “I agree.”
16 The SCC met on January 14, the first in a series of meetings on U.S. strategy for
Southwest Asia and the Pacific. For the summary of conclusions of the meeting, see Foreign
17 Christopher, not Brzezinski, met with NATO members on January 15 in Brussels.
See footnote 4, Document 163.
18 At the bottom of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “a) We should probe for more
normal relations among friends of SU, i.e., Angola, V. Nam, Cuba, Ethiopia, Syria, Iraq,
etc. as feasible. b) A quick move to consult c¯ PM Gandhi is needed. We must leave the
door open for her & encourage Pakistan & PRC to do the same. c) Economic consultations
c¯ LDCs should be expedited, with rich OPEC & our trading partners involved to discuss
food, energy, raw materials, etc. d) Assess how Mid East peace effort is affected.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
153.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, January 9, 1980
AFGHAN EXILE GROUPS BASED IN PAKISTAN
Peshawar, on the Pakistani side of the Khyber Pass, has for a
century been the most important safehaven for Afghans who oppose
whatever regime may be in power in Kabul. Following the Marxist
coup in April 1978, the number of Peshawar-based dissidents grew
and there was a proliferation of marginal and essentially ineffective
“liberation groups”. Lacking meaningful financial support, the exile
groups have had at best a modest impact on the course of the insur-
gency. Fragmentary reporting suggests they have provided insurgent
groups in eastern Afghanistan with some material assistance, but the
rebels’ main source of arms has been stocks captured from Afghan
Army units or turned over by deserting Afghan troops and bought
from arms dealers in Pakistan. ([classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified])
The numerous fragmented and feuding organizations acknowl-
edge no single leader and have made numerous unsuccessful efforts
to unify the Afghan exile opposition. An exile leader’s claim to the press
after a recent meeting to have united exile organizations to counter
the new Soviet threat is probably as insubstantial as earlier similar
claims.2 Among its leaders there is no figure with religious or political
stature comparable to Ayatollah Khomeini who could rally national
support against the Soviet-installed Kabul regime or serve as the leader
of a new government. The exile groups probably do not have a sufficient
number of technically qualified members who could form a new gov-
ernment. It is possible exile organizations could, however, contribute
a few cabinet-level officials to a national front government made up
of officials from former governments who might have survived Com-
munist purges since April 1978. ([classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified])
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
tion not declassified]. A typed note at the bottom of the page indicates that the memorandum
was prepared in the Office of Political Analysis.
2 A likely reference to a statement made by Ali Tabib, spokesman for the Afghan
National Liberation Front (ANLF), who promised that major Afghan opposition groups,
including the ANLF, the Islamic Society, the Islamic Party, and the Islamic Revolutionary
Movement planned to announce their “organizational unification” against Soviet forces.
Tabib also stated: “the key will be for us to make this war as costly for the Russians as
Vietnam was for the Americans.” Tabib was quoted in David Kline, “Soviet Combat

Afghanistan
With the exception of one or possibly two groups that have a small
guerrilla capability, the exile organizations do not command forces
that have been active in the Afghan insurgency. One organization, the
Islamic Party operates a clandestine radio in the Pak-Afghan border
area that has probably made some impact in whipping up sentiment
against the “godless” Kabul regime. Some exile religious leaders, more-
over, are reported to cross the border into Afghanistan occasionally
to buoy the morale of insurgent tribes responsive to their religious
leadership. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
The exile groups are likely to continue their infighting and probably
will have no more than a marginal effect on the course of the insurgency
unless Pakistan takes the lead in trying to unite or at minimum increase
the coordination among the diverse groups. Without the assistance of
Pakistan, moreover, the establishment of an exile command and control
structure that could coordinate insurgent military action on a national
scale would be beyond the capability of the Afghan exiles. ([classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified])
The exile groups could become a more effective conduit for chan-
neling arms, food and funds to insurgent groups if Pakistan took charge
of overseeing logistical arrangements. The Saudis have withheld more
substantial financial aid to the exile groups—their payments probably
total no more than $5 million—because they regard their disorganized,
and uncoordinated efforts as ineffectual in supporting the insurgency.
Some of the Saudi money reportedly has lined the pockets of some
exile leaders. If the Saudis suspect that their funds are being misused—
and they probably do—this would inhibit them from making further
contributions to support the insurgency. They might be encouraged to
reopen their coffers if Pakistan took responsibility for overseeing the
expenditure of funds by the exile groups. A key factor in any Saudi
decision would be their perception of US intentions regarding possible
support of the insurgents.
The exile groups are the source of numerous misleading if not
false stories that have appeared in the press on various aspects of the
insurgency. Some of these stories allege the exiles exert command and
control over guerrilla groups operating in Afghanistan. Other accounts
have made exaggerated claims of rebel “victories” and, since Soviet
intervention, of Soviet offensives against rebel strongholds.3 ([classifica-
tion marking not declassified])
There are scores of exile groups based in Pakistan that have political
and religious roots in Afghanistan of varying significance. The four

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
most important, in approximate order of their significance, are the
following:
—The Islamic Party (Hizbi-Islami). Probably the best organized of
the dissident organizations, the Islamic Party is led by Gul Buddin
Hekmatyar, also known simply as Gul Buddin. He commands a group
of about 600 guerrillas based in Pakistan that, with the support of
the Pakistan Government, carried out some paramilitary operations
in Afghanistan against the Daoud government. Gul Buddin’s group
probably has conducted a few raids in Afghanistan since the Marxists
took power in 1978 and it may pass some arms to insurgent groups
operating in Afghanistan. It reportedly continues to receive some sup-
port from Pakistan. The Islamic Party is somewhat more secular in
outlook than other exile groups and Gul Buddin’s rejection of the
monarchy as a possible alternative to the present regime has tended
to isolate him from other exile leaders. The Islamic Party was repre-
sented at the recent meeting at which the groups in attendance claimed
to have succeeded in their effort to unite their organizations. Gul Bud-
din’s group has roots in the area between Ghazni and Qandahar and
is most active there. ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
—The Afghan Islamic and National Revolutionary Council (Jab-
bah-Azadibakhsh Islami) also known as the National Front for Islamic
Revolution of Afghanistan. The Council is headed by Sayed Ahmad
Gailani (also known as Effendi Jan) who is an important pir or religious
leader who claims to have a following of 100,000 in the eastern prov-
inces. Described by a US Afghan specialist as the exile Muslim leader
with the most modern outlook, Gailani’s political strength is based on
his religious following. He is related to the Iraqi Ambassador to Paki-
stan of the same name but it is not known whether this personal
tie equates to a connection with the Iraqi Government. ([classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified])
—The Afghan Islamic League (Jamiat-Islami-Afghani). The League
is headed by Burhanuddin Rabbani, a former professor of Islamic Stud-
ies at Kabul University. The organization reportedly receives some
financial support from a small, conservative political party in Pakistan
and is affiliated with another Afghan dissident organization, the
Afghan National Liberation Front. Rabbani’s group reportedly has a
military arm but its mission and capability are unknown. ([classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified])
—The Afghan National Liberation Front (Jabhe-I-Negat-I-Melli).
The group’s leader, Sebqatullah Mojededi, is a member of an important
religious family that has a following in Kabul and other urban centers
of eastern Afghanistan. An Islamic scholar, Mojededi reportedly has
good contacts in Saudi Arabia and Libya. He claims to represent the
Front’s “real” leader Prince Abdul Wali, cousin and son-in-law to King
Zahir. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])

Afghanistan
154.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, January 10, 1980
SUBJECT
A Wrong Signal to the Soviets (U)
I am strongly opposed to Watson returning to the Soviet Union
this weekend. It sends exactly the wrong signal to the Soviets—i.e.,
that we are now ready to return to a “business as usual” posture. It
also sends the wrong signal to the Allies and to the general public and
will be a difficult public relations problem for Jody to handle. The
President recalled Watson as a sign of the seriousness with which we
regarded the situation in Afghanistan. In my view, he should not go
back to the Soviet Union until we have completed a full policy review
of the implications to us of the invasion of Afghanistan and until we
have decided on the full range of actions we plan to undertake to deal
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Outside
the System File, Box 45, Afghanistan Invasion: U.S./Allied Relations, Olympics, Grain
Embargo: 1/80. Confidential; Outside System. Sent for information. A copy was sent
to Schecter.
2 In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “He won’t return for now.” Watson
returned to his post in Moscow by late January.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
155.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 10, 1980
SPECIAL ANALYSIS
PAKISTAN: Reaction to Afghanistan
[less than 1 line not declassified] CIA
The Pakistani Government sees itself today as weak, isolated, and clearly
threatened by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Pakistani officials believe
that Soviet combat troops will soon be operating in Afghan border regions
and that action against the insurgents will spill over into Pakistan. Despite
their fears, Pakistan’s military leaders are cautious about openly seeking US
support. (S [handling restriction not declassified])
Pakistani officials fear that once Afghanistan has been pacified,
Moscow and Kabul will turn their attention to Pakistan. They see a
possibility of an Afghan incursion into Pakistani areas along the border
where Afghan refugees are concentrated, but they have a much greater
fear of attempts to assist dissident tribesmen in Pakistan’s border prov-
inces. (S [handling restriction not declassified])
Pakistan’s sense of isolation has been increased by Indira Gandhi’s
victory in India, which will rekindle the Pakistanis’ fear of a Moscow—
New Delhi alliance bent on destroying their nation.2 (S [handling restric-
tion not declassified])
Caution Toward US, USSR
In deciding whether to embrace US support, Pakistan’s military
leaders must take into account anti-US sentiment in Pakistan that they
fear may be turned against the government by opposition political
leaders. Pakistani leaders, moreover, view the US as undependable
because of its termination of military assistance during Pakistan’s wars
with India and its opposition to Pakistan’s nuclear policy.3 (S [handling
restriction not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, NIDs. Top Secret; [codeword, handling restriction,
and text not declassified]. The full version of this National Intelligence Daily was not filed
with this collection. The article printed here was found in this form.
2 Indira Gandhi was sworn in as Prime Minister of India on January 14.
3 President Lyndon B. Johnson suspended military aid to Pakistan in September
suspended aid to Pakistan in April 1979 pursuant to the Symington Amendment. See
Document 102.

Afghanistan
In the period before the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, Paki-
stani leaders considered attempting to normalize relations with
Afghanistan and the USSR. Even now, there is some sentiment in the
government for keeping the Soviet option open. Senior foreign affairs
adviser Agha Shahi, who is thought to hold this view, may be pressing
the government to demand maximum commitments from the US in
the hope of demonstrating that Washington cannot be counted on. (S
[handling restriction not declassified])
President Zia and most military leaders would prefer—in the best
of worlds—to return to a close relationship with the US. Zia and other
top officers are all anti-Soviet, and few of them believe that better
relations with the Soviets would do more than buy time. They recognize
that any longer term benefits would founder on the higher priority the
USSR will—in a crunch—always give India. (S [handling restriction not
declassified])
Military Assistance
In recent years, Pakistani foreign policy has emphasized ties with
Islamic and nonaligned nations—a policy that probably will continue.
For Pakistan to establish close ties with the US again would require
Washington’s willingness to provide the military equipment Pakistan
believes it needs to assure its security. The Pakistanis believe a military
aid package must contain sophisticated weaponry, preferably including
A–7 aircraft—previously denied them by Washington. (S [handling
restriction not declassified])
There probably would be little give in Pakistan’s position on the
nuclear issue. The Pakistanis believe strongly that a nuclear capability
is critical for Pakistan to become a secure and important Third World
power. There is no dispute over this objective in Pakistan—Zia’s oppo-
nents also support it—and any compromise on it, regardless of other
aid from the US, would meet strong public opposition. (S [handling
restriction not declassified])
Zia would probably regard a joint Sino-American effort to resupply
and reequip his forces as a particularly attractive proposal. The Paki-
stanis are heavily dependent on their relationship with China. If they
are to risk incurring Soviet wrath, they would like to have their two
great-power allies united behind them. The popularity of China among
Pakistanis would also be a useful counter to their generally critical
attitude toward the US. (S [handling restriction not declassified])
The conclusion of a US military assistance program with Pakistan
would cause a furor in India. Indira Gandhi can be expected to launch
a vigorous campaign against new arms deliveries to Pakistan even
though India’s armed forces are overwhelmingly superior to Pakistan’s,
both in equipment and numbers of personnel. (S [handling restriction
not declassified])

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
156.
Draft Telegram From the Department of State to the
Embassy in the United Kingdom1
Washington, January 10, 1980
Subject: Letter From President to Prime Minister on Afghanistan.
For the Ambassador.
1. S—Entire text.
2. You should request appointment with Prime Minister Thatcher
at earliest opportunity to deliver letter personally from the President
concerning coordinated Western response to Afghanistan crisis (text
at para 4 below). (FYI: Similar messages are being sent to Schmidt,
Giscard, Cossiga, and Clark.)
3. In delivering letter, you may draw as appropriate on follow-
ing points:
—President Carter asked that I request this appointment with you
to deliver a personal message from him concerning the situation in
Afghanistan and to convey to you his views regarding the Western
response to that crisis.
—We completely share your view of the Soviet invasion as a serious
threat to peace, and we intend to follow through vigorously on the
measures announced by the President on January 4.
—The President has asked that I pass on to you his very great
appreciation for the public support you have given to our position.
—We have valued our close consultations with you, both at the
London and Brussels meetings last week, and in our discussions
together, and we look forward to continued close cooperation. We have
been particularly grateful for your vigorous démarches in Third World
capitals, urging those countries to join in condemnation of Soviet
actions.
—Now that the focus of world attention has shifted to the upcoming
UN General Assembly debate on Afghanistan, we must continue to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File,
C to a covering memorandum (not printed), January 10, from Brzezinski to Carter. Also
attached but not printed are draft telegrams containing similar messages from Carter
to Giscard d’Estaing (Tab A), Helmut Schmidt (Tab B), Francesco Cossiga (Tab D), and
Joe Clark (Tab E). In the covering memorandum, Brzezinski noted: “The telegrams lay
out our appraisal of the strategic consequences of the Soviet invasion and convey our
conviction that a strong and united Allied reaction will be necessary both in Southwest
Asia and in Europe.” Brzezinski recommended that Carter approve the telegrams. Carter
placed a checkmark beside “Approve,” and wrote “All ok.” in the right margin. The

Afghanistan
seek a strong, united Western response, both in Southwest Asia and
in the context of East-West relations. If we fail to do so, the Soviets
may only be encouraged to take similar moves elsewhere.
—The President looks forward to staying in the closest possible
communication with you, as our two governments further develop
their positions, and he has asked me to be available to you and your
government to assist in any way possible.
4. Begin text of letter:
Dear Margaret:
As I know you will agree, the Soviet Union’s invasion and occupa-
tion of Afghanistan are matters of the gravest concern. In my view,
the Soviet action represents one of the most serious security challenges
which our countries have faced in the post-war era. This naked aggres-
sion has implications in Southwest Asia and the Middle East, as well
as globally, in the bilateral relationship between each of our countries
and the Soviet Union, and in the multilateral relationships which have
developed among the countries of the West and the Warsaw Pact
involving European matters in the past decade. A failure on our part
to respond adequately to the Soviet challenge in Afghanistan can only
encourage Moscow to move in the future even more aggressively.
Pakistan, Iran, the Gulf, Yugoslavia, and even Turkey come immedi-
ately to mind. By the same token, a strong united Western response
can correct Soviet perceptions, restrain Soviet behavior and ultimately
advance the cause of détente to which both our countries are dedicated
over the longer term. I know that you share my view that in these
circumstances, it is imperative that you and I and our representatives
in Washington and London maintain close and continuous consulta-
tions and coordination.2
You are already familiar with the measures which I announced on
January 4 involving our bilateral relations with the Soviet Union, and
I appreciate your support for these actions.3 I had previously
announced my decision that the SALT II Treaty not be called up for
2 An article in the President’s Daily Brief, January 10, noted that the British had
taken the most “aggressive stance” among the NATO Allies, who so far had been “unable
to agree on a strong response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.” The article also
noted that France opposed the British call for the Alliance to apply sanctions against the
Soviet Union, advocating instead that nations should respond to the invasion bilaterally.
Meanwhile, the PDB noted, the West Germans were caught in a “dilemma” because
“Schmidt realizes that a weak response would give his political opponents a good election
issue, but fears that a vigorous reaction would undermine Ostpolitik, the keystone of
12 years of Social Democratic foreign policy.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of
the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Senate action in light of the Soviet invasion and occupation of Afghani-
stan. I did not withdraw the treaty because I believe its ratification
would be in the interest of the West, and I hope that circumstances
will, in time, make it possible for me to request that the Senate proceed
with action on the treaty. Further, I believe that it is important to
continue our efforts in MBFR to reach agreement with the East which
will lower military forces and tensions in Europe and to pursue vigor-
ously our TNF arms control proposal. In my judgment we should also
continue to participate in the CSCE process which if carefully managed
promotes Western interests.
However, I feel strongly that we would be making a grave error
should we, in the interest of preserving an atmosphere of détente,
attempt to separate developments in Southwest Asia involving the
Soviet Union from the bilateral or multilateral relations which we have
with the USSR. The process of détente can continue only if we, collec-
tively and individually, make clear to the Soviet Union that actions
such as its invasion and occupation of Afghanistan must have serious
consequences for the Soviet Union in other areas of the world, includ-
ing Europe.
The Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan is simply not consistent
with détente in Europe, and this must be made clear to the Soviet
leadership. If Moscow does wish to pursue détente, then in the wake
of Afghanistan it must give us evidence of such a desire. The most
convincing confirmation of Moscow’s desire to retrace its steps back
to policies consistent with the principles of détente would be an early
and total withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. To this point,
I regret to say that we have seen no evidence that that is Moscow’s
intention and the continually growing USSR deployment in Afghani-
stan appears to us to suggest that the Soviet Army went to that small
and defenseless country to stay. And in the light of other Soviet activi-
ties in the region—especially in Ethiopia and the Yemens—we would
have to regard a prolonged Soviet occupation of Afghanistan as part
of a calculated strategic thrust against the West’s vital interests.
We have already noted a predictable tendency in the Soviet Union’s
propaganda to try to divide the United States and Western Europe
over the matter of Afghanistan. Indeed, I think we can expect the
Soviets to launch a “peace offensive” in Europe in the near future.
Moscow will undoubtedly hope that by offering various inducements
to West European countries they can secure a “business-as-usual”
approach by these countries, a tacit agreement to let concern about the
Soviet occupation of Afghanistan fade away. I know that you will be
particularly sensitive to this Soviet objective and will work with me
and our colleagues from the other Western European countries to
ensure that this Soviet aim is not realized.

Afghanistan
Finally, I want to assure you that I am prepared to commit the
United States to take the necessary steps to enhance security in South-
west Asia and the Middle East, not just because of U.S. interests, but
because of the broad stakes the West in general has in this region’s
stability and the flow of oil. In this effort, it will be important for
the United States to have the support—and in some cases the direct
involvement of our European allies. The challenge to our common and
crucial interests in this area is unprecedented; it calls for an unprece-
dented and coordinated Western response. This includes support for
Pakistan, intensified political involvement with specific nations stretch-
ing from Southwest Asia to the Eastern Mediterranean, increased secu-
rity involvement and military presence, increased economic assistance,
as appropriate, and arms support to friendly nations. The United King-
dom’s role in this effort will be particularly important and I look
forward to learning of Peter Carrington’s impressions after his visit to
the region.4
I want to thank you for your support in these trying times. I will
be anxious to have your views in the coming period on the posture
that we should adopt to convince this Soviet leadership and the
following one that they cannot undertake naked aggression such as in
Afghanistan without the most serious penalties for them.
Sincerely, Jimmy Carter
End text.
February. Telegram 3930 from Bonn, February 29, reported on a meeting between Carrin-
gton and Genscher. Both men agreed that the European Community should attempt to
determine the likelihood of Moscow’s intention to withdraw, but they were under no
illusions that in fact, “the Soviets are digging themselves deeper every day.” (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
157.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 11, 1980
BRIEFS AND COMMENTS
USSR-PAKISTAN: Soviet Tactics
The Soviets are trying to deter Pakistan both from moving closer to China
and the US and from providing increased aid to the Afghan insurgents.
([classification marking not declassified])
In some of their contacts with the Pakistanis, the Soviets appear
to be playing to those who advocate a policy of accommodation to the
USSR. [10½ lines and classification marking not declassified]
[1 paragraph (9 lines) and classification marking not declassified]
Soviet media treatment of Pakistan after the invasion was initially
restrained. As late as last Saturday, Soviet media were commending
Pakistan for its alleged lack of enthusiasm for US arms offers and
telling the Pakistanis it was “not too late” to respond to Afghanistan’s
appeal for better relations. Pakistan’s condemnation of Soviet actions
in the Security Council debate, coupled with its dialogue with the US
over security reassurances, have since appeared to prompt Moscow to
toughen its treatment of the Pakistanis.2 On Monday, Soviet media
warned the Pakistanis that “no good will come” of closer ties with the
US, and on Wednesday Pravda reminded them that the US supply of
weapons to Pakistan would cause considerable concern among
Pakistan’s neighbors, particularly India.3 [classification marking not
declassified]
Soviet officials in Pakistan have in their contacts with Pakistanis
gone further than the media, threatening that if Pakistan does not cease
all aid to the rebels, its security position will be “precarious” with
Afghanistan and Soviet troops on one side and India under Indira
Gandhi on the other. [classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
restriction not declassified]. The full version of this National Intelligence Daily was not
filed with this collection. The article printed here was found in this form.
2 Pakistan was one of 52 countries to sign the letter to the UN Secretary General
condemning the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and requesting a Security Council
session. See footnote 6, Document 136.

Afghanistan
158.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, a security information page, and a
cover page.]
The Invasion of Afghanistan: Implications for Soviet Foreign Policy
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
Soviet decisions on the scope and timing of the intervention in
Afghanistan were dictated largely by the situation in that country,
but—once Moscow decided to invade—it presumably anticipated geo-
political gains that extended beyond Afghanistan. The naked display
of Soviet military strength, moreover, will generate opportunities and
costs that will affect Soviet foreign policy on a global basis.
In moving into Afghanistan, Moscow probably calculated that, in
view of the decline in Soviet-American relations in recent years, it did
not have much to lose in its relations with the United States. The Soviet
leaders knew that they would have to pay a price in their relations
with the West and that their actions would create deep suspicions
about Soviet policy within the Third World. Past precedents, however,
probably gave the Soviet leaders—most of whom participated in the
decision to invade Czechoslovakia—ample reason to believe that, over
time, their willingness to use military force in Afghanistan would
enhance their efforts to extend their worldwide influence.
Moscow will attempt to show that it can wait out any US retaliation
by turning to third country suppliers of embargoed or restricted goods.
It may also undertake some retaliatory steps of its own, such as
increased pressures on dissidents, harassment of US citizens in the
USSR, and efforts to isolate the US politically from its allies and from
the Third World on the issue of Afghanistan. In the face of increasing
US pressures, it might take further steps—in Cuba, Berlin, or on arms
control—to exacerbate relations with the United States.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
81), Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options. Secret; [handling restriction not
declassified]. A statement on the cover page reads: “This assessment was prepared by
Melvin Goodman and [name not declassified] of the Office of Political Analysis. It has
been coordinated with the National Intelligence Officer for USSR-Eastern Europe and
the National Intelligence Officer for Near East South Asia.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
In the near term, Moscow will seek to consolidate its gains in
southwest Asia and attempt to minimize the costs elsewhere. To date
the Soviets appear surprised by the forcefulness of the US response
which, together with the general outrage expressed by most non-Com-
munist nations, may be giving Moscow reason to believe it underesti-
mated the wider effects of its actions in Afghanistan.
There is no reason to believe that foreknowledge of these responses
would have altered the Soviet decision to intervene, but Moscow may
have to give more attention than it had thought necessary to its relations
with the world community. In Europe, for example, we would expect
the Soviets to appear to be more accommodating on disarmament
issues while portraying the United States as the principal obstacle to
progress. In the Middle East, Moscow will attempt to divert Arab
attention away from the Soviet attempt to crush a Muslem insurgency
and back toward American support of the Egyptian-Israeli peace proc-
ess. Elsewhere in the Third World, the Soviets will try to counter
the damage to their image among the nonaligned states. The Afghan
invasion has already embarrassed Moscow’s Cuban surrogates and
caused Havana’s withdrawal from consideration for a seat on the UN
Security Council.2
From Moscow’s point of view, the most worrisome potential conse-
quence of its Afghanistan adventure is the prospect of closer Sino-
American security cooperation. Soviet actions in Afghanistan will make
the soon-to-resume Sino-Soviet talks even more difficult. Moscow will
also be watching for signs of a more aggressive Chinese stance toward
Vietnam now that the USSR has, for the first time, invaded a country
that borders China.
The foreign policy fallout of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan will
be mixed. A long-term Soviet presence in Afghanistan and continued
involvement in the conflict will probably lead to increasingly unfavor-
able reverberations for Moscow’s standing throughout the Islamic
world, particularly among Afghanistan’s neighbors who are opposed
to a change in the balance of power in the area and are apprehensive
about the dangers inherent in Soviet-American rivalry being played out
in their region. Indeed, the longer the Soviets remain in Afghanistan,
the greater the temptation will be for Moscow to take more active
steps to influence the behavior of Iran and Pakistan. Similarly, a long
involvement in Afghanistan might alter the terms of detente in a way
that could tempt the Soviets to challenge US interests in the Middle
East and the Caribbean more aggressively.
[1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified]
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
2 According to a news report, January 6, Cuba concluded “the Soviet intervention
of Afghanistan has started a landslide of votes for Havana’s opponent, Colombia.”

Afghanistan
159.
Letter From President Carter to Pakistani President Zia
ul-Haq1
Washington, January 11, 1980
Dear Mr. President:
The overthrow of the Afghan Government and occupation of that
country by Soviet military forces represents a profoundly disturbing
threat to the stability of the region and, most directly, to the security
of Pakistan.
In these circumstances, it is essential that there be no misunder-
standing as to the commitment of the United States to the security and
territorial integrity of Pakistan. The 1959 Agreement for Cooperation
between the United States and Pakistan represents a firm commitment
between our two governments which remains fully valid. Its provisions
are directly relevant to a Soviet threat via Afghanistan. I want you to
know that the United States intends to stand by its commitments under
this Agreement.
I am particularly concerned with the crescendo of charges and
threats emanating from certain quarters regarding the presence in your
country of hundreds of thousands of unfortunate refugees fleeing
oppression and violence in Afghanistan. In these circumstances, the
United States reiterates that it considers the Durand Line to be the
international frontier between Afghanistan and Pakistan and that our
actions under the 1959 Agreement will reflect that fact.2
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
tion marking.
2 On the original U.S. policy regarding the Durand Line, see Foreign Relations, 1955–

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
160.
Response to Request for Intelligence From the Acting
Assistant Director for Joint Chiefs of Staff Support ([name
not declassified]) to the Director of Joint Strategic Plans and
Policy (Lyons)1
Washington, January 11, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghan Paper for DDPMA Trip (U)
REQUIREMENT
airlift and casualties in Afghanistan
1. (C) Sanctions: The principal Soviet reactions to the various retribu-
tive measures announced by the President have been twofold. First,
military operations in Afghanistan have continued with increasing
evidence that the force buildup has not abated. Second, Moscow has
launched a propaganda blitz, accusing the US, with Chinese and Egyp-
tian complicity, of meddling in Afghan internal affairs, arming and
training the insurgents, and supporting Pakistan in its assistance to
rebel factions. Presumably the Soviets will take steps to ameliorate
any shortfall in grain, fish, and technology requirements by finding
alternative sources of supply or buying through a third country
“cutout.” There are retaliatory actions against the US and allies avail-
able to the Soviets in such areas as Berlin, Cuba and elsewhere; however,
these do not appear too likely in the near term given the operational
success of their occupation of Afghanistan.
2. (TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Soviet Tactics:
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan began with an airbridge into Kabul
on 25 December. When completed on the 27th, the airhead consisted
of an airborne force equivalent to two regiments. Another proximate
airborne regiment had previously been deployed to Bagram airbase
north of Kabul in early December. The airborne forces in Kabul initiated
the coup d’etat in the capital on the night of the 27th while some
Bagram elements may have deployed north to secure the major road
leading from the Soviet border.
(TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) In Kabul,
BMD-equipped battalions apparently moved to secure key government
facilities, the Radio Afghanistan compound, and Darulaman Palace in
the city’s suburbs where President Amin was staying. Soviet troops
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, Background paper
for new DJ5. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].

Afghanistan
took Afghan sentries by surprise at most locations and after brief fire-
fights succeeded in securing and disarming the troops. In addition,
airborne forces moved to secure Afghan army garrisons ringing the
capital. Amin and his entourage were reportedly executed that night.
(TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Simultane-
ously, two Soviet motorized rifle divisions poised on the border appar-
ently invaded on two axes. One division moved south to Kabul along
the road previously secured by the Bagram forces and arrived in the
city on 29 December. The other division crossed into western Afghani-
stan and occupied the key Afghan cities of Herat and Shindand. These
are the only confirmed ground force divisions in Afghanistan. How-
ever, elements of two additional divisions may now have entered the
country—one along each of the previously used axes of advance.
(TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Information
on the tactics employed in the operation, is sketchy [less than 1 line not
declassified]. It appears that both divisions conducted a tactical road
march south to their respective objectives with the western division
reportedly encountering some resistance in Herat. The rise [use] of
reconnaissance aircraft in support of ground formations’ advance along
major routes has been confirmed as has the use of helicopters for
medical evacuation missions. As yet, there is no reliable evidence of
heliborne assaults or air strikes in conjunction with the Soviet campaign
and, indeed, no indications of active Soviet counterinsurgency opera-
tions have been noted to date. As a footnote, despite the lack of hard
evidence, it is believed some airborne elements may have been flown
into key outlying cities during the 25–27 December airlift to secure
important airfields prior to the subsequent arrival of regular combat
units.
3. (TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Airlift: Cur-
rently, Soviet military transport aviation (VTA) is supporting military
operations in Afghanistan with an average of 15–30 flights a day. These
flights are bringing in important supplies as well as providing some
medical evacuation support.
(TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) During the
Christmas airlift into Kabul, the Soviets apparently committed 50 per-
cent of their AN–22/COCK and IL–76/CANDID assets to the air opera-
tions in addition to 35 percent of their more numerous AN–12/CUB
fleet. These aircraft were drawn primarily from the western USSR but
some came from the Soviet Far East. The actual airlift was conducted
in two phases. The first phase conducted on 24–25 December repre-
sented an airlift of 150–200 VTA sorties into bases in the border region
from the western USSR. This was the relocation of major elements of
an airborne division. The second phase consisted of the movement of
these airborne forces into Kabul and possibly other key cities by an

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
at least two airborne regiments were introduced.
4. (S) Casualties: There has been no accurate information on Soviet
or Afghan casualties incurred during the coup. One report cited as
many as 250 Soviet casualties incident to the takeover but this is unsub-
stantiated. Similarly, there are various reports of conflict between Soviet
units and dissident Afghan army troops and insurgents—all of these
suffer from imprecise casualty figures. All that can be responsibly
stated is that Soviet casualty levels are expected now to be low, resulting
primarily from terrorist attacks and various hit-and-run attacks by the
rebels. These figures should increase as the Soviet units become more
actively engaged in combat operations.
[name not declassified]
Assistant Director for JCS Support (Acting)
161.
Intelligence Cable1
[cable number not declassified]
Subj: [1 line not declassified]
Afghanistan: Status of the Afghan Army. (U)
1. (S [codeword not declassified]) The internal collapse of the Afghan
Army is gathering momentum.2 An engagement on 9 January is the
first confirmed Soviet operation against the rebels.
2. (S [codeword not declassified]) The Army’s desertion problem has
become particularly acute in the northeast. Officers and men of the
31st Regiment of the Nahrin-based 20th Division deserted last week
following an accidental bombing of their position. Virtually all 20th
Division forces in Takhar Province have deserted. Additionally, troops
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Sensitive; Priority. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situa-
tion Room.
2 An intelligence memorandum prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
January 9, noted: “rebel forces appear to be making substantial gains in a large number
of regions” and “the Afghan military is attempting to assert itself more but to date
seems barely capable of holding on to areas that have been under its control.” (Central
Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject
Crisis—January 1980, SITREPs)

Afghanistan
of the 75th Regiment sent from Kabul to reinforce the 20th Division’s
units in Konduz are deserting. Most of the locally recruited troops of
this regiment are returning to their homes in Konduz. As a result, the
20th Division’s artillery regiment is being moved from Konduz as a
precaution.
3. (S [codeword not declassified]) In the adjacent 19th Division in
Badakhshan Province, both the 24th and 27th Regiments are suffering
from severe combat fatigue, desertions, and dissension spread by dis-
loyal troops and intense rebel pressure. Airborne and commando battal-
ions attached from Kabul since November are also threatening to refuse
to fight.
4. (S [codeword not declassified]) Evidence of disloyalty has also sur-
faced in other units. Armored troops of the 17th Division in Herat are
spreading antigovernment propaganda. Intelligence and police forces
in the city are refusing to work, and the town has been virtually shut
down for 3 days. Herat and other large cities have been placed under
a strict night curfew to avert the danger of civil disorder. Herat is of
particular concern because it was the scene of a bloody anti-Soviet
military and civilian uprising last March. East of Kabul, both the 11th
Division at Jalalabad and the 9th Mountain Division at Asadabad have
experienced severe desertion problems. In each division at least one
regiment has bolted or refuses to fight.
5. (S [codeword not declassified]) South of Kabul, a mortar company
of the 14th Division at Ghazni attacked its battalion headquarters before
fleeing. Deserters from the disarmed Kabul garrison have been cap-
tured by the Kandahar-based II Corps. That Corps and its sister III
Corps in Paktia Province have also experienced desertions but at appar-
ently lower rates than units nearer the Soviet border.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
162.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, January 12, 1980
CHINA-PAKISTAN:
Response to invasion of Afghanistan
In a reversal of its earlier policy, China is now prepared to provide arms
to the Afghan rebels.2
The Chinese are seeking Pakistani “approval in principle” for such a
move, [1½ lines not declassified].
Beijing reportedly has also told the Pakistanis that it is urging the US
to renew substantial arms shipments to Pakistan and to revitalize the 1959
US-Pakistan security treaty. The Chinese, [1½ lines not declassified] fear that
a “partial” US response to Pakistan would signal a lack of US determination
to confront Soviet aggression. China may also increase its own military and
economic aid to Pakistan after Foreign Minister Huang Hua’s visit to Islama-
bad late next week.
Over the longer term, Beijing may try to create a “regional alignment
of forces” against Moscow, according to one Chinese official. Some Chinese
diplomats hope that the Afghan crisis will lead to increased cooperation between
Beijing and New Delhi, but we see little prospect of this in the near term
with Indira Gandhi back in power.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The
full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The article
printed here was found in this form.
2 An intelligence cable prepared in the Department of Defense, January 10, reported
on a series of meetings that took place in London starting on January 6 between repre-
sentatives of Norinco, a Chinese manufacturer of military hardware, and Afghan “libera-
tion leaders.” The cable noted that the Chinese “are prepared to accept political risk vis-
à-vis USSR of their hardware being picked up on battlefield and being identified as of
PRC origin.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, PRC Support for
Insurgents) A news wire item from Islamabad, January 17, reported that China informed
Pakistan “that it has no intention of becoming physically involved in any confrontation
with the Soviets over Afghanistan,” but it pledged to support the Afghan rebels with
“moral and material means.” (“China to Aid Afghan Rebels with Moral, Material Means,”

Afghanistan
163.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Meeting with Agha Shahi
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Graham Claytor, Deputy Secretary of Defense
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of Near Eastern & South Asian Affairs
Arthur W. Hummel, Ambassador to Pakistan
Thomas P. Thornton, National Security Council
Agha Shahi, Foreign Affairs Adviser, Pakistan
Muhammad Sultan Khan, Pakistan Ambassador
General Ghulam Jilani, Pakistan
General Khalid Mahmoud Aref, Pakistan
The President met on Saturday, January 12, with Pakistani Foreign
Affairs Adviser Agha Shahi. The meeting took place in the Cabinet
Room, following meetings that Shahi had had with Dr. Brzezinski and
Secretary Vance.2 Various advisers were present on each side. (S)
The President opened by welcoming Shahi and noting that he had
had a good series of communications with President Zia. President
Carter noted that the Soviet invasion is a major adverse development,
an ominous change in Soviet practice. He was pleased at the support
that he had received from the American people for his responses, and
from nations all around the world. The President recalled that we had
again reaffirmed the validity of the 1959 agreement, and our recognition
of the Durand line as the international boundary between Pakistan and
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White House Cabinet Room. The full
text of the memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
2 Shahi and Brzezinski met in Brzezinski’s office immediately preceding this meet-
Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Thornton, Country File, Box 95, Pakistan:
that the two discussed “possible aid and security guarantees.” (Robert B. Cullen, “Vance-
Pakistani Talk on Aid Is Termed ‘Very Constructive,’” Washington Post, January 13, 1980,
p. A20)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Afghanistan.3 He pointed out that we had put together with great care
a strong military and economic aid package, and that some of our top
officials will be going to Europe in the next week to discuss sharing
of the economic and military burden.4 He said that he believed the
European leaders were already positively inclined and he would appre-
ciate Agha Shahi’s guidance on the degree to which our efforts in all
of these regards should be made public. He noted, of course, that the
dimensions of our aid program will have to become public as soon as
we present it to Congress. (S)
The President reviewed various measures that we have taken to
increase our strength on a permanent basis, including the revitalization
of NATO, the establishment of important relations with China, and
measured development of Diego Garcia, where the British are now
more willing to be forthcoming on expansion. He noted, however, that
our relations with India have become difficult following the elections.
He told Mr. Shahi that he had had a nonsubstantive telephone conversa-
tion with Mrs. Gandhi and that he was disconcerted, although not
especially surprised by the speech which the Indian Permanent Repre-
sentative had made on Afghanistan in the UN General Assembly.5 The
speech sounded as if it had come from East Germany, Czechoslovakia,
or North Vietnam. He told Shahi that we plan to send an emissary to
India to attempt to convince Mrs. Gandhi of our attitude towards her
country, and to point out that we will be making commitments to
Pakistan. (S)
The President said we trust that Pakistan is determined to defend
its territory. We will report back on matters of concern to you after we
have talked to India and our European allies. The Chinese Foreign
Minister will soon be visiting Pakistan and I hope you will share with
us, to the proper extent, the results of that visit. (S)
3 See Document 159.
he met with the North Atlantic Council in Brussels on January 15, he noted that he was
“encouraged” by the progress made toward agreeing on the response to the Soviet
intervention in Afghanistan. (Flora Lewis, “Gains Reported at NATO Parley on Anti-
5 Carter’s phone conversation with Gandhi took place earlier that day. The January
11 statement by the Indian Permanent Representative was relayed in telegram 714 from
New Delhi, January 12. The major points of the statement, as reported in the telegram,
included the assertion that the Soviet Union was in Afghanistan “at the invitation of
the previous Afghan Government and with the agreement of the present government,”
that “India has had assurances from the USSR that Soviets will withdraw on request by
Afghan Government,” and “discussion in the UN of an issue involving the sovereign
rights of the Afghan people would not be helpful.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800020–0906)

Afghanistan
We are talking not about a transient commitment. We value our
relations and are aware of our interest in Southwest Asia. Our position
on nuclear explosives is clear and I hope you will relay our concern
to President Zia. Movement on this is not a prerequisite for cooperation,
but our long-term relations will be substantially affected by the question
of nuclear explosives. We hope that you could promise not to test
during the administration of President Zia. Such a pledge could be
kept confidential; we would share it only with a few Congressmen. It
could, however, be a prerequisite to the granting of aid. A future
explosion by Pakistan would be a matter of deep concern to the United
States. The nuclear question, then, is no longer an insurmountable
obstacle, but it remains important. (S)
Agha Shahi thanked the President for taking time to see him, and
for reaffirming the American commitment under the 1959 Agreement.
Mr. Shahi said that no matter how difficult the situation might be, it
was always a pleasure to deal with Secretary Vance. (S)
Mr. Shahi agreed that there was a need to continue the discussion
between the two sides. He referred to an Army-Air Force-Navy team
which would meet with American counterparts to review the threat
to Pakistan and discuss its requirements.6 He pointed out that the
Pakistani requirements were large because their Western Frontier is
nearly undefended. All the troops are in the East because Indian forces
are massed along that border. (S)
Mr. Shahi said he had received fairly explicit and satisfactory reas-
surances about our security guarantee. He noted that in the past there
had been some question of the applicability of these guarantees, and
wondered if an executive agreement would be as effective as a treaty.
He said that Secretary Vance had given him the benefit of his views
and that he was glad to hear from the President that the American
commitment to the region is permanent. He stressed that if Pakistan
does face up to the Soviet threat, and once again is left high and dry by
the United States, this would pose a great danger to the very existence
of Pakistan. Pakistan is now a front-line state; its concerns are legitimate
and its demands are not exaggerated. He hoped for some possible
strengthening of the 1959 Agreement, particularly one that would be
binding on future administrations. (S)
6 A meeting on this topic between senior officials of the Pakistani military and the
Department of Defense took place earlier in the Department of State. A cable summarizing
the meeting is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX,
South Asia.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
President Carter replied that both he and Dr. Brzezinski had pub-
licly broadcast this commitment to the American people. In addition,
it will be possible to send a message to Congress to this effect.7 (S)
Secretary Vance pointed out that such a reaffirmation of the 1959
Agreement would be included in the language of the assistance pack-
President Carter said that the material included in the legislation
would be the same as in the letter that he had written to President Zia.
He said it would be impossible to put any treaty to the Senate before
the SALT II Agreement was considered, and that was, of course, now
deferred. (S)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
President Carter observed that a move of Pakistani forces to the
West would be a sign of Pakistani resolve. He said that the United States
will be helpful in getting support for Pakistan from other countries
and asked that Agha Shahi give Zia exactly the same message that had
been given to him. We will stand with Pakistan. Pakistan is vital to
United States’ security, and the 1959 Agreement is permanent. It is a
pleasure to have Pakistan as a friend. We both now have an opportunity
to repair the doubtful relations of the past. Please take to heart the
American people’s concern about the spread of nuclear weapons; this
concern is not directed particularly at Pakistan, but also a series of
other countries who are at the nuclear threshold. (S)
Thereupon the meeting ended. (U)
7 The President’s State of the Union Address to Congress, January 23, included the
following pledge: “We’ve reconfirmed our 1959 agreement to help Pakistan preserve its
independence and integrity. The United States will take action consistent with our own
laws to assist Pakistan in resisting any outside aggression.” The full text of the address
memorandum transmitting Presidential Determination 80–11, Carter sent Vance authori-
for the use of $5.3 million “to respond to the urgent humanitarian needs of Afghan
refugees in Pakistan.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800046–

Afghanistan
164.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Bilateral Responses to Future Unacceptable Soviet Behavior (U)
Leaving ancillary events aside, there are basically only two results
possible in Afghanistan:
—Either the Soviets mop up the insurgents in short order, control
the passes, and exert sufficient force to seal the Pak-Afghan border; or
—Moscow runs into more difficulties than I presently anticipate
and becomes enmeshed in a long-range counter-insurgency war in
Afghanistan. (S)
In either case, unless the Pakistanis can be prevailed upon by
Moscow to close the Afghan border to the insurgents, it is almost a
certainty that at some point the Soviets will feel compelled to conduct
cross-border operations into Pakistan aimed at wiping out the military
value of the refugee camps. In such an event, the pressures on us to
react forcefully will be enormous. (S)
In fact, the Soviets now seem to be laying the propaganda ground-
work for future attacks against Afghan rebel bases. As I pointed out
in my Evening Report of January 9, [less than 1 line not declassified]
analysts are convinced that the Soviets will be attacking such bases in
the near future.2 Certainly Soviet military commanders in Afghanistan
will be pointing out to Moscow that allowing the refugee camps to
remain untouched would mean that the insurgency could go on, fueled
by outside forces, perhaps for decades. There is no country within the
Soviet orbit where Moscow has allowed an insurgency to continue. It
is extremely doubtful that Afghanistan will be an exception to this
Furthermore, a cross-border operation into Pakistan is only one,
and not the most serious, of the contingencies which we will be facing
in the next several months. Neither a Soviet move into Northern Iran
nor a Vietnamese thrust into Thailand can be ruled out with any degree
of certainty. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
Odom, Ermarth, Griffith, Henze, and Welch.
2 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Even without further provocations by the Soviets, the President
has called the invasion of Afghanistan the worst crisis we have faced
since the Second World War. But—to deal with just one of the post-
WW II crises—after construction of the Berlin Wall to provide needed
manpower draft calls were doubled and tripled, enlistments were
extended, and the Congress promptly and unanimously authorized
the mobilization of up to 250,000 men in the ready Reserves and
National Guard, including the activation of two full divisions and fifty-
four Air Force and Naval air squadrons. Some 158,000 men, Reservists
and Guardsmen, mostly for the Army, were actually called up; and
altogether the strength of our armed forces was increased by 300,000
men. Some 40,000 were sent to Europe, and others were prepared for
swift deployment. Six “priority divisions” in the Reserves were made
ready for quick mobilization, and three Regular Army divisions
engaged in training were converted to full combat readiness. (U)
Along with the manpower, the Berlin build-up provided enough
equipment and ammunition to supply the new troops, enough sealift
and airlift to transport them, and enough airpower to cover ground
combat. Some three hundred tactical fighter aircraft, more than 100,000
tons of equipment, and several thousand tanks, jeeps, armored person-
nel carriers and other vehicles were placed in position on the European
continent, and still more on “floating depot” ships. (U)
If the Soviets carried on with further objectionable actions in
Afghanistan and adjacent regions, unless we reacted with the same
kind of vigor that President Kennedy did, i.e., actions stronger than
anything so far being contemplated, the press would almost certainly
begin to make unfavorable comparisons between our reactions to Berlin
and Afghanistan and try to paint the President as weak and ineffec-
I believe we should be staffing-out the pros and cons of the
following specific options which the President could use at some later
date, in the face of almost inevitable further Soviet objectionable action:
—Calling up the Reserves.
—Establishing a manpower commission to study the reinstitution
of the draft.3
—Increasing our military presence in the area.
—Providing security guarantees for the nations of Southwest Asia,
thereby drawing a clear line as to where we see our vital interests in
the region.
3 Carter reinstated draft registration, but not conscription.

Afghanistan
—Enhancing our base structure; pushing ahead for bases in one or
more of the following countries: Kenya, Oman, Somalia, Egypt, Israel.
—Providing a meaningful military and economic assistance pack-
age to Pakistan (the current package is entirely inadequate).
—Boycotting, partially boycotting, or moving the venue of the
Olympics (no single action by the US would have greater impact on
the Soviet people).
—Renouncing the 1972 US-USSR Joint Declaration of Principles,
since Soviet actions in Afghanistan are in direct violation of its letter
and spirit. (The Declaration never received much attention in the United
States—it was a crumb Kissinger and Nixon threw the Soviets—but it
has language supporting our position in this instance, and is very
important to the Soviets. They cite it frequently and have used it inter-
nally to convince the Soviet public that relations with the US are
under control.)4
—In line with the above, suspending the various exchange agree-
ments initiated in the full flush of the inauguration of detente from
—Suspending the Maritime Agreement (as indicated elsewhere, I
think we should do this in response to a Soviet veto of sanctions
against Iran).
—Suspending Aeroflot landing rights entirely.
—Reducing Embassy staffing.
—Expelling fifty or more of the top KGB operatives in the United
In any case, I think it is the right tactic to let the Soviets know,
and our bureaucracy as well, that we have other actions up our sleeves
which we will use should the Soviets engage in further unacceptable
behavior. By doing so there is at least a hope that we would inhibit
the Soviets from acting recklessly. (S)
4 No renunciation of the Declaration of Principles occurred.
5 The British expulsion, part of Operation Foot, occurred following the defection
of the KGB official Oleg Adolfovich Lyalin, who notified British intelligence officers of
the scope of Soviet espionage activities in the United Kingdom. According to Lyalin,
Soviet agents were plotting to mount terrorist attacks in London, the United States,
France, the FRG, and Italy. See “Operation Foot (1972),” in R.S.C. Trahair, ed., Encyclopedia
of Cold War Espionage, p. 220.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
165.
Annex A From the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, January 14, 1980
PROSPECTS FOR INSURGENCY IN AFGHANISTAN
Whether the disparate Afghan insurgent groups can stand up to
the Soviet military occupation forces depends on the degree of Soviet
commitment.
The Soviets appear to have three options:
(1) To use Soviet forces primarily to secure urban areas and major
roads and to rebuild the Afghan Army for the role of pacification in
the countryside.
(2) To use Soviet forces directly in counter-insurgency operations
in the countryside as a supplement to the Afghan Army wherever
most needed.
(3) To use Soviet forces as the primary element in crushing the
insurgents throughout the country.
We believe that the Soviets already have sufficient forces (80,000
troops) in Afghanistan to fulfill option 1, and in fact now control the
urban areas and key roads. The longer task of rebuilding the Afghan
Army to the point where it can challenge the insurgents in the country-
side will be much more difficult. Even before the Babrak coup, the
Afghan Army was well below strength due to desertions and low
morale. If the Afghan Army cannot regain more of the initiative against
the insurgents soon, the Army may continue to disintegrate and rural
territory continue to fall to the insurgents.
We believe, then, that the Soviets will be drawn into an active
counterinsurgency role as in option 2. The recent establishment of General
Sokolov’s headquarters in Kabul and of a tactical air headquarters at Bagram
airfield would seem to point in this direction. The introduction of more
airpower, especially transport and gunship helicopters and close air
support aircraft, or the availability of the latter from nearby airfields
in the USSR, would presage such intentions.
A key question is whether limited Soviet counterinsurgency opera-
tions under this option would intimidate the insurgents into at least
quiescence. The insurgents have probably not faced the ruthlessness
with which the Soviets will destroy their villages, mosques, and farm-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The
full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The annex
printed here was found in this form.

Afghanistan
lands, and have not been subjected to the massive firepower of helicop-
ter gunships, jet bombers, and tactical missiles that the Soviets have
on hand and will use.
We tend to believe that the insurgents are sufficiently mobile, elu-
sive, and determined not to be cowed by such Soviet tactics, at least
in the central, northern, and eastern portions of Afghanistan. In most
of this area, the base altitude is about 15,000 feet. Helicopter perform-
ance is poor and aircraft are inhibited.
In the southern and southwestern areas, however, the terrain is
generally flat and accessible. Here even the existing levels of Soviet
forces are probably adequate to overpower the insurgents and establish
firm control. Thus the insurgency is not likely to prevent the Soviets
from establishing a secure base area from which they could conduct
covert operations, infiltration, or military operations against either Ira-
nian or Pakistani Baluchistan or both.
If the Soviets and the Afghan Army cannot establish adequate
control over the mountainous countryside, the Soviets will be faced
with the decision as to introducing substantially larger ground forces.
The Soviets have few troops left in the border area and would have to bring
in units from other parts of the USSR. Once these forces were in place,
the Soviets could move against the insurgent strongholds countrywide,
relying heavily on airstrikes against rebel concentrations but sending
in units on foot against remote rebel bases.
Such actions would probably push tens of thousands of refugees,
including insurgents, across the border into Pakistan and Iran and force
many others to give up the fight. They would allow the Soviets to
reduce the insurgency to nuisance levels, but at a very high cost. Still,
we would expect the rebels to return to Afghanistan and renew the
fight whenever the Soviets decided to wind down their involvement.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
166.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 14, 1980
BRIEFS AND COMMENTS
USSR: Brezhnev’s “Interview” on Afghanistan
Brezhnev’s “interview” yesterday in Pravda is the most comprehensive
denunciation of the US by a Soviet leader in many years and signals Moscow’s
conviction that it cannot reach a modus vivendi with the Carter administration,
at least in the near future. ([classification marking not declassified])
In condemning the “latest irresponsible actions” and “the extremist
position” of the US, Brezhnev warned his Soviet audience to expect
further US efforts to “poison” Soviet-American relations. Although
Brezhnev did not announce any Soviet countermeasures, he further
warned that US actions would, “like a boomerang,” come back to
hit the US, “if not today, then tomorrow.”2 ([classification marking not
declassified])
Brezhnev’s efforts to separate the US from its West European allies
continues a trend in Soviet policy that has been especially prominent
since the Afghan crisis erupted. In alleging that the US has shown itself
to be “an absolutely unreliable partner” and in assuring the West
European governments of Moscow’s desire to continue political and
military detente, Brezhnev hoped to provide incentives to the West
Europeans to dissociate themselves from US actions and to continue
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1979, NIDs. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified].
The full version of this National Intelligence Daily was not filed with this collection.
The article printed here was found in this form.
remarks in Pravda provided an opportunity for the United States to challenge the Krem-
lin’s attempts to assure Soviet citizenry and world opinion that the intervention in
Afghanistan was the right decision. This endeavor would include demonstrating that
the Soviet Union had not acted in a way befitting a “responsible superpower and a fit
partner for negotiating major arms issues and for mutually advantageous coopera-
tion;” that the intervention “gravely damaged” Soviet efforts to stymie U.S.-Chinese
cooperation, to “pacify” Western Europe, and to continue “neutralizing” regional powers
such as Turkey and Iran; that only a significant change in Soviet behavior could prevent
a “major new arms race with the U.S.;” and, finally, “to get across that Moscow cannot
have it both ways and will have to give up its ideological aspirations to support ‘national
liberation’ if it wants to advance other important Soviet interests.” The Embassy further
argued that this message should come in the form of a Presidential speech. (National
Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary

Afghanistan
economic relations as before. Brezhnev also announced Moscow’s posi-
tion that the stance taken by NATO in December makes negotiations
on long-range theater nuclear forces “impossible.” ([classification mark-
ing not declassified])
On Afghanistan, Brezhnev characterized the threat that prompted
the invasion as a “serious danger” to Soviet security; his failure to
repeat earlier descriptions of the intervention as “limited” suggests a
decision to prepare the Soviet public for a long, hard campaign. This
impression is reinforced by his reference to “tens of thousands of
insurgents” in Afghanistan as well as by his claim that the White
House has announced “its decision to expand” aid to the Afghan rebels.
([classification marking not declassified])
One of Brezhnev’s major objectives in the “interview” was to assure
Soviet audiences on the domestic impact of US measures. He claimed
“plans for providing bread to the population will not be affected by
US actions,” an assertion that will be read by his audience as confirma-
tion that meat supplies will be hurt.3 Brezhnev appealed to Soviet
patriotism, recited the failure of past foreign efforts to test Soviet “met-
tle,” and warned that US actions have a “dangerously destabilizing
impact” on the world situation. [less than 1 line and classification marking
not declassified]
mood of the ‘man-on-the-street’ in Moscow toward the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
appears to be one of puzzled apathy. Some sources, however, report the existence of
grumbling because the invasion occurred at a time of widespread shortages of food and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
167.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and
cover page.]
Prospects for Soviet Operations Against the Insurgency in
Afghanistan ([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
Through a carefully prepared, massively staged military interven-
tion, the Soviets have imposed a new Communist puppet government
in Afghanistan and have occupied the key government and population
centers and the main communications facilities with Soviet troops. By
early January, the Soviets had six divisions and over 75,000 troops
inside Afghanistan—with more apparently on the way—and were rap-
idly consolidating their control. ([classification marking and codeword not
declassified])
We have no direct evidence of the Soviets’ expectations for the
eventual size, nature, and duration of their military adventure in
Afghanistan, but we believe that substantial Soviet forces will remain
there for the foreseeable future. The most likely commitment would
appear to be a force of some six to 10 divisions and as many as 150,000
men. Such a force could have been made available within a few weeks
of the beginning of the invasion, but the deliberate pace of the buildup
suggests that it will not be fully deployed until spring, when operations
can resume at full intensity. A force of this size could ensure the survival
of the Babrak regime, retain control over major population centers and
lines of communication, and conduct limited pacification operations.
Meanwhile, the Soviets are likely to make efforts to reconstitute the
Afghan Army over the next one to three years with the object of making
it effective enough to undertake a long-term pacification effort. ([classifi-
cation marking not declassified])
In the unlikely event that the Afghan insurgency increases beyond
the capacity of the force described above to contain it, or if the Soviets
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. According to a statement on the cover page: “This assessment
was prepared in the Office of Strategic Research and was coordinated with the Afghan
Task Force, the Office of Political Analysis, the Strategic Warning Staff, and the National
Intelligence Officers for Warning, General Purposes Forces, and USSR-Eastern Europe.”

Afghanistan
thought they could do the job quickly, they might decide on a major
pacification effort. The manpower requirement for such an effort would
be open-ended, probably taking far more than 150,000 men. The
buildup of such a force could only be accomplished over a period of
months. ([classification marking not declassified])
Soviet operations, which almost certainly will combine carrot with
stick, may be able to intimidate or placate the insurgency to quiescence,
and they can certainly remove it as a potent threat to the Babrak regime.
Indeed, it is unlikely that even a much stronger insurgency could
seriously threaten either the Soviets or Babrak’s government as long
as the Soviets retain substantial forces in Afghanistan. On the other
hand, the traditional militancy and fierce independence of the rebels,
coupled with the severe difficulties that the mountainous Afghan coun-
tryside poses for military pacification operations, probably will make
it impossible for the Soviets to eradicate the insurgency. ([classification
marking not declassified])
Thus, the long-term outlook for the Soviets in Afghanistan is for
a continued military presence with both Soviet and government forces
harassed by at least low-level insurgent operations. The Soviet presence
could provoke the insurgency to greater determination and closer coop-
eration. The rebels could continue harassing operations for the foresee-
able future, withdrawing into high-mountain redoubts or to sanctuaries
across the border to evade search-and-destroy operations. We can fore-
see almost no circumstance in which the Soviets will be able to eradicate
the insurgency and permanently pacify the countryside, but, with a
force of 150,000 men, they probably could reduce the insurgency to an
acceptable level of annoyance. ([classification marking not declassified])
The Soviet military occupation of Afghanistan is likely to be of
long duration. The Babrak regime is not likely to be either politically
or militarily secure without the Soviet presence, and rebuilding the
Afghan Army probably will take from one to three years. Eradication
of the insurgency—if it can be accomplished at all—could take some
years after that. In the short term, there is the threat of spillover into
adjacent areas of Pakistan and Iran resulting from a Soviet decision to
attack or pursue insurgents operating out of those countries. Given the
dislocation of so many Afghan refugees, the refugee camps’ potential
as a source of recruitment and supplies for the insurgents, and the
Soviets’ publicly stated rationalization of the invasion as a response to
external threats, the potential for spillover is high. ([classification marking
not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
168.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to President Carter, Vice President Mondale, Secretary of
State Vance, Secretary of Defense Brown, and the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 15, 1980
The attached paper sets forth our preliminary views of Soviet
options and constraints in Southwest Asia following the invasion of
Afghanistan. Its focus is on the major actors in the region from the
Soviet perspective; it does not deal explicitly with possible US policies
or how those might influence Soviet positions.
Stansfield Turner2
Attachment
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency3
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Soviet Union and Southwest Asia
1. It is unlikely that the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan constitutes
the preplanned first step in the implementation of a highly articulated
grand design for the rapid establishment of hegemonic control over
all of Southwest Asia. Rather than signaling the carefully timed begin-
ning of a premeditated strategic offensive, the occupation may have
been a reluctantly authorized response to what was perceived by the
Kremlin as an imminent and otherwise irreversible deterioration of its
already established position in a country which fell well within the
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Mondale Papers, Box 42,
Foreign Countries—Afghanistan, 1980. Secret; Noforn.
2 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above his typed signature.
3 Secret; Noforn. In an undated, unsigned memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski sum-
marized the CIA memorandum and wrote: “it is thoughtfully argued and deserves your
attention.” Still, Brzezinski noted, it “does not examine the possibility the Soviets may
move more forcefully with their military power against Iran, and possibly Pakistan, in
the near future.” Brzezinski surmised that a combination of a settlement of the Iran
hostage crisis (which, in his view, would increase Iranian anti-Soviet sentiment) and the
perception of a growing U.S. military presence in the region could convince the Soviet
leadership to make preemptive moves “while the balance is more in their favor.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 82, USSR: 1/

Afghanistan
Soviet Union’s legitimate sphere of influence. However, there is no
reason to doubt that the Soviets covet a larger sphere of influence in
Southwest Asia or to suppose that their decision to occupy Afghanistan
was made without reference to broader regional objectives. On the
contrary, their willingness to incur what they almost certainly antici-
pated would be serious costs strongly suggests a belief that their occu-
pation of Afghanistan would improve their access to a number of
extremely lucrative targets of opportunity and might eventually lead
to a highly favorable and enduring shift in the regional and perhaps
even global balance of power.
2. The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan was probably predicated
on a belief that Afghan resistance would prove relatively short lived.
Among other things, their historical experience in their own Central
Asian republics may have persuaded the Soviets that a strategy combin-
ing military intimidation, political conciliation, and economic entice-
ment would quickly reduce resistance and enable their puppet regime
to acquire at least a modicum of grassroots political authority and
administrative control. If this turns out to be a miscalculation and
Afghan resistance becomes or remains persistent and widespread, the
Soviets could become so bogged down in guerrilla warfare that they
abandon any hopes of further near-term expansion. However, they are
unlikely to withdraw their forces from Afghanistan and might well
try to alleviate their problems there by intensifying pressure on or
expanding the conflict to Pakistan.
3. In the face of intractable Afghan resistance, the Soviets are likely
to attribute much of the blame to direct or indirect Pakistani involve-
ment and to take what they deem to be essential deterrent and retalia-
tory measures. These measures could include not only cross-border
raids by loyal Afghan and/or Soviet forces, but also extensive Soviet
support for anti-Pakistani tribal insurgents and intimidating demarches
on Islamabad by the Soviets’ Indian allies.4 In extremis, moreover, the
Soviets might press a not-too-reluctant India to join them in an all-
out campaign of political subversion or even in a concerted invasion.
Although the inevitable costs of such a drastic action might give the
Soviets pause, their behavior in Afghanistan (as well as the earlier
escalatory behavior of the United States in Vietnam-Laos-Cambodia)
reported that “the Pakistanis are concerned the Soviets may soon initiate military action
against Afghan refugee camps located along their common border with Afghanistan. The
USSR claimed Soviet intervention in Afghanistan is warranted because of the continuing
Pakistani training and support of Afghan insurgents.” The cable also reported that the
number of Afghan refugees in Pakistan had risen to 400,000 over the past year and could
“easily” reach one million in response to Soviet military action. (Carter Library, National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
suggests that they might be undeterred by anything short of a credible
threat of direct US military retaliation.
4. Unless their position in Afghanistan impels them to take a harsh
anti-Pakistani line, the Soviets are likely to give Islamabad time to
adjust to the “realities” of its new situation and adopt a more concilia-
tory approach to the USSR. In this case, the Soviets are more likely to
let their presence in and growing control over Afghanistan speak for
themselves than they are to underscore Pakistani vulnerabilities by
issuing explicit threats. While exercising such self-restraint, moreover,
the Soviets are likely to offer the Pakistanis substantial inducements
to distance themselves from the United States and the PRC. Although
they will have to guard against jeopardizing their close relations with
India in the process, the Soviets are likely to try to woo the Pakistanis
not only with pledges of noninterference and offers of economic aid
but also with offers of at least limited military assistance and promises
to use their good offices to keep Pakistani-Indian relations on an even
keel. Should India take serious umbrage at such initiatives, the Soviets
might temporarily take a less forthcoming line. But they would also
be mindful of the extreme improbability of a markedly anti-Soviet
realignment of Indian policy and might be willing to expend a substan-
tial amount of the capital they have accumulated in Delhi in order to
secure Pakistani acceptance of the Soviet Union’s growing regional
influence.
5. If Islamabad were to prove insufficiently responsive to their
blandishments, the Soviets would probably use less subtle means to
try to encourage greater “realism.” As already indicated, the means at
their disposal would include military intimidation, political subversion,
and tribal insurrection, as well as the activation of longstanding Afghan
and Indian claims on Pakistani territory. If these tactics also fail to
produce the desired results, the Soviets might eventually conclude that
it was advisable to allow Pakistan an interlude in which to work out
its own destiny. A decision to this effect would seem particularly
appropriate if attempts to escalate the pressure on Islamabad seemed
likely to increase US involvement in Pakistan and to limit Soviet oppor-
tunities elsewhere in the region. Such an interlude would not necessar-
ily be long lasting, however, and could come to an abrupt halt if
subsequent developments expose additional Pakistani vulnerabilities.
6. Of all of the objectives that their occupation of Afghanistan may
have placed within easier Soviet reach, a pro-Soviet Iran is almost
surely the most tantalizing. Although the Soviet occupation of an
Islamic country has undoubtedly confirmed and strengthened the anti-
Communist sentiments of Iran’s fervently religious ruling elite, it has
also emplaced Soviet forces on Iran’s eastern as well as its northern
border and has created possibilities for direct large-scale Soviet aid

Afghanistan
to Baluchi as well as to Azari and Kurdish separatist movements.
Furthermore, it has done so at a time when Iran is going through a
paroxysm of anti-American hysteria and may be on the brink of politi-
cal, social, and economic chaos. Since this is also a time when the
Soviets are about to encounter significant shortfalls in domestic energy
production, it seems probable that the expansion of its influence over
Iran will rank at or near the top of the Kremlin’s hierarchy of
regional priorities.
7. Although the possibility cannot be excluded, it does not seem
likely that the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan will turn out to have
been a dress rehearsal for an impending gala performance in Iran.
Unlike Afghanistan, Iran is clearly too important to the West to make
the risk of a counterintervention seem negligible, and the exercised
American reaction to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan has probably
convinced even the Kremlin’s most unreconstructed hawks that a fron-
tal attack on Iran could lead to a full-fledged military showdown with
the United States. However, fear of such a showdown will not lead
the Kremlin to forsake its ambitions or prevent it from pursuing them
by more circuitous means. At the margin, apprehension that any impor-
tant Soviet breakthrough in Iran would elicit a determined US military
reaction may exercise a restraining influence, but the Soviets will proba-
bly still have extensive room for maneuver in a situation in which
American options are severely circumscribed and Iranian vulnerabili-
ties are very large.
8. At least for the immediate future, the Soviets are likely to make
assiduous efforts to improve their relations with the Khomeini regime.
Among other things, they will probably signal their willingness to be
supportive diplomatically and to provide Tehran with economic and
military aid. Such overtures will not prevent the Soviets from
entrenching themselves on Iran’s Afghan border, cultivating their con-
tacts with anti-Persian nationalist movements, and supporting the
Tudeh’s efforts to build up its organizational infrastructure and pene-
trate the country’s governing elites. Instead of flaunting these activities,
however, the Kremlin will probably try to keep them inconspicuous
and take special precautions to neutralize their potentially provoca-
tive effects.
9. Although the Soviets can have few illusions about the possibility
of altering the fundamentally anti-Communist ideological tenets of the
Khomeini regime, they probably do foresee a possibility of growing
Tudeh influence over current governmental policy and of a significant
Tudeh role in a more secular and “progressive” post-Khomeini regime.
The early emergence and smooth stabilization of such a non-Commu-
nist but Communist-tinged regime probably represents the Soviets’
preferred outcome to the Khomeini succession, since they could then

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
look forward to the establishment of much more intimate Soviet-Iranian
relations which it would be extremely difficult for the United States
or other foreign countries to disrupt. Outside powers would be hard
pressed for an excuse to interfere with a legitimate and viable Iranian
regime, and any credible threat of hostile action on their part could
provide the Soviets with a welcome opportunity to extend protection
to a friendly neighboring country which also shared a common border
with the Soviets’ Afghan allies. While the experience of President Amin,
et al., would doubtless make many Iranian leaders question the wisdom
of signing a Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assistance with the USSR,
the external (and/or internal) pressures upon them might make their
position seem too precarious to allow them any choice.
10. Given the extremely remote prospect of an early pro-American
reorientation of Iranian policy, the Soviets would probably not attempt
to overthrow or subvert a post-Khomeini regime which denied the
Tudeh access to position of influence power. However, if they were
persuaded that such a regime was developing real durability and
becoming so anti-Communist that their potential leverage in Tehran
was in jeopardy (e.g., as a result of a credible threat to crush the Tudeh),
the Soviets would probably not hesitate to take strong counteraction.
Unless it were firmly convinced that such behavior would boomerang,
the Kremlin might well resort not only to stern diplomatic protests but
also to military intimidation and even, if necessary, to the encourage-
ment and support of intense centrifugal pressure on Tehran by anti-
Persian nationalist forces. So long as they themselves stopped short of
direct military intervention, the Soviets would probably discount the
possibility of US military action to save the incumbent regime. If, as
also seems probable, they were highly skeptical about the likelihood
and/or efficacy of US nonmilitary responses to a possible request by
Tehran for help, the Soviets might well risk the possibility that Tehran
could successfully resist their pressure and become militantly anti-
Soviet for the sake of the probability that it would bow to their pressure
or be replaced by a more accommodating successor.
11. Unless they become convinced that Iran was otherwise almost
certain to become a US client or was caught in the throes of an irreversi-
ble process of fragmentation and disintegration, the Soviets are not
likely to become wholehearted supporters of any of the country’s ethno-
nationalist secessionist or independence movements. If they were so
convinced, however, the Soviets would probably jettison Tehran with
alacrity and encourage the formation of Soviet-backed provisional gov-
ernments in Iranian Azarbayjan, Kordestan, Baluchestan, Khuzestan,
etc. Although the Kremlin would recognize that such a patent effort
to establish Soviet controlled mini-states could precipitate a US military
intervention (presumably to try to preserve the integrity of Iran but

Afghanistan
possibly—and in a possible de facto and ad hoc alliance with a severely
chastened Iraq—to simply occupy Khuzestan), it might well try to deter
such an intervention by a preemptive intervention of its own. Moreover,
if they felt that their only other real choice was acquiescence in what
they would almost certainly envision as a more or less permanent US
military presence on or close to their southern border, the Soviets might
not be averse to confronting the United States in an area in which
the local population was strongly anti-American and the USSR could
benefit from many logistical advantages.5
5 In a January 18 memorandum to Brzezinski, Odom laid out three strategies for
dealing with a Soviet invasion of Iran, none of them “very attractive.” The memorandum
169.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
271. Subject: Afghanistan Sitrep No. 23.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary. Kabul remains quiet but tense as the Soviet profile,
while lowered, remains visible. The ruling Parcham faction is trying
to broaden its bases of support through a Fatherland Front. There are
indications that even the Parchamists are splitting among pro- and
anti-Soviet presence elements. The government-controlled media con-
tinue to attack the U.S. and President Babrak Karmal has made a strong
pitch for Afghan-Iranian solidarity against American “imperialism.”
He pledged that the DRA would not permit Afghanistan to be used
as a base of operations against Iran (ignoring the presence of over
25,000 Soviet troops near the Afghan side of the two nations’ border)
and expected Iran to assume a “reciprocal” stance. The Afghan econ-
omy appears to have come to a standstill, at least in regard to develop-
ment activity and commerce. Although foreign exchange reserves are
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information to Ankara, Beijing, Bonn, Islamabad, Lon-
don, Karachi, Moscow, New Delhi, Paris, USNATO, USUN, USICA (for NEA), CINCPAC
(also for POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
high, wheat, the staff of life, is in short supply and is becoming dearer
in Kabul markets. End summary.
3. As of mid-afternoon Wednesday, January 16, Kabul remains
quiet but somewhat tense. The quietness reflects the absence of noted
incidents; the tension reflects widespread unease and anger at the
continued Soviet occupation of the country. Although the Soviet pres-
ence is not visible on every street corner, the passing of a truckload
of armed Soviet soldiers, the presence of a Soviet soldier (military
policeman?) at the entrance to an Air Force installation near the Kabul
Airport, the increased number of Soviet civilians seen living in Kabul’s
Karteh Seh and Karteh Chahar areas (near the Soviet Embassy) all
serve to remind Afghans and other observers that the Soviets are very
much on the scene. (This is to say nothing of the curfew hours when
Soviet troopers reportedly take over much of the guard responsibilities
at many DRA installations.)
4. The ruling Parchamist faction of the People’s Democratic Party
of Afghanistan has made an attempt to broaden its bases of support
through the cooption of some non-partisan, prominent Afghans, of
some former Khalqi officials, and of officials from the Daoud and King
Zahir eras, in an effort to form a “Fatherland Front,” presumably at
Soviet urging. (The Soviets had reportedly urged unsuccessfully the
Taraki-Amin regime to broaden, rather than narrow, its bases of sup-
port last year.)
5. Despite the recent Parchamist effort to form its Fatherland Front,
there are indications that splits are occurring within Parcham, as well
as within Khalqi, circles over the issue of Soviet domination. If such
indications prove true, it would appear that Afghan nationalism is a
force to be reckoned with, even within President Babrak Karmal’s
Parcham faction. There are also rumors repeat rumors that Babrak
himself is growing unhappy with the degree of Soviet control of his
government.
6. Meanwhile, the DRA-controlled Kabul New Times maintains its
incessant anti-U.S. and anti-Western drumbeats.
7. Babrak has, however, made an overture to Iran’s Khomeini in
a publicized note to the latter, carried in the Times’ January 14 edition.
Babrak charged that “certain Iranian men and circles . . . have been
doing vile propaganda and are engaged in unfriendly and unbrotherly
activities at the instigation of American world imperialism . . . against
the revolutionary change brought about by the Moslem, freedom-lov-
ing and brave people of Afghanistan . . .” Babrak assured Khomeini
that the present DRA leadership wishes to have “most cordial relations
based on Islamic brotherhood with the Islamic Republic of Iran.”
Babrak pledged that the DRA “will never allow anybody to use our
soil as a base against (the) Islamic revolution of Iran and against the

Afghanistan
interests of the fraternal Iranian people. And we expect our Iranian
brethren to assume a reciprocal stance.” (Comment: We are unaware
of any Iranian forces lined up on their side of the Afghan-Iranian
frontier, whereas upwards of 25,000 Soviet troops are near that border.)
8. We have been deluged by American (and other) journalists for
whom we have given background, unattributed press briefings. One
of the issues upon which those representatives have focussed is the
Soviet rationale for beefing up their military presence on the Iranian-
Afghan border. It is clear that many of them suspect that the Soviets
may have designs on Iran.
9. Economically, Afghanistan seems to be more or less at a stand-
still. There is little or no development activity going on in the country at
present. In Kabul, commerce is dead, according to our Afghan contacts.
Commercial imports declined sharply in the late summer, owing par-
tially to Pakistani measures blocking re-exports (smuggling) of tires,
textiles and other imported commodities to that country, and have
reportedly remained down. Foreign exchange reserves stood at about
dols 420 million as of mid-December, according to a source with excel-
lent contacts in the Finance Ministry, reflecting both the decline in
commercial imports and a relatively high rate of exports during most
of 1979. We lack data whether there has been a decline in reserves since
the December 27 Soviet invasion; we suspect there has not been yet.
10. Wheat, the Afghan staff of life, is becoming both scarcer and
very much dearer in the Kabul bazaars. Bazaar merchants attribute
this development both to the problem of bringing wheat in from the
producing provinces as a result of the Soviet intervention, and to hoard-
ing on the part of Kabulites. There is also a strong rumor that the anti-
Soviet protest strikes, which have reportedly occurred in Kandahar
and Herat, may spread to Kabul within the next fortnight.
11. Reports continue to reach Kabul sporadically about clashes
between insurgents and Soviets in various provincial areas. An Afghan
source, who is believed to report accurately what he hears, spoke
recently to a merchant who had come to Kabul last week from Doshi
(about mid-way between Kabul and Baglan on the road to the north).
The merchant swore on the Koran that he had seen a band of rebels
near Doshi chanting death to the Russians and carrying the heads of
seven decapitated Soviets. Source felt confident that his informant was
telling the truth.
Amstutz

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
170.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 17, 1980
SITUATION REPORTS
USSR-AFGHANISTAN
Three weeks after the Soviet intervention, insurgent activity remains on
about the same level as before the invasion. ([classification marking and code-
word not declassified])
The rebels continue to cut vital lines of communication by felling
trees, seizing bridges, and opening floodgates on mountain streams.
They also are setting up ambush positions to prevent the movement of
troops and supplies. Army units cannot move along the main highways
without armored or air escort. In addition to harassing troop convoys,
the insurgents are disrupting the flow of food and fuel from the country-
side to the cities, activity that could bring serious winter shortages
unless the Soviets undertake a major resupply effort. ([classification
marking and codeword not declassified])
The Soviets evidently have no active plans to pursue rebel forces,
but appear satisfied with reacting to flash points of insurgent activity
and maintaining control of the key cities—Kabul, Jalalabad, Qandahar,
Herat, and Mazar-e-Sharif. Opening of the major roads may require a
substantial commitment of additional ground and air support forces
to push the insurgents back into remote mountainous regions. ([classifi-
cation marking not declassified])
Military Movements
A Soviet airborne artillery regiment, which had been at Kokayty
airfield for the past two weeks, is no longer there and may have moved
into Afghanistan. [2 lines, classification marking, and codeword not
declassified]
Soviet forces are being airlifted into Ghowr Province to break a
rebel siege at Shahrak. The situation in the province is critical, and
Afghan units have been unable to move without air support. ([classifica-
tion marking and codeword not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed is a map of Afghanistan. The full
version of this National Intelligence Daily was not filed with this collection. The article
printed here was found in this form.

Afghanistan
Military Morale
The installation of President Babrak’s regime and its complete
dependence on Soviet support has led to increased despondency in
the Afghan military, [1 line not declassified]. Many officers resent the
role of Soviet forces in the coup and their disarming of Afghan units
whose loyalty to the new regime was suspect. [less than 1 line not
declassified] all ranks of the military generally believe that the Afghans
will be unable to regain control of their country without foreign assist-
ance. ([classification and handling restriction not declassified])
Babrak’s Poor Showing
[less than 1 line not declassified] Babrak’s inept performance at a
press conference for foreign newsmen last week has been ridiculed
in Kabul and has further degraded his popular standing. The press
conference, aired on local radio and television, reinforced the widely
held view that Babrak is a Soviet puppet. The session reportedly was
terminated before half its scheduled time had elapsed.2 There is specu-
lation in Kabul that the Soviets probably are belatedly aware of Babrak’s
shortcomings and may soon replace him. [less than 1 line, classification
marking, and handling restriction not declassified]
2 According to a news report, the January 10 press conference was completely
controlled by Soviet officials. Karmal pledged that Soviet forces would leave Afghanistan
when the United States, in conjunction with Egypt, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and China,
halted “aggressive policies” against Afghanistan. (James P. Sterba, “Soviet Lets Press
See Afghan Ruler, Then Impedes Reports on Meeting,” New York Times, January 12,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
171.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
438. Also for Ambassador Hummel (NEA). Subject: Agha Shahi
Gives Preliminary Views of Pakistan Government on Aid Package.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. I was called in this evening (Jan 17) by Foreign Advisor Agha
Shahi to receive what he described as preliminary reaction of Pakistan
Government to U.S. aid offer.2 Agha Shahi prefaced remarks by saying
U.S. should understand that GOP appreciates firm stand by President
Carter over Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and his offer to come to
Pakistan’s assistance. However, he would like Washington to have his
“informal and preliminary” assessment of initial GOP reaction to aid
package. Fuller and more formal GOP reaction would be forthcoming.
3. Agha Shahi said that initial reaction of government leaders was
one of disappointment. Considering the immensity of the threat, U.S.
offer of $400 million viewed as inadequate to meet the situation in
terms of the kinds of military equipment that Pakistan required, $200
million would not go very far, particularly if one took into account
requirements such as high performance aircraft. He had also discussed
offer of $200 million in economic assistance with Economics Minister
Ghulam Ishaq, who felt that this amount would not go very far in
meeting Pakistan’s needs, particularly with questions of debt resched-
uling still hanging over their heads. However, Agha Shahi added, aid
package more inadequate in regard to military needs.
4. GOP also concerned about degree of American resolve, since
already the “liberal” press in U.S. is attacking provision of assistance
to “undemocratic” government in Pakistan.3 Certainly Pakistan did
not enjoy an ideally democratic government and martial law prevailed,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 For the U.S aid package, see Document 151.
3 An apparent reference to an editorial in the New York Times, January 15, entitled
“The Tilt in South Asia,” which questioned Zia’s reliability as a U.S. partner. (New York

Afghanistan
but such a reaction was disappointing in view of the critical threat
posed by Soviet aggression.4
5. A further concern, said Agha Shahi, is fear of Indo-Soviet alliance
against Pakistan. He had learned on good authority that visit to Moscow
by Indian defense team (sent by caretaker government) had resulted
in firm Soviet offer of $2 billion in arms. Pakistan wanted to reach an
understanding with Indira Gandhi on response to Soviet expansion,
and GOP had authorized Lord Carrington to convey this view to Indian
Government.5 He felt Soviet military aid offer could go a long way to
explain pro-Soviet statement made prior to UN General Assembly vote
on Afghanistan which should have dictated a negative Indian vote on
resolution. Indian Government now backing down somewhat only
because of massive UN vote against Soviets. In any case, overtures to
India had been made. Ambassador Bajpai had brought message from
Indira Gandhi accepting President Zia’s congratulations on her election
and proposing visit to Islamabad by Indian Foreign Secretary early in
February. Proposal had been accepted.
6. In response, I said that “preliminary reaction” would be immedi-
ately transmitted to Washington. In regard to doubts that Foreign
Advisor expressed there would be ample opportunity to discuss mat-
ters further. Ambassador Hummel would be returning to Islamabad
around Jan 21 and as he was aware, Deputy Secretary Christopher
would be paying a visit in very near future. There should be no doubt
at all regarding American resolve in face of Soviet aggression. Pakistan
should not expect unanimity of views in American press on situation.
There would, of course, be comments critical of Pakistan Government
among reports of huge number of journalists already assembled in
Islamabad. More could be expected out of Tehran and we had just had
report foreign journalists in Kabul being expelled and many of those
would no doubt come here. In long run, however, Pakistan should
expect to benefit from world attention being focussed on Soviet aggres-
sion, and I thought it would be particularly beneficial to have plight
of Afghan refugees given full publicity. In any case, there should be
no confusion over what free press may or may not say and U.S. Govern-
4 An intelligence memorandum prepared [text not declassified] for the Secretary of
Defense, January 16, addressed the Pakistani reaction to the U.S. aid offer. The memoran-
dum relayed comments by Pakistani Air Chief Marshall Shamim, a “Zia protégé and
supporter,” who “welcomed the prospect of US military aid for Pakistan, but cautioned
that such assistance would be perceived by the population as a show of support for Zia
and the Martial Law Administration (MLA). Since Pakistanis, including the all-powerful
army officer corps are ‘fed up’ with the MLA, Shamim acknowledged that US aid could
have a negative impact and would inhibit the emergence of a democratic political system
in Pakistan for another 5 to 10 years by bolstering Zia’s position.” (Washington National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ment position. I had provided Foreign Secretary Shahnawaz with full
texts of Hodding Carter’s press briefings, which I thought spoke for
themselves.6
7. Comment: Agha Shahi’s expression of disappointment over aid
package came as no surprise. In backgrounder yesterday to several
American journalists, he was even more critical of U.S. $400 million
aid package (Islamabad 437).7 From our contacts we believe there is a
continuing debate on this question within the GOP. While Agha Shahi
and others may be taking negative view, which we must remember
may be largely for bargaining purposes, there seems to be much more
positive attitude on part of Pakistani military. We will have better idea
of whether President Zia will now modify his original positive public
reaction to aid offer after press briefing he quite willingly gives to
several American journalists, which will take place this evening.
8. Department may wish pass this message to New Delhi and
Moscow.
King
6 A news report quoted Hodding Carter as saying: “The Soviet Union has created
a destabilizing situation where Pakistan, with good reason, can feel threatened. Our
response, in the first instance, must deal with that situation.” The report concluded,
quoting Carter: “Since we don’t know why the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, we can’t
rule out a second, third, or fourth operation against other countries.” (Don Oberdorfer,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800029–0032)

Afghanistan
172.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
SCC Meeting on Southwest Asia and the Persian Gulf
PARTICIPANTS
State
OMB
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Deputy Director John White
Deputy Secretary Warren
White House
Christopher
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Defense
Hamilton Jordan
Secretary Harold Brown
Jody Powell
Ambassador Robert Komer
Hedley Donovan
David Aaron
JCS
Chairman General David Jones
NSC
Lt. General John Pustay
Colonel William E. Odom
Captain Gary Sick
CIA
Thomas Thornton
Deputy Director Frank Carlucci
Fritz Ermarth
Robert Ames
Charles Cogan
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Dr. Brzezinski explained that the purpose today is to cover a num-
ber of points, not all of them for decision, but as information and
recommendations to the President as a backdrop for the decision he
will shortly be making about our policy toward Southwest Asia and
the Persian Gulf region. He noted the agreement about the strategic
dynamics of the Soviet military move into Afghanistan expressed at
the previous SCC,2 the consequences for Pakistan and Iran, and also
the importance of Soviet influence in Yemen and Ethiopia.
Dr. Brzezinski also added that the Soviet publication “New Times”
has issued a call for all Communist states and parties to seize new
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. In the upper right corner,
Carter wrote: “Zbig—These are very serious matters. The discussions are necessary but
any proposal for contentious action must be submitted to me first. J.” For other excerpts
of the summary of conclusions and a January 18 memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter
transmitting it to the President, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East
Region; Arabian Peninsula, Documents 42 and 43.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
revolutionary opportunities created by the present political conditions
in the world, disturbing evidence of present Soviet policy directions.
Military Assistance to Pakistan
Dr. Brzezinski and Secretary Vance commented that the President’s
meeting with Agha Shahi went as well as could be expected.3 Secretary
Brown asked how we will deal with the situation if the Pakistanis insist
they want $1 billion in aid while we only offered $400 million. Secretary
Vance predicted that they will take our $400 million and complain, not
reject our aid.
Dr. Brzezinski asked about the French willingness to sell the Mirage
aircraft to Pakistan. Secretary Vance reported that the French will prob-
ably supply the Mirage. As a next step, it will be discussed at the
Political Directors Meeting in London on January 24th. State will push
France to make a decision by then.
Dr. Brzezinski raised the question of American A–7 aircraft for
Pakistan. It was pointed out that the Pakistanis did not ask for them.
Rather they asked that they be supplied with aircraft sufficient to
protect themselves against the Soviet air threat, implying, of course,
for the need for the US F–16 or the Mirage. The A–7, as Dr. Brzezinski
pointed out, would be very useful in a ground support role along the
Western frontier. Furthermore, because the U.S. has a large number,
the Pakistanis might be willing to buy some A–7s.
Military Consortium
Dr. Brzezinski asked for Defense’s proposal for a division of labor
among the members of the military consortium. Secretary Brown sub-
mitted a paper showing which countries can produce what categories
of military equipment. The issue of who pays remains to be solved,
he added. Secretary Vance noted that according to Agha Shahi, the
Saudis promised Pakistan $800 million for military purchases over a
year ago but have not yet delivered. We should press the Saudis to
make the promise good.
Concerning Japan, Vance has instructed Phil Habib to ask the Japa-
nese for $400 million for the consortium. They may give less, but Vance
feels we should ask for that much. We will get little from Britain and
France, he continued, but the French should be willing to sell them
aircraft and the British will certainly be willing to sell tanks and tank
guns. Secretary Brown added that the U.S., France, and Germany can
provide anti-tank weapons, much needed for insurgency and defense.
3 See Document 163.

Afghanistan
It was also pointed out that the Pakistanis want foreign assistance for
building a communications infrastructure on their western front.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if we need a big consortium figure for public
and political effect such as $1 billion. Secretary Brown observed that
one to one and a half billion dollars for equipment spread over three
years could be absorbed effectively by the Pakistanis; therefore, Dr.
Brzezinski’s figure is about right. Dr. Brzezinski added that we must
avoid a figure which is so high that we are open to criticism that we
are “saturating” Pakistan with arms the same way we did Iran.
Dr. Brzezinski added that we need a military equipment package
and a concept for a division of labor which we can propose to the
allies. Secretary Vance suggested that this be done at the upcoming
Political Directors Meeting on January 24. Dr. Brzezinski agreed; we
must supplement our delegation with technical teams sufficiently com-
petent to make concrete decisions on both funds and equipment.
Agreed action:
—State will press France on the Mirage aircraft.
—The Political Directors Meeting will be reinforced with sufficient
staff to discuss military assistance and funding.
—The U.S. will give an exemplary package to the Political Directors
as a proposal for a division of labor.
—To fund the consortium, we will press the Japanese for $400
million and the Saudis for $800 million which, combined with our $400
million, should be above $1 billion.
—Britain and France will be encouraged to supply specific military
equipment.
U.S. Assurances to Pakistan
Secretary Vance reported that we are still working out contingency
scenarios to define circumstances under which we would come to
Pakistan’s military assistance against foreign attack. Secretary Vance
promised to have a paper by Friday or Saturday which spells these
out in considerable detail for the President.
It was agreed, at Secretary Vance’s suggestion, that this is the next
big decision issue which should be discussed with the President.
Contingency of a Soviet Invasion of Iran
Dr. Brzezinski proposed that the President mention in his speech
that the United States has been committed to the independence of Iran
for the past 30 years and remains so committed today.4 Secretaries
4 Reference is to the President’s upcoming State of the Union speech; see footnote
2, Document 175.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Vance and Brown wondered if this does not so clearly imply our
previous ties to the Shah that it will provoke Khomeini’s public rejection
and fail to achieve the political effect in the region for which it is
intended. Dr. Brzezinski observed that we must simply accept the cost
of a possible Khomeini statement because our vital interests in the area
are so great. Secretaries Vance and Brown suggested omitting reference
to “30 years.” They accepted Dr. Brzezinski’s alternative language “as
we have been” so that a sentence in the speech might read: “The U.S.
remains committed to an independent Iran today as it has been in
the past.”
Agreed action: The record of the meeting should solicit the Presi-
dent’s reaction to this proposal.5
[Omitted here is a discussion on regional military bases and
Yemen.]
Afghanistan Insurgency
Secretary Vance reported that Agha Shahi calls the insurgency in
Afghanistan “a dangerous lightning rod” and, therefore, a very difficult
decision for General Zia. Dr. Brzezinski commented that a massive
insurgency at present is probably not in our best interest. Rather a low-
level and enduring insurgency is essential to keep the Islamic states
mobilized against the Soviets in Afghanistan.
Secretary Brown added that Agha Shahi’s comments were probably
not meant to indicate that Zia will be backing out, but rather to keep
the option open for the future.
Afghanistan Refugees
State reported that it is possible for the United States to provide
bilateral aid for refugees in Afghanistan as well as aid through the
UNHCR.
Agreed action: State was tasked to prepare a plan for providing at
least a small part of their refugee aid through bilateral channels and
present it at the next SCC on refugee support.6
Dr. Brzezinski observed that the large degree of consensus on all
agenda issues today may negate the need for an NSC meeting with
the President on the same topics. All agreed and Secretary Vance added
that the next issue we need to discuss directly with the President
5 Neither the “Approve” nor the “Disapprove” option was checked, but to the left
of the option lines, Carter wrote: “Covered on Meet the Press.”
6 Not further identified.

Afghanistan
concerns the contingency scenarios for Pakistan and the assurances we
give that government.
Secretary Vance then added two additional items to the agenda.
U.S. Boxing Group to the Soviet Union
Secretary Vance reported that a boxing team is to depart for a
competition in the Soviet Union in five days. All agreed that we should
discourage them from going.
Agreed action: Secretary Vance and the Vice President, and possibly
Lloyd Cutler, will discuss the matter directly with them to discourage
their participation.
Backgrounder on Christopher Trip to Europe
All agreed with Secretary Vance’s proposal that Warren Christo-
pher give a press backgrounder on his recent trip to Europe in order
to prevent speculation and misleading reports. Christopher will empha-
size the Afghanistan side of his mission because the allies were more
forthcoming on that issue. He will deemphasize the Iranian side
because the results were less encouraging.
Agreed action: Christopher will give a backgrounder.
173.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci) and
the Deputy Director for Operations (McMahon)1
Washington, January 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Conversation of 16 January 1980 (U)
1. Re Afghanistan, I also discussed our first shipment to the insur-
gents and said we were holding the second one waiting for Pakistani
clearance.2 (In my meeting with Brzezinski later, he urged me to come
back to the SCC quickly for permission to go on with the second
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Officials and Subjects. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. An unknown hand
signed for Turner.
noon. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
tranche. He said that because he felt some people were beginning to
waiver in whether and how far we should continue this support. I told
him that I wasn’t coming back to the SCC; I was going ahead with the
second tranche and felt that we had that authority up to $10 million.
He agreed and encouraged us to push the second tranche as rapidly
as possible.) (S/Sensitive)
2. I went on in my discussion to point out the dilemma that support
to the insurgents created, i.e., the more they succeeded, the more likely
the Soviets were to put pressure on Pakistan and that the best the
insurgents could hope for was a continual running sore with loss of
life. The comment was made that in some sense the fact that we had
to funnel through Pakistan was a check valve on this, and that if they
thought it was resulting in too much pressure on them they would
slow it down or turn it off. (S)
3. There was also a discussion of the possibility of diversion of
equipment to Pakistani or other uses. I said I certainly thought that
was likely and possible and that we could not hold a real audit on
this, but that nonetheless it was all going to be useful. The comment
was made that perhaps some of our own military aid would be sent
to the insurgents. I pointed out that that was American equipment and
we were using Soviet and hoped to keep it that way so the American
hand was not as blatant. That point had not been registered before,
that is, that we were supplying Soviet equipment. I then asked that
mention of thanks for the splendid cooperation of the Egyptians in
providing ammunition to match our Soviet weapons be given to
Mubarak tomorrow. (S)

Afghanistan
174.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, January 18, 1980
COUNTRY
China Afghanistan/USSR
SUBJECT
Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs Bulletin No. 9 of 1980, Providing Analysis
and Guidance on the Afghanistan Situation [less than 1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[1 line not declassified]
1. Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Bulletin No. 9 of
1980, issued on 14 January, contained analysis of the Afghanistan situa-
tion and provided Chinese Missions abroad with guidance. The MFA
Bulletin summed up major recent developments and presented the
following analysis:
A. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was due partially, but signifi-
cantly, to hegemonistic expansionism. The year 1979 began with the
Soviet invasion by proxy of Kampuchea and ended with the direct
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
B. The invasion of Afghanistan revealed on a grand scale the mad
adventurism of the Soviet Union. This move again proved that the
Soviet Union would be the origin of world war and remained the
primary threat to world peace.
C. The Soviet action revealed Moscow’s claimed opposition to
hegemonism to be false, and it proved the Soviets to be liars. It further
proved the illusion of signing friendship treaties with the Soviet Union.
D. The Soviet invasion indicated the serious escalation of Soviet
expansionism to a new stage outside the Socialist bloc and into the
Third World. The move also represented an escalation from the use of
Cuba and other proxies to the direct involvement of Soviet forces in
military aggression.
E. Increased vigilance and unity were required on the part of other
nations in the world community. These nations should be encouraged
to be unafraid of the Soviets.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of
Soviet and East European Analysis, Program Files for Soviet-Asian Relations, 1960–1981,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
2. The MFA Bulletin provided the following guidelines to Chinese
Missions on the Afghanistan situation:
A. In propaganda, there should be a minimum of comment on the
new Afghan Government. Stress should be placed on support of the
Afghan people in their struggle against Soviet invaders. The new gov-
ernment in Kabul should not yet be referred to as a Soviet puppet
regime.
B. Work among host governments would vary from country to
country.
(1) In Western Europe, it should be pointed out that faith can no
longer be placed in détente. Substantive work and measures would be
required to defeat Soviet moves toward war. Western Europe required
better relations with the Third World.
(2) In the Third World and among nonaligned nations, govern-
ments should be alerted to the potential for situations in which they
face “the tiger at the front door and the wolf at the back door.” In
other words, vigilance was required against a direct Soviet invasion,
as well as Soviet invasions by proxy using countries such as Cuba and
the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
C. The world would also have to be alerted to the possibility of a
Soviet peace offensive following consolidation of Afghanistan. Moscow
had done this in the past to assuage ill will and lower the guard of
the world.
3. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
(ConGen, DPO and Political Counselor only).

Afghanistan
175.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1
Washington, January 19, 1980
SUBJECT
State of Union Speech
While I have provided detailed comments to Zbig, I feel strongly
enough about the State of the Union speech as it now stands to make
the following points:2
1. Overall, the speech is not well-organized, is neither tough nor
sharp in its focus or language, and lacks coherency. It is in short
“mushy”.
2. It is difficult to discern what the Carter doctrine or central mes-
sage is from the draft—is it merely the aid to Pakistan—is it a broader
statement that we will intervene militarily if any nation in the area is
threatened or only some and if so which ones? The draft uses the
phrase you aptly mentioned during our meeting on the speech—that
you are drawing the line, but it is unclear where the line extends and
what happens if it is breached. It is critically important that this be
clearly stated and that we stress we have the staying power to pro-
tect the vital interests of the countries in the area in continued
independence.
3. You strongly urged during our meeting on the speech that spe-
cific bases or facilities be announced and urged Zbig and Cy to expedite
the necessary decisions. This would be the most dramatic part of the
speech—clearly indicating we are stepping up our military presence
in the area. Yet it is stated so obtusely and vaguely in the speech that
the point and its significance is totally lost.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Offices, Counsel, Cutler, Box 108, President’s
sonal. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
2 Carter’s State of the Union Address, delivered on January 23, went through several
drafts. The particular version Eizenstat referred to was not further identified and not
found. Text of the final address is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I,
Document 138. In the speech, Carter pointed out the challenges posed by the situation
in Iran and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and enunciated what would become
known as the Carter Doctrine: “Let our position be absolutely clear: An attempt by any
outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault
on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled
by any means necessary, including military force.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
4. The sections dealing with Iran badly need to be reworked:
a. Parts actually seem to embrace the revolution.
b. The tone is (even before our hostages are out): We have always
liked you and we still do.
c. You must repeat for the American people the tough steps already
taken—cut off oil imports, frozen assets, no spare parts, Allied coopera-
tion, refusal to bend to demands.
d. The press has widely reported (front-page New York Times
yesterday) that we will cut off all trade with Iran within a few days.3
This would be an appropriate time to make the announcement so that
we follow through on your promise to continue to turn the economic
screws on Iran while our hostages are there.
5. The centerpiece of your new Southwest Asia policy is aid to
Pakistan—yet the $400 million is already being discounted and dispar-
aged by Pakistan. Perhaps we could mention a consortium of western
aid which you have organized and pledges from our Allies could be
obtained within the next few days to bolster the package. Also, I see
no reason for delay in converting the Executive agreement into a treaty.
It now appears we are unwilling to give Pakistan the full protection
she feels necessary (see front-page Washington Star today).4
6. Your dramatic decisions to bolster defense spending need to be
better emphasized. Having done it you should clearly explain the need
and let people know the boldness of your response.
misguided. It appears that we are saying we are no threat to their
interests and that they face a choice they have already made. We should
try to steer them back to a cooperative position, but not indicate they
have yet to make their choice. The whole point of the Afghanistan
invasion is that it is a clear departure from their policies and that they
have opted for the wrong path.
8. I am simultaneously sending to you under separate memo my
suggested language for the economic/energy portion of the speech. I
am also sending Charlie Schultze’s suggested version, which incorpo-
rates the comments of Secretaries Duncan and Miller.5
3 See Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Plans Embargo on Iran on its Own as Allies Shun
4 The article in the Washington Star was not found, but there was a front page
Washington Post article on the subject that day. See John M. Goshko, “U.S. Forging Ahead
5 Neither Eizenstat’s nor Schultze’s memorandum was found.

Afghanistan
176.
Editorial Note
A status report prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, Janu-
ary 21, 1980, described weapons shipments destined for Afghanistan
as part of the early stage of the covert action. The report noted that an
unidentified insurgent group had already received 50 AK–47s and
50,000 rounds of ammunition. This information was elaborated on in
an attached memorandum, January 6, [text not declassified] of the Central
Intelligence Agency to Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield
Turner, in response to Turner’s request for figures on arms deliveries
to Pakistan. The report itemized several shipments. One shipment,
delivered from [text not declassified] to Saudi Arabia and from there to
AK–47 ammunition, and approximately 2,000 pounds of explosives.
Another shipment, delivered from Cairo to Dhahran, contained another
first shipment, the memorandum reported that the equipment arrived
in Islamabad January 4, and was received by the Pakistani Intelligence
Service. The second shipment, the memorandum noted, contained
Egyptian arms at a cost of $1 million to the United States; an additional
32,000 pounds of arms were en route from Dhahran to Cairo, delivered
via [text not declassified] at Saudi request, so as to conceal Saudi and
Egyptian involvement in the arms shipments. (Central Intelligence
Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R:
The status report also noted that another load of weapons was in
the process of being purchased from Egypt with Saudi money. An
attached cable, prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency January
18, transmitted authorization from CIA Headquarters to the [text not
ammunition, 250 anti-tank grenades, 1,700 Czech-made anti-tank
that the shipment should commence as soon as possible, with pickup
in Cairo en route to Islamabad. [text not declassified] Regarding the
Soviet detection of the source of the weapons, Headquarters advised
that its depots contained weapons from several countries, but the opera-
tion should ensure that only identifiably Egyptian arms should appear
in Afghanistan. (Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 82M00-
Finally, the status report noted that Egypt was willing to sell 15
SA–7s, and referred to an attached cable that authorized Pakistani

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
acquisition of the SA–7s. That cable was not attached and not found,
but a status report for Brzezinski’s trip to Pakistan, January 29, noted:
“Regarding SA–7s, the Pakistanis would like American instructors to
train six to eight Pakistani Pushtu and Dari speaking Paks in SA–7
operations in a secure Pak military area. They would later infiltrate
into Afghanistan to work with the insurgents, employ the weapons,
and further train Afghans in the SA–7.” The report further noted of
the arms shipments: “We have some unilateral indications that the
weapons are being distributed by the Pakistanis to various insurgent
groups. The chief of Pakistan service is confident that under present
conditions, these weapons can be infiltrated overland into most areas
of Afghanistan, including the Hazarazat. The Pakistanis claim that the
availability of these weapons and promise of distribution was instru-
mental in forcing the insurgents to establish at least a surface unity,
which was announced at the recently concluded Islamic Conference.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip
Book I) On the Islamic Conference, see footnote 2, Document 184.
177.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
366. Subject: Soviet Occupation of Afghanistan: Some Suggestions.
Ref: State 12427.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Begin summary: As the Department ponders over possible next
moves to make the Soviet occupation more costly, and how the Soviets
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
to USUN. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
The telegram was summarized in a memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, January
23. Regarding Amstutz’s recommendation that the UN withdraw its aid missions from
Afghanistan, Carter wrote: “Try to do so.” In response to Amstutz’s suggestion that UN
troops replace Soviet troops in Afghanistan, Carter wrote: “ok.” (Carter Library, National
soon as possible and urge him to send UN representatives to Afghanistan “without

Afghanistan
might be induced to withdraw, I have two thoughts to throw into the
hopper. One is that, if the Soviets and DRA continue to disregard the
UN resolutions (as is likely),3 the Department try to persuade UNHQ
to withdraw its aid missions from Afghanistan. The other is that, were
the Soviets ever to appear to realize their presence in Afghanistan
is too costly for them, the Department should consider approaching
Waldheim or Indian PM Gandhi to propose a face-saving exodus by
substitution of UN troops for Soviet forces, conditional on the holding
of new supervised elections. End summary.
3. We at Embassy Kabul have been delighted with the strong
response of Washington to the Soviet occupation of this country. We
applaud the steps Washington has so far taken and share the wide-
spread view that the Soviets underestimated the degree of Western and
world reaction. Suspecting that the Dept is considering what additional
steps might be taken, I offer here two suggestions.
4. As we reported last week, the puppet Babrak regime has
refrained from telling its people about the Security Council and UNGA
votes.4 Instead, it has tried to obfuscate the issue by saturating the
media with allegations of U.S. and “imperialist” treacherousness and
our alleged close ties with “monster” Hafizullah Amin. While supress-
ing what happened in the UN, the DRA has nonetheless not attacked
the institution of the UN itself, and so far as we can tell still holds it
in respect. This is important in the context of my recommendations.
5. First recommendation. As of this time, we are unaware of any
UNHQ emissary coming to Kabul to investigate whether the DRA and
the Soviets are complying with the UN resolutions. But whether any
emissaries come or not, the Western Embassies here are unanimous in
believing that the Soviets are not about to pull out their forces. (Were
they to do so, the Babrak govt would instantaneously collapse.) On
the contrary, there are many signs that the Soviets are digging in to
stay for a long time. Their forces are building military bastions about
Kabul, and their logistic arrangements point to their establishing or
taking over permanent lodging quarters.
6. Assuming that the Soviets have no intention of complying with
the UN resolutions, it seems to me that the least the UN itself can do
is to withdraw its UN economic aid missions here. Were this done,
this would be a severe psychological and discrediting blow to the
DRA—an action much more effective than all the measures the Western
Embassies here in aggregate could do. A withdrawal of UNDP and
3 See Document 136.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
associated economic missions would confirm in the eyes of the Afghan
public, in a most telling way, the lack of legitimacy of the Babrak
regime. It would be a humiliating blow to the DRA. I hope, therefore,
that the Department will give serious weight to this recommendation—
and if possible, get it implemented by, say, the end of Feb.
7. Were though the Department to press such a recommendation
on UNHQ, it should be aware that there are UN elements here who
would resist it. One, of course, would be the Bulgarian UN res rep,
Yuli Bahnev, who will use every argument Moscow and Sofia can
supply him to oppose it. At the very least he will urge that a UN
office be maintained with the flag boldly flying, so as to maintain an
unmistakeable presence and to honor past contractual aid commit-
ments. I think both arguments should be resisted. The UN office should
be made to close and the total UN presence withdrawn. Nothing less
than hauling down the UN flag is required to have the kind of political
impact this govt and the Soviets deserve. As for other local UN sources
of opposition, some among the UN experts would be fearful for their
jobs, and for self-serving reasons would oppose the cancellation of
their contracts.
8. My second recommendation, as mentioned in the summary,
there may come a time when the Soviets appreciate that their involve-
ment here is too costly and they may welcome a face-saving way to
exit. If this were to occur—and it would likely only happen if the
insurgents can carry on an effective fight against the Soviets and the
Babrak government—then the Soviets might be amenable to some face-
saving suggestions. One that occurs to me is for either UN SecGen
Waldheim or the Indian Government to propose the posting of UN
troops in Afghanistan to replace the Soviets. But were this done, care
would have to be taken to make sure the UN troops were not here
merely to sustain the despised Babrak government. Hopefully, a UN
presence would be conditional on its monitoring a relatively free elec-
tion to choose a new, legitimate government.
9. During a discussion this week with Indian Ambassador Jaskaran
Teja (who last served as DCM in Moscow and is suspected among
Western diplomats as being pro-Soviet and a Communist sympathizer),
Teja said he was sure the Soviets would never accept the idea of the
UN replacing its troops here. He could be right. Certainly, the success
of the Soviets at the end of WW II in Eastern Europe gives them some
reason to think they can get away with it again, but I still think my
suggestion worth bearing in mind.
10. Comment: I hope these two basic ideas are helpful.
Amstutz

Afghanistan
178.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
USSR/Afghanistan
SUBJECT
Comments of a Soviet Diplomat on Factors Leading to the Soviet Intervention in
Afghanistan [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[3½ lines not declassified]
1. (Headquarters comment: The source made the following remarks
in an informal conversation during which he said that he felt that the
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was unwise and not in the best
interests of the USSR. [2 lines not declassified])
2. In early January 1980, officials of the Soviet Ministry of Foreign
Affairs who, in late December 1979 and early January 1980, were
involved in the support of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan said
that the Soviet decision to intervene was based on the following factors:
A. The Soviets were humiliated by the outcome of the August 1979
issue of Soviet combat troops in Cuba. They considered that they had
backed down on this issue in deference to the right of the United
States to dominate events on its borders. The Soviets also accepted an
unfavorable resolution of this issue because, at the time, they still
had hopes for a treaty from the second session of the Strategic Arms
Limitations Talks (SALT II).
B. Soviet leaders saw the decision of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) to modernize its Theater Nuclear Forces (TNF)
as an act requiring a response.
C. The Soviet Embassy in Washington was reporting in November
1979 that there was no chance of the U.S. Senate ratifying the SALT
II treaty.
D. Soviet personnel in Afghanistan had been tortured to death
by Afghan dissidents and retribution for these acts had become an
emotional issue with Soviet leaders.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
E. The intervention of the U.S. in the Dominican Republic in 1965
was considered a valid precedent for Soviet intervention in Afghani-
stan. The Soviet view was, “who today remembers the U.S. intervention
in the Dominican Republic?”2
3. The most important of these factors, according to the Soviet
Foreign Ministry officials, was that the U.S. had imposed its will on
Cuba in 1979 and that the USSR must demonstrate that its will must
be respected in areas close to its borders, as well.
4. The Foreign Ministry officials also said that the possibility of a
boycott against the Moscow Olympics had been considered during the
planning for the intervention in Afghanistan and that, in fact, it had
been planned that Soviet troops would be out of Afghanistan by 1 May
1980 to avoid disrupting the games. The Ministry officials said that
U.S. call for a boycott of the Olympics was a sore spot with the Soviets
and that Moscow would take a boycott seriously. Valentin Falin, First
Deputy Chief of the CPSU Central Committee’s International Informa-
tion Department and former Soviet Ambassador to West Germany,
was quoted as saying that now, because of the U.S. ultimatum, it would
be difficult for the USSR to withdraw its troops before the Olympics.
5. According to Falin, Soviet leaders were completely surprised
by the coup which overthrew the Government of Afghan President
Mohammad Daoud in 1978. At that time, and again in January 1978,
Nur Mohmmad Taraki, Daoud’s successor, asked for Soviet support,
but was refused. The Soviets did not trust Prime Minister Hafizullah
Amin and repeatedly warned Taraki to beware of Amin. According to
Falin, Taraki’s attendance at the non-aligned summit in Havana in
September 1979 was a mistake as it gave Amin the opportunity to plan
his coup. Following that coup, the Soviets warned Amin not to kill
Taraki. The Soviets held Amin responsible when, after three weeks in
prison, Taraki was strangled. In November 1979, the internal situation
in Afghanistan had deteriorated to the point where Amin asked for
Soviet intervention despite that fact that he realized the Soviets were
not his friends. In sum, as Falin explained it, the surprise overthrow
of Daoud by a leftist regime had started a chain of events which the
Soviets reacted to rather than initiated. The Soviets were prepared to
accept the Daoud regime and did not try to replace it, but when a pro-
Soviet regime came to power, they could not ignore it nor refuse to
support it.
6. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
2 For documentation on the U.S. intervention in the Dominican Republic in April
Guyana.

Afghanistan
179.
Annex From the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, January 23, 1980
USSR: PROBLEMS IN AFGHANISTAN
Four weeks after launching its invasion, the USSR has encountered
a range of political and military problems in Afghanistan that portend
an even deeper and larger Soviet role.
[less than 1 line not declassified] Soviet officials in Kabul indicate
Moscow is dismayed over the failure of Babrak Karmal’s government
thus far to take hold. Babrak has made an effort, at Soviet behest, to try
to appear more moderate than his predecessors, but he is so obviously
a Soviet puppet that his regime would collapse if Soviet troops were
to withdraw. [less than 1 line not declassified] Soviet officials have complained
about the factional and personal rivalries within the regime, and one [less
than 1 line not declassified] Soviet official in Kabul has even speculated about
a successor to Babrak.
The disintegration of the Afghan military has speeded up since
the Soviet invasion. Rather than welcoming Soviet support against the
insurgents, some units have clashed with Soviet troops and the rate
of desertions has increased. The Soviets do not appear to have an
effective remedy at hand.
General Sokolov, the USSR’s First Deputy Minister of Defense and chief
commander in Afghanistan, reacted to ineffectiveness in one Afghan unit
by recommending that its Soviet advisers be replaced. But Afghan military
dissatisfaction will increase as Soviet advisers—under pressure from their
superiors to produce results—take an increasingly heavy hand in Afghan
military affairs.
The Insurgency
The introduction of Soviet troops—far from intimidating the insur-
gents—has probably served to increase popular support for the rebel-
lion. The insurgents have taken advantage of the demoralization of the Afghan
Army and bad weather to maintain a steady harassment of isolated Afghan
towns and Soviet lines of communication. In particular, the Soviets have had
problems keeping open the Termez-Kabul road, which passes through extremely
difficult terrain.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The
full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The annex
printed here was found in this form.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
This has led the Soviets to undertake a number of small-scale sweeps
and to launch tactical airstrikes and helicopter attacks at suspected rebel
concentrations. In the northeastern provinces of Takhar and Badakhshan, the
Soviets have undertaken a more ambitious operation to ensure that the besieged
provincial capitals do not fall to the rebels. This drive, however, has been
hampered by bad weather, poor road conditions, and insurgent harassment.2
We have no evidence that Soviet forces have been able to engage the
rebels on terms that would allow the Soviets to bring to bear their
superior firepower and air support.
We have had several reliable but fragmentary reports of Soviet casualties.
One report from a Soviet town near the border reports the recent arrival of
a large number of coffins bearing remains of Soviets killed in Afghanistan.
We believe the Soviets have sustained as many as 2,000 killed and wounded
since the invasion began. We have no information about the number of insur-
gent casualties.
Prospects
Moscow probably will not find early relief from these problems.
The Babrak regime shows no sign of pulling together, and the situation
in the Afghan military will be extremely difficult to retrieve. Even
under the best of conditions, it could take years to assemble an Afghan
military force capable of controlling the country. Thus Moscow almost
inevitably will have to take a more direct hand in running and pacifying
the country.
An early collapse of the rebellion also seems unlikely. Better
weather in the spring probably will bring an increase in insurgent
activity.
All of this does not mean that Moscow cannot maintain essential
control or keep whatever government it wants in power in Kabul. Nor
is there the slightest sign that the Soviets might seriously contemplate
withdrawal.
Politically, Moscow probably will intensify its effort to establish a
more effective Afghan Government. If Babrak cannot do the job, the
Soviets could engineer yet another coup in Kabul, as embarrassing as
that might be for them. But they are unlikely to come up with a formula
2 A situation report on Afghanistan, January 25, prepared in the Bureau of Intelli-
gence and Research, noted that Afghan and Soviet military forces faced a “serious
dilemma” regarding the insurgency: “They must carry out orders that state ‘the rebels
must be destroyed using all resources’ and, at the same time, adhere to a government
policy of refraining from attacking villages or pursuing rebels who take sanctuary in
villages and homes. That policy is part of a propaganda program to reduce hostility
toward the Soviet and Afghan armies.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director
of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordina-

Afghanistan
that resolves the contradiction between their interest in a government
with broader support and their intention of dominating Afghanistan.
Militarily, the Soviets could continue on their present course, under
which their military forces maintain control of Kabul and other essential
points and conduct counterinsurgency operations necessary to prevent
major setbacks. But this seems unlikely since it would allow the insur-
gents a free hand in most of the country, allow them to prey on extended
Soviet supply lines, and present the Soviet leadership with the prospect
of continued casualties and a steady drain on resources.
The Soviets now have the forces in Afghanistan to conduct a some-
what expanded counterinsurgency effort. It is unlikely, however, that
the forces now there could end the insurgency. If the Soviets seek to
end the insurgency—and, as seems likely, cannot rely on effective
support from the Afghan Army—they will have to commit more forces.
180.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 26, 1980
SUBJECT
Getting Our Act Together on Afghanistan (U)
As I noted in my memo of January 7 (Tab A),2 the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan offers this Administration a priceless opportunity to
begin to speak with one voice on how we deal with and what we say
about the Soviets. This is very important from a political (viz., George
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
were sent to Ermarth, Griffith, Henze, Odom, Thornton, and Schecter. In the upper right
corner, Brzezinski wrote: “agree→first rate.”
2 Attached but not printed. Brement wrote to Brzezinski, January 7, to emphasize
“the country wants the President to exercise firm, vigorous leadership in foreign affairs.
The crisis in Afghanistan will enhance this desire.” Brement argued that Afghanistan
gave the Carter administration an opportunity to reverse a “commonly-held perception”
among domestic critics and the Soviets, that U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union lacked
focus and resolve. Brement’s memorandum is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 255.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Bush’s remarks on the subject);3 from a diplomatic (i.e., relations with
the Allies and with the Third World); and from a strictly US-Soviet
(Moscow should be getting a clear and simple message from us) point
Unfortunately, this is not happening. There has been a stream
of Government-originated analysis and public testimony which has
muddied the waters with regard to (a) the motivations that impelled
the Soviets to attack Afghanistan, (b) the prospects which the Soviets
face in Afghanistan, and (c) the length of time that we are prepared
to maintain the current series of punitive actions vis-à-vis the Soviets.
The line propounded has directly undercut the President’s message.
Whether this is intentional or unintentional, I do not know. But what
is clear to me is that our interests are being damaged in the process.
The harmful line which has emerged, and which has been consciously
abetted by the Soviets, is as follows:
Why Did the Soviets Attack? According to one school of thought,
the Soviets felt impelled to move into Afghanistan because of legitimate
defensive concerns to avert chaos in a neighboring Communist state
and because the penalties which such a move would normally trigger
in terms of US-Soviet relations and world opinion were no longer
operative. Moscow was thus, allegedly influenced by the overall down-
turn in US-Soviet relations, as exemplified by the Cuban brigade crisis,
the TNF dispute, friction over Southeast Asian relief and security mat-
ters, US defense increases, SALT II delay, etc. The obvious assumption
behind this argument is that the Soviet invasion only has implications
for Afghanistan itself, is not connected with the strategic importance
of the Persian Gulf and Iranian oil, and that making a US-Soviet or
East-West issue out of it is a big mistake. The further implication is
that if SALT had passed and we had not decided on TNF deployment,
the Soviets would not have invaded Afghanistan. Almost all genuine
experts on the USSR would argue that this last assertion is highly
implausible; that the Czechoslovakia decision in 1968 was a hard one
for Brezhnev, but that given his outlook and that of his colleagues, the
decision to invade Afghanistan caused little if any internal dissent
among the leadership; and that the Soviets would have gone into
Afghanistan no matter what the state of US-Soviet relations had been
in December 1979. (In fact, it might be useful for Carter partisans to
ponder the fact that had SALT passed on schedule in November, and
3 The reference to Bush’s remarks likely comes from Robert Scheer, “Bush Assails
running for President and had recently won the Iowa Republican caucuses, cited Carter’s
cuts in defense spending and linked that policy with the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan.

Afghanistan
had the Soviets followed-up with an invasion of Afghanistan in Decem-
ber, the President’s chances for reelection at this point would be consid-
erably slimmer than they are at present.) (S)
In any case, excusing the Soviet invasion or laying the blame for
it on the feebleness of our diplomacy and the lack of wisdom of specific
actions taken by the President (viz., Tab B)4 undercut the President’s
leadership, question his judgment, and are not appropriate analyses
from high officials of the Carter Administration. We are not, after all,
participating in a graduate seminar. If we lay emphasis on US culpabil-
ity for the worsening of US-Soviet relations and indicate that this is
the prime factor, or at least a prime factor, in the Soviet decision to
invade Afghanistan, this takes the Soviets off the hook both in the
United States and abroad, undercuts the President’s position both with
the US public and with the Allies, and measurably weakens our chances
for getting a satisfactory reaction on the part of others to Soviet aggres-
The line which should be adopted by all authoritative US officials
is the one very clearly enunciated by the President, i.e., that this is an
unprecedented event, marks a very grave deterioration of the peace,
has extremely ominous ramifications for the future, requires concerted
international effort to deal with it, demonstrates the callous insensitivity
of the USSR to the ordinary norms of international behavior, and is,
in short, the gravest threat to the general peace since the Second World
War. In other words, this is no time to be “even-handed” in back-
grounding Soviet motivations, nor should we downplay the obvious
geopolitical factors which influenced the Soviets to take over Afghani-
stan in the first place. (C)
A Soviet Miscalculation? Other recent background briefings from
“high Government officials” have stressed the “miscalculation” that
the Soviets have made by moving into Afghanistan.5 According to this
line of reasoning, the Soviets are now becoming involved “in another
Vietnam” and will not be successful in suppressing the insurgency
through military means for years to come. My view, on the contrary,
is that the Soviet war aims—to control the population centers, the lines
of communication and the major passes leading to Pakistan—will
4 At Tab B, attached but not printed, is a January 22 memorandum from Brement
to Brzezinski and Aaron, calling their attention to a Department of State briefing book
prepared for Italian Prime Minister Francesco Cossiga’s visit to the United States, which
listed a number of issues not directly related to Afghanistan that compelled the Soviet
intervention. These included the Theater Nuclear Force (TNF) issue in Europe, SALT II,
and Soviet troops in Cuba. Of the Department of State attitude, Brement concluded: “In
other words, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan is our fault.” In the upper right corner,
Brzezinski wrote: “Agree! ZB.”
5 Not further identified and not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
almost certainly be accomplished by this summer, and that Soviet
control of the media will then make it possible for them, without
necessarily eliminating the resistance everywhere in Afghanistan, sim-
ply to declare victory, a declaration which will be greeted with a sigh
of relief by our European Allies, among others (Tab C).6 (C)
Whether this is a correct analysis or not really begs the question.
The hidden assumption behind the statement that Afghanistan is a
“Soviet Vietnam” is that the Soviets are having, and will have, so much
trouble in that country that this in itself will be a lesson to them to
desist from further actions of this kind. The corresponding message
for Americans is that the Soviets will derive the same lessons from
Afghanistan that we did from Vietnam. This is not only contrary to
fact but also undermines our policy, because it implies that it would
be sufficient for the United States and our Allies simply to sit back
and observe Soviet discomfiture at the “miscalculation.” Strong actions
on our part, in this light, are obviously overreactions. Such analysis
consequently undercuts our efforts to ensure that our Allies take, and
the general public supports, strong, concrete and punitive measures
against the Soviets because of Afghanistan. (S)
The Short Duration of Our Reaction. Some public testimony, in addi-
tion to much background briefing, leaves the implication that the pen-
dulum will swing back in due course and that within several months
we can expect “business as usual” with the Soviets. This has been
evident at several meetings I have recently attended. The primary
evidence for such belief is that we have carefully maintained the fabric
of our relationship and have not “broken any agreements” with the
Soviets. In fact, the Soviets are carefully spreading the myth that they
will be withdrawing from Afghanistan in short order. The Singaporeans
evidently believe such twaddle and have warned us not to be left
holding the bag when this fabled event takes place in thirty days. (The
Soviets, of course, spread the same sort of stories and repeated them
officially after the invasion of Czechoslovakia.) (S)
Questioning the long-term commitment of the President to the
actions we have undertaken undercuts his leadership, puts his judg-
ment in doubt, and is politically very damaging (i.e., if this is the
most serious event since the Second World War, then why will we be
engaging in “business as usual” in a matter of months?). Furthermore,
it is grist for the mill of those Europeans and others who argue against
taking precipitate or strong action against the Soviets. (S)
6 Printed as Document 132.

Afghanistan
The Recommended Line. In my view, all top Administration officials
should be speaking with one voice in disseminating the following
analysis of events in Afghanistan:
—The Soviet decision to invade Afghanistan was a carefully consid-
ered one and grew out of the mission of General Pavlovski to Afghani-
stan, which began last August.
—The Czars thirsted after ports on the Indian Ocean for centuries.
In line with those historical aspirations, Molotov asked von Ribbentrop
for a sphere of influence over Afghanistan and Iran in 1940. The Soviets
marched into Northern Iran in 1942 and again in 1946. The geopolitical
aims of the Soviets in taking over Afghanistan should not be underesti-
mated. Soviet education, doctrine, and outlook would all lead one to
believe that the geopolitical factor is an important element in the Soviet
design to turn Afghanistan from a buffer state into the Mongolia of
Southwest Asia.
—The Soviets are, of course, aware that by introducing their troops
into Afghanistan they are measurably escalating the risks of eventual
armed conflict. Obviously, they felt the risk was worth taking.
—The elimination of Afghanistan as a buffer state in Southwest
Asia, just as the elimination of Cambodia as a buffer state in Southeast
Asia, indicates a dangerous, even unprecedented, new adventurism on
the part of the Soviets, who have been, ever since 1975, demonstrating
a growing willingness to use armed force to settle disputes in their
favor in Third World countries.
—Our best forecast is that the Soviets will put enough strength
into Afghanistan to prevail militarily and that they will eventually
subdue Afghanistan, just as they subdued the peoples of the Baltic and
East Europe in the 1940s. Any other conclusion would be wishful
thinking.
—While we would welcome being proved wrong, we do not expect
the Soviets to withdraw their forces from Afghanistan for the foresee-
able future. Our reaction to the Soviet aggression must, therefore, be
firm, measured and long-term in nature.
—The United States has no intention of resuming a “business as
usual” posture toward the Soviet Union until we are convinced that
the Kremlin has absorbed the message that was delivered in the State
of the Union address. President Carter is, above all, determined to
avoid future Afghanistans. (C)
Trying to shove this message directly down the throat of the State
Department would be worse than hopeless. My suggestion is that you
proceed as follows:
a) Raise the importance of speaking with one voice on this issue
in the SCC, emphasizing the need of those working in the reelection
campaign to have clear, simple guidance on Afghanistan and Iran.7
Brement attended the meeting, but Brzezinski did not; he was in Saudi Arabia at the
time. See Documents 194 and 195.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
b) Task the Schecter policy information committee to come up with
such guidance.
c) Disseminate the guidance developed by the committee to the
domestic staff for general guidance to all Administration officials.
d) Once we have an official agreed line, make sure that all top
officials, and particularly Administration Soviet experts, adhere to that
181.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State and the International Communication
Agency1
1474. Subject: Soviet Reaction to U.S. Policy.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. One of the first authoritative Soviet reactions to President Carter’s
State of the Union message has come from Leonid Zamyatin, Chief of
the International Information Department of the CPSU Central Com-
mittee, who appeared, along with Yevgeny Primakov, the Director of
the Institute of Oriental Studies of the USSR Academy of Sciences, on
the January 26 “Studio 9” television program.
3. Zamyatin made the sharpest criticism to date of President Carter
personally and of the “turnaround” in U.S. policy—which he said had
begun long before Afghanistan.2 He also, for the first time to our
knowledge by a high level Soviet official, publicly made the charge
that Hafizullah Amin was a CIA agent. The Soviet press has printed
this charge before, but attributed it to Afghan officials. Also of interest
are Zamyatin’s claim that the Soviet Union more than once had warned
the United States via diplomatic channels to “stop the action against
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
to Warsaw, Amman, Baghdad, Beijing, Beirut, Belgrade, Berlin, Bonn, Bucharest, Buda-
pest, Cairo, Damascus, Islamabad, Jidda, Kabul, Leningrad, London, Paris, Prague, Rome
Sofia, Tel Aviv, Tokyo, Tripoli, USBerlin, USNATO, and USUN. Printed from a copy
that was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 An item in the President’s Daily Brief, January 29, described an article in Pravda,
January 29, as “Moscow’s initial authoritative reply” to Carter’s State of the Union
address, and characterized it as “polemical and vindictive” and “replete with abusive
language about your administration.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director
of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordina-

Afghanistan
Afghanistan that you are carrying out from the territory of Pakistan”
and Primakov’s charge that the U.S. is planning military intervention
in Iran. In this latter connection, Primakov said Soviet declarations had
made it clear that the USSR could not stand aside if events took such
a turn.
4. Zamyatin was, in effect, elaborating Brezhnev’s claim in his
January 12 Pravda interview that, if there had not been an Afghanistan,
the U.S. would have had to invent one in order to further its policy of
destroying détente.3 But Zamyatin did so with all the venom and
invective for which he is famous. His analysis was that the U.S. is
embarking on the role of world gendarme, and he illustrated the point
by quoting James Reston as having told him on his recent visit to
Moscow that Washington was “nostalgic” for the days of Truman when
the U.S. could carry its will anywhere in the world.
5. Zamyatin also elaborated Brezhnev’s “threat from the south”
theme, providing considerable detail aimed at convincing his audience
that the U.S. was on the verge of taking over Afghanistan and that,
between that and Amin’s machinations with the CIA, the Soviet Union
really had no choice but to act. Given the shrillness of his remarks on
U.S. policy, the Soviet listener must have been a bit puzzled by both
Zamyatin’s and Primakov’s concluding references to the viability of
the policy of détente and to CPSU determination to continue in this
direction because there is no alternative to détente.
6. Our conclusion, based on programs such as this, as well as
Gromyko’s remarks in Damascus4 and reports we have received of
bilateral Soviet approaches to the French and West Germans, that the
Soviets are taken aback by the strength of the international reaction to
their invasion of Afghanistan and are now rapidly mounting an all-
out propaganda offensive in an effort to shift world opprobrium to
the U.S. While many of their “big lie” charges are ludicrous, we fear
that continued denials, such as that the Department spokesman has
already given concerning the Amin-CIA connection,5 will be called for
in the days and weeks ahead.
7. Washington will have received excerpts from the “Studio 9”
interview via TASS English. We have also pouched a tape of the broad-
cast to USICA.
Watson
3 See Document 166.
4 Gromyko’s remarks on Afghanistan during his visit to Damascus were reported
in telegram 662 from Damascus, January 28. The telegram characterized Gromyko as
“strongly attacking” the United States during an exchange of toasts at a dinner in his
5 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
182.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
Pakistan/Afghanistan
SUBJECT
Discussion among senior Pakistani military officers on how Pakistan military
should respond to question of hot pursuit [less than 1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[2 lines not declassified]
President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq and a group of senior Pakistani
military officers discussed how the Pakistani military should respond
if Soviet and Afghan forces cross into Pakistan in “hot pursuit” of
Afghan insurgent forces.
2. Martial Law Administration Chief of Staff and General Zia’s
personal staff officer, Major General K.M. Arif, led off the discussion
by suggesting that a meeting should be arranged between President
Zia and the Soviet Ambassador in Islamabad to assure the Soviets that
Pakistan will not aid the Afghan insurgents. If this assurance is not
made, the question of “hot pursuit” will soon arise and the Soviet and
Afghan forces will assuredly pursue the insurgent forces into Pakistan.
In such a situation, Pakistan will be the “loser”, according to Gen-
eral Arif.
3. Lt. General Mohammad Iqbal Khan basically agreed with Gen-
eral Arif’s assessment, adding that only if Pakistan receives adequate
military aid and assistance from outside sources should the Pak military
respond strongly to an incursion into Pak territory.2 In the absence of
strong support from the outside as well as adequate preparation by
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 An intelligence information cable prepared in the CIA, January 29, reported infor-
mation [text and 1 line not declassified] regarding a special report on Pakistan’s defense
needs, prepared for Zia by the Pakistani Ambassador in Moscow. The report concluded
that Pakistan would be unable to “meet a sustained military attack from the Soviets in
the present state of readiness.” This shortcoming, according to the report, could only
be reversed by U.S. aid, and the “best possible” way to assure U.S. commitment to
Pakistani security would be the establishment of U.S. military bases in Pakistan. (Wash-

Afghanistan
Pak forces, the Pak military should not overreact to any Soviet or
Afghan incursion, and that any future skirmishes along the border
should be limited to insurgents and Afghan or Soviet forces. (Field
comment: This recent position taken by General Iqbal is somewhat
different from a more hawkish position he held in early January as
reported in [less than 1 line not declassified] from the same source.)3
4. Northwest Frontier Province Governor and corps commander
General Fazle Haq did not venture an opinion on the question of hot
pursuit. He did report, however, that the tribal chiefs in the tribal
territories adjacent to the NWFP had given him assurances that the
army would have complete freedom of movement in the tribal areas.
General Fazle Haq also reported that as of 26 January there had been
no confrontations between Pak and Soviet forces along the border.
5. (Field comment: A contrary view was provided by [1 line not
declassified] who said on [less than 1 line not declassified] January that
while no specific plans to resist Soviet/Afghan military attacks into
Pakistan had been developed, President Zia had instructed senior com-
manders that if the Soviet or Afghan forces cross into Pakistan in a
hot pursuit situation Pak forces must hit them with all possible force.
Zia said that Pakistan must hit hard at the first incursion even if Soviets
use superior forces. The Pak officer said it is difficult for Pakistan to
respond to a Soviet-backed incursion without knowing the extent of
U.S. backing but that Zia’s order would be obeyed.)
6. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
183.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci), the
Deputy Director for Operations (McMahon), and the
National Intelligence Officer for China ([name not
declassified])1
Washington, January 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Conversation with Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, 28 January
1980 (U)
1. We talked about the Secretary’s trip to China with regard to [less
not declassified]
Stansfield Turner
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Officials and Subjects. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. An unknown hand
signed for Turner.
184.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 29, 1980
BRIEFS AND COMMENTS
AFGHANISTAN-PAKISTAN: Exile Front
The durability of the exile united front, formed over the weekend in time
to participate in the Islamic Conference, will depend on Pakistan’s efforts to
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
restriction not declassified].

Afghanistan
hold together the squabbling exile groups. [classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified]
The Islamic Alliance for the Liberation of Afghanistan—composed
of six exile groups including the four most important ones—was formed
only after considerable prodding by the Pakistanis. At the Islamic
Conference yesterday it was allowed to discuss the insurgents’ position
and to appeal for financial support.2 The resolution adopted early today
calling on Islamic states to withhold recognition of Afghanistan until
Soviet troops withdraw declares that a three-nation committee will
supervise aid for the “struggle” of Afghans. [classification marking and
handling restriction not declassified]
Pakistani pressure may help to check infighting within the new
organization. The exiles are reportedly on notice that further aid—
including antitank and antiaircraft weapons—from Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, and other sympathetic countries is contingent upon the survival
of a unified exile organization. [classification marking and handling restric-
tion not declassified]
With the exception of one or two groups that have a small guerrilla
capability, the exile organizations do not command forces that have
been active in the Afghan insurgency. The exiles have provided the
various independent insurgent groups with modest amounts of arms
and supplies and could become a more effective conduit if Pakistan
should take charge of logistical arrangements. Disclosure of more direct
Pakistani support of the Afghan insurgency, however, is certain to
elicit a sharp reaction from Moscow. [1 line, classification marking, and
handling restriction not declassified]
2 The Conference of Islamic Foreign Ministers convened in Islamabad at Saudi
and Pakistani request for an emergency session, January 27–29, to discuss the Soviet
intervention in Afghanistan. A news report on the meeting quoted General Zia: “An
unequivocal message should go forth from this conference conveying to the Soviet Union
the grave concern of the Islamic world at the presence of its troops in Afghanistan and
calling upon that great power to reverse the course of its military intervention.” (William
Mullen, “Soviets Warned of Breaking Ties with Moslem Nations,” Chicago Tribune, Janu-
on the Islamic Conference from the Soviet perspective. In the aftermath of the strong
anti-Soviet sentiment of the conference, the Embassy observed that the Soviet leadership
“apparently made a serious miscalculation of the Islamic reaction to the invasion of
Afghanistan,” and that the conference “represents a serious setback to Soviet foreign
policy interests in the Muslim world.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezin-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
185.
Memorandum From W. Averell Harriman to
President Carter1
Washington, January 30, 1980
In compliance with your request, I state below the high spots of
my talk with Dobrynin last night. Pam and Mrs. Dobrynin were present
at dinner but not afterwards.
Dobrynin indicated the Soviets would be ready to withdraw their
troops from Afghanistan providing we stopped outside intervention,
particularly from Pakistan. He did not mention China. He concentrated
on Pakistan as the source of greatest danger. He suggested that if
necessary the Soviet government would be willing to join in guarantee-
ing Pakistan’s security and independence. He said also we should not
establish any military bases in the Persian Gulf but made no mention
of the Indian Ocean.2
At a different time, he indicated the Soviet Union would strongly
object to any U.S. military assistance to China but said they were not
concerned by intervention by Iran.
He had indicated that they were developing a carefully trained
communist regime, but in answer to my question he said that he did
not rule out the possibility of a neutral government for Afghanistan.
He had emphasized their satisfaction with the government under the
King, which of course Daoud overthrew. He emphasized the cruelty
of Amin and maintained specifically that not a single individual had
been executed since their troops intervened and most of the political
prisoners had been released from jail.
Dobrynin was deeply concerned because it appeared to him there
was no channel of communication between our two governments. This
he considers dangerous.
May I suggest, as I indicated yesterday, that you write a letter to
Brezhnev in which you emphasize the importance of Soviet troop
withdrawal from Afghanistan and that conditions surrounding it might
be discussed in an early meeting between Cy and Gromyko.3 I recognize
that it will take some time before all of the Soviet troops can be with-
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
classification marking. In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “Private—cc V.P.—Cy—
Zbig. J.”
2 Carter drew a bracket along the left side of this paragraph and an asterisk in
the margin.
3 Despite Harriman’s suggestion, no letter from Carter to Brezhnev was found.
Vance wrote to Gromyko on February 8; see Document 202.

Afghanistan
drawn, but substantial withdrawals might begin promptly and be com-
pleted on a step-by-step basis.
In addition, it may be worthwhile your asking Brezhnev to see our
Ambassador, Tom Watson, and in turn indicating that after that you
would receive Dobrynin.4 I am satisfied that Tom can be of enormous
help at this time if he gets entrée to Brezhnev as well as Gromyko.
In answer to my question on Brezhnev’s health, Dobrynin told me
that Brezhnev had some good days and some bad ones.
Of most importance is getting the troops out of Afghanistan. The
Soviet threat in the area would then be vastly reduced. At an appropri-
ate time Cy might indicate to Gromyko that if we agree to have no
bases in the Persian Gulf, the Soviets should agree that there would
be no communist regime in Iran.
In sum, a complete withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Afghani-
stan by the autumn, with the installation of a neutral government and
an agreement by the Soviets on Iran, would be a good way out of
the crisis.
If ratification of SALT II could be obtained, it would be useful. I
would hope progress could be made in the negotiations in the arms
control field, which I understand are continuing. Progress on MBFR
and theatre nuclear weapons would be important.
I will, of course, continue to be in touch with Cy.
Averell
4 No record of a meeting between Dobrynin and Carter or between Watson and
Brezhnev was found. Watson met with Gromyko January 30; see Document 186.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
186.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
1670. Subj: Meeting With Gromyko. Refs: (A) State 25675, (B) State
1. (S—Entire text.)
2. Summary: Gromyko responded to our démarche on U.S.-Soviet
relations and Afghanistan by elaborating the emerging public line that
the administration had embarked, long before Afghanistan, on a course
aimed at damaging U.S.-Soviet relations and increasing international
tension. He ticked off numerous “examples” to illustrate his point,
beginning with NATO’s adoption of its Long-Term Defense Program
while the UNGA Special Session on Disarmament was in session and
including familiar complaints about the LRTNF decision as violating
the equality which the President had allegedly acknowledged existed
at the time of the Vienna Summit. He also faulted our handling of the
Cuban brigade issue and charged that our conduct in the various arms
control negotiations indicated that we were negotiating simply for the
sake of negotiating, not with any intention of reaching agreement.
On Afghanistan, though he did not refer specifically to threats to
Soviet security and only indirectly accused the U.S. of responsibility
for events there, Gromyko generally repeated the public Soviet justifica-
tions for their action. He flatly denied a Soviet role in the change of
government in Kabul, and he just as flatly stated that the Soviet troops
would not be withdrawn so long as “external aggression” continued.
He tried to dismiss as “not serious” any suggestion that the Soviet
Union had designs on Pakistan or the Persian Gulf region, adding that
N00002–0517. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis; Cherokee.
tion that the United States should refute Soviet allegations of collusion between Amin
and the CIA. The telegram offered the following talking point to that effect: “The Soviet
charge that Amin was an agent of the CIA is ludicrous. Either your government is
completely misinformed or this is a deliberate attempt at disinformation.” (National
diplomatic and consular posts, February 2, the Department expanded the effort to combat
the Soviet “disinformation campaign” with a series of talking points to be used by U.S.
diplomats worldwide. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800058–
to seek an appointment with Gromyko to underscore some of the points made by Carter
in the State of the Union message. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P880025–0688)

Afghanistan
anyone who really had doubts on that score should know that Brezhnev
had clearly denied it.
The Sakharov case, Gromyko said, was a domestic affair which
the Soviets were not prepared to discuss with any outsiders.
The Minister interspersed his basically hard-line response with
appropriate indications of indignation, ridicule, and regret, but for the
most part he seemed relaxed throughout the lengthy meeting. As was
probably to be expected, there was no indication in anything he said
of any give on Afghanistan in the near future. There was one concilia-
tory note at the end of his presentation, when he picked up our reference
to the President’s willingness to search for areas of cooperation and
reduce the risks of conflict. If we were sincere, he said, we would
find that the Soviets would not hold back, as this had always been
their policy.
Although State 26328, on your meeting with Dobrynin, arrived
after I had seen Gromyko,3 I did not receive any clear intimations of
interest in providing guarantees with regard to Iran and Pakistan—
unless his observation that Brezhnev had already assured the world
that they have no designs on other parts of the region could be consid-
ered such. As for Soviet withdrawal, his assertion that this would not
occur until outside aggression ceased seems more categorical than
Dobrynin’s hint that limitations on assistance to insurgents might suf-
fice. Yugoslavia did not arise in the conversation. End summary.
and fifteen minute meeting. I read to him the talking points on U.S.-
Soviet relations and Afghanistan from refs A and B and then also made
the instructed démarche on Sakharov, leaving copies of the talking
points on both subjects as non-papers.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
15. Calling it his 7th point, Gromyko took up Afghanistan, noting
that I had singled it out for “special treatment” in my statement.4 He
observed first of all that Afghanistan is not an American province. I
might reply, he said, that it is not a Soviet province either. This is true,
and the Soviets never claimed that it was. But the Soviets resolutely
reject all efforts to deny the Afghanis the right to decide for themselves
questions of how they are to live, what kind of leadership they are to
have, and so forth—and the U.S. is claiming the right to do that.
4 Presumably Watson was referring to the de´marche, not to a separate statement,
which was not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
16. The U.S. Government can be in no doubt, Gromyko continued,
that Afghanistan was subjected to outside aggression. It was in that
connection that it called for assistance. In accordance with the UN
Charter and the Soviet-Afghan treaty it had a firm legal basis and every
right to appeal for help, including that of a military character in the
struggle against external aggression. Washington, he said, does not
like to touch on that question; it pretends not to see how things really
are, to be aware of the aggression from the territory of Pakistan. Per-
haps, he said, I could advise Washington to pay more attention to that
question so it could see the situation better. He then referred to camps
in Pakistan where thousands of people were being armed and trained
and being sent to struggle against the people and Government of
Afghanistan. In answering the President’s message sent on the hot line,
Brezhnev had stated that there was a great deal the U.S. could do to
stop those armed incursions from Pakistan.5 But this was not and is
not being done.
17. The Soviet military contingents are in Afghanistan, Gromyko
continued, and there is no basis for them to be withdrawn. They will
remain there until such time as there is no external aggression and the
U.S. Government must realize that. The Soviets pointed out in their
initial statement to certain governments—without waiting for any
propaganda campaigns to develop—that their contingents would be
withdrawn if the external aggression ceased. The Soviet Union does
not need Afghanistan—its territory or its riches. The U.S. Government
and the President are aware of that. And the deeds and the words of
the Soviets—unlike those of some others—do not diverge.
18. What Gromyko numbered example no. 8 was that Washington
continued to repeat one false thesis, which had also been mentioned
albeit softly in my earlier statement. This was that the Soviet Union
was somehow involved in the changes in the leadership of Afghanistan.
Nyet. That is an invention of Washington’s. The Soviet Union was not
involved. The change was brought about by the Afghanis themselves.
The present Afghan leaders did not come from the moon. The Afghanis
formed their government and it is general knowledge that it is not
doing badly. For example, tens of thousands of prisoners have been
set free, including large numbers of Muslim clergy. Washington likes
to speak of human rights. It should welcome this move, even if it does
not applaud it. But it does not do so because this does not interest
the administration; it is only interested in “pinching the foot” of the
Soviet Union.
reply, December 29, see Document 114.

Afghanistan
19. It would be better, Gromyko went on, to stick closer to the
facts. Meanwhile, no one should tell the Afghanis how to run their
affairs. And it is now clear to the whole world what kind of figure
Amin was. One can only be astonished at what is being said about
him in Washington. Every Afghani damns him, but Washington seems
to like him.
20. As example no. 9, Gromyko took up Pakistan and the Persian
Gulf, stating in this connection that he found the turn of Washington’s
thinking on foreign policy questions really remarkable. This was espe-
cially true in connection with the aggression against Afghanistan, and
also in regard to the statement in my démarche which implied anxiety
on the part of the administration that the Soviet Union might take
some action in regard to Pakistan and the Persian Gulf. In actual fact,
he said, he thought that Washington did not actually think that way;
there were too many leading figures who knew better, and only the
paranoid could believe that the Soviets were intending action against
Pakistan and in the region of the Persian Gulf. He asked that I inform
my government and the President accordingly. My statement, he said,
suggested that the Soviets were sending some sort of challenge. He
asked what kind of challenge and to whom. As for the alleged danger
to Pakistan and the Persian Gulf region, it was not enough to say
simply that this was false; it was fabricated. The thought could only
arise in the mind of a person who does not go to the trouble to analyze
the situation. Anyone who knows the Soviet Union knows that such
action is alien to the Soviet Union’s policies, ideology, and foreign
policy line aimed at international détente and peace.
21. Noting that Brezhnev had made it clear, in his answers to a
Pravda correspondent, that any such intentions toward Pakistan, Iran
and the Persian Gulf were alien to the Soviet Union, Gromyko said
that he was thus spared the necessity of speaking in more detail on
the matter.6 He could only wonder however at the people who posed
such questions concerning the intentions of the Soviet Union, and he
asked whether I personally, as an Ambassador, and as an important
representative of the American business community, could really
believe such fabrications. But if there should be someone, somewhere,
who has such beliefs, he hoped that his clarification would help them
understand the truth of the matter.
22. As his tenth example, Gromyko referred by indirection to the
measures taken by the U.S. in response to the Afghanistan action. The
administration, he said, is now working energetically in shirtsleeves to
increase international tension and sow discord in U.S.-Soviet relations.
6 See Document 166.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Brezhnev has clearly pointed out that it is easy to destroy relations but
much harder to build them up and develop them. The question arises
of how a great power can simply throw aside all of the positive things
which have been accumulated over the years by previous administra-
tions. He described the administration as looking around, throwing
things overboard rapidly, and if it finds any left throwing them over-
board as well. He then mentioned with some forcefulness that the
Soviet Union had not come into being due to some external force but
through the forces of its own people, in the same way as the United
States came into being and exists with all of its social and economic
attributes without any external approval. Questions of whether we
approve of a social and economic structure or not, it seemed to him,
should be set aside in our relations. Meanwhile, he concluded, it was
not the Soviet Union but the U.S. side which bears responsibility for
the growth of tension and for damage to U.S.-Soviet relations.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
—As for Afghanistan, I said I had heard what Gromyko had said
but that I assumed he did not really mean that he thought the U.S.
was involved in any aggression against Afghanistan. Nor was I aware
from any information which had come to me that Pakistan citizens
were involved in the conflict, though he had referred to Pakistan
involvement. Gromyko responded that I simply then did not have the
facts—that there was no doubt about Pakistani involvement. There was
massive evidence about their assistance in training Afghan rebels, about
the supply of arms, and about the fact that U.S. arms were also involved.
—I told Gromyko I would like to understand more clearly what
he had said about Soviet involvement in the events in Afghanistan,
particularly with regard to the change of government. Our information,
I said, was that Babrak had arrived in Kabul on a Soviet plane. Gromyko
retorted that we put such information into circulation ourselves and
then believed it when it comes back to us. I said I didn’t think that
was where my information had come from and that I had in fact had
the impression that Babrak had been living in the Soviet Union.
25. Gromyko then returned to my remarks on theater nuclear weap-
ons to state that the principle of equality does not relate just to strategic
arms. When this principle was addressed in Vienna it was understood
that it related to the entire military and strategic posture and equilib-
rium of the two sides.7 How else, he asked, could it be? Otherwise
there would be the absurd situation of reaching equality in one field
VI, Soviet Union, Documents 203 and 204.

Afghanistan
and having it destroyed in a second or third field. Another aspect of
the issue, he added, was that while U.S. medium-range missiles could
reach the territory of the Soviet Union, just like strategic missiles, Soviet
medium-range missiles could not reach the territory of the United
States.
Watson
187.
Memorandum From President Carter to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the
Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, January 30, 1980
SUBJECT
Your Visit to Pakistan (U)
The following will be your objectives in your discussions with
President Zia and senior Pakistani officials.
—Lay a solid basis for a further mutual understanding of the issues
we face as regards Soviet behavior and intentions, global and regional
responses, and our bilateral trust and cooperation. An important part
of this exchange will be listening to Zia’s views.
—To convey to Zia a sense of the breadth and firmness of the U.S.
response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. You should draw on
my State of the Union message.
—To impress upon Zia that our support for Pakistan’s independ-
ence and security is enduring, based on our vital interests, and backed
up not only by U.S. resources, but by a determined U.S. effort to
mobilize broad international support.
—To reaffirm the present level of our proposed bilateral assistance
through FY 81 and to convince Zia that it would be unwise, and detract
from our central effort, to voice public disappointment with our assist-
ance or to criticize U.S. unwillingness to negotiate a treaty.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, in which Brzezinski noted that Vance
already cleared the instructions and recommended that Carter approve them as well.
Carter approved and initialed “J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—To begin to define with Zia and his advisers the nature of U.S.
responses in various contingencies arising from a Soviet-Afghan threat
to Pakistan’s security.
—To present our firm view that it is essential to Pakistan’s security
that Pakistan and India continue to expand their efforts toward normal-
ization of their relations.
—To seek assurances that the Zia government will not test a nuclear
device and to impress upon Zia how dangerous a test would be to
Pakistan’s security and to the new Western relationship we are seeking
to develop. And to point out that a satisfactory long-term relationship
requires a settlement of the nuclear problem.
—To convey to Zia U.S. interest in a resolution of Pakistan’s internal
political and economic problems so that Pakistan can address its secu-
rity problems from a united base.
—To inform Zia of our intention to proceed with: submission of the
Pakistan legislation on February 4; military supply talks in Islamabad
following your meetings; discussions of the programming of our pro-
posed AID funds; and continuing mutual efforts to muster broad sup-
port for Pakistan.
You should describe to President Zia why it is not feasible to
convert the 1959 Bilateral Agreement into a treaty. You should impress
upon Zia the relevance of the 1959 Agreement for the contingencies of
a Soviet or Soviet-directed attack on Pakistan. You should also note
my letter to President Zia2 and point out that we are asking the Congress
to affirm the 1959 bilateral. You can assure him that in the event of an
attack threatening the independence of Pakistan, we would consider
our vital interests to be engaged and we would consult urgently with
both the Government of Pakistan and the Congress on steps to be
taken, including the use of force. (S)
In discussing contingencies with Pakistan, you should raise (but
not press at this time) the possibility of additional U.S. access to facilities
or bases on Pakistani soil. However, in addressing possible large-scale
Soviet incursions or assaults on Pakistan, you should note that it is in
our mutual interest to begin discussions of ways in which U.S. forces,
particularly naval and tacair, could be deployed in and near Pakistan
in certain situations. You should also indicate that we would be pre-
pared now to make an exercise visit of U.S. tactical aircraft and/or
engage in joint air or naval exercises if Pakistan would find that a
useful demonstration of U.S. resolve. (S)
2 See Document 159.

Afghanistan
In responding to President Zia’s questions on contingencies involv-
ing an Indian attack on Pakistan, you should point out that Pakistan’s
best security against a two-front war or an Indian attack lies in the
normalization process with India, and the strength of its broad-range
relationships with China, the United States, the Moslem world and the
Non-Aligned. You should make clear that the interests of Pakistan, the
U.S. and the West would be injured by closer Indian relations with the
Soviets and we should all work to avoid such a course on India’s
In your discussions of military assistance for Pakistan, you should
emphasize that we are prepared to move quickly in providing equip-
ment that can be made readily available and will immediately improve
the situation along the Afghan border, strengthening the ground and
air defense capability. While we will be willing to assist the Pakistanis
in seeking financing from others for high-performance aircraft, these
financing requirements should be considered in the context of overall
defense needs and the priority for the immediate strengthening of
defense on the border. (S)
You should inform President Zia that the amounts of our military
and economic support assistance for FY 1980 and 81 are firm. You may
also say that in considering our levels for FY 1982 and beyond, we will
carefully assess Pakistan’s ongoing requirements. President Zia should
also be apprised that we are making strong efforts, in support of their
own activities, to enhance support for Pakistan from other Western
and Islamic donors. On debt rescheduling, you can inform Zia that we
are prepared to consider this question in concert with other creditors
in conjunction with an upper tranche IMF stabilization program, if an
emerging default situation seems likely. (S)
In addressing the nuclear question, you should seek assurances (in
addition to the assurances on non-development of weapons and trans-
fer of sensitive technology) that President Zia will not test a nuclear
device while he is in office. You should stress that we will continue
our dialogue with Pakistan looking forward to an understanding on
the scope and purpose of Pakistan’s nuclear program. (S)
If you are asked about our objectives in Afghanistan and our view
of the insurgents, you should say that our maximum goal is a neutral
Afghanistan, free of Soviet forces, and our minimum goal is a protracted
resistance that increases the costs to the Soviets and galvanizes world
opinion against their aggression. (S)
You should note to President Zia our continuing interest in Paki-
stan’s political development, greater political unity and attention to
the needs of minority groups such as the Baluchis. (S)
In your approach to the Pakistanis, you should keep in mind that,
despite their assertions to the contrary, Pakistan deeply needs our

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
support both in bilateral assistance and in mobilizing diplomatic and
other resources. You should, therefore, be firm in presenting our actions
and program of assistance in a positive light and avoid any sense of
defensiveness about our participation in Pakistan’s security. (S)
Jimmy Carter
188.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 31, 1980
SPECIAL ANALYSES
AFGHANISTAN: The Babrak Government’s Bleak Prospects
by [less than 1 line not declassified] CIA
After a month in power, the Soviet-installed government of President
Babrak Karmal has little prospect of becoming more than a transparent cover
for Soviet military occupation. There is evidence that Moscow is disappointed
in Babrak’s performance, and rumors are widespread in Kabul that the Soviets
are planning to replace him. In the near term at least, there is little chance
that the Soviets could put together any government that would be viewed as
more than a puppet and have any chance of staying in power if Soviet troops
were withdrawn. ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
Babrak’s Problems
Babrak’s regime has virtually no popular backing. Dissatisfaction
is widespread in all major cities, and in some instances has resulted
in public demonstrations. Attacks by individual Afghans against Soviet
troops continue as do clashes between Afghan and Soviet Army units.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
There are numerous reports of passive resistance among Afghan
civil servants, and one has indicated that 400 Soviets have been brought
in to help keep the major ministries running. Support for Babrak within
the ruling People’s Democratic Party is attenuated by a continued
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
restriction not declassified]. The full version of this National Intelligence Daily was not
filed with this collection. The article printed here was found in this form.

Afghanistan
festering of longstanding divisions, aggravated by the pervasive Soviet
role in the country. ([classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified])
The government’s policies are designed to win wider popular sup-
port while pursuing basic goals of the Marxist regime. A major aspect
of this effort has been to blame the late President Amin for the past
hostility between the Marxist rulers and the people. The government
has made much of Amin’s perversion of the “revolution” in his alleged
efforts to turn Afghanistan over to the US and to destroy Islam. ([classifi-
cation marking not declassified])
To correct Amin’s misdeeds, the government claims it has released
15,000 political prisoners and abolished the secret police. Many Afghans
are aware that few prisoners, other than members of Babrak’s previ-
ously suppressed faction, have been freed. ([classification marking not
declassified])
The President’s credibility has been further undermined by his
appointing as a deputy prime minister the man who headed the secret
police until last September.2 In fact, executions continue at about the
same rate as under Amin, and the secret police have changed little
except their name. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
Babrak also has tried with scant success to prove that his govern-
ment is not anti-Islamic. His claim that his is the first government in
50 years to allow religious freedom is unlikely to impress a population
that equates Marxism and the USSR with atheism and views many of
the reforms the government advocates as antireligious. ([classification
marking and codeword not declassified])
The cabinet still represents little more than the various groups that
joined the first Marxist government established after the coup in April
1978. The three ministers who do not belong to the party hold minor
positions. Moreover, because of their association with Babrak, they are
popularly regarded as having been long-time secret Communists or
Soviet agents. ([classification marking not declassified])
A recent deemphasis on the role of the party—it is now said to
have only the “leading” role in the “revolution”—probably has been
too slight to change the popular view of the government. The suppres-
sion of opposition by previous governments has left few organizations
to join the “Fatherland Front” Babrak reportedly plans to form. ([classifi-
cation marking not declassified])
There is little chance that nonparty figures of any prominence at
any level can be persuaded to support the government unless there is
2 A reference to Assadullah Sarwari.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
a major shift in its orientation. Most such persons are either in exile
or leading insurgent bands. ([classification marking not declassified])
The Marxists’ broad social goals are themselves a major cause of
discontent, especially among the Muslim tribesmen and peasants who
comprise almost all of the population. They regard programs designed
partly to win popular support—such as increased education and land
reform—as threats to their traditional way of life. ([classification marking
not declassified])
Alternatives to Babrak
One figure whom the Soviets are said to be considering as a possible
replacement for Babrak is Commerce Minister Jalalar, a non-Marxist
who also served in the cabinets of former King Zahir and former
President Daoud. He has no independent political following, however,
and is one of those whose willingness to participate in Babrak’s cabinet
has only convinced most Afghans he has always been a Soviet stooge.
There is some evidence that he has been a Soviet intelligence source.
([classification marking not declassified])
Major General Qader, who was jailed by Taraki in August 1978,
is another possible candidate. Now a member of the Revolutionary
Council, he reportedly made a secret trip to the USSR in mid-January.
([classification marking not declassified])
As a former Defense Minister, Qader might be attractive to the
Soviets because he evidently still has some following in the Afghan
military and—if given more authority—might be able to stem its
decline. Qader’s prospects probably have dimmed, however, in light
of the anti-Soviet demonstrations in Herat last weekend set off by his
public appearances there. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
No alternative leader would be any more effective than Babrak in
attracting domestic support so long as his power is maintained with
Soviet troops. The establishment of a government that is both respon-
sive to Soviet security concerns and capable of winning even grudging
tolerance from the Afghan people is a process that will take years
and require extensive Soviet involvement and support. ([classification
marking not declassified])

Afghanistan
189.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and
cover page.]
Afghanistan: The Economy Under Marxism
[classification marking not declassified]
Summary
Even before the December 1979 Soviet invasion, Afghanistan’s
economy was faltering and its minimal economic gains had ground to
a halt. Land and credit reforms initiated by the pro-Soviet Marxist
government that took power in April 1978 caused major disruptions
in economic activity and helped spark the insurgency that has now
spread throughout the country. ([classification marking not declassified])
Kabul’s land reform program, coupled with unfavorable weather
production. Government attempts to tighten control over commerce
produced frequent shortages of essential goods and led to capital flight
by bazaar merchants, who are a major factor in overall trade and
economic activity. ([classification marking not declassified])
Since the Soviet invasion, economic activity has slumped further.
The insurgents are hampering food and fuel deliveries to Kabul. In
the capital, the Soviet-backed Babrak government has imposed price
controls on items such as meat and tea and established special dis-
tribution centers for essential commodities. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Longstanding Afghan-Soviet trade and economic aid ties are likely
to be strengthened in the wake of the Soviet invasion. Soviet economic
support is critical for Kabul now that Western aid donors have sus-
pended their small but important programs and multilateral financial
institutions have halted disbursements pending a reviewing of their
operations. Even with Soviet help, the durability of the Babrak regime
is in doubt because it has failed to rally popular support and it is
viewed by nearly all Afghanis as atheistic and anti-Islam. ([classification
marking not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
omy Under Marxism, ER 80–10120. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A statement
on the title page reads: “The author of this paper is [text not declassified] Developing
Nations Division, Office of Economic Research. This paper was coordinated with the
Offices of Political Analysis and Geographic and Cartographic Research.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
190.
Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of
State1
2112. Subject: Clark Clifford’s January 30 Meeting With Indian
Foreign Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao.
1. S—Entire text.
2. Summary
Mr. Clifford conveyed to FonMin Rao President Carter’s view of the
world situation after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.2 Mr. Clifford
emphasized the need to take measures that would effectively deter
the Soviets from further aggression in the sensitive Persian Gulf area.
Projected U.S. arms deliveries to Pakistan would be defensive in charac-
ter to meet Pakistan’s needs arising from the new Soviet military pres-
ence on its border. There was nothing threatening to India in this
renewed U.S. interest in Pakistan’s security, or the further development
of Sino-American relations. FonMin Rao focused his remarks on the
resumption of U.S. arms supplies to Pakistan, which he requested
should not take place. End summary.
3. Mr. Clifford and FonMin Rao met for 20 minutes prior to the
larger meeting with MEA officials. Foreign Secretary Sathe and Joint
Secretary D’Souza (notetaker) were also present, as was Ambassador
Goheen (notetaker).
4. Mr. Clifford opened by speaking of the President’s special inter-
est in India. He also described his own close relationship with the
President, which had led to the President’s asking him to come to India
as his Special Emissary. The President, he said, very much wishes to
achieve better understanding and closer relations with India, and hopes
that the candid exchange of views now and in the future can help the
two countries get past some of the misunderstandings of past periods.
Mr. Clifford then described the seriousness we attach to the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan and the necessity of not letting such aggression
go unchallenged. The President wants India to understand clearly the
considered reasons behind his decision to provide assistance to Paki-
stan, and he wants also, through Mr. Clifford, to have a full understand-
Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Kuala Lumpur, Beijing, Colombo,
Dacca, Islamabad, Kabul, Hong Kong, London, Moscow, Paris, Tokyo, USUN, Bonn,
USNATO, Seoul, Ankara, Athens, and CINCPAC for POLAD.
2 Carter asked Clifford to go to India as his Special Emissary to explain U.S. policy
in the region. Clifford recounted his trip in his memoirs, Counsel to the President, pp.

Afghanistan
ing of how India views the situation created by the Soviets’ move into
Afghanistan.
5. The Foreign Minister responded by first expressing appreciation
to the President for having sent you (Mr. Clifford) as his emissary. The
closeness of the relationship between the President and Mr. Clifford
gave the latter’s visit a special dimension and assured the authenticity
of the views that he expressed. He said also that Indians generally
have great respect for President Carter and feel he has a sense of affinity
for India. Thus, the Foreign Minister was confident that there was
goodwill on both sides and that it could help the two governments
overcome friction and setbacks arising from differing perceptions. On
strictly bilateral matters, he said, there seemed to be few problems,
but, as Mr. Clifford had intimated, there were differences in the way
the two countries perceived world events. It was good that there could
be candid exchanges of view on these differences.
6. The situation arising from the Soviets’ action in Afghanistan,
the Foreign Minister said, had indeed serious implications. Rather than
speculating about what led to it, or arguing about the rights or wrongs
involved, it was a situation that everyone should now be seeking to
“defuse.” Moreover, while there are no doubt wider implications, for
India the paramount concern had to be the new threat of big power
confrontation within the South Asia region. India’s concern was how
it could pursue its critical development objectives free of these tensions,
without the impediments that they threaten.
7. Then, speaking very deliberately, the Foreign Minister expressed
objection to America providing arms for Pakistan. Any introduction
of arms for Pakistan, he said, will not achieve security for that country;
it will simply escalate the tensions.3
[Omitted here is the remainder of the telegram, unrelated to
Afghanistan.]
Goheen
3 Clifford met with Carter in the Oval Office, February 6, to report on his meeting
with Gandhi. He relayed that Gandhi “opposes what the United States is doing in
Pakistan. India has no confidence in President Zia; his government is very narrowly
based. India is concerned that Pakistan may use arms from the United States against
India. Mrs. Gandhi does not like Zia or Pakistan but she did not favor intervention.”
Clifford reported that he responded that Gandhi “should not worry” that U.S. arms
shipments to Pakistan would be used against India. (Carter Library, National Security

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
191.
Intelligence Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[paper number not declassified]
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and
cover page.]
The Soviet Leadership Balance and Afghanistan
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
The decision to intervene in Afghanistan has raised the question—
as all major Soviet decisions have in the past—of the degree of con-
sensus that existed among the leadership on this action. It has also
prompted speculation that President Brezhnev—the Kremlin’s strong-
est advocate of detente—is no longer a leading force in Soviet policy-
making. ([classification marking not declassified])
On balance we believe that Brezhnev remains the dominant force
within the Politburo and was directly involved in and supportive of
the decision to invade Afghanistan. Measuring the level of enthusiasm
within the Soviet hierarchy for military action is more difficult. We
suspect there were some reservations, but we believe these concerns
did not extend to fear for the future of detente, a policy with which the
leadership was increasingly disenchanted during the closing months
of 1979. ([classification marking not declassified])
Public statements by Soviet leaders about Afghanistan before the
invasion occurred revealed little more than a common concern with
developments there. Party ideologist Suslov, who has often spoken out
favorably about revolutionary processes in the Third World, implied
that Afghanistan was a Communist state worth preserving. This could
mean that he was in the vanguard of those favoring intervention.
([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
Premier Kosygin was removed from the political scene in mid-
October by a heart attack and almost certainly did not play an active
part in the Afghan decision. His counsel probably would have been
on the side of caution, and his absence from office probably facilitated
the choice for military action. ([classification marking, codeword, and han-
dling restriction not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. A statement on the title page reads: “The author of this paper
is [text not declassified] USSR-Eastern Europe Division, Office of Political Analysis.”

Afghanistan
Because the temper of the Politburo as a whole shifted away from
detente, however, it seems unlikely that Kosygin’s presence would
have altered the decision. Despite this shift, we have not detected a
basic realignment of power within the Politburo. In November, an
opportunity to replace Kosygin was allowed to pass; he is still being
ranked second in the Soviet pecking order. Instead of retiring Kosygin,
the Politburo brought in a 74-year-old Brezhnev loyalist, First Deputy
Premier Tikhonov. We have no reason to believe that Tikhonov’s pro-
motion, in itself, altered the balance within the Politburo on foreign
policy issues. ([classification marking not declassified])
The USSR’s leaders must have taken their positions on the interven-
tion with an eye on their relative standing in a post-Brezhnev political
environment. To the extent that the intervention has undercut detente
policies—with which most Soviet leaders had been signaling their
increased discontent—so, too, has it weakened the succession prospects
of Brezhnev’s protege Chernenko, one of detente’s most vocal advo-
cates in the Kremlin. The contender who presumably profited the most
is Brezhnev’s party deputy, Kirilenko, who in the past has voiced some
reservations about detente. ([classification marking not declassified])
If the invasion is a success, those who might have argued against
it probably will remain silent. But if the USSR is drawn into a long,
costly military operation that damages Soviet interests on a global
basis, the decision will be reexamined. There are already signs of second
thoughts surfacing among second-level officials. The outcome of such
a debate could have a significant impact on the makeup of the leader-
ship, particularly in the post-Brezhnev era. ([classification marking not
declassified])
A prolonged, costly conflict in Afghanistan might encourage
younger elements in the Soviet establishment to press for a rejuvenation
of the leadership. Unsatisfactory results in Afghanistan might also
make KGB Chairman Andropov and Defense Minister Ustinov vulnera-
ble and subject to removal at or before the next party congress in early
1981. Foreign Minister Gromyko might also be faulted for miscalculat-
ing the adverse worldwide reaction to the use of military force in
Afghanistan. ([classification marking not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the report.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
192.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, February 1, 1980
USSR: Propaganda line on Afghanistan
The Soviets are pushing a propaganda and diplomatic line de-
signed to counter US and other foreign reactions on Afghanistan.
A Soviet journalist has acknowledged to West German officials that Mos-
cow made a major mistake in not laying the political groundwork for its
intervention. In their commentaries and remarks to foreigners, Soviet
officials are now trying hard to promote their rationalization of the
circumstances triggering the coup against Amin and the Soviet inva-
sion. This includes finding more “proof” of foreign support for the
Afghan resistance and a better explanation for Amin’s ouster so soon
after he reportedly requested Soviet intervention.
The Soviets are also claiming they have no intention of keeping
troops in Afghanistan indefinitely. They have told many foreigners
that troops will be pulled out when the situation is stabilized. [5 lines not
declassified] Ambassador Dobrynin claimed on Tuesday that a phased
withdrawal is possible within several weeks or a few months.2
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—February 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only.
The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The
article printed here was found in this form.

Afghanistan
193.
Summary Record of Talks1
PARTICIPANTS
Pakistan
President Zia
Ghulam Ishaq, Finance Minister
Agha Shahi, Foreign Affairs Adviser
Shahnawaz, Foreign Secretary
General Jilani
General Arif
Ambassador Sultan Khan
Ambassador Yaqub Khan
United States
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
David McGiffert, Assistant Secretary of Defense
Arthur Hummel, American Ambassador to Pakistan
Thomas Thornton, NSC Staff Member
Jane Coon, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
General Graves, Department of Defense
Arnold Raphael, Department of State
The meetings began on the morning of February 2, with a briefing
of the military situation by the Pakistanis. It followed the customary
lines and concentrated heavily on both the Afghan/Soviet and the
Indian threats. The main contingencies which the Pakistanis envisioned
on their Western border are the following:
(1) Hot pursuit by Soviet or Afghan units pursuing Afghan rebels.
The Pakistani objective would be to punish the intruding troops.
(2) A Soviet/Afghan attempt to occupy and hold salients within
Pakistan. The Pakistanis would seek to dislodge these salients.
(3) An attack by India as a Soviet proxy. The Pakistanis say they
need additional equipment and a stronger commitment from the United
States to deal with this.
(4) An attack from east and west with the objective of dismantling
Pakistan. Pakistan would require additional equipment to strengthen
itself so that it could deter or delay such an attack until the U.S. could
come to its assistance. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Secret; Sensitive.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
In the course of this military briefing, Dr. Brzezinski asked whether
it would be helpful to the Pakistanis if the Chinese were to increase
their forces along the Indian border, thereby forcing the Indians to pull
troops away from the Pakistan border. The Pakistani briefer replied
that this would probably not be very useful since the seasons for
military operations on one border are quite different from those on the
After the military briefing, the two sides gathered in a smaller
group for discussions led on the Pakistani side by President Zia, and on
the American side by Dr. Brzezinski and Mr. Christopher. Dr. Brzezinski
opened by putting out that he had learned much from the briefing and
emphasizing the historical significance of the current meetings for U.S.
and Pakistan relations. He read Presidential instructions reiterating
American support for Pakistani independence and security and said
that the U.S. has made an important choice in this regard.2 He outlined
our attempt over thirty years to build security and stability in Western
Europe and the Far East. We have vital interests there which are insepar-
able from our own security and our actions have demonstrated our
seriousness there. We have made clear the threat of nuclear war in
Europe and showed ourselves ready to shed blood in the Far East. The
President has, in addition now, indicated that American vital interests
are engaged in Southwest Asia.3 (S)
In defending these vital interests we have a choice between a purely
maritime strategy on the one hand, and on the other an involvement
on the mainland. We have chosen not to adopt a purely maritime
strategy because we have faith in Pakistan and in the future of the
relationship. We are just at the beginning of a new stage with the
relationship, not one that is going back to the 1950’s, but one in which
we will stand by you since we believe you are prepared to stand up
on your own. (S)
After some discussion of the global threat and Soviet moves in
Afghanistan, Dr. Brzezinski returned to the points made in the briefing
concerning the threats to Pakistan. He said there are four areas of
response to the Soviet aggression in Afghanistan (leaving aside for the
time being bilateral U.S.-Pakistani issues):
(1) The first is a broad, strong and continuing international
response.
2 See Document 187.
3 An apparent reference to Carter’s January 23 State of the Union address and his
enunciation of the Carter Doctrine.

Afghanistan
(2) It is important to keep the Soviets occupied within Afghanistan
so as to raise the cost to them and prevent a quick consolidation of an
operating base.
(3) There is a need for a multilateral effort with United States
participation to strengthen Pakistani capability to withstand especially
the lower levels of Soviet aggression. Dr. Brzezinski added that Iran
must be included in this at some time and wondered whether Pakistan
could help. He noted that the American people were deeply resentful
about Iran but were also mature enough to put this matter behind
them once the issue is resolved. (S)
(4) We must convince the Soviets of an American response if they
impose a challenge beyond Pakistan’s capabilities. (S)
These four considerations in turn define minimum and maximum
objectives for Afghanistan itself. The maximum objective would be the
establishment of a neutral Afghan government without any Soviet
presence. The minimum objective is protracted Soviet involvement in
the suppression of the Afghan people. The former of these is harder
to obtain; thus it should be made politically and militarily costly for
the Soviets to continue on with their actions. On the political front
you and other Muslim nations might propose a neutralization by an
international Muslim force. This would put the Soviets on the defensive
and belie the idea of U.S.-Pakistani collusion. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski went on to discuss the progress which we had made
in the four objectives he had mentioned above. He noticed that the
Islamabad conference had been remarkably successful in bringing inter-
national pressure to bear on the Soviets as had the vote in the United
Nations.4 He praised Pakistan for its role in both of these. It is important
to insure that there is a more intense and more sustained response in
this case than there was at the time of the invasion of Czechoslovakia.
The United States leadership is determined to make this stick. (S)
On the second point we need to consult more closely. This is a
delicate matter that needs to be handled with determination. We have
also discussed it with other governments. (S)
On the third issue it is important to strengthen Pakistan’s ability
to respond to political intimidation or subversion as well as limited
military operations (e.g., the first two threats mentioned in the morning
briefing). The Soviets must be forced either to withdraw or to escalate
the conflict which would precipitate a U.S. engagement under the 1959
agreement. It is necessary to examine concrete ways for strengthening
north-west frontier. Turning to other concerned regional nations, Dr.
footnote 6, Document 136.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Brzezinski recounted briefly some of the results of the Brown visit to
China. With regard to India he cautioned the Pakistanis not to prejudge
that country in a way that would become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
We, too, were disturbed by the Indian statement in the UN General
Assembly, but we do not see India as a partner in the Soviet global
design.5 Perhaps we and our allies can encourage them to realize that
the strengthening of Pakistan’s security will help them too. We have
to be sensitive to India about their concerns in the view of their own
role. We do not dispute the dilemma that Pakistan faces, but the United
States and Pakistan should not become anti-Indian. With regard to
Iran, he reiterated our willingness to re-establish relations and look for
a new relationship. (S)
Pakistan and the United States, he went on, are at the beginning
of a new relationship which must be based on realistic harmony. It
was impossible to satisfy Pakistan’s immediate expectations, but this
must be seen as a long-term relationship. Pakistani independence is
important to the United States, and we know that you will fight even
if you are not supported by outside forces. We think of you as Poles
rather than Czechs. (S)
A year ago, what we are proposing to do with Pakistan would
have been inconceivable. (S)
If the result of our meeting is that our effort is seen as inadequate,
this will impact adversely on our historic relationship. (S)
It is hard to mobilize others, but by all means do not characterize
what we are doing as inadequate. We have to convince Congress five
years after the Vietnam war to become reengaged. The threat is one
of great magnitude and we do not want to have to fall back to a
maritime strategy. We cannot expect 100% agreement with you, but
we should not leave the impression of a dispute. (S)
President Zia responded by mentioning three additional points: This
is the first time that the Soviet Union has expanded into Asia; a buffer
state has disappeared from the maps; and Peter the Great’s will is
being carried out. (Dr. Brzezinski intervened at this point to say that
the so-called will of Peter the Great is a forgery.) Zia continued that
the world community’s conscience had been aroused in a way that
had not been the case previously. A Russian expansionist movement
has engulfed Afghanistan and is threatening Pakistani security and
U.S. vital interests. There is a qualitative geopolitical change in Southern
Pakistan, Zia continued, has a superpower on its western borders
and an unfriendly, if not hostile India on the East. Pakistan is looking

Afghanistan
for durable and permanent guarantees for its security; thus, they are
seeking clarification (assumedly of the U.S. commitment). The Soviets
resent the activities of which Pakistan is a focal point. The Indian
Foreign Minister demanded a regional discussion of the problem, but
Zia responded to him that the problem is global. The Islamic Conference
was indeed a victory for the United States and Pakistan, but it leads
to further Soviet hostility. Thus we need another superpower as an
antidote to the hostility of that superpower. The 1959 agreement must
(Zia at this point went into a fairly lengthy discussion of assurances
from Ambassador Oehlert, George Ball, and the quotes in the Kissinger
autobiography about 1971.)7 In order to remove these lacunae, Pakistan
proposes that the 1959 agreement be turned into a treaty, or else give
it a Congressional cover, approval or reaffirmation. To write a new
treaty is, of course, lengthy and difficult. (S)
How does the U.S. see implementation of the 1959 agreement now?
In case of aggression from the West, will it stand committed to Pakistani
security? If the threat is agreed on, military assistance should be com-
mensurate with the appreciation of that threat. We have to assure our
own security and half-way measures will not be adequate. Certain
items will be needed urgently for dealing with hot pursuit, and these
will also help to boost army morale. We have to start development
activity in the West, and that means economic assistance. How are we
going to be able to overcome our problem in the East? Can the Indian
threat be neutralized? Can the U.S. approach China to give guarantees
to Pakistan? What if the USSR and India attack jointly? We are seeking
to improve our relations with India, but what if we fail? If there is
collusion and an attack from both sides will you stand by our side? (S)
Henry Kissinger, in the January 21st Wall Street Journal interview
said it is unlikely that the Soviets would attack Pakistan over an Indian
objection.8 The danger for us is being dismembered by India. We are
trying hard in our relations with India. But don’t forget that during
the 1970 visit (to Washington) Mrs. Gandhi talked about the congenital
6 The dates refer to the previous Indo-Pakistani wars.
7 The reference to U.S. assurances to Pakistan in 1971 is from Henry Kissinger,
White House Years, p. 892. On assurances made by George Ball and Ambassador to
Pakistan Benjamin Oehlert, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XXV, South Asia, Docu-
8 For the text of the interview, see Karen Elliot House and Thomas J. Bray, “An
paraphrase of Kissinger’s remarks is accurate.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
defects of Pakistan, its regional weaknesses, etc. This is all in the Kissin-
ger book.9 (S)
Therefore, a reaffirmation of the 1959 agreement should address
first, proxy aggression from India, second, subversion, and third, it
should be free from references to all older documents such as the
Eisenhower doctrine, since this poses problems with Pakistan’s non-
alignment. It should become a purely bilateral agreement against the
threat from the West as well as the East. (S)
Our position is similar to that of Poland in 1939, when the Germans
and Russians wanted territory and the UK had no power to uphold
the guarantees it had given. Agreements and treaties are valid only as
long as they can be implemented. (S)
President Carter has said that the United States wants to give
Pakistan the ability to repel and deter invasion. Our commitments are
permanent, not transitory. We conclude that the United States is serious
and will provide the necessary support. If so, you need not be reminded
that limitation to any particular armament is not practical. We must
assess the needs and find ways to meet them. Dr. Brzezinski has said
the U.S. would “become engaged” in case of a hot pursuit. What does
that mean in light of the 1959 agreement? Our experiences are bitter.
In 1970 and 1971, refugees went to India from East Pakistan and the
Soviets accused us of mismanagement. In 1979, the Soviet Ambassador
claims that Pakistan is interfering in Afghanistan by accepting refugees.
Also in 1970–71, we told Indira Gandhi that if she supports the insur-
gents it would cause similar problems for India. She agreed, but then
did exactly the opposite. The Soviets have a tremendous reinforcement
capability. If they can move 50,000 troops into Afghanistan in four
weeks, we can imagine what greater things they could do. (S)
Turning to the scope of the Afghan insurgency, when in April
1978, following the coup, we consulted China, we were told that we
would get our fingers burned if we became involved. We felt that the
United States was not interested in the situation. Even with our meager
resources we have alone been helping the freedom fighters. In Novem-
ber 1979, we told Prince Fahd that the Muslims could regain their
position if they had help. He, however, said no. But we have been
helpful (and with U.S. aid in the last few months). Now the Chinese
and Saudis have also agreed in principle. Throughout centuries, the
Afghans have never been subjugated. The insurgency will continue,
9 Kissinger briefly described Gandhi’s visit in his memoirs. For a fuller record of
Rogers in New York in October 1970 and Rogers’s subsequent phone call with Kissinger
in which Rogers summarized his conversation with Gandhi.

Afghanistan
but whether at a high or low level depends on the level of Soviet
operations. The Soviets are ruthless. (S)
fled to Pakistan, showing Soviet ruthlessness. Therefore, the insurgency
has prospects but the freedom fighters need outside support. They will
need outside bases, and that means Pakistan and to some extent Iran,
and these bases must be secure. An insecure Pakistan would jeopardize
the future of the freedom fighters and the situation in Iran is still less
favorable. (S)
What is the likely timeframe for the Soviet push further southward?
We cannot fix that. It depends on the deterrents at the international
level—the United Nations, the Islamic Conference, U.S. resolve and
support—and also the strength of Pakistan itself. (S)
U.S. and Pakistan each have interests to watch over. President
Carter has talked about vital interests in the Persian Gulf. That is a
strong commitment. Is Pakistan included? I gather from Dr. Brzezinski
that we are. (S)
There was then some discussion on the exact wording of the Presi-
dent’s State of the Union message, and what the Pakistanis perceived
as a difference in strength of commitment between the longer and
shorter versions. (S)
This new undertaking has a dynamic which we appreciate. Not
only the quick U.S. response including steps already taken, but interna-
tional efforts as well which we appreciate highly. (S)
We had serious differences over a few months ago, and I was
deeply ashamed about these. (President Zia was referring here to the
burning of the American Embassy.)10 We have never been ungrateful,
we have tried to stand by our friends. We are facing serious decisions
and are at a crossroads. No country ever closes its options, and frankly
this is the best time for U.S.-Pakistani cooperation. You will find a
neglected ally and you will build a dam against the Soviets. Our
national interests coincide. We deeply appreciate your visit and hope
we will be able to find appropriate answers to all these questions. (S)
Deputy Secretary Christopher then spoke concerning the American
security commitment to Pakistan. He noted that the President has
recently reaffirmed this commitment publicly, and in a letter to Presi-
dent Zia.11 We are ready to do more. We are ready to make this letter
public, and to ask Congress to reaffirm the 1959 agreement. Asking
Congress to do this is highly significant. It would define the Soviet
threat (at this point Secretary Christopher quoted a sentence beginning
11 For the letter, see Document 159.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
“these extraordinary.” Such a reaffirmation would be enacted in both
Houses and thus be more binding than an Executive agreement. Secre-
tary Vance and I have discussed this with Congress and they are
prepared to move ahead. The contemporary vitality of this agreement
will reassure you and educate our people. This is an unprecedented
way for us to go about making such a commitment. (S)
It is also unprecedented that the legislation will provide for assist-
ance “notwithstanding any other provision of law”, thus setting aside
the Glenn and Symington amendments and any other obstructions. (S)
We need to see this as a beginning of a process. We have to get it
enacted. Congress is chary of such things, but at this time it is willing
to do it. Proceeding this way is much quicker, cleaner and more decisive
than a treaty. You recognize the delay that would be involved in a
treaty, and an in-treaty [a new treaty?] would likely incur debate over
various conditions such as non-proliferation. (S)
Addressing the contingencies you raised, a Soviet or Soviet/
Afghan attack that threatened your independence or integrity would
fall under the terms of the 1959 agreement. The President would imme-
diately consult with you under Article I of the agreement, and also
consult with Congress. Our response could involve the use of armed
In case of a concerted Indian-Soviet attack, the first article of the
1959 agreement would also come into play. (S)
If the Soviets have India attack as a proxy—we see this most
unlikely. India is even less willing to do this after the invasion of
Afghanistan. The key, though, would be whether the attack was Com-
munist controlled and/or inspired. More important, though, is that
the United States and India have good relations. We are pleased that
you are consulting with the Indians. To sum up, though, if India
attacked as an agent of the Soviet Union, Article I would indeed come
into effect. (S)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
You have talked about “keeping the insurgency alive” in Afghani-
stan. The issue is one of motivation. To accept an injection of arms to
the refugees would be dangerous for us unless we are able to defend
against the first two strategic contingencies we discussed earlier.12 (S)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
12 Text of the full record of the talks is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
that he thought the talks were “excellent.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

Afghanistan
194.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of Dr. Brzezinski’s and Mr. Christopher’s Meeting with Prince Saud of
Saudi Arabia
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
U.S. Ambassador to Saudi Arabia John West
Jane Coon
Gary Sick
John Trattner
Jerry Schecter
Isa Sabbagh
Eugene Bovis
Prince Saud
Mr. Mansouri
Ambassador al-Hegalan
Abdul Aziz Thunayyan
Prince Saud opened the meeting with a brief discussion of his experi-
ences at the Islamic Summit in Islamabad.2
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Prince Saud wondered what are the Soviet interests in Afghanistan.
Dr. Brzezinski said that he was prepared to accept the fact that the
Soviet motives were limited to Afghanistan itself.3 The Government
there was losing its ability to govern and he thought that replacement
was the probable motive for the politburo members. However, the
rationale for entering Afghanistan is irrelevant; the results are to create
a strategic dynamic which is not limited to Afghanistan. The effects of
the invasion are of global significance regardless of their immediate
interests. It represented a strategic challenge. They have turned a buffer
state into an offensive wedge. These acts are very serious. History
shows that acts of limited objectives sometimes lead to general out-
comes. After all in World War I the parties began with very limited
objectives. The United States has been bogged down with the Iranian
hostage issue, with the Arab-Israel question, the Mecca problem, Paki-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
Saud’s home.
3 An unknown hand crossed out “interests” and wrote “motives.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
stani problems, etc.4 The Soviets may have seen this array of problems
and decided that this was the moment to act, but we must be aware
of the objective consequences of their actions. What the Saudis did in
Islamabad is of historic significance. It is the first time that a group of
nations has confronted the Soviets apart from the United States. The
Islamic states represent a greater challenge to the Soviets than the
United States. You represent a revitalized religious renaissance which
is on the move. There are sixty million Moslems in the Soviet Union
who are increasingly aware of their identity and who are experiencing
an intense feeling of Moslem identity. This makes the Soviets fearful.
Prince Saud said that’s true. In the region there is a feeling that the
Soviets did not act due to reasons of self-defense. These were offensive
intentions, not defensive. They are going to try to consolidate Soviet
power and gain back lost ground. The timing was determined by their
need to capitalize on the present situation. He noted that in Lebanon
we may have reason to expect some sort of conflict perhaps like 1967.
The Soviet military posture in the Middle East is not an attempt to
resolve the Israeli problem but to bring contradictions between United
States and the Arab world more to the front. The regional nations see
the Soviet aims; even Iran does, though not the students. The regional
states want to oppose the Soviets despite the immense dangers, such
as Pakistan. It was not an easy decision to help Afghanistan especially
since they were not sure of the backing they would have from the
United States and others. They took the decision since they are aware
that they are next. However, this situation should not be viewed as a
crisis rather it is something people in this region live with every day.
Dr. Brzezinski wondered if that same reasoning applied to Iraq
and Algeria.
Prince Saud said yes. They see the Soviets as aggressive and imperi-
alistic. Public opinion and government opinion in the region all oppose
the Soviet tendency to take what they want by force. The regional
states will do what is necessary and they are confident that the US will
help. They need to understand how the US will do it.
Mr. Christopher wondered what his views were on the results in
Pakistan. On the favorable side, Mr. Christopher thought that recent
talks were successful in standing up to Soviet aggression. However,
we had presented what we thought was a sound approach which
involved going to Congress and getting a firm commitment as well as
providing nearly half a billion dollars in assistance. We are not sure
4 The “Mecca problem” likely refers to the attack by Islamic dissidents on the Grand
Mosque in Mecca, November 20, 1979.

Afghanistan
we understand why the Pakistanis would not accept this as a major
first step.
Mrs. Coon noted that the Pakistanis were anxious to reaffirm the
security commitment.
Mr. Christopher wondered if the aid was too small or too big. We
had spent six or seven hours discussing this issue at the highest levels
of the Pakistani Government and were still uncertain of what their
reasons were.5
Prince Saud said that the Pakistanis think the aid is not sufficient
to meet the challenge. They fear the Soviets and India. In order to resist
they have legitimate defense needs to defend themselves. You said
that the United States would oppose the Soviets, however, they do not
see the US as willing to enter into a direct conflict in this area. For
example, to have troops available to defend Afghanistan. Maybe this
was not mentioned by them. But they are looking for a clear view of
the extent of backing by the US Government. They have no other source
to back them. They wanted to have US aid sufficient to have the
capability to resist the Soviets.
Mr. Christopher said to Prince Saud you know our country. When
we reverse course sometimes that is done in increments. We have a
long series of problems to overcome particularly the nonproliferation
issue. We tried to persuade them that a half billion dollars is not
insubstantial. We talked ourselves blue in the face and we came
away perplexed.
Prince Saud said they are afraid the US will throw them in front
of the bear and not help them when the chips are down. They also
have a problem justifying their policy internally. They also recognize
the turnaround by the United States but they wonder if assistance will
come in time and be sufficient in quantity.
Mr. Christopher wondered if they wanted to turn off our
turnaround.
Dr. Brzezinski said he thought not. We are able to match their
commitment to fight with our willingness to assist them in case of
massive intervention by the Soviet Union in accordance with our consti-
tutional processes. Did the Islamic Conference agree to supply aid
to Pakistan?
Prince Saud said yes and there will be more when others see the
US commitment.
Dr. Brzezinski said if the Soviets intervene massively we will not
stand by. They now understand that. If intervention comes in a limited
5 See Document 193.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
way we want to be able to help on a limited basis. Some suggest that
we do not have the power. In fact we have the capacity to do a lot of
damage. In Baluchistan, for example, US air power could be quite
decisive. Also our conventional capability in the region is substantial.
We are not obliged to respond in a way where the Soviets choose the
time and place of their own choosing. There are other places in the
world where we can do things where we have a preponderance of
power. We do not necessarily have to match the Soviets gun for gun
in this area. We have the means and our country has the will. We are
no longer a country paralyzed by the Vietnam war. We are ready to
demonstrate that we mean what we say. Like the Soviets the imperialist
Germans said they were trying to avoid encirclement but their diplo-
macy was so inept they did not succeed and brought the whole world
against them.
Prince Saud said they think they can succeed in making the Soviets
not succeed.
Dr. Brzezinski said as far as Afghanistan is concerned it requires
continuing discussion.
Prince Saud said that if we could help with the Indians that would
be a good thing.
Dr. Brzezinski said we sent Mr. Clifford to India and his age was
the equivalent of the two of us put together.6
Prince Saud said that the Pakistanis worry a lot about the Gromyko
visit to India. They hope that the Indians can be persuaded. We the
Saudis have no influence. They buy some oil from us and some other
Arab countries. Even Iraq sends them some oil. We will do what we
can but you must also act.
Dr. Brzezinski said that Mrs. Gandhi feels deeply about the shabby
treatment she got from the US press.
Prince Saud said that is the same way that General Zia feels.
Dr. Brzezinski said the press has not paid much attention to General
Zia, except during the Bhutto affair and the Bhutto incident was not
a beautiful period of Pakistani history. Mrs. Gandhi is a different situa-
tion. There was a long love affair with India in the United States and
there has subsequently been a disillusionment especially among the
Left intellectuals. The conversation continued after the group sat down
to lunch. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the Afghanis are very tough. He
had visited a refugee camp. However he feared that the Soviets would
be more effective than the British had been a hundred years ago when
only one out of ten thousand men returned from an engagement.
6 See Document 190.

Afghanistan
Prince Saud noted that most of the Afghanistan army is joining
the rebels.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we don’t have as good information as we
need about the rebel situation, however, we have good information
on Soviet dispositions. Thus far the Soviets have not engaged in the
resistance with full scale fighting, rather they have focused on the lines
of communications. This is a good time for weapons to go in before
the Soviets launch a counterinsurgency effort in a big way.
Prince Saud said that the people in Afghanistan are capable of
using sophisticated equipment. They need training on communication,
recoilless rifles. Surface to air rifles [missiles?] would take care of part
of their problems. He wondered if we have SA7s by chance.
Dr. Brzezinski said by chance we do. The Egyptians also have Soviet
equipment. The Algerians are fearful of getting involved.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
195.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of Dr. Brzezinski’s and Mr. Christopher’s Meeting with Crown Prince
Fahd of Saudi Arabia
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
U.S. Ambassador to Saudi Arabia John West
Gary Sick
Arnie Raphel
Crown Prince Fahd
Prince Saud
Dr. Pharaon
Mr. Mansouri
Abdul Aziz Thunayyan
Notetaker
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
Royal Palace.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Dr. Brzezinski noted that there had been many changes in the world
during the year since he had last been here in Riyadh.
Prince Fahd said that he hoped the changes were in the interests
of the free world.
Dr. Brzezinski said not everything that happened last year was
good; however, we were encouraged by the results of the Islamic
Conference and hope that this part of the world has been encouraged
by the President’s State of the Union address.
Prince Fahd said nobody in his right mind would have expected
the Soviet invasion in Afghanistan.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that he had visited the refugee camps in
Pakistan.
Prince Fahd said that this was a heartbreaking sight. It was the
results of the invasion. It was most unconscionable to resort to outright
invasion as opposed to other means that were available. He wondered
what news the United States had of the internal nationalistic resistance.
Dr. Brzezinski said that every indication we have is that the resist-
ance is growing steadily. Over the last few days there has been an
increased number of clashes between the Soviets and Resistance Forces.
The Afghan troops have largely been passive and disarmed but recently
there have been direct clashes between Afghan soldiers and Soviet
forces.
Prince Fahd said this is a very significant development and will
give a shot in the arm to the resistance.
Dr. Brzezinski said that our present estimates show that there are
73,000 Soviet troops in Afghanistan, perhaps up to 92,000.
Prince Fahd said that these indications suggest that they really got
in in force.
Dr. Brzezinski said that some Soviet troop deployment suggests
that they might be considering operations against northeastern Iran.
Prince Fahd said that there is nothing that is not likely anymore.
Dr. Brzezinski said we had a good talk with the leaders of Pakistan.
The President asked us to lead a delegation there and tell them that if
there was a threat to the territorial integrity of Pakistan, we would not
let them stand alone. They understand this. We left a military team to
examine their needs and we also discussed with the Pakistanis the best
way to make certain that the Soviets are not able to consolidate their
gains in Afghanistan.
Prince Fahd said that is very good.
Dr. Brzezinski continued I know that some of these matters were
discussed with Prince Turki.2 We would also like to increase our psy-
chological propaganda to the Muslims.
2 No record of this meeting was found.

Afghanistan
Prince Fahd said that is very important.
Dr. Brzezinski continued that Ambassador West will talk to Prince
Saud about leasing transmitter time because we feel that the indignation
of the rest of the world is shared quietly by the 50 to 60 million Moslems
in the Soviet Union.
Prince Fahd said that was true. They have the feeling that this
Islamic fervor is against any one act of invasion such as that by the
Soviets. He had not witnessed a comparable reaction to any other single
act. He thought that the Soviets had not imagined that the reaction
would be so intense and so deep. This is very important. They have
witnessed an international outcry all around the world.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we think this calls for a response on many
levels. Most importantly is the level of the Islamic world. We are also
prepared to respond in several ways to help Pakistan militarily and
economically. We intend to strengthen our military presence in this
part of the world. We are not asking for bases from anyone but we
are negotiating with a number of countries for the use of facilities so
we are able to respond quickly and effectively to any threat. We will
respond on the level of psychological broadcasts as well. We are pre-
pared to work with every country in the region to strengthen security.
We indicated to the Pakistanis that the 1959 agreement is still valid
but we are also planning to work with other countries to organize
economic and military assistance for them.
Mr. Christopher said that our trip to Pakistan was better than antici-
pated but also different than anticipated. The President had announced
that he was prepared to go to Congress to seek nearly a half a billion
dollars in assistance, including two hundred million dollars in military
credits and other economic assistance. Somewhat to our surprise the
Pakistanis asked us not to send this until they had a better understand-
ing of what the reaction of their other friends would be. No doubt
Saudi Arabia is aware that Pakistan has enormous needs in military
and economic fields. Their balance of payments deficit is greater than
a billion dollars a year and even more urgently the Pakistan army
needs to be reoriented back to the West, since it is now focused mostly
in the East. This move requires some change to the Pakistani military
and increased infrastructure. So now it is of great importance to know
what other nations can do. We would ask your comments on your
evaluation of Pakistan’s needs and your own discussion with the
Pakistanis.
Prince Fahd said that Saudi Arabia had for many years been giving
Pakistan very good aid in military and economic fields trying to be as
supportive and helpful to Pakistan as they can possibly be. They know
that if they buoy up Pakistan economically that people will be able to
breathe more easily. Also, they are prepared to do whatever they

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
can in the military field. They firmly believe that Pakistan should be
supported to the maximum possible extent. Psychologically now is the
time to rally to Pakistan’s support. If friendly states dilly dally at this
point future steps will be more difficult.
Mr. Christopher said he agreed. President Carter is prepared to take
unprecedented moves to support Pakistan.
Prince Fahd said that they had felt this from President Carter’s
statements and they are sure that the Pakistani people also feel it. Also
it is very important vis-a-vis the Soviets, they did not imagine the
response would be so firm and intense. Maybe the Soviets thought
they could do this thing and get only some brief reaction then perhaps
in the future go on to Pakistan with only a brief outcry. That is why
the Saudis have a strong feeling that the people of the world recognize
that the US lion has begun to stir. Of course we realize that the aim
of the Soviets is to get to warm waters so in fact this aggression makes
a later move toward the Persian Gulf more possible. He noted that
during Nixon’s first tenure he had forewarned the American Adminis-
tration about this very thing.3 Just to illustrate graphically the Soviets
first thought that they would make use of Iraq as a launching pad
against this part of the world. Now they have switched and are using
the PDRY for this reason. Their failure in Iraq led them to attack
Afghanistan.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
3 Not further identified.

Afghanistan
196.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
2027. Subject: Soviet Occupation of Afghanistan: Updated Assess-
ment and Policy Recommendations. Ref: Moscow 2026.2
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Begin summary. This cable updates the Embassy’s continuing
assessment of the current crisis in U.S.-Soviet relations and recommen-
dations for dealing with it.
My overall recommendation is to maintain a tough stance on the
sanctions already announced (without dribbling out minor new ones),
while leaving open the door for later redemption; to make clear by
our actions that we object only to Soviet behavior and do not seek to
overthrow the Soviet system; to proceed carefully in defending areas
of vital interest in order to avoid our having forced on us a choice
between defeat on the ground and nuclear war; and to explore ways
to maintain a dialogue.
Specifically, I recommend:
—continued freeze on most if not all new trade deals while allow-
ing, subject to more stringent strategic guidelines, the completion of
contracts already underway and continued delivery of spare parts;
—continued honoring of existing agreements at the government
level, including civil air and maritime (with good faith efforts to over-
come trade union resistance), Embassy construction, etc.;
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
dential; Immediate; Nodis; Cherokee.
Department to expect telegram 2027. Watson wrote: “The world is beginning to look
more dangerous to me. I am sure that everyone recognizes that an error in judgment on
either side could elevate finally to thermonuclear war. We are dealing with a monolithic
government with top leadership average age of 69. They have badly miscalculated in
Afghanistan. We have tried unsuccessfully to understand and predict this government
for nearly 50 years with notable lack of success. Furthermore, although Afghanistan is
unforgivable, we must recognize that our record does not look lily white to them.”
ization of Soviet miscalculation was corroborated in an intelligence memorandum pre-
pared in the Central Intelligence Agency, February 19, that noted that many leaders had
become “disturbed about the impact of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan on Soviet
foreign and domestic policy.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—continued freeze on scientific and cultural exchanges except for
routine academic exchanges and other low-level exchanges on a case-
by-case basis;
—stop further moves with China, especially in military-related
fields;
—informal explorations on getting the Soviets out of Afghanistan
and also on starting up arms control talks, using me and Dobrynin for
smoking out the possibilities and possibly by sending an unofficial
interlocutor such as Averell Harriman. End summary.
3. I am deeply conscious of the seriousness of the present crisis
in U.S.-Soviet relations. My staff and I are continuing to review our
assessments and recommendations to be sure that we give you our best
advice, both as to Soviet motivations and tactics and as to U.S. actions.
4. We continue to think that Moscow miscalculated the conse-
quences when it went into Afghanistan, but are now inclined to think
the miscalculation was more acute with regard to the rest of the world
than to the U.S. They probably expected, and possibly intended, a
worsening of relations with the U.S., though not of the breadth and
depth that materialized. Perhaps the operation in Kabul was botched,
and they had expected a smoother change of regime followed by a call
for Soviet support, under circumstances in which world reaction would
have been narrower and the U.S. could have been more easily depicted
as an excitable anti-Soviet warmonger. The line now being purveyed,
both privately (including by Gromyko) and publicly—that even before
Afghanistan the U.S. had deliberately worsened relations with the
USSR—indicates an intent to blacken us before the rest of the world
and to undermine our policy at home.
5. The Soviet leaders may actually have convinced themselves that
the Carter administration is out to do them in. Their restraint at
Vienna—their refusal to go much beyond the signature of SALT, to
resolve the Jackson-Vanik problem,3 or to take other steps—signalled
their reservations. Their paranoia about China may have been one
reason for their mulish attitude throughout 1979. (I have recently read
Brezhnev’s letter to the President in December 1978 warning against
the arming by the West “of a neighboring country which pursues an
openly hostile policy toward us . . . we must do what we consider
necessary . . . due attention to our defense,” and asserting we were
at a crossroads, one turning of which threatened “confrontation and
increased threat of war.”) The standard litany of charges against us
3 The Jackson-Vanik amendment to the Trade Act of 1974 required the relaxation
of Soviet emigration restrictions before most-favored-nation status for the Soviet Union
would be considered.

Afghanistan
also includes many other items including TNF and the Middle East,
about which the Soviets also feel strongly. It is odd that our China policy
has dropped out of this litany, for example as recited by Gromyko to
me last week.4 It probably means that they think talking about it may
be counter-productive, that we are too far along the road of working
closely with China to be deflected by words.
6. Of course the great disadvantage of the Soviet system is that
there is no built-in balance, no one to point out emphatically and
publicly the fallacies in the skewed views of the old men in the Polit-
buro. If they decide it is right to try to “teach the U.S. a lesson,” to
show the U.S. electorate that failure to cooperate with the USSR will
lead to a dangerous situation, there apparently is no one to explain to
them that such a policy is highly counter-productive if not dangerous.
Since they pride themselves on judging others by actions, not words,
it is up to us by our actions to get across to the Soviet leadership that
they have misjudged us: we are not trying to do them in, but we cannot
be stampeded by a show of strength.
7. In these circumstances, the President’s cool but determined
approach may have to continue for some time. We will want to show
our capability for moving along lines that could hurt their interests on
key sensitive points—China, international isolation, a possible new
arms race. At the same time we must make clear that we are not trying
to destroy the Soviet Union; we are prepared to talk arms control; and
we are prepared for the present to move slowly on the above sensitive
points to see if the Soviets will change their behavior. We may have
to continue along these somewhat limited and constraining lines for
several months, if not longer. My guess is that they will not show much
desire to talk seriously until they become convinced of the inevitability
of President Carter’s re-election. Meanwhile, it will be important not
to move too quickly on matters they consider affect their vital interests,
particularly China.
8. I want to offer a few thoughts on setting ourselves up for
confrontations.
A. There is an obvious danger that one side or the other will make
a mistake about the other side’s determination and perception of its
own interests. It is of course vital to communicate one’s own perception
of vital interests, as the President has done with regard to the Persian
Gulf region. A great danger arises however if we assume that the threat
of direct military combat between Soviet and American forces will
cause Moscow to back away and that therefore only token forces will
be required to make the threat valid.
4 See Document 186.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
B. I can see at least two circumstances in which the Soviets would
not eschew local hostilities. One would be that they consider their own
vital interests directly engaged, therefore giving them—in their eyes—
no choice. The other, less likely but not outside the realm of possibility,
is that the Soviet leaders would conclude that the U.S. must be taught
a more powerful lesson by being forced to back away from nuclear
confrontation as the USSR did in 1962. However misguided, the calcula-
tion could be that if U.S. theater forces were defeated in, for example,
the Persian Gulf area, the U.S. would decline to go nuclear and that
the shock of this decision would reinvigorate forces in the U.S. and
the rest of the world seeking an accommodation with the Soviet Union.
C. But I believe it would be a grave error on our part to continue
assuming that the Soviets want to avoid at all costs any confrontation
which could go nuclear; I can even envisage some Soviet leaders want-
ing such a confrontation if they expect (however naively) to be able to
pre-ordain an American backdown by arranging it at a time and place
of their choosing. At the moment they face a new arms race—both
strategic and theater—even if SALT II is ratified; the U.S. may be
seen as moving toward a military alliance with China; and the Soviet
economy is rapidly losing momentum. They may feel that if a confronta-
tion must come, it should be sooner rather than later.
D. My point is that we should not bluff in moving toward confronta-
tion with the Soviets at this stage in history and at a point near their
borders: tripwire forces may not deter them, and might even invite
their attack; they may not believe any threats to use tactical nuclear
weapons; and if we are forced to use them I personally believe the
worst predictions about escalation will come true.
9. I also have some other policy suggestions, flowing from the
above analysis and in most cases not much different from what we
are already doing.
A. A general point is that we should not give Moscow grounds to
believe that the U.S. follows a policy of trying to destroy, fragment
or overturn the Soviet regime; if the Soviet leadership comes to that
conclusion its inferiority complex could result in a “cornered rat” syn-
drome and a turn toward calculated confrontation.
B. Our remaining “China cards” should not be played this year,
particularly those which appear to be intended to build up Chinese
military potential, because that too could support any inclinations here
to seek a confrontation with the U.S. sooner rather than later. Moreover,
once played they lose their usefulness as leverage and become excuses
for Soviet counterreaction. And they help unify the Soviet people
behind the Soviet leadership.
C. Obviously the various sanctions imposed after Afghanistan must
be maintained for an extended period unless Soviet policy gives us

Afghanistan
cause to ease off. The lesson we are trying to teach by means of the
sanctions will be easily dissipated if we do not assiduously maintain
them.
D. A corollary is that having administered the lesson (of which
the Olympics boycott is important and deserves determined follow-
through), we should stand back and await the results. Continued drib-
bling out of further sanctions beyond those specified by the President
will give the impression of terminal anti-Sovietism rather than a stern
lesson. Moreover, we ought to save a few measures for counter-retalia-
tion for any Soviet retaliation against our sanctions and as new sanc-
tions in the event of further Soviet misbehavior.
E. Another point about economic sanctions: Our policy of stern
application of sanctions even to the point of self-sacrifice, if it is to
have any chance of contributing to improved Soviet behavior, must
also leave open the possibility of some day resuming normal trade
relations. I would be deeply concerned in this regard if we were to cut
off completely the delivery of contracted items and particularly of spare
parts. It would be satisfying indeed to see major Soviet projects grind
to a halt until they can arrange alternate suppliers or install new
machines not dependent on U.S. spare parts. But this would only be
a temporary setback to them, while signalling that we have written off
U.S.-Soviet trade for decades to come. I believe that would be a danger-
ous signal to send. Instead I recommend that contracts which are signed
and well launched, as well as normal spare parts supplies, should be
obstructed only if a good case can be made under revised, more strin-
gent strategic guidelines. I am not concerned about the political conse-
quences of discouraging new deals even in totally non-strategic areas
during the coming year; this conveys the proper message and is in
tune with our policy on agricultural exports.
F. Scientific, cultural and educational exchanges should be an
important part of our long-term repeat long-term strategy, because
they can be helpful in gradually opening up this society to the kind of
counterpressures against foreign adventurism and domestic repression
which we would like to see gain a foothold. But since that internal
process will require decades, at the present juncture we can afford to
proceed tactically and we should therefore continue to hold down
large-scale and visible exchanges (while if possible preserving the basic
academic exchanges) until the Soviets give good reason for us to signal
that they are worthy partners in this sort of endeavor.
G. The most important and urgent positive signal is the one we
have already given, that we are prepared even now to continue the
arms control dialogue. Tactics and timing are important and are dis-
cussed below.
H. Finally, there is the urgent question of the struggle for the sup-
port of the rest of the world in opposing Soviet external aggression. It

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
is still true that the Soviets, when they think their backs are to the wall,
will pursue what they see as their vital interests without regard to
world opinion. But it is also true that they have gradually come to
place increased weight on their acceptance by the rest of the world.
This is a positive development and it is obvious that we should exploit
it to the fullest. Without trying to spell out specifics, I would merely
comment that it is important that while organizing the power to resist
Soviet aggression we also continue the effort to persuade the neutral
and non-aligned countries to put political pressure on the Soviets. India
and the Islamic countries are obviously important in this regard. How
we approach the Third World as a whole is outside my competence,
but even from here it seems obvious that simply appealing to them to
be anti-Soviet may strike them as self-serving. One of our Western
friends here, with much Third World experience, has urged that we
approach the developing nations in terms of helping them achieve
their own goals and aspirations.
10. Recommendations on mechanics and timing.
A. It is important that we continue to take a tough stance, not
appearing to have second thoughts about our present course, even
while leaving openings for the Soviets to signal willingness to start
talking about some of the most serious issues. This will not be easy
but deserves our best efforts.
B. Obviously a key element will be continued dialogue between
you and Gromyko through both me and Dobrynin. As we have seen
in the most recent exchanges, Dobrynin has begun offering “personal
ideas” for a solution of the Afghanistan problem itself; the tactic is to
get Washington to venture out on a limb on the basis of Dobrynin’s
suggestions. You might wish to respond by feeding me some ideas to
give Gromyko, also on a “personal” basis. That way we get some
reaction from Gromyko first hand without committing you and the
President to anything. This could be done even more unofficially by
using Arbatov (who is expected to be back to work soon). I am frankly
not optimistic that we could find any basis for an early Soviet with-
drawal, but I see an advantage in dangling some ideas for letting the
Soviets extract themselves gracefully if they are so inclined. At least
we could find out for sure whether they are so inclined. Movement
toward an internal regime of “national reconciliation” together with
some sort of effort to repatriate the refugees back from Pakistan and
pacify the border seems unlikely at this stage, but there would be no
harm in exploring it if it could be done unofficially. Perhaps some UN
involvement would be feasible. Conceivably we could also discuss
some sort of “hands off” agreement regarding Iran.
C. We need to follow up quickly on SALT I and SALT II interim
observance (Gromyko did not respond to that portion of my démarche)

Afghanistan
and, even without waiting for a solution in Afghanistan, to pursue
explorations about TNF talks, and about how to prepare for SALT III.
Perhaps Washington will conclude that talks could be held behind the
scenes at the SCC [CCD?], augmented and kept in continuous session
for the purpose, or perhaps you would wish to develop a scheme along
the lines of my suggestion for a new joint committee of experts to
explore the possibilities for balanced unilateral restraint. In any case I
think we should settle on some coherent proposal and then begin to
explore it, also in an unofficial way through “personal ideas” which I
would float or some other means. (Of course we have to be careful not
to appear too eager on interim observance of SALT, lest they decide
to shake us up by indicating doubt that interim observance can continue
very long.)
D. One other avenue for exploring some of these ideas informally
would be to send Averell Harriman over on a private visit.5 He would
have access to Brezhnev and other leaders and would be taken seri-
ously, but he could also discuss these issues informally and unofficially.
If Harriman is too political and too closely connected to the administra-
tion, you might consider someone else, perhaps a businessman with
good connections here.
E. The measures we have taken thus far have had a three-fold
purpose: showing the Soviets that such behavior cannot be cost-free;
deterring future aggressive behavior; and, ideally, forcing a roll-back
in Afghanistan. The first point we will have made if we stay the course.
If we succeed in the second one—deterrence—the effort will have
been well worth it, particularly if we were able to gain believable
commitments against future such actions. But realistically we must
admit, for purposes of choosing our long-range approach to relations
with the Soviets, that the third may not happen. We may be faced with
a fait accompli, the continued existence of [garble—Afghanistan] as an
[garble—East?]-European style—or even Mongolian-style—satellite. In
our actions and our public pronouncements about the duration of the
measures we have taken, we need to balance that possibility against
the intractable need for that minimum level of dealings with the Soviets
which will head off nuclear confrontation.
F. It is nevertheless just barely possible that the Soviets are having
second thoughts, and we should not neglect opportunities to explore
the possibility of a relatively quick reversal in Afghanistan. If there is
any such opportunity, it might lie in the early deadline created by the
Olympics. Therefore if we are going to give the Soviets any prodding
5 No record of a visit by Harriman to Moscow was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
on Afghanistan while offering to drop our opposition to the Moscow
Olympics, we should do so quickly.
G. I frankly doubt, however, that it will be successful. It is for that
reason, and with an eye to the long-range prospects and dangers, that
I think we should begin exploring possibilities for getting back to the
arms control table. Some say that it will be impossible to have any
serious talks, even on arms control, while contacts are frozen in other
areas. But I think we have to give it a try.
Watson
197.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Summary Report and Recommendations Pakistan/Saudi Arabia
The talks with the Saudis were better than a year ago: franker,
more specific and more constructive. There is no doubt that your State
of the Union message has had a fundamental impact. They now take us
seriously. In Pakistan I believe we convinced the Pakistani leaders that
you stand foursquare behind the reaffirmation of the 1959 Agreement.
As a result, we neither had to up the ante on the $400 million nor
promise a formal treaty.
Subject to your guidance, I believe we should now pursue the
following items:
1. Since the Pakistanis have basically decided to stand up to the
Soviets, we may need to increase our military assistance, but primarily
in anti-tank and other defensive-type weaponry. In addition to what-
ever we can raise from others (and the Saudis promised to make a
substantial contribution), we may then eventually have to go beyond
the $200 million if we want them to be effective in responding to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
the upper right corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig—J.” Attached but not
printed is a covering note from Brzezinski to Carter, February 6, in which Brzezinski
offered to give an oral report of his trip in addition to the “action-oriented” items he
provided in the memorandum.

Afghanistan
a low-level threat. Their military position is really deplorable: poor
equipment, no infrastructure, little effective communications.
2. As a confidence building measure, and also as a way of keeping
tabs on the Pakistanis, we should have regular military consultations
on possible Soviet-Afghani offensive options against Pakistan.
3. We need to find some formula for a Congressional reaffirmation
of the 1959 Agreement, even if for the time being there is no legislative
package for Pakistan. This is psychologically very much needed and
the timing in Congress [will] probably never be better.
4. To keep India at bay, and especially to prevent the Indians
from concentrating all their forces against Pakistan (which makes it
impossible for the Pakistanis to build up their northwestern defenses
effectively), we should explore with the Chinese the possibility of some
Chinese deployments north of Nepal.2 This would siphon off Indian
forces and keep the Indians honest (though anything along these lines
would have to be done very cautiously so as not to precipitate increased
Soviet/Indian military cooperation.
5. To mobilize Arab support for our position in the region, and
particularly to shore up Islamic opposition against the Soviets, we
simply must accelerate our efforts regarding the Palestinians. There is
no doubt that this matter preoccupies the Saudis, and they are right
in saying that lack of adequate progress on the Palestinian issue would
benefit the Soviets quite directly. Either you or Fritz should find occa-
sion to underline our commitment.
6. We should tell Sadat in no uncertain terms that his public polem-
ics against the Saudis are harming U.S. interests in the region—and
hence we expect him to desist out of deference to our concern with
strengthening U.S. interests.
7. We should try to be somewhat more forthcoming on some of
the military items urgently requested by Saudi Arabia—and John West
will be writing to you on this matter shortly. Most involve symbolic
issues, yet of considerable importance to Saudi pride and to their feel-
ing that we are not reciprocating for their help with regard to oil
production.3
8. If the positive news regarding Yemeni accommodation to Saudi
demands proves (as is quite possible) to be false, we should actively
cooperate with the Saudis in the implementation of the plan developed
by Carlucci. Otherwise Yemen will be your next major crisis—and this
time in an area directly of vital importance to us.
2 In the right margin, Carter wrote: “No.”
3 In the right margin, Carter wrote: “These are not known by me.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
9. In our next communication to the Soviets we should tell them
unambiguously that continued Soviet/Cuban build-up of South Yemen
is unacceptable and that it will precipitate U.S. countermeasures. (Aden
is quite susceptible to a blockade and it may be better at some point
to seal the place off than to be faced with a genuinely effective PDRY
challenge—backed by the Soviets and the Cubans—to Saudi Arabia.)
10. As soon as practicable and welcomed by host Middle Eastern
countries, some amphibious marine landings and a joint exercise with
a U.S. airborne brigade would provide a credible and impressive dis-
play of our ability—and therefore will—to project effective American
power into the region.
These summary recommendations will need to be staffed out and
more fully considered, but your reactions to them would be helpful.
In brief, we must capitalize on the extraordinarily effective impact of
your recent speech on an area which is simultaneously vital to us and
yet extraordinarily fragile and vulnerable.4
4 At the bottom of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “(Warren was great, and
the spirit could not have been better).”
198.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Pakistan/Saudi Arabia
PARTICIPANTS
State
CIA
Warren Christopher
Frank Carlucci
David Newsom
White House
Matthew Nimetz
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Richard Cooper*
David Aaron
Peter Constable
Henry Owen
George Vest*
Lloyd Cutler
Hedley Donovan
the White House Situation Room. In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “Zbig—C.”

Afghanistan
OSD
NSC
Secretary Harold Brown
Gary Sick
W. Graham Claytor
Thomas Thornton
William Perry*
Robert Blackwill
JCS
*Present for last ten minutes only
General David Jones
General John Pustay
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The meeting was devoted almost entirely to a report by Dr. Brzezin-
ski and Mr. Christopher on their mission to Pakistan and Saudi Arabia.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that the assessment of the situation by both Paki-
stan and Saudi Arabia is graver than ours. They both see Soviet actions
as part of a deliberate strategic challenge to the U.S. and the region.
The Pakistanis see four options facing them:
1. Possible Soviet penetration of their borders.
2. Soviet penetration and retention of some territory.
3. Aggression against Pakistan by India, possibly Soviet-inspired.
4. A coordinated Soviet-Indian attack against Pakistan.
The Pakistanis believe they can handle the first contingency. They
are worried about the second since it might be intended to humiliate
them and they would probably lack the capability to eject Soviet forces.
The third is a major concern, since they are convinced that the Indians
are aggressively minded and in league with the Soviets. The fourth
would be a calamity for them, and only superpower intervention could
stave off a major defeat. (S)
The Pakistani objectives in the talks was to upgrade the 1959 Agree-
ment to the status of a treaty, to increase the aid package about [above]
$400 million, and to keep their options open regarding possible opposi-
tion or accommodation with the USSR. The latter was probably a device
to keep pressure on us on the other two points. In fact, they have taken
a rather firm position—both at the Islamic Conference and in the final
communique of this trip—opposing the Soviets.2 Accommodation does
not appear to be a genuine option for them. The party was impressed
by the evident determination of Pakistan to fight if need be to protect
its independence. After intensive discussions, it was agreed that we
would not present the aid package to Congress until we had sounded
out other powers about the assistance they could provide. It has not
been decided exactly how to proceed with Congressional affirmation
of the 1959 commitment, but the initial reaction of the SCC was that
2 For the text of the joint U.S.-Pakistani statement issued on February 3, see the
Department of State Bulletin, March 1980, p. 65.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
the legislation on the 1959 agreement and waiver of the Symington
Amendment should only be presented to Congress in the context of a
specific aid proposal, rather than being sent up independently. The
Pakistanis were evasive on non-proliferation. In the initial series of
talks, there was some indication that a nuclear explosion might be
imminent, but this was probably a negotiating tactic and was specifi-
cally denied later by Agha Shahi. (S)
Mr. Christopher noted that the Pakistanis appear to be considering
an “Islamic option,” which would include a security umbrella from
the United States but rely primarily on the Islamic states for the bulk
of direct support and cooperation.3 The Pakistanis were very pleased
by the degree of support they received at the Islamic Conference, and
they may find this an attractive alternative to a total reliance on the
U.S. However, they did not seem to have thought this through, and
the exact form of an “Islamic option” remains very unclear at this point.
In general, the SCC thought that such an option could be entirely
consistent with what we are trying to do. The nature of the security
umbrella and the exact role of our cooperation would have to be defined
much more precisely. (S)
In Saudi Arabia, the mission was struck by the change of mood
from a year ago. The Saudi response to our proposals for a closer
security relationship was much more positive. Both the Saudis and the
Pakistanis seem to have reacted very positively to the President’s State
of the Union address and the explicit security commitment which it
announced. The Saudis took an alarmist view of the situation in the
PDRY, including a report of Soviet and Cuban troop exercising there
which we cannot confirm. They asked for more reconnaissance over-
flights. Mr. Carlucci noted that our overflights along the border had
failed to discover any useful information, [2 lines not declassified]. The
Saudis complained about the slowness and inadequacy of the U.S.
response to their requests for advanced military equipment. They out-
lined the levels of aid they were prepared to provide to Pakistan but
asked that these numbers be very tightly held and, if necessary, that
the actual levels be revealed by the Pakistanis rather than us.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
3 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “good.”

Afghanistan
199.
Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 8, 1980
SUBJECT
Record of your Meeting with Lt. Gen Akhtar
The following are the main points that arose in your discussion
with General Akhtar in Islamabad on February 3:
—He explained that he has a very small organization for his Afghan
operation which handles everything involved. In the Pakistan govern-
ment, only President Zia is aware of it.
—To your question about what he is receiving, he gave you a
satisfactory answer, noting the same numbers in categories of support
as you had in your talking paper.
—He is proceeding very cautiously both in technique of transporta-
tion and in quantity of equipment and actions. To prove to you the
results are concrete, not phoney, he promised to send through “other
channels” some photographs.
—You asked about U.S. debriefing of more personnel. He declined
to make them available because it is his policy to allow no one to
return to Afghanistan once he has been exposed to U.S. or Pakistani
intelligence officials. If some are wounded and unable to return, they
could be turned over for a debrief.
—He admitted that some cross-border fire and very small border
clashes have occurred.
—He has pulled together the six political leaders from the Afghan
resistance and told them that support is dependent upon their coopera-
tion and combined planning. They are obliging.
—When you asked what else we can do to help, he asked for
[less than 1 line not declassified] of Soviet formations and movements,
particularly on the Soviet side of the Afghan-Soviet border. You prom-
ised to look into it upon return to the U.S.
—Akhtar also registered a complaint about our request through
Defense channels for the EC–135 flight. Keep it in intelligence channels,
he begged!
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—Finally, Akhtar expressed disappointment that we had not
reached more concrete results in negotiating the modalities of U.S.-
Pakistani aid during your visit.
200.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to Secretary of State Vance and the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 7, 1980
SUBJECT
American Aid to Pakistan Concerning Afghanistan
1. The American offer of US$200 million in military assistance to
Pakistan remains completely unacceptable and personally demeaning
to President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, according to Lt. Gen. Akhtar
Abdul Rahman, Director General of the Pakistan Inter-Services Intelli-
gence Directorate (ISID), who spoke privately about the matter on 5
February 1980. Rahman said that when he talked with National Security
Advisor Brzezinski, Zia had wanted Rahman to convey the message
that the U.S. and Pakistan must keep talking to find a solution to the
problem. Rahman quoted Zia as saying that Zia would do whatever
the U.S. wanted, including an agreement in writing, to confirm the fact
that he has sided with the U.S. against the USSR. Rahman expressed
the view that a way must be found to develop a new package. He said
he was embarrassed at the failure of the Brzezinski talks because he
(Rahman) had urged Zia to look forward to those meetings with the
expectation that there would be some improvement in the US$400
million total package.
2. Rahman commented further that there is a very strong anti-
Pakistan, leftist lobby in Iran which is feeding reports to Pakistan
officials to the effect that Iran is opposed to Pakistan accepting any
U.S. aid. Rahman believes that these reports are encouraged by the
Soviets. The reports are being used nonetheless, said Rahman, by some
Pakistan officials as an argument against acceptance of American aid.
Stansfield Turner2
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
restriction not declassified]. A handwritten note indicates the memorandum was received
in S on February 12.
2 An unknown hand signed for Turner.

Afghanistan
201.
Intelligence Appraisal Prepared in the Department of
Defense1
Washington, February 8, 1980
AFGHANISTAN: THE PARCHAM REGIME (U)
Summary
(S) The Soviets apparently are using the current government to
restart the Afghan revolution in the moderate direction in which they
had hoped both Taraki and Amin would proceed. Despite numerous
conciliatory gestures and the announcement of a “Fatherland Front,”
members of the new government are leftists and Communists. They
do not represent a broad national front and are instead a Soviet puppet
government. Lacking credibility, legitimacy, and popular support, the
government’s authority extends to those areas where it can be backed
primarily with Soviet military power, on which it depends for survival.
(S/[handling restriction not declassified]) Babrak’s regime, installed
by Soviet paratroops on 27 December, has been troubled by serious
instability. Babrak’s Parcham group is engaged in a power struggle to
consolidate its control of the new government and consequently has
not addressed the nation’s problems, which are largely out of control.
His Soviet mentors are displeased with the regime they installed, and
especially with the incessant factional strife. They, however, rather than
Babrak, will decide the outcome of the power struggle, and his tenure
is likely to be brief. The Soviets have little to lose in experimenting
with the government to find a leadership combination that might be
capable of establishing tolerable conditions in the country. Under cur-
rent conditions, their chances to do so seem very slim. In the short
term, the Army officer corps, which is almost the only functioning
national-level organization, is likely to assume a larger political role.
The Soviets, however, have invested heavily in Afghanistan’s future. By
the mid-1980s, thousands of Afghans now in Soviet and East European
schools will begin to return to their country. These students are the
future leaders of a Communist Afghanistan, which will remain under
close Soviet guidance if not outright control.
[Omitted here is the body of the appraisal.]
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 1, Afghan Politics.
Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
202.
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to Soviet Foreign
Minister Gromyko1
Washington, February 8, 1980
Dear Mr. Minister:
I have carefully studied Ambassador Watson’s detailed report of
his January 30 meeting with you and reflected on my discussions with
Ambassador Dobrynin since his return from Moscow.2 Clearly there
is a high risk of miscalculation between us. In order to avoid this
danger, I am writing you privately and personally to make clear our
actions and policies.
As the President stressed in his State of the Union message, the
relationship between our two countries is the most critical factor in
determining whether the world will live in peace or be engulfed in
conflict. A series of events culminating in the Soviet actions in Afghani-
stan have brought us to a critical juncture in our relations. It is vital
that both of us give sober and dispassionate consideration to the impli-
cations of the current situation for each side’s interests and the mainte-
nance of world peace.
Despite the differing political convictions of our two countries, and
because of the inherent competition between us, we have sought to
establish common rules of behavior which would reduce the risk of
conflict, and to search for areas of cooperation which would help pro-
duce a more stable world. I have hoped and believed that this might
be possible. This will not be possible, however, unless both of us
recognize the need to act with restraint in troubled areas across the
globe. As events following your actions in Afghanistan make clear,
unrestrained actions in any one area inevitably have an impact on our
relations as a whole.
Our most serious concern at present centers in Southwest Asia.
The presence of Soviet military forces in Afghanistan creates a new
and more dangerous situation in that region. We do not know your
ultimate aims in sending your forces into Afghanistan. We do know,
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
2 For Watson’s report, see Document 186. Vance’s most recent meeting with
Department noted that Dobrynin had no new official messages to communicate to Vance,
but underscored that the Soviet leadership felt its Afghanistan policy was “justified”
and was “aggrieved” by the negative worldwide reaction to the intervention. (National

Afghanistan
however, that your action has violated the sovereignty of an independ-
ent nation.
The continued Soviet military presence in Afghanistan will inevita-
bly continue to raise concerns about the desire of the Soviet Union to
conquer and subjugate the Afghan people and the further possibility
of Soviet military action against Pakistan and Iran. Both the presence
of Soviet troops in Afghanistan, and the precedent of their use there,
are of serious concern to Pakistan and other states in the region. The
Soviet action in Afghanistan and increasing Soviet military activity
along the northwest border of Iran also generate apprehension about
the possibility of Soviet actions to undermine the independence and
territorial integrity of that country.
It should be evident that the prompt withdrawal of all Soviet
military forces from Afghanistan is necessary to restore stability to this
region. The actions of the United Nations and the Islamabad Conference
of Islamic States have made it clear that most of the peoples of the
world share this conviction.
For our part, we have no interest in seeing a government in Kabul
hostile to the Soviet Union. A return to a neutral, non-aligned but
genuinely independent Afghanistan would be in the interests of all
and we would support such a development.
There are similar dangers in the Middle East and in particular the
Persian Gulf. It is essential you understand that the United States has
vital interests at stake in this region. We are prepared to defend those
interests. But if there is restraint on both sides, as befits our two great
nations, and respect for the independence and territorial integrity of
the states in the region, our respective interests need not lead to confron-
tation. In this connection, I must note that the substantial Soviet/Cuban
presence in the PDRY is a matter of grave concern to us and perhaps
we should search for ways whereby we could reduce the possibility
of confrontation.
The US has made clear that it supports the independence, unity,
and territorial integrity of non-aligned Yugoslavia. In my discussion
with Ambassador Dobrynin, he indicated that the Soviet Union does
also. We welcome this position. We and our allies have no intention
of interfering in Yugoslavia’s internal affairs and would view any effort
to weaken Yugoslavia’s internal cohesion or undermine its independent
foreign policy with gravest concern, as we understand you would.
In his State of the Union message, the President gave particular
emphasis to the importance of SALT in the prevention of nuclear war.
It is the President’s intention to press for the ratification of SALT II at
the earliest moment that the political climate permits. In the meantime,
as we have said privately and publicly, we believe that observing the
mutual constraints imposed by the terms of the SALT I and SALT II

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
treaties will be in the best interests of both our countries and will help
to preserve world peace.
Mr. Minister, I look forward to any response you may wish to
make on these matters and any clarification you may care to provide.
Sincerely yours,
Cyrus Vance
203.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
567. Subject: The Afghan Situation as of February 9.
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Begin summary: We have some strong indications that fierce
infighting is taking place within the ruling party’s inner circles. It seems
quite clear that there is little trust between the party’s Parcham and
Khalqi factions. The reported intra-party squabbles may well have
resulted in the wounding by gunshot of one or more Cabinet members
this past week, including the regime’s number two man, Vice President
Keshtmand. There is an unconfirmed report that the Parcham faction
may be preparing to go underground if worse comes to worst. There
are also indications that disaffection is spreading further in the Afghan
military. Afghanistan’s foreign trade suffered another blow when
Indian banks reported they required full deposit coverage for letters
of credit. End summary.
3. The mood in Kabul: Some of our Afghan sources tell us that
there is a growing expectation here that the rebel Muslim forces will
soon move on Kabul. One such source, who is believed to have good
contacts in People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) circles,
says that some of his PDPA Parcham faction contacts claim that Presi-
dent Babrak Karmal is fearful that Gulbaddin Hekmatyar’s Muslim
forces will sooner or later oust him. Some of the source’s other contacts
say that the Muslim Brotherhood (Ikhwan-ul-Muslimeen), with which
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
to New Delhi. Also sent for information to Islamabad, London, Moscow, CINCPAC
for POLAD, and USICA. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House
Situation Room.

Afghanistan
Gulbaddin is reportedly closely associated, is gaining many adherents
in Kabul, even to the point that the Brotherhood is “almost openly”
issuing membership cards to those who wish to join this anti-Commu-
nist, pro-Islamic movement. (N.B. It will be recalled that the Brother-
hood was a favorite bête noire of the Taraki-Amin era when the DRA
media referred to it as the Ikhwan-ush-shayateen—Brotherhood of
the devils.)
4. Meanwhile, adherents of Karmal’s Parcham faction and the Tar-
aki-Amin Khalqi factions continue to feud among themselves, accord-
ing to reports from Afghan sources having contacts with both factions.
A source with Parchamist connections says that a fierce debate between
Parchamists and Khalqis took place this past week when the dominant
Parcham faction reportedly bowed to pressure from many of its rank
and file who demanded Vice President and Deputy Prime Minister
Sarwari’s removal from the government. The Parcham leadership
decided to send Sarwari off to genteel exile as an Ambassador (just as
Taraki and Amin had done to several Parcham leaders, including Kar-
mal, in the summer of 1978). The Khalqis, however, according to the
source, resisted in having Sarwari (linked to the Taraki sub-faction of
the Khalqis) removed from the regime’s leadership circles since that
would reduce Khalqi representation there. The debate reportedly
turned to shooting on Wednesday or Thursday, with Keshtmand and
some others falling victims of gunshots. Source was uncertain that
Defense Minister Rafie was among the other gunshot victims. (Kabul
Radio announced that Keshtmand left for the USSR on Feb. 7 owing
to illness).
5. (Comment: Whether or not the foregoing report is true in all of
its essentials, we believe that serious intra-PDPA strife is not only going
on, but that it is logical to expect that it would take place sooner or
later. There are simply too many old scores that various Khalqis and
Parchamists have to settle with one another—the Soviet role in pushing
for a united front notwithstanding.)
6. A Parchamist informant has provided yet another indication of
intra-PDPA differences. He claimed that the PDPA’s Central Commit-
tee has instructed that all party offices, down to the ward level, turn
in their files on Parchamists. The files reportedly include each party
member’s picture, description and other identifying data. The infor-
mant said that the Central Committee is compiling a consolidated
list of all Parchamists, but is destroying their individual files. The
Committee is not doing the same for Khalqi members’ files, the infor-
mant said. (Comment: If this report is true—and it has not been substan-
tiated—it might suggest that the Parchamists are preparing to go under-
ground, if necessary, and let the Khalqis bear the wrath of the Muslim
rebels should the latter gain the upper hand. It should be noted, how-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ever, that we have seen no convincing evidence that the PDPA’s rule
in Kabul is about very much in control here and in key provincial areas.
We have heard—the bickering, feuding and general incompetence that
the present divided PDPA leadership is manifesting.
7. Further indications of disaffection in the Afghan Army: Accord-
ing to an Afghan source with relatives in the military, the commander
of the Afghan unit at Karga (just outside Kabul) addressed officers and
noncommissioned officers on February 6 and admonished them to
support the “new phase” of the great Saur revolution. The commander
praised Babrak Karmal’s leadership and expressed confidence that the
Soviet military, who he said were defending the revolution against
foreign imperialist intrigues, would soon leave. A sergeant reportedly
spoke up and asked the commander what he really believed about
the political situation here since he had earlier praised Taraki and
condemned Karmal, then praised Amin and condemned Taraki, and
he now praised Karmal and Taraki. The meeting is said to have broken
up immediately thereafter, with many officers congratulating the ser-
geant for voicing a concern common to all. As of yesterday, the sergeant
has not yet been disciplined, source said.
8. On the economic scene, Afghanistan’s foreign trade has suffered
another blow. According to a local banking source, Indian banks have
joined Japanese and U.S. banks in requiring a 100 percent deposit
before issuing letters of credit to finance Afghan imports or exports.
(Comment: This will particularly hurt dried fruit exports, which are
Afghanistan’s main foreign exchange earner, since most exporters
cannot afford such deposits.)
Amstutz

Afghanistan
204.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, February 11, 1980
2316. Subj: February 9 Meeting With Korniyenko: Afghanistan,
Iran, Aeroflot Flights. Refs: (A) Moscow 2279, (B) State 35391, (C) State
1. (S—Entire text.)
2. Reftel A summarized the highlights of my meeting with First
Deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko on the afternoon of February 9.
There follows for the record a fuller account of the meeting.
Afghanistan
3. After Korniyenko had read the Secretary’s letter to Gromyko
(Reftel B), he said that while I of course did not expect him to give an
immediate response he would like to make two or three points.3 He
began with Afghanistan, stating that, as Gromyko had already told me
and as the Soviets had told us repeatedly both through Dobrynin and
publicly, there was only one reason for their having sent troops to
Afghanistan, at the request of that government—to repel external
aggression. Unfortunately, that reason continued.
4. He said that aggression as defined by the United Nations—
and our two countries had participated actively in developing that
definition—was not necessarily limited to the violation of the borders
of one state by the armed forces of another. That which had happened
in Afghanistan, and unfortunately was still happening on an even
larger scale—the introduction from the territory of Pakistan of weapons
and armed units, not small units but large, armed units—was very real
aggression. And it was well known, he added, that the U.S. had a very
direct relationship to that aggression. To try, therefore, to make it
appear that the U.S. did not understand why the Soviets had sent their
troops in and their objective was simply not serious. Their sole purpose
was to assist Afghanistan in repelling external aggression. “We have
frequently stated this and I can again firmly state it today.”
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Moscow (Ref C) are all dated February 9. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
N800003–0172, respectively)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
5. For that reason, Korniyenko went on, all inventions with regard
to plans or designs on the part of the Soviet Union vis-à-vis Pakistan
or Iran, or concerning a movement to warm seas, were “absolute non-
sense.” If the aggression stopped, if the armed incursions into Afghani-
stan from the territory of Pakistan “or any other territory” stopped,
the necessity for the presence of Soviet troops in Afghanistan would
cease. But only in that case—i.e., when the discontinuance of the aggres-
sion was guaranteed—would Soviet troops be withdrawn, and not
before.
6. Korniyenko said that he must categorically reject the statement
in the Secretary’s letter concerning the violation of Afghan sovereignty
by the Soviet Union. The right to appeal to another government for
help was one of the elemental attributes of sovereignty. The Afghan
Government could do so even in the absence of the UN Charter or the
bilateral Afghan-Soviet treaty; its right to do so was even clearer, given
the reaffirmation in the UN Charter of the inalienable right to individual
and collective self-defense. And the bilateral treaty meant that the
Soviet Union had not only the right but a direct obligation to afford
assistance at the request of the Afghan Government. Thus, he must
repeat that any assertion that the actions of the Soviet Union violated
Afghan sovereignty was absolutely unacceptable, since it absolutely
did not correspond to reality.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Watson

Afghanistan
205.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
China/Afghanistan/Pakistan
SUBJECT
Chinese Disappointment Over Pakistani Reluctance To Coordinate With China
on Aid to Afghan Rebels [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[2½ lines not declassified]
Afghanistan situation and the late January visit to Pakistan of Chinese
Foreign Minister Huang Hua, [less than 1 line not declassified] stated that
his government had been disappointed by aspects of Huang’s talks
with the Pakistanis. Although the Chinese have established direct con-
tact with Afghan rebel leaders in order to develop some idea of the
capabilities and actual needs of the rebels in terms of arms, equipment
and other logistical support, the Pakistan Government is not being
cooperative regarding timely coordination of a joint position on the
level and implementation of such aid and support to the Afghan rebels.
Pakistan indicated it wished to consider the matter further, and the
Chinese ascribe the Pakistani reluctance to their concern that meaning-
ful support to the Afghan rebels could have negative consequences for
Pakistan with regard to possible Soviet actions on the border.
declassified] Government was attempting to move Pakistan speedily on
this issue because the Chinese believe it is essential that the Soviets be
engaged militarily in Afghanistan in a way which will inflict personnel
losses the Soviets will be unwilling to sustain for both foreign and
domestic policy reasons. Thus, in the Chinese view, the Afghan rebels
must be provided the training and means to render the invasion of
Afghanistan costly to the Soviet Union.
3. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
declassified]
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, PRC Support for
Insurgents. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
206.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, February 12, 1980
COUNTRY
Iran/Afghanistan/USSR
SUBJECT
Comments by President Bani-Sadr on Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan and on
Iranian Support for Afghan Rebels [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[2½ lines not declassified]
1. In early February 1980, Iranian President-elect Abdulhassan
Bani-Sadr stated in a private conversation that he opposed the Soviet
intervention in Afghanistan, and that he considered an armed Soviet
presence there a threat to the security of Iran. Bani-Sadr said that if
the Soviets invaded Iran, Iran would fight them with all the means at
her disposal. However, Bani-Sadr added, he expected Afghani opposi-
tion to the Soviet presence in Afghanistan to increase and to fully
occupy the efforts of the Soviets.
2. Bani-Sadr said that because of current internal turmoil, and
because of the Iranian-American confrontation, Iran could not afford
to antagonize the Soviets. Nevertheless, Bani-Sadr confided, Iran would
give arms and funds to the Afghani rebels, who had recently formed
a united opposition to the Soviets. Bani-Sadr added that Iran would
also undertake military training of Afghani rebels. Bani-Sadr added
that Saudi Arabia was also aiding the Afghani rebels, primarily by
sending them funds through Pakistan. (Source comment: Bani-Sadr
did not elaborate on Iranian plans to assist the rebels, nor did he
mention the source of his information concerning Saudi aid.)
3. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
Services, Job 97S00360R, Intelligence Document
(3150130080–3150299980). Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].

Afghanistan
207.
Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
Department of State1
3468. Subject: (S) Afghanistan: Request For Arms for Insurgents.
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Salim Azzam, head of the London-based Islamic Conference of
Europe, and still carried as a Saudi diplomat on the British diplomatic
list, asked EmbOff to call February 14.
3. Azzam had just returned from Pakistan where he claimed to have
been personally responsible for the formation of the United Islamic
Liberation Front of Afghanistan. He said that he had himself announced
the Front’s formation to the press and recalled earlier conversations
with EmbOff in which he had said he had been working toward getting
the various groups to agree to a charter.2
4. Azzam claimed also that he had been responsible for having the
Afghans accepted as observers at the Islamic Conference where he had
personally assisted them in meeting with important Arab Foreign
Ministers.
5. Asked if he thought the Front would hold together, Azzam
says that he believes it will because money will be supplied not to
independent groups but only to the umbrella organization. This he
had personally made clear to the leaders when he delivered to them
“donations” from “private individuals” in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and
the UAE.
6. Since he has now come to know the various leaders quite well,
Azzam said, he has become certain of their real needs. No weapons,
he insisted, have been delivered to them from the Peninsula, and they
have expressed an urgent need for particular items:
—anti-tank weapons;
—anti-aircraft weapons for use in shooting down Soviet helicopters
from the “sides of deep mountain valleys” as the pilots drop down for
low-level reconnaissance and attack;
—small arms ammunition.
7. In summary, Azzam said, it is important to insure that the Soviet
stay in Afghanistan is made as uncomfortable as possible; the Afghans
Secret; Nodis.
2 Azzam’s activities in Pakistan were reported by James Sterba. See “Moslem Meet-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
want to fight; the new United Front will hold together as long as money
and arms are denied to its constituent parts; all that is needed are
weapons. Azzam asked that this message be passed to Washington for
urgent consideration, implying that he would be the obvious channel
for communication between the USG and the Front.
8. EmbOff thanked Azzam for his views but emphasized that any
consideration which the Western alliance might give to his suggestion
would be complicated by obvious factors, not the least of them being
the attitude of the Pakistan Government. Azzam said he had been
assured by senior officials in the GOP (he said he had talked to Zia,
but did not say he spoke to him on this subject) that Pakistan would
welcome arms shipments for the Afghans although Zia would, of
course, continue to deny in public that any arms had in fact been
delivered. EmbOff reiterated that while we appreciate Azzam’s efforts
to offer us useful advice, the USG was not in the business of clandestine
arms supply. EmbOff did, however, promise to convey Azzam’s views
to Washington.
9. Comment: Azzam is believed in London to have a Muslim Broth-
erhood background and the money for his Islamic Council is said to
come from his relation by marriage to Muhammed bin Faysal.3 He has
in the last year sponsored several expensive conferences in London on
Islamic issues (from which the Egyptian Embassy has routinely been
excluded) ranging from the recent Jerusalem seminar to an early 1979
effort on behalf of Khomeini. We think he is an ambitious man who
reflects Saudi foreign policy concerns—thus he is stridently anti-Camp
David and was quick to denounce the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
in public and in letters to Mrs. Thatcher and President Carter.4 We are
obviously unable to judge what if any links he has developed with the
various Afghan groups, but judging by his derogatory comments about
Gailani, he does not enjoy a good relationship with the latter. Our
guess is that Azzam knows he will gain important points with SAG if
he can attain U.S. assistance for the new Afghan Front and he will
hope for some kind of answer to his presentation to us.
10. Suggest Department repeat to Jidda and to Islamabad and
Peshawar.
Streator
3 An apparent reference to the Saudi Prince.
4 Not found.

Afghanistan
208.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Defense for
Policy (Komer) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, February 14, 1980
My reaction to Tuesday SCC meeting is that in light of Pak response
to Brzezinski mission, we should lay off chasing the Pakistanis.2 Two
broad alternative explanations of Pak conduct are: (1) they genuinely
believe it better to rely on Islamic/PRC ties and not get too close to
US; or (2) they are playing us to get more aid. Probably elements of
both are involved. In either case, why not sit back a while and see if
they come to us?
Though some reports (probably planted) talk about a third Pak
option of “accommodation” with the USSR, I’d heavily discount this.
The Paks have played this card before and found Moscow much more
interested in 650 million Indians than in 75 million Paks (as in analogous
Ethiopia/Somalia case). Moreover, Pak Army wouldn’t stand for it,
and Chinese would be affronted. So basically Paks have nowhere else
to go but in our direction, since neither China nor Islamic world can
offer them enough security against USSR plus India.
Nor do I see much early military threat to Pakistan. By reaffirming
the 1959 “commitment” we have already clearly told the USSR that
Pakistan is under our security umbrella. This will serve as a deterrent.
In any case, a direct Soviet push into Pakistan seems unlikely (as
opposed to hot pursuit across the border or subversion in Baluchistan
and/or Pathan areas—don’t forget Kabul’s favorite “Pushtoonistan”
theme). Direct aggression (or even large scale military action on the
borders) would further harden Islamic and other opinion against the
USSR, confirm the US position about Soviet expansionism, and really
worry India. Much better for Moscow to play a subtler game exploiting
Pak minority problems, economic instability and Zia’s fragile politi-
cal base.
If above is broadly correct, then a lot of heavy military equipment
should not be high on our priority list of what Paks need. A guaranteed
supply of Islamic oil at discount prices would be more immediately
desirable—and should perhaps be made part of our economic aid
and Wolfowitz.
2 The summary of conclusions of the February 12 SCC meeting is in the Carter
12/80, Iran, Afghanistan & Pakistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
consortium package). So too would be light internal security type equip-
ment, not tanks and advanced aircraft.
R.W. Komer3
3 Komer initialed “RWK” above his typed signature.
209.
Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 15, 1980
SUBJECT
India/Soviet
In an interesting and very frank discussion with Mr. Nathan of the
Indian Embassy, he made the following points:
—Although the Gromyko visit to New Delhi was not the “disaster”
it was reported to be in the Western media, he said he could assure
me that what Gromyko heard from Mrs. Gandhi was the strongest
opposition to the continued presence of Soviet troops in Afghanistan
that he was likely to hear from any country outside the U.S.2 The Indian
line, reportedly, was that they were not prepared to pass judgment on
the Soviet motives in sending troops into Afghanistan in the first place,
but that they cared very deeply about their continued presence there
and the dangers which this posed to Indian security. The Soviets were
urged to pull back their forces to about the 6,000–10,000-man presence
they had prior to the invasion.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
and Thornton. “ZB has seen” is stamped in the upper right corner of the memorandum.
“disaster” is likely a reference to several news stories that reported India’s “failure” to
convince the Soviet Union to withdraw its military forces from Afghanistan. See, for
example, Tyler Marshall, “India Apparently Fails to Sway Soviets on Afghanistan Pull-

Afghanistan
—The Indians have made a comparable approach to Karmal via a
special emissary who had known him in the past. Nathan suspected
that Karmal’s subsequent statement that there were only 10,000 Soviet
troops in Afghanistan reflected his understanding that that would be
a more acceptable level of Soviet force presence.
—In a very delicate reference to the Post story about support for
the Afghan resistance, he noted that one of the dangers of the Soviet
presence was the inevitable temptation to go after rebel sanctuaries.3
That would mean a widening of the war and raise additional fears
in India.
—If the Soviets do cross the border, the loudest voice of concern
and opposition will be the Indians who do not want to see the Pakistani
buffer removed. In their view, however, it is best not to tempt fate
by mounting a major and organized resistance effort from Pakistan
which will perpetuate the Soviet presence in the name of self-de-
fense and which will eventually draw them into a wider conflict in the
Subcontinent. (S)
3 A likely reference to Michael Getler, “U.S. Reportedly is Supplying Weapons to
news stories, telegram 1487 from Islamabad, February 19, summarized a conversation
between Hummel and Shahi, during which Shahi conveyed Zia’s “very deep concern
about these evident leaks,” which raised his concern about whether Pakistan “can confide
in U.S. officials and leaders and take their word in return for face value.” (Carter Library,
In a memorandum to Vance and Brzezinski, February 27, Turner relayed similar com-
ments made by Lieutenant General Akhtar, who was instructed by Zia to convey the
following message regarding the Afghan covert action program: “President Zia and I
are greatly incensed at leaks by U.S. officials about support to Afghan tribesmen. Our
future cooperation will be jeopardized if there are similar leaks in the future. Some
advisors close to General Zia have suggested that the U.S. Government has done this
deliberately to turn Moscow completely against Pakistan and force Pakistan to accept
U.S. aid on U.S. terms. I find it difficult to believe after recent talks with Dr. Brzezinski
that this is possible. However, my own position and credibility are being undermined
by such leaks and my efforts to improve U.S.-Pakistani relations cannot succeed under
such circumstances. President Zia and I request your understanding and cooperation
to prevent any further leaks.” (Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
210.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
2551. Subj: Ambassador’s Meeting With Pakistani Ambassador
Yaqub Khan. Ref: (A) State 39978.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. I had a lengthy meeting with Pakistani Ambassador Yaqub Khan
on February 15, following his return from Washington and Islamabad.
After commenting favorably on the discussions between Pakistani Pres-
ident Zia ul-Haq and Brzezinski and Christopher, Khan told me in
confidence that Zia would probably call him back to Pakistan from his
post in Moscow in the next two to three months to assume a post in
the government in Islamabad (strictly protect his confidence).3 The
most important part of Khan’s remarks was his suggestion that the
key to the situation in Afghanistan was to have some influential and
neutral intermediary talk with the Soviets to get them to accept some
idea of an international commission of neutral nations to guarantee
Afghanistan’s border, which step should enable the Soviets to with-
draw their troops from Afghanistan. The main points of our conversa-
tion follow:
3. In reference to the Afghan refugee presence in Pakistan, Khan
said that this “sanctuary” was basically limited to providing shelter
for the refugees and that the refugees were receiving modest amounts
of money to sustain themselves. There is no organized military effort
and no training. If Pakistan did more than this there would be major
consequences. The Soviets, he said, know what we and the U.S. are
doing in this respect, but we do [not?] “connive.” The Soviets claim
that the mainstay of the insurgency in Afghanistan comes from the
“sanctuary” and that Pakistan is the focal point of this activity and not
merely a subsidiary to the rebellion. In fact, however, only 20 percent
of the insurgents in Afghanistan could ever reach the “sanctuary” in
Pakistan. Eighty percent of the Afghanistan insurgency is internal and
it can not be effectively helped by the “sanctuary.” If the Soviets actually
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East,
that was received in the White House Situation Room.
Ambassador Yaqub participated in the discussions in Islamabad with Christopher and
Brzezinski, directed the Embassy to approach Yaqub informally to get his views on those
3 Khan stayed on as Pakistani Ambassador to the Soviet Union through September
1980, after which he was assigned as Ambassador to France.

Afghanistan
believe what they claim, i.e., that the “sanctuary” is a major part of the
problem, then it would follow that they must destroy the “sanctuary”
in Pakistan and would have to attack Pakistan. Khan thinks the Soviets
have a more realistic understanding of the situation, however, and
therefore considers this a remote contingency.
4. Khan thought the Soviets had three options in Afghanistan. One
would be to help Babrak Karmal consolidate his position. The second
would be to change leaders. The third would be to continue their
military build up in Afghanistan to control the country. Khan thinks
that the Soviets would like to follow the second option; namely, to put
in the best moderate leaders acceptable to the tribesmen and form a
government which could manage these people and eventually establish
a political base with grassroots support in the country. Under these
circumstances, if there was some proposal put forward by a party
acceptable to the Soviets (Khan specified that it could not be the U.S.)
for an international commission which would guarantee that there
would be no threat to the Soviet Union’s southern border, then the
Soviets could withdraw their troops from Afghanistan. Khan said that
this course was not unknown in Soviet history and that they have
withdrawn militarily, while assuring the establishment of a regime
friendly to them.
5. Khan commented that the Soviets have seriously miscalculated
the local Afghanistan situation. Daoud was removed from the top and
there was no grassroots support for the regimes which followed. The
situation in Afghanistan was quite different than that which prevailed
in Iran where the Shah was hated and where he did not have deep
grassroots support. In contrast, the revolution in Afghanistan is stuck
in the mud. Tribal resistance can only be broken by working with
the tribes themselves. Nevertheless, the Soviets decided to go into
Afghanistan, encouraged by the wave of anti-American opinion in
neighboring Iran, the shakiness of Saudis and the burning of the Ameri-
can Embassy in Pakistan. All of these factors gave the Soviets the feeling
that they could pull it off. They also seriously miscalculated President
Carter and felt that the liberal foreign policy establishment in the United
States would not act, especially in order to avoid a double crisis situa-
tion. The Soviets were surprised by President Carter’s sharp turn in
foreign policy. They, also, seriously miscalculated the international
condemnation of their invasion of Afghanistan. For the past 100 years
there has been no real threat from Afghanistan. Now, the Soviets have
stirred up a hornets nest. They have accelerated events that they dread.
For example, closer relations between U.S. and China and Japan, respec-
tively. When the hostage situation in Iran is settled and there is an
improvement in Iranian/U.S. relations, the Soviets will be in an even
worse situation. In sum, the Soviet attack on Afghanistan has coalesced
many nations behind the U.S.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
6. In Khan’s view, the key to the situation in Afghanistan is for
someone to try to talk with the Soviets and to get them to accept
some idea of establishing a commission of neutral nations to guarantee
Afghanistan’s borders so that the Soviets can withdraw and give them
time to build up a stable regime in Afghanistan with which the Soviets
can live. The establishment of such a commission would allow the
Soviets to save face. The problem here is their belief that revolutionary
processes are irreversible, which makes it difficult for them to back
out. Khan said “We ought to line up some friend acceptable to the
Soviets to help them save their face and pride.”
7. It is completely coincidental, but of interest, that immediately
after my meeting with Khan, I had a long scheduled meeting with
FRG Ambassador Wieck who also floated the idea of an international
commission. Wieck, speaking personally, proposed that the U.S. try to
structure a commission composed of Third World countries to arrange
a “neutral policy” for Afghanistan. Wieck was deviously thinking out
loud and indicated that what was really needed was a neutralist scheme
for the whole region involving Iran, Pakistan, Afghanistan and, possi-
bly, India and other states. Perhaps, he suggested, this would be a very
good role for Indira Gandhi to play. In any case, any approach, Wieck
suggested, should have Indira Gandhi’s support so that we will not
be viewed as the perpetrators of the plan. Wieck also referred to Soviet
difficulties in Afghanistan. Wieck mentioned that the Soviet Ambassa-
dor to the United Kingdom told a group of British Parliamentarians
that the Soviets would withdraw, if the West would guarantee non
interference in Afghanistan.
Watson

Afghanistan
211.
Translation of a Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister
Gromyko to Secretary of State Vance1
Moscow, February 16, 1980
Dear Mr. Secretary,
Having read your letter of February 8 I would like to tell you
frankly the following.2
One could only welcome the recognition in the letter of the crucial
importance of relations between our countries for the general world
situation and the apparent desire to search for ways of overcoming
the serious situation prevailing now in these relations.
However, the attempt to evade consideration of the real causes
complicating the international situation, efforts to reduce the whole
matter to the recent developments in Afghanistan depicted, for that
matter, in a completely distorted light, and the raising of various kinds
of other far-fetched questions—all this in no way demonstrates a real
intention to rectify the current situation.
Indeed, it is impossible, without sinning against the truth, to dis-
pute the fact that the exacerbation of the international situation by no
means began at the end of last December, but rather much earlier.
We also pointed out to the US side the reasons for this exacerbation
much earlier.
Among these is the decision on deployment in the US of the MX
mobile ICBM system which was made almost immediately after the
SALT II Treaty was signed in Vienna.
There is also the artificially created “mini-crisis” on the question
of a “Soviet brigade” in Cuba.
There is also the urgent establishment of the “Rapid Deployment
Force” designed for armed intervention in various parts of the world.
There is the long-range program of permanent defense spending
increases and arms build-up imposed by the US on its NATO allies.
Finally, there is the decision to deploy new US missiles on the soil
of Western Europe, which creates a serious threat to the security of
the USSR and its allies.
And what has become of the SALT II Treaty? Incidentally, in taking
the decision to develop and deploy MX missiles the US Government
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
2 See Document 202.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
stated that this decision would promote the ratification of SALT II.
Without addressing now the substance of the MX missile question—
which is a subject for a special discussion—one cannot fail to observe
that in fact the decision on the MX missile is being implemented while
the SALT II Treaty has not been ratified. In pressing its NATO allies
to agree to the deployment on their soil of new American missiles, the
US was also saying that this would facilitate the ratification of the
SALT II Treaty. Even putting aside, once again, the question of the
invalidity of such linkage, the picture remains the same: the decision
on the deployment of new missiles in Western Europe has been adopted
and is being implemented, but the Treaty has not been ratified.
Try to see all this through our eyes. Can these facts be seen in any
way other than as a departure by the US from the principle of equality
and equal security which was reconfirmed in Vienna, as evidence of
a policy line now pursued by the US to break out of the existing military
and strategic parity between the USSR and the US, to rush ahead in
an effort to gain military superiority for itself?
No references to events in Afghanistan can conceal this turn in US
policy—a turn from detente to a new aggravation of international
tensions, to a new round of the arms race.
In your letter you mention the need for our two states to show
restraint and moderation in international affairs and in relations with
each other. Well, the thought itself is correct. We, on our part, are also
in favor of this. It is important, however, for the United States also to
adhere to such a course in international affairs and not treat them with
such astonishing light-mindedness as it now does.
As for Afghanistan, our position on this question has been set forth
more than once with utmost clarity, specifically as you know in the
answers by L.I. Brezhnev to the questions of the Pravda correspondent
as well as in our contacts with the US side.3
Facts do not cease to be facts because the US side does not want
to admit that acts of aggression against Afghanistan have been and
continue to be committed from the territory of Pakistan. Also indisputa-
ble is the fact that in providing assistance to Afghanistan in repelling
external aggression, the USSR has acted in full accordance with the
UN Charter and the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between
the USSR and the DRA.
We have also spoken on more than one occasion as to when and
under what circumstances the withdrawal of Soviet troops from
Afghanistan will be carried out. I would only like to stress that if the
US really wanted this to occur sooner, it could, of course, take measures

Afghanistan
to stop the aggression against Afghanistan. So far, the practical actions
of the United States go exactly in the opposite direction: everything
is being done to expand armed incursions into the territory of
Afghanistan.
You say in your letter that the US has no interest in seeing a
government in Kabul hostile to the Soviet Union. In fact, however, the
United States is exerting every effort toward uniting counterrevolution-
ary Afghan groups under foreign auspices and even toward the virtual
establishment of an illegal Afghan “government in exile” in the territory
of Pakistan.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
So, as you see, there is nothing we must justify before the United
States, but the list of complaints which we have the right to present
to the US happens to be a rather long and impressive one.
Of course, the serious damage to the international situation and
Soviet-US relations already inflicted by the actions of the United States
can hardly pass without a trace. But it is alien to us to be guided by
emotions in our policies. We would be prepared, if the United States
is also willing, to seek opportunities to return to the path of cooperation
between our two countries and with other states for the sake of improv-
ing the international situation, strengthening peace and universal
security.
If, as your letter says, Soviet-US relations are now at a “critical
juncture,” then the choice of which way to proceed is up to the US.
Our choice is clear. We would like to hope that the US will also make
the only sensible choice—in favor of detente and peaceful coexistence.
I hope, Mr. Secretary, that you will understand correctly the
motives by which I was impelled in speaking in such a frank manner.
We would welcome any constructive considerations and ideas in sup-
port of detente in Soviet-American relations which you might offer on
your part.
Sincerely yours,
A. Gromyko

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
212.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghanistan—What Next?
Background
One of our problems in dealing with Afghanistan is that we haven’t
really expected a satisfactory outcome—i.e., a Soviet withdrawal. Our
secondary objective—making the Soviets pay for their actions—is of
considerable value but is certainly not a long-term policy goal. Given
the Pakistani reluctance to be very involved with us (and the Chinese),
I am concerned that, in some regards at least, we may find that we
cannot extract a maximum price from the Soviets. The press leaks will
make the Paks even less amenable and may, on their own, undercut
our position in general. (S)
From reading the intelligence reporting, I gather that the Soviets
are finding the going a lot tougher than they expected. They probably
realize that they are in for a long and costly operation but are no doubt
determined to do whatever is necessary to secure their border. I have
little doubt that they can succeed ultimately. (S)
There is a lot of diplomatic activity going on. The Soviets are
dropping hints about willingness to come to a compromise solution.
The British are talking about an “Austrian” solution. The President’s
comment about a Muslim occupation force has stirred interest.2 Jaya-
wardene is trying to do something. Most important, perhaps, is the
tough line that India is taking in private while still keeping its options
open in public. (S)
Evaluation
This all may or may not provide us with something more than
diplomatic and propaganda maneuvering space. I continue to believe
that all alternatives are going to founder on the Soviet desire to have
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
2 In a news conference on February 13, Carter called for Soviet withdrawal from
Afghanistan and a Soviet commitment not to invade other countries, and suggested the
use of a peacekeeping force comprised of Muslim troops during the transition period
between Soviet withdrawal and the establishment of a neutral Afghan Government.

Afghanistan
absolute security along its borders. But I am no longer as convinced
as I have been in the past. They may be looking for a way out. (S)
The odds are, also, that initiatives by the Sri Lankans, Indians, etc.,
are not going to get off the ground. None of these countries has a very
good track record for effective diplomatic work. The Indo-Pakistani
rivalry is also a barrier. But neither of these considerations is absolute.
India and the other regional states may just be sufficiently disturbed
that they could put something together. (S)
RECOMMENDATION
Even if the well is probably dry, I think we should put the bucket
down. It won’t cost much, and we could just possibly find something
there. Specifically:
—We should have an intelligence assessment of how much the
Soviets are paying for their action and what the chances are that they
would settle for some sort of alternative outcome. We should evaluate
the Soviet feelers that have been put out.
—We should seriously assess the possibility that the Indians (or
somebody else) might be able to play an effective intermediary role.
And we should develop an idea of what that role might be and how
we should stimulate or otherwise relate to it. (E.g., might the President
urge Mrs. Gandhi to take leadership; if so, what would we be willing
to concede?)
—We should consider what kind of alternate arrangements would
be acceptable to us and staff them out carefully. (E.g., the idea of a
Muslim peace-keeping force has its virtues, but it is not likely to be
attractive to India—which is inevitably going to be a principal actor.) (S)
I suggest that you bring this complex of questions up at the Tuesday
SCC and ask that a working group of State, CIA, NSC and, if necessary,
DOD, be established to come up with answers on an urgent basis.3 (C)
Alternatively, I could draft a tasking memo, but I think it is better
to get the matter discussed in the SCC and launched from there. (C)
I am attaching a cable from Moscow, quoting the Pakistani ambas-
sador, that you should read.4 (S)
3 No record of a February 19 SCC meeting was found. The SCC did meet on February
22. The summary of conclusions of the meeting is in the Carter Library, National Security
Persian Gulf. See also Document 214.
4 Attached; printed as Document 210.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
213.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, February 16, 1980
USSR-AFGHANISTAN: Situation report
The Soviets have stepped up their military operations in northern and
eastern Afghanistan over the past week, but they have been unable to stem
the crumbling of the Afghan Army and continue to have difficulty maintaining
security in Afghan cities.
Soviet ground forces, led by new field commanders appointed last weekend
and supported by fighter-bombers and helicopter gunships, are conducting
sweeps in several provinces. The operations appear to be most intensive in
Baghlan Province. The Soviets have also moved reinforcements, including
tanks and helicopter gunships, into Jalalabad and have launched counterinsur-
gency operations in the area. They have bombed rebel positions in several
provinces surrounding Jalalabad.
The Afghan Army, meanwhile, has continued to deteriorate, and there is
growing evidence that the Soviets no longer trust the Afghans. Soviet and
Afghan units have clashed recently near Kabul, Jalalabad, Nahrin, and other
towns (your Brief of Thursday). The Afghan division stationed in Paktia
Province has suffered heavy desertions, refused to fight, and may be negotiating
to join the resistance.
The continued unraveling of the Afghan Army, together with popular
antipathy toward the Soviets, has resulted in a serious breakdown in security
in several cities. The situation in Jalalabad reportedly has reached crisis propor-
tions; insurgents control much of the city and also control a checkpoint on
the highway linking Jalalabad and Kabul. In Qandahar, a recent Afghan
military message said that the city was “lost to the Muslims” and could be
secured only by a large-scale attack. Soviet reinforcements have taken up
positions on the outskirts of Qandahar but have made no attempt to secure
the city. Civil unrest has also been reported in Herat.
The security situation in Kabul has also deteriorated. Soviet soldiers
have stepped up their patrols and are enforcing a longer curfew. Many
residents believe the Soviets are looting shops during the curfew. The
police force in the city appears to have disintegrated, and students at
Kabul University recently were arrested because they were planning
to demonstrate against the Soviets and the Afghan Government. [4
lines not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—February 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only.
The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The
article printed here was found in this form.

Afghanistan
214.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Chairman of the Special Coordination Committee1
Washington, February 21, 1980
SUBJECT
Additional Funding for Afghanistan Covert Action Program (S/[handling
restriction not declassified])
1. The Afghanistan Covert Action Program began with a Presiden-
tial Finding dated 3 July 1979 which authorized humanitarian aid to
the insurgents.2 The SCC authorized [amount not declassified] in support
of this program. A second Finding on 7 November expanded the pro-
gram by authorizing procurement advice and communications equip-
ment. The SCC authorized [amount not declassified] for this phase of the
program. Following the Soviet invasion, a third Presidential Finding
dated 28 December expanded the program further by authorizing the
provision of lethal military equipment to the insurgents.3 The SCC
authorized an additional [amount not declassified] for the program. As
you are aware, Saudi Arabia has agreed to cooperate with us in this
program and has contributed [amount not declassified] for a total Afghan
program budget of [amount not declassified]. This amount will soon be
exhausted. (S/[handling restriction not declassified])
continuation of the Afghanistan Covert Action Program for the remain-
der of calendar year 1980.4 We need approval from the SCC to request
a release [less than 1 line not declassified] which is the amount we estimate
we need to maintain our part of this program. For your information,
we anticipate that Saudi Arabia will contribute an additional [amount
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
not declassified].
4 No record of an NSC meeting on that date was found. Reference may be to a
foreign policy breakfast, February 15, attended by Carter, Vance, Brown, Jordan, Brzezin-
ski, Cutler, Donovan, and General David Jones. The meeting was noted, but not elabo-
rated upon, in the President’s Daily Diary. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, Presi-
dent’s Daily Diary)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
not declassified] million for a total Afghan program budget of $30 mil-
lion.5 (S/[handling restriction not declassified])
Stansfield Turner6
5 There is no indication on the original of the SCC Chairman’s approval. Attached
but not printed is a summary of projected expenditures for the Afghan covert action
program, divided into three items: covert paramilitary [text not declassified], covert action
[text not declassified], and intelligence collection [text not declassified] for a total of $30
million. This list is further broken down into an itemized list, also attached but not
printed. In addition, two intelligence cables updating the Chief of Station in Islamabad
on the status of the covert action program and a list of “propaganda themes” for promul-
gation on Afghan radio are attached but not printed.
6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
215.
Analysis Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research1
Washington, February 21, 1980
1. AFGHANISTAN IN TURMOIL
The Afghan nationalist rebels are steadily expanding their area of
influence as the government forces disintegrate. Babrak Karmal, the
Soviet puppet, is despised and ridiculed, while increased conflict
between Khalqis and Parchamists has created political anarchy.
Another change at the top is likely, but another leftist in Babrak’s place
would not promise to end the drift into chaos.
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan may have been intended to
establish stability, but it has had the opposite effect. The Soviets vastly
overrated the clout of the Parchamist supporters of Babrak Karmal,
who rules from an even narrower base than his predecessors.
The key problem, however, is the popular revulsion to the Soviet
presence. Soviet forces were probably expected to stiffen the Afghan
army and free it to fight insurgents as the Soviets secured the cities,
roads, and key installations. But the Soviet presence has caused army
units to evaporate as Afghan soldiers join the nationalists in ever
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner of the paper.

Afghanistan
increasing numbers. Police too are deserting in droves as the rebels
extend their control into provincial centers and major cities.
Disaffection is reaching into the highest levels. According to clan-
destine reporting, the governor of critical Badakhshan province recently
joined the rebels, and the Minister of Defense, sickened by reports of
intensive Soviet bombing of provincial villages, has retreated into a
military hospital. A high level Afghan intelligence official has stated,
according to a clandestine report, that Afghanistan is “out of control.”
While this is an exaggeration, if the trend continues, the regime might
completely fall apart.
The bitter rivalry between Khalqis and Parchamists, whom the
Soviets have unsuccessfully tried to bring together into a reunited
party, has resulted in at least one shoot-out at the highest levels of
government. Babrak appears to have moved off center stage and talk
of coup plots and successors is rampant.
The Soviets must be even more alarmed now than when they
moved against Amin. Not only is Afghanistan in chaos, but their own
forces have not performed well and have sustained significant losses.
The Soviet dilemma is indicated by the widespread rumors of a
Soviet deal with the former royal family. For the moment, however,
another leftist candidate is probably more likely to be the immediate
successor to Babrak. (Secret/Noforn/Nocontract/Orcon)
216.
Editorial Note
reported on a speech delivered by Soviet General Secretary Leonid
Brezhnev. With regard to Afghanistan, the Embassy surmised the
speech signaled that the Soviets were possibly “looking for a way out”
of Afghanistan or, on the other hand, perhaps Brezhnev was making
an “attempt to shift the blame to others—especially the U.S.—for a
prolonged Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.” The Embassy went on
to quote Brezhnev: “The United States loudly demands the withdrawal
of Soviet troops, but in fact it is itself doing everything to make this
possibility remote: it is continuing and building up its interference in
the affairs of Afghanistan. I want to state very definitively: we will be
ready to commence the withdrawal of our troops as soon as all forms
of interference from outside directed against the Government and peo-
ple of Afghanistan are fully terminated. Let the United States, together
with the neighbors of Afghanistan, guarantee this. And then the need

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
for Soviet military assistance will cease to exist.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West,
In a memorandum to Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, February 22,
Acting Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs H. Allen
Holmes analyzed Brezhnev’s speech, noting that it was the latest in a
string of Soviet statements to the effect that the Soviet Union would
withdraw its troops once “US-supported aggression from Pakistan has
terminated.” The memorandum offered four reasons to be “skeptical”
of Brezhnev’s pledge: 1) it was possibly a ploy to shift the responsibility
for the crisis in Afghanistan to the United States; 2) Soviet offers to
negotiate with the United States might have to be focused on bilateral
issues outside the Afghanistan issue; 3) the ideological basis for the
intervention in Afghanistan would preclude Soviet willingness to with-
draw because it “would mean the collapse of the Karmal regime and
the establishment in Afghanistan of a government hostile to the Soviet
Union;” and 4) the Soviets had recently rebuffed calls by both Carter
and the European Community for the establishment of a neutral
Afghanistan. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
The conclusion of this memorandum was echoed in a memoran-
dum from National Security Council Staff member Marshall Brement
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew
Brzezinski, February 25, suggesting that the string of Soviet statements
on Afghanistan “does not represent a genuine negotiating proposal by
the Soviets, but is rather a propaganda attempt to shift the blame for
the continuing Soviet presence in Afghanistan onto the shoulders of
the US and, to a lesser extent, China and Pakistan.” In the upper right
corner of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “Basically I agree. But
it is important to make the Soviets look as if they were rejecting bona
fide proposals for withdrawal.” (Carter Library, National Security
That same day, President Jimmy Carter sent a handwritten note
to Vance about Brezhnev’s speech, stating: “Cy—I do not attach much
importance to Brezhnev’s ‘olive branch.’ As I said on the phone, the
worst thing we could do would be to waffle. We must respond immedi-
ately to any allegation by the Soviets that we are involved in or caused
the SU/Afghan invasion. Our not answering Brezhnev gave them a
propaganda victory for 24 hours, and some of our ‘allies’ are very
receptive to this. J.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall
D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet Affairs, 1977–
Finally, an intelligence information cable prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency, April 18, relayed comments on the speech made

Afghanistan
by Viktor Komplektov to a U.S. businessman: “it is not an invitation
to negotiate the status of the Government of Afghanistan, but it does
not exclude a political settlement.” (Carter Library, National Security
217.
Editorial Note
In the last week of February 1980, a general strike and large-scale
protests in Kabul and other Afghan cities posed the greatest challenge
to Soviet control of the country since the intervention in late December
1979. Determined to maintain order in Kabul, the Soviet military moved
troops, tanks, armored personnel carriers, and helicopters into the cen-
ter of the city, February 22, in an attempt to break up protesting crowds
who were shouting “God is great,” and “death to the Soviets.” ([text
not declassified] February 22; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the
Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the
Crisis—February 1980, NIDs) Later that day, Radio Kabul announced
the Afghan Government had declared martial law, blaming the “sub-
versive acts” in Kabul on “foreign agents and mercenaries and British,
American, Pakistani, and Chinese lackeys.” An intelligence assessment
prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, which reported this state-
ment, observed that the protest “further undermines the legitimacy of
President Karmal’s regime, sets back the USSR’s timetable for dealing
with the insurgent threat in the countryside, and considerably compli-
cates Moscow’s efforts to deal with the negative international conse-
quences of its intervention.” ([text not declassified] February 23; Central
Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job
81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for
Four days later, February 23, another intelligence report prepared
in the CIA noted that the shopkeepers’ strike was still at 80–90 percent
of its original strength and that the Afghan Government was reported to
have made widespread arrests in Kabul, especially targeting minority
Hazara tribesmen believed to be at the forefront of the protests. At the
same time, the Soviet military had set up checkpoints “along most of
the roads leading into the city.” ([text not declassified] February 23;
Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
gence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
NIDs)
[text and 2 lines not declassified] (Central Intelligence Agency, Office
of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of
stan Crisis—February 1980, PDBs) An article in the President’s Daily
Brief, February 27, [text not declassified] referenced an old adage regard-
ing two of the major Soviet news organs [text not declassified]: “There
is no news in the Truth (Pravda) and no truth in the News (Izvestia).”
The Soviet news outlets alleged that the strike was forced upon Afghan
shopkeepers by foreigners and that the rebellion was “past its peak.”
(Ibid.) An annex to the same PDB noted that the Kabul rebellion had
likely hastened discussions in Moscow regarding next steps in Afghani-
stan. The annex predicted that the Soviets would opt to send in more
troops—possibly in conjunction with another change in Afghan leader-
ship—to deter future rebellions. (Ibid.)
In telegram 826 from Kabul, February 27, the Embassy reported:
“While the citizens of Kabul remain tense and nervous, the city has
returned to a semblance of normality,” and that the “rumor mill doubts”
that Karmal was still in charge because of his absence from public
view. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800101–
0667) In a concluding analysis, a memorandum prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency, February 28, noted the strike “demonstrated the
ability of anti-Marxists to close down the capital, which previously
had not witnessed any previous unrest,” while also illustrating the
weakness of the Afghan Government and its complete reliance on the
Soviet military to guarantee its position against the Afghan resistance.
([text not declassified]; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director
of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential
February 1980, NIDs) An article in the President’s Daily Brief, February
28, surmised that the strike went according to plan and more unrest
in Kabul could be expected, while Afghan forces would be “increasingly
loath to act against their fellow countrymen.” (Central Intelligence
Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R:
Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–

Afghanistan
218.
Response to Request for Intelligence From the Acting
Assistant for Joint Chiefs of Staff Support ([name not
declassified]) to the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for
Policy (Murphy)1
Washington, February 26, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghan Update (U)
REQUIREMENT
For use at SCC Meeting2
1. (TS/[codeword not declassified]) SOVIET ACTIVITIES IN
AFGHANISTAN:
—It is estimated 100,000 Soviets troops are committed to the Afghan
invasion. About 60,000 ground and air force combat personnel and
some 10,000 support and advisory personnel are in Afghanistan. Some
30,000 troops are across the border in staging areas near Termez and
Kushka.
—Current analysis indicates the Soviets have completed the first
phase of their Afghan invasion. Their lines of communications are
relatively secure and their base areas are fairly well established. A
second, operational phase is expected in the near future with operations
in contested areas, especially in the West and Northeast. As weather
conditions improve, and more Soviet forces and equipment are brought
in-country, these operations will probably be more extensive.
—Soviet casualties are difficult to estimate. Reports have placed
Soviets killed in action as high as 1,500–2,000, with wounded at several
times that number.
2. (TS/[codeword not declassified]) AFGHAN POLITICAL SITUATION:
—As evidenced by growing country-wide urban unrest, especially
in Kabul, no major segment of the Afghan populace can be said to
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, Background Paper
for new DJS. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
2 This is presumably a reference to an SCC meeting held the same day in the White
House Situation Room. According the summary of conclusions of the meeting, the SCC
agreed on two goals with regard to Afghanistan: 1) “to make the Soviets pay a price
for Afghanistan and to prevent their driving wedges among the allies;” and 2) “to
maintain pressure to gain Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, holding out an acceptable
political scenario.” (Carter Library, National Security Council Institutional Files, 1977–

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
accept the legitimacy of the regime of the Soviet presence essential to
its survival.3 The rebellion lacks coordination and a leader, but these
shortcomings may be corrected with growing urban opposition.
—Babrak Karmal was last seen on 21 February. Rumors abound
that he will abdicate, be replaced by another Soviet selectee, or be the
victim of yet another coup. A military government is highly likely.
3. (TS/[codeword not declassified]) RELATIONS WITH PAKISTAN:
—Following the Islamic Conference’s denunciation of the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, Pakistan’s relations with Afghanistan became
characterized by arm’s length dealings. Relations began to deteriorate
with the arrest of Pakistani private citizens and detention of embassy
officials. Propaganda directed against Pakistan by Kabul and Moscow
has become increasingly hostile. In retaliation, Pakistan has increased
surveillance of Afghan diplomats in Pakistan.
—Anticipating the Afghan government will use Pakistan as a scape-
goat for recent disorders in Kabul, Islamabad has ordered the closure
of Pakistan’s Embassy in Kabul and Consulate in Kandahar.
—Severance of diplomatic relations, which is apparently the Paki-
stani intention, would be consistent with last month’s Islamic Confer-
ence resolution. It would also be prudent in light of the recent direction
of relations, and the increased prospect of Afghan harassment or repris-
als against Pakistani’s in Afghanistan. Conversely, such a break may
confirm Afghan suspicions that Pakistan’s intentions are hostile. Should
relations be severed, the danger of border clashes is likely to increase
substantially.
[name not declassified]
3 See Document 217.

Afghanistan
219.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 26, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghan Muslims (U)
We should be careful in implying blank endorsement to the Muslim
forces in Afghanistan. First off, some of the groups are obscurantist at
best; most of them are quite literally reactionary. They have some noble
aspects and nobody who hates Russians can be all bad; nonetheless,
they tend to be a pretty ugly bunch. I shudder to think of the human
rights problems we would face if they came to power. Second, by
emphasizing the Muslim aspect, we are scaring the Indians—and per-
haps the Soviets counterproductively.2 Third, there is no reason to
assume that these people like us much more than they do the Soviets.
They are quite likely to take a Khomeini approach—or perhaps emulate
the theology of the fellow who tried to seize the Mecca mosque. Finally,
we get more than occasional reports that at least some of the insurgents
inside the country are very anti-American because they think we aren’t
helping them. (S)
Obviously, there is nobody in Afghanistan to deal with except
Muslims and we certainly want to support their right to exercise their
religion freely (as long as I don’t have to be around while they are
doing it!). We do not, however, need to convey the idea that we want
to see Afghanistan handed over to Muslims qua Muslims. If that
unhappy land is to regain any kind of order, it is more likely to be
from semi-secularists such as the royal family and any of the “modern-
izers” who are still alive. (S)3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
2 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin beside this sentence.
3 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin beside this sentence and wrote
at the bottom of the memorandum: “that’s half the issue right now. The pt. is to mobilize
Moslem forces there and elsewhere. ZB.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
220.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee (Intelligence) Meeting1
SUBJECT
Afghanistan (U)
PARTICIPANTS
State
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Mr. David Newsom, Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Mr. David Mark, Deputy Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research
OSD
Deputy Secretary W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
Ambassador Robert Komer, Under Secretary for Policy
JCS
Lt. General John Pustay, Assistant to the Chairman
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Mr. Chuck Cogan, Chief, Near East Division
Justice
Mr. John Shenefield, Acting Attorney General
Mr. Ken Bass, Counsel for Intelligence Policy
OMB
Dr. John White, Deputy Director
Mr. Randy Jayne, Associate Director for National Security and International
Affairs
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. David Aaron
NSC
Mr. Thomas Thornton
Mr. Donald Gregg
Summary of Conclusions
The SCC (I) met to give formal approval to the use of an additional
[less than 1 line not declassified] for use in Afghanistan.2 This money is
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–020, Minutes—SCC 1980. Secret; Sensitive. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right
corner. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.
2 In a memorandum, February 29, Brzezinski notified Turner that Carter approved
the SCC(I) recommendation to use an additional [text not declassified] for the Afghan
program. (Ibid.)

Afghanistan
needed to carry out the program that the President had previously
approved for the remainder of 1980. The funds will be matched by
another country. (S)
Admiral Turner briefed the meeting on the details of the program;
some signs of effectiveness are already being noticed. (S)
All member agencies agreed that the money should be provided.
The only reservation noted was OMB’s concern that the amount might
prove to be insufficient. (S)
Anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons remain the insurgents’ greatest
need. Soviet-origin equipment is becoming very expensive, however,
and SA–7s are in very short supply. It was agreed that CIA would
approach Egypt to see if the Egyptians could purchase Yugoslav-built
SA–7s and then pass them on to us. Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Pakistan
should also be asked to seek to obtain SA–7s on our behalf from Algeria
and possibly other countries with large stocks. (S)
CIA was also asked to try to increase its intelligence take from the
insurgents. (S)
221.
Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Clift) to Vice President Mondale1
Memo No. 907–80
Washington, February 28, 1980
SUBJECT
George Kennan’s Assessment of Current Soviet Leadership and the Afghanistan
Invasion
You asked me if there was anything to the assertions by George
Kennan (article at Tab A) that Soviet actions in Afghanistan were out
of character for Brezhnev, Kosygin and Gromyko.2 CIA has responded
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Mondale Papers, Box 70,
unknown hand wrote: “VP has seen.”
2 The article, attached at Tab A but not printed, is George Kennan, “Washington’s
Reaction to the Afghan Crisis: ‘Was This Really Mature Statesmanship?’” New York Times,
in Afghanistan was “abrupt,” “bizarre,” and “clumsy” which suggested “the recent
breakthrough, to positions of dominant influence, of hard-line elements much less con-
cerned for world opinion, but also much less experienced, than these older figures,”
that is, Kosygin, Brezhnev, and Gromyko.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
that Brezhnev still appears to be in charge and, of the others, only
Kosygin was apparently not a party to the Politburo’s decision to
invade Afghanistan. CIA reasons that a gradual disenchantment with
Detente (witnessed by the U.S. Congress position towards SALT as of
last November and the concurrent U.S. decision to deploy new TNF
assets in Europe), together with the fear that Muslim extremism of the
type practiced in Iran would spill over into Afghanistan and into the
Soviet Union, served to remove most, if not all, concern about unneces-
sarily harming U.S.-USSR relations by a decision to commit troops.
At Tab B is CIA’s initial assessment of Brezhnev’s role, as stated
in their 16 January daily intelligence report.3 At Tab C is a preliminary
CIA assessment of Politburo’s decision-making concerning Afghani-
stan, and at Tab D is a later CIA memorandum on current Politburo
thinking on Afghanistan.4 Clipped portions of Tabs C and D appear
to be especially relevant to Kennan’s assertions.
3 Attached at Tab B but not printed is a CIA memorandum, January 16, that con-
cluded Brezhnev “continues to be in the center of things and it seems almost impossible
that the decision on Afghanistan could have been made over his objection.”
4 Attached at Tab C but not printed is a CIA memorandum, February 5, that repeated
the initial intelligence assessment of January 16, to the effect that Brezhnev remained
“in full political control and was directly involved in and supportive of the decision to
use military force against the Afghan insurgents.” Tab D is printed as Document 191.
222.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State and the International Communication
Agency1
3295. Subject: A Revised Brezhnev Doctrine in the Wake of Afghani-
stan? One Possible Approach. Ref: USICA 7395.2
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary. Actions of the magnitude of the Afghan invasion may
perhaps be justified to the world at large in terms of Realpolitik or
international law. The Soviets are busily attempting that, with a steady
Confidential. Sent for information to Leningrad, Warsaw, Belgrade, Berlin, Bucharest,
Budapest, Munich, Prague, Sofia, and USNATO.
2 Not found.

Afghanistan
propaganda barrage aimed at proving external aggression, duty-to-
treaty obligations, and threats to the USSR’s own security. But for the
Party faithful, domestically and in the Communist Parties abroad, more
important is the need to understand how the invasion comports with
Marxist-Leninist ideology. Despite this obvious need, we find, how-
ever, that Soviet leaders—perhaps because of Moscow’s awareness of
the anxieties generated abroad by the Brezhnev Doctrine—have so far
made only a few stabs at rationalizing their action in ideological terms.
No general theory has yet been articulated. Prompted by reftel, which
suggests the existence of an “Afghan corollary” to the Brezhnev Doc-
trine, we have reexamined the post-Afghanistan Soviet leadership state-
ments as well as current and earlier theoretical journals. Thus far, the
ideological linkage between the Brezhnev Doctrine—which applies to
“socialist states”—and the Afghan invasion has not yet been made,
though one prominent ideologist does hint in a pre-invasion article at
the need to act when the gains in countries with a “socialist orientation”,
such as Afghanistan, are in jeopardy. If Washington analysts agree
with our analysis of the ideologist’s article, it may be worth flagging
to interested scholars or the media for their consideration and possible
exploitation. End summary.
3. Since the invasion of Afghanistan, there has been speculation
about the emergence of a revised or extended Brezhnev Doctrine to
explain the Soviet action (e.g., USICA 7395). The speculation is based
on the conclusion that the Brezhnev Doctrine, as imputed to the Soviets
following the Czechoslovak invasion, falls short of providing a plausi-
ble ideological explanation for the latest Soviet invasion, and therefore
one needs (leaving aside for the moment why the “need” arises) a
revised formulation of the original doctrine or an “Afghan corollary”
to it.
4. In what way does the Brezhnev Doctrine fall short of explaining,
in Marxist-Leninist terms, the invasion of Afghanistan? Following the
August 1968 invasion, students of Soviet ideology relied on various
official statements—but especially one by Brezhnev at the Fifth Con-
gress of the Polish United Workers Party on November 12, 1968—to
make the case that a new ideological doctrine had been fashioned.
Brezhnev stated at the Congress that:
When internal and external forces, hostile to socialism, seek to
reverse the development of any socialist country whatsoever in the
direction of the restoration of the capitalist order, when a threat to the
cause of socialism arises in that country, a threat to the security of the
socialist commonwealth as a whole—this already becomes not only a
problem of the people of the country concerned, but also a common
problem and the concern of all socialist countries.
Because Czechoslovakia was a Warsaw Pact country, “any socialist
country” as used by Brezhnev was mainly viewed at the time as encom-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
passing the countries of Eastern Europe, including Yugoslavia, rather
than those elsewhere such as North Vietnam, North Korea, and Cuba.
5. The key point of the Brezhnev Doctrine in terms of its present-
day [garble—relevance?] to Afghanistan is the reference to “socialist
country”. No Soviet official has ever argued that Afghanistan has been
a “socialist country” (or, for that matter, ever experienced “a capitalist
order”), or is presently calling on the “socialist commonwealth”, as
was done in the case of Czechoslovakia, to react to Afghanistan. Before
the April 1978 revolution which overthrew Daoud, Afghanistan was
seen as essentially feudal, and after the revolution as embarking on
the path of “socialist orientation”. Soviet ideologists make a sharp
distinction between “socialist countries” and those bearing the label
of “socialist orientation”: The Deputy Chief of the Central Committee’s
International Department, Ul’yanovskiy, writing in the authoritative
CPSU theoretical journal Kommunist last July, defined the latter group
of countries as “those, not yet being socialist, (but) which reject capital-
ism as a system, carry out fundamental social changes facilitating and
hastening their possible transition to socialism.” Among the Third
World countries assigned by the Soviets to this category besides
Afghanistan (which Ul’yanovskiy last July noted had “recently joined
them”) are Algeria, Benin, Burma, Guinea, PDRY, Congo (Brazzaville),
Syria, Tanzania, Angola, Madagascar, Mozambique, Ethiopia, and
Jamaica. Candidate Politburo member Demichev, in discussing the
international situation in his February 1 election speech, alluded to
both kinds of Soviet allies, stating that “the fraternal countries of social-
ism, (and) the developing countries which have adopted a socialist
orientation, are proceeding (forward) shoulder to shoulder along
with us.”
6. If Afghanistan does not fit neatly into the Brezhnev Doctrine as
it is usually understood, then is there some doctrine-in-the-making in
which it does fit, as some Western observers are speculating? Are
there statements by Soviet leaders or ideologists since the Afghanistan
invasion which put the Soviet action in a Marxist-Leninist framework
of more general applicability? Obviously, here arises a dilemma for
the Soviets. Domestically, and for Communist parties abroad, there
exists a need to provide some transcending ideological rationalization
for the Soviet action in Afghanistan, just as Brezhnev felt compelled
to provide some rationalization at the PZPR Congress in November
1968 following the Czech invasion. Since the entire Soviet system
derives its legitimacy from Marxism-Leninism, the millions of Party
faithful who serve as props for that system have to be served up some
such interpretation of events such as Afghanistan. The danger in the
absence of such an interpretation is further ideological erosion.
7. At the same time, the very interpretation which the leadership
provides can only further heighten anxieties abroad, raising a dilemma.

Afghanistan
Just as the Brezhnev Doctrine reinforced skepticism about Soviet inten-
tions in “socialist countries” such as Romania and Yugoslavia, so will
any overarching interpretation for Soviet military aid in circumstances
such as Afghanistan raise concern among actual or potential countries
assigned by Moscow to the “socialist orientation” category, i.e., all
countries of the Third World as the Soviets see it. Although Brezhnev,
speaking in Belgrade in 1971, denied the existence of any “so-called
new doctrine of limited sovereignty,” the label “Brezhnev Doctrine”
has continued to stick, and do damage to the Soviet image abroad.
8. Perhaps in part because of the history of the Brezhnev Doctrine,
Soviet leaders have so far played down ideological explanations for
their rendering aid to Afghanistan. The heavy emphasis has rather
been on meeting an Afghan request, in compliance with treaty obliga-
tions, and on rights reaffirmed by the UN Charter, with occasional
reference to the need to protect Soviet state interests, by liquidating a
situation which could have resulted, in Moscow’s view, in hostile bases
along the southern border. Soviet leaders and ideologists have made
a few random “stabs” at rationalizing their action in terms of stock
Marxist-Leninist formulas but nothing approaching a general theory
has yet been articulated. Among such attempts, which have sometimes
misled a few outside observers to conclude a “new doctrine” is being
offered, are:
—“Proletarian internationalism”: Two Central Committee appa-
ratchiks (Kobysh in Literaturnaya Gazeta, January 23, and Portugalov
in TASS, February 6) first used the hoary favorite, “proletarian interna-
tionalism”, in addressing the Afghan question. However, with the
exception of KGB Chief Andropov, the Soviet leaders themselves have
avoided resort to this rationalization in the specific context of military
aid to Afghanistan. (Andropov said that the Soviet aid was a “high
act of faithfulness to the principle of proletarian internationalism . . .”)
We assume Brezhnev and others have steered clear of “proletarian
internationalism” for the reason that Afghanistan obviously lacks a
proletariat of any significance for which such aid could be justified.
—“International duty” or “international solidarity”: Soviet leaders,
including Defense Minister Ustinov, have generally settled for one of
these hackneyed formulas to justify their military assistance on Marxist-
Leninist grounds. Both recur in the unsigned Novoye Vremya article
which prompted David Binder to speculate in the New York Times that
an “extended Brezhnev Doctrine” was in the making.3 Our problem
with the Novoye Vremya article, however, apart from the “unofficial”
3 The full reference to the article is: David Binder, “Brezhnev Doctrine Said To Be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
character of the journal as a Soviet source, is that it provides too sweep-
ing language for any new doctrine . . . a succession of slogans such as
“international solidarity” rather than workable criteria. Both of these
slogans did appear in the Brezhnev-Marchais statement issued in Mos-
cow January 10 which International Department head Ponomaryev has
strongly recommended to Party members for an understanding of
Afghanistan.4 Both formulas also are to be found in profusion in the
Soviet press immediately following the Czechoslovak invasion, begin-
ning with the August 22, 1968 unsigned statement in Pravda entitled
“The Highest International Duty.”
9. Although Soviet statements since the Afghanistan invasion there-
fore provide little substance for a revised Brezhnev Doctrine, the fact
that Afghanistan falls into a common stage of development on the
Marxist-Leninist road to Communism, along which many other coun-
tries are depicted (by the Soviets) as traveling, provides Western ana-
lysts with some basis to construct a revised doctrine. It seems to us
what is missing from Soviet statements since Afghanistan which would
lend itself to such an effort is a description of the circumstances trigger-
ing a Soviet decision to render its “aid” to countries of “socialist orienta-
tion”. The Brezhnev Doctrine, as cited in paragraph 4, describes the
“trigger” in the case of “socialist countries” as the emergence of “inter-
nal and external forces, hostile to socialism, seek(ing) to reverse the
development of any socialist country . . .” But what circumstances
are germane in triggering Soviet assistance to a country of socialist
orientation?
10. The deputy head of the Central Committee’s International
Department Ul’yanovskiy, writing in the earlier cited Kommunist of
last July, identifies circumstances which we believe could serve as the
basis for a doctrine of general applicability to this category of country.
Ul’yanovskiy states that a “socialist orientation” can be sustained “so
long as vigilance to imperialism’s schemes is maintained, so long as
rebuffs are given to insidious and dangerous neocolonialism.” “Any
manifestation,” Ul’yanovskiy continues, “of a lack of confidence, but
even more, of hostility to the world of socialism, any manifestation of
a tendency to conciliation in relation to imperialist policy, to neocolo-
nialists—‘beware of these latter day bearers of gifts’—usually serves
as a signal of a retreat from the principles of socialist orientation.”
by French Communist Party leader Georges Marchais, January 10. Marchais declared
the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was justified in order to defeat the “imperialist
threat” Afghanistan faced. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Afghanistan
11. Ul’yanovskiy’s statement does not include an explicit warning
of the consequences when a “signal” is received by Moscow of a
“retreat” from a “socialist orientation”. In terms of the translation of
theory into practice, the threshold triggering and defining Soviet action
obviously is seen to vary from case to case (depending on geopolitical
factors, international environment, etc.), even for an ideologist such as
Ul’yanovskiy; thus no Soviet “aid” at all was rendered to Somalia
although it is cited in the article as a country of “socialist orientation”
in retreat. (Besides, Soviet ideologists are not supposed to issue warn-
ings.) But the net result of Ul’yanovskiy’s description of what comprises
a “retreat”, when considered in light of the action the Soviets took
against the Amin government, is to suggest a doctrine akin to the
Brezhnev Doctrine—but addressed to this category of countries rather
than “socialist countries”. For the countries of the Third World,
assigned now or in the future by Moscow’s ideologists to the “socialist
orientation” category, Ul’yanovskiy’s language adds up to a fairly
credible warning—and made more credible as Moscow’s capability to
project force into the Third World improves.
12. While our purpose has been to focus above on an ideological
justification for Soviet intervention in Third World countries, the fact is
that—as mentioned previously—in the case of Afghanistan the Soviets
have thus far emphasized primarily “legal-political” justifications,
especially the 1978 Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation. It may well
be that the Soviets in fact will only feel comfortable engaging in a
significant military intervention in a sovereign state in circumstances
providing both an ideological explanation for domestic consumption
within socialist countries, and a “legal-political” justification for the
world at large. This would follow the Czechoslovak pattern where the
Soviets had their “legal-political” pretext, given Czechoslovak member-
ship in the Warsaw Pact, and developed their ideological justification
in the form of the Brezhnev Doctrine only after the fact of the invasion.
In any event, the ideological justifications discussed in the preceding
paragraphs in no way contradict Soviet “legal-political” explanations
for the Afghan invasion, but are rather hypothesized as a complement
to them. All factors considered, there is the suggestion that the states
most endangered by the precedent of Afghanistan are those countries
which are both “of socialist orientation” and have in addition legal-
political ties to Moscow such as treaties of friendship and cooperation.
13. We suggest the above as one possible approach to identifying
a Brezhnev-type doctrine in the thicket of the largely non-ideological
Soviet statements so far issued in justification of the Afghanistan inva-
sion. Given Moscow’s awareness of anxieties in the Third World
following its action, it may be some time before a comprehensive state-
ment lending itself to the development of a new doctrine actually

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
surfaces here. It may be worth Washington’s effort, therefore, in terms
of our public diplomacy in the Third World in the next years, to flag
the approach to interested scholars or the media for their consideration
and possible exploitation.
Watson
223.
Memorandum From Lincoln Bloomfield of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 28, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghan Neutralization—Some Broader Aspects (C)
The Carter Doctrine adds the general area of the Persian Gulf
(which I strongly recommend we henceforth refer to as the “Gulf”) to
Western Europe, Japan and the Eastern Mediterranean as among the
vital interests to the United States. Unlike the other areas, the Gulf is
unique in having been defined by both superpowers as of vital interest
(see the Molotov-Ribbentrop agreement of 1940).2 This makes it essen-
tial to elaborate new ground rules for superpower relations to replace
those agreed to at the 1972 Moscow summit prohibiting advantage-
seeking in peripheral areas, flagrantly violated by the Soviet Union in
Angola, Ethiopia, and South Yemen. (U)
Afghanistan is of course more than that. It is a case of armed
intervention, but in an area of vital interest to Moscow. (The closest
U.S. analogy is the Dominican Republic in 1965.)3 But it is also a third
world, “unaligned” country. Any viable ground rules applicable to
Afghanistan should respond both to Soviet perceptions of interests,
and to third world allergy to superpower military intervention. (C)
The essence of such a rule would be a prohibition not just of
advantage-seeking but of outside armed military interference in third
world conflicts or in the internal affairs of unaligned countries. Such
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File,
were sent to Thornton, Owen, Pastor, and Brement.
2 See Document 243.

Afghanistan
a doctrine would have been explicitly violated by Cuban troops in
Africa or Soviet troops in Afghanistan. (It also would have barred our
intervention in the DR in 1965, France in Zaire and Morocco, etc.) (C)
Such a doctrine would leave untouched the established military
dispositions of the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe and the United
States in Western Europe and the Pacific, and would leave both free
to deploy their fleets. (C)
“Guaranteed neutrality” for Afghanistan in exchange for complete
withdrawal of Soviet combat forces would serve U.S. interests, but
seems a non-starter as it offers nothing to Moscow except face-saving.
But its potential value to the larger need for universally-applicable
ground-rules requires that it be seriously analyzed. Two things are
required: a greater inducement to Moscow to accede; and some imagi-
native instrumentalities, such as international observation, to make the
guarantee effective. (C)
Afghanistan will undoubtedly revert to its historic xenophobic
stance, which leads Americans to predict Soviet non-acceptance. But
the matter acquires more substance when seen in a larger perspective,
particularly in terms of Cuba. Afghanistan and Cuba are symmetrical
in unique ways. (C)
A guarantee of neutrality was in effect given in 1962 when Moscow
agreed not to make it a base for offensive weapons, in exchange for
which we agreed not to invade Cuba. (U)
A comparable agreement should be considered for Afghanistan.
In both cases the internal political orientation will probably remain
anathema to the neighboring superpower. But a variety of tolerable
coexistence becomes possible by virtue of neutralization, meaning: a)
verified guarantees against pursuit of policies threatening to the neighbor;
and b) absence of superpower military intervention (including China). (C)
In linking Cuba and Afghanistan, we do not want to generate a
new crisis. The point is that President Kennedy’s 1962 agreement could
be the obvious model for Afghanistan. U.S. self-imposed restraint after
such an agreement becomes the implicit model for Soviet policy in
withdrawing from Afghanistan. (C)
(An even broader global perspective is afforded by Palestinian
autonomy. A well-developed and implemented doctrine prohibiting
armed intervention will undoubtedly have to be an element in the
essential neutralization of any Palestinian homeland. The latter case
would be characteristic of the settlements which brought long-term
peace to Belgium, Switzerland, and Austria. The new rule would be
very relevant.) (C)
A final element is an enhanced role for international peace observa-
tion. The habitual dismissal of this capability until it is desperately

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
needed in crisis should be eschewed, and it should be made part of
serious planning. (C)
224.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, March 3, 1980
PAKISTAN: Position on US aid offer
[2 paragraphs (17 lines) not declassified]
The Pakistanis appear convinced that accepting the proposed aid
package would increase Soviet hostility without significantly enhanc-
ing Pakistan’s ability to respond to the Soviet threat from Afghanistan.
Last week, the Deputy Commander of the Pakistani Army criticized
the Foreign Ministry for even discussing assistance without a solid US
defense commitment, [1 line not declassified]. Another influential military
officer, the Defense Ministry Secretary General, has reportedly also
argued for a stronger defense treaty. Neither General appears to want
an accommodation with the USSR, but both have reportedly talked
about staying neutral in hopes that the Soviets would leave Pakistan
alone.
[1 paragraph (18 lines) not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—March 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The
full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The article
printed here was found in this form.

Afghanistan
225.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research (Spiers) to Secretary of State
Vance1
Washington, March 4, 1980
SUBJECT
Soviet Motives in Afghanistan
In choosing to intervene in Afghanistan, the Soviets were primarily
motivated by their own security concerns. In their pre-decision deliber-
ations, they apparently underestimated both the strength of the insur-
gency and the intensity of the international reaction. Despite their
miscalculations, however, we believe the Soviets are not now prepared
to alter their course. Present efforts seem primarily aimed at stabilizing
the situation in Afghanistan, exploiting differences among the western
allies, and limiting the damage which Afghanistan has done to overall
US-Soviet relations.
By late 1979, Moscow was faced with a dire situation in Afghani-
stan. If it did not act, the best it could hope for was prolonged fighting,
further regime coups, and political chaos; the worst, the establishment
of an anti-Soviet regime that would develop ties with Iran, Pakistan,
the US, and China. From the Soviet perspective, such a turn of events
would have overturned a long tradition of Afghan dependence on the
USSR and would have meant an unacceptable situation on the USSR’s
southern border. Tolerance of such an outcome would have called into
question Moscow’s willingness to back its clients elsewhere in the Third
World. By early December, the Soviet leadership concluded that the
only solution to the problem was military intervention, and that while
such action would carry considerable political costs, the benefits of a
stable and secure Afghanistan firmly in the Soviet camp were worth
the price.
Miscalculation
In its deliberations, Moscow miscalculated. In terms of the military
situation, the Soviets seem to have misjudged the strength and capabili-
ties of the insurgents. While the Soviets probably calculated that their
own troops would have to secure the major urban areas and lines
of communication in Afghanistan until the Afghan army could be
reorganized and equipped to fight the insurgency, it probably underes-
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
Drafted by W. Limberg (INR/RSE). [text not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
timated the time and manpower that would be needed even for this
limited objective. Originally, Moscow may have hoped that 40,000 to
60,000 Soviet troops would be enough; present force configurations
would seem to indicate that the Soviets now believe that it will need
at least double that number, and that the Soviet, rather than the Afghan,
army will have to bear the brunt of the fighting for the present.
Moscow apparently also miscalculated the intensity of the interna-
tional reaction to its intervention in Afghanistan. In terms of US-Soviet
relations, Moscow was probably ready to accept a bad press and the
delay of SALT II ratification. However, the Soviets may not have antici-
pated the American actions either to curtail shipments of feed grains
and export of high technology or to boycott the Olympics. Indeed,
clandestine reporting indicates that the Soviets may have believed
that the US was too distracted by the situation in Iran to develop a
strong response.
The Kremlin also seems to have been taken aback by the strength
of the West European response. While it no doubt expected them to
denounce Soviet actions, Moscow may not have expected the West
Europeans to give the US as much support as they have. Moscow was
probably equally surprised by the nearly unanimous hostile Islamic
reaction evoked at the Islamabad Conference in January.
In Afghanistan
Resistance in Afghanistan has evidently been stronger than Mos-
cow originally anticipated. The Babrak government has not been more
effective than Amin’s, and the internal situation has deteriorated since
the intervention.
Despite the international reaction and the resistance in Afghanistan,
the Soviets are adding men and equipment to their forces, building
permanent barracks and are apparently planning for large operations
against the rebels. The Soviets have yet to engage in major operations
against the rebels, and seem unlikely to conclude that their intervention
will not succeed in its limited military objectives of stalemating the
insurgency before a spring offensive is tried.
Diplomatic Posture
Although the Soviet media and leadership have been quick to pick
up on the theme of Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan voiced in the
West, there has been little or no deviation from their original position
of December 27. Indeed, Brezhnev in his speech of February 22, seemed
to add to earlier demands on the question of withdrawal when he said
that the Soviets will only withdraw when the US and Afghanistan’s
neighbors are willing to “guarantee” that all outside interference in

Afghanistan
Afghanistan has ceased.2 On the face of it, Brezhnev’s statement was
probably not intended as a signal of Soviet interest in negotiation
on the issue. However, Moscow may have been impressed by the
subsequent Western reaction to even such a slight shift in the Soviet
position and is now attempting to play on this interest to imply reason-
ableness in the Kremlin.
Similarly, the Soviets have given little public play to the West
European proposal for the “neutralization” of Afghanistan.3 They have
not, however, dismissed it outright nor have they ruled out the idea
of future discussion or negotiations. Indeed, in his discussion with
Armand Hammer, Brezhnev reportedly expressed an interest in
mutually acceptable solutions.4 Thus, it would appear that the Soviets
are trying to dangle the prospect of a political solution to the Afghan
situation in order, in the short run, to divide western opinion and
policy, and, in the longer run, to keep open the possibility of a negoti-
ated agreement that in effect would place a world seal of approval on
the Soviet intervention and the resulting permanent satellization of
Afghanistan.
At the same time, the Soviets are intent upon limiting the damage
Afghanistan has wreaked on its relations with the West and the Third
World. Moscow has repeatedly stressed that detente remains its basic
policy line. Similarly, one Soviet article has tried to allay West European
fears of an increased Soviet threat to the oil rich Persian Gulf by resur-
recting its 1976 proposal that the security of the area be internationally
guaranteed.5 Moscow has also attempted to deflect Arab displeasure
by hammering away at the betrayal of the Palestinian cause allegedly
2 See Document 216.
3 The Foreign Ministers of the nine European Community nations, meeting in Rome
on February 19, issued a statement proposing a neutral Afghanistan under international
guarantees if the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw its troops. (Paul Lewis, “Europeans
Propose a Neutral Afghanistan With Guarantees to Allow Soviet to Leave,” New York
London February 19–22 to discuss Afghanistan with European leaders. For his February
20 joint press conference with German Foreign Minister Genscher, see the Department
4 Hammer, the head of Occidental Petroleum, had significant business interests in
the Soviet Union. His meeting with Brezhnev in Moscow, February 27, was reported in
telegram 3231 from Moscow, February 27. During the meeting, Brezhnev told Hammer
that if the United States and Afghanistan’s neighbors would guarantee nonintervention in
Afghan affairs, “we can come to a settlement,” provided that, subsequently, Afghanistan’s
military capabilities would be limited to defensive needs. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0629) The meeting was also reported in the New
York Times; see Jane Seaberry, “Hammer Expects Crisis With Soviets to End Soon,” New
5 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
inherent in the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty and longer term at the
continuing threat which the US poses for the Middle East.
In the longer term, Moscow probably believes that it can eventually
stabilize the situation in Afghanistan, and that, as it does, international
pressure will decrease, much as it did in 1968 with Czechoslovakia.
The Soviets probably have concluded that continued tensions in the
Mideast will eventually allow them to recoup their losses, largely
because the radical Arabs have few other options in terms of sophisti-
cated arms and great power support. Moscow also probably believes
that the very fact that it has secured its position in Afghanistan will
enable it to exert more influence on Iran and Pakistan, and in time to
undercut US and Chinese influence. To this end, the Soviets probably
will try to refrain from overly antagonizing any of the parties involved.
As their involvement in the counterinsurgency in Afghanistan grows,
however, this moderate position will become increasingly difficult to
maintain both as a result of fighting the war itself (which may inevitably
come to involve Pakistan’s border areas), and as a result of having to
justify that war to a worried home front.
226.
Memorandum to the Director of the National Foreign
Assessment Center (Clarke)1
Washington, March 5, 1980
SUBJECT
Station Chief’s Assessment of the Insurgency in Afghanistan
1. In reviewing the Chief of Station Kabul’s latest assessment on
the insurgency in Afghanistan and its prospects for the next six months,
we found that we totally agreed with some of the conclusions made
by the COS but disagreed with others.2
2. Analysts on the Afghan Task Force have long believed that the
insurgents were too weak to topple the government by defeating the
Afghan Army in military action. The insurgents can harass and pressure
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
The author of the memorandum was not identified. Attached but not printed is a covering
note from Clarke to Turner, stating: “[less than 1 line not declassified] doubts that the
Soviets will be able completely to secure the roads in the countryside in six months time.”
2 The referenced assessment was not found.

Afghanistan
Afghan Army units in the field but do not have the leadership, training,
experience, or firepower to engage the Afghan Army in set-piece bat-
tles. The danger has always been the potential for unraveling from
within, and it was that danger that brought the Soviets into
Afghanistan.
3. The Soviets have thus far not enjoyed any meaningful successes
against the insurgents, but that is likely to change now that the weather
is improving and the Soviets can use their firepower more effectively.
The Soviets have begun a major new offensive in eastern Afghanistan
and the preliminary evidence suggests they are successfully pushing
the insurgents back in several provinces. This is not unexpected. We
knew the rebels would avoid set-piece battles with the stronger Soviet
forces and that appears to be what they are doing. We believe the
insurgents will retreat rather than fight pitched battles. They will move
deeper into sanctuaries inside Afghanistan and across the border
into Pakistan.
4. The Soviets are likely to further intensify their attacks on insur-
gent bases over the spring and summer months. This will result in
their consolidating their control along key roads and around major
cities and in pushing the insurgents back. But, it is questionable if these
will be lasting successes. We believe the insurgents will avoid the
Soviets when they hold the edge but will reoccupy territory as the
Soviets withdraw. In short, the insurgents will fight when they have
the advantage and not when the other side holds the edge. We doubt
that the Soviets can completely secure the roads and the countryside
in six months.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
227.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 6, 1980
SUBJECT
U.S. Aid Reaching Afghan Insurgents
1. Attachment A is a complete list of the arms and ammunition
This list, given to us by the responsible Pakistan liaison officer, tallies
with the list of supplies provided by this Agency to Pakistan as of that
date. The Pak liaison officer said that his people closely monitor the
movement of the supplies to the tribesmen and slow down or stop
deliveries to those who cannot move them rapidly. There have been
seven groups receiving supplies to date:
a. The Hezbe-Islami (HI) headed by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar;
b. The Jamaat-I-Islami-Afghanistan (JIA) led by Professor Burha-
nuddin Rabbani;
c. The Harakat-E-Inqalab-I-Islami (Movement of Islamic Revolu-
tion—MIR) led by Maulana Muhammad Nabi Muhammad;
d. The Jahbe-I-Nejat-I-Melli-Afghanistan (Afghan National Libera-
tion Front—ANLF) led by Sebqatullah Mojedidi;
e. The Afghan Islamic and National Revolutionary Council (AINR)
or Surah-E-Melli-Inqalabi-Islami-Afghanistan led by Syed Ahmed
Gailani;
f. The Khalis Faction which is a break-away group from the Hezbe-
Islami and led by Yunus Khalis; and
g. The Hazaras which are a Shi’a minority group.
2. Obtaining independent confirmation of these deliveries is very
difficult. An Afghan informant with access to this information reported
that during the past three months the Gailani group has been receiving
regular supplies of ammunition and military hardware from the Gov-
ernment of Pakistan. The informant stated that during the week of 17
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
[handling restriction not declassified].
2 Attachment A, not printed, is a table listing the weapons distributed to the seven
resistance groups.

Afghanistan
February 1980 the following items were delivered: (See Attachment B
for full report).3
a. 60 AK–47 Assault rifles,
b. 60,000 rounds of AK–47 ammunition,
c. 20,000 rounds of .303 ammunition,
d. 200 magnetic anti-tank mines, and
During the week of 24 February the delivery to Gailani consisted of:
a. “About” 200 magnetic anti-tank mines,
b. “About” 60 anti-tank rockets, and
c. 30 AK–47 Assault rifles and a quantity of ammunition.
gency in Wardak Province and stated that it might parallel insurgency
from Peshawar to Wardak. Paragraph 9 states: “A caravan reaching
Wardak on about January 25 reportedly brought twelve ‘shoulder-fired
anti-tank guns,’ ninety ‘long-range’ rifles, one ‘dah shoba’ (phonetic—
10 branches?) anti-aircraft weapon, and three ‘multi-purpose’ weapons
usable against aircraft or tanks. The rifles were allegedly ‘American
made.’ The other arms were of Chinese origin, one source’s informants
say. A 120-man caravan is expected to reach Wardak from Peshawar
on about March 5 . . . with more weapons. (Comment: The information
about the arms smuggling was provided in early February, before the
Washington Post and New York Times published stories alleging that the
U.S. was clandestinely supplying arms to Afghan rebels.5 None of our
sources has indicated that any of the smuggled arms came from U.S.
or Pakistani suppliers.)” (Kabul Embtel 0690, Attachment C).
4. In sum, the weapons and supplies supplied by this Agency
appear to be getting through to the insurgents and without the U.S.
hand showing.
Stansfield Turner6
3 Attachment B, not printed, is an intelligence information cable, March 3, that
reported comments made by Hossain Gailani, nephew of Syed Ahmed Gailani, who noted
the insurgents’ greatest need was for anti-aircraft weapons, because Soviet “helicopter
gunships are almost impossible to bring down with conventional arms.”
4 Attachment C, not printed, is telegram 690 from Kabul, which reported claims
made by insurgents in Wardak, a province west of Kabul, that they were preparing a
Spring offensive, and that these plans might be part of a broader plan for increased rebel
attacks in other provinces. The Embassy concluded that the information was accurate.
6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
228.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Iran/Afghanistan
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Henry Owen (Chairman)
Warren Christopher
Jody Powell
David Newsom
Lloyd Cutler
Peter Constable
Hedley Donovan
Nelson Ledsky
NSC
Gary Sick
OSD
William Odom
W. Graham Claytor
Jerrold Schecter
JCS
General David Jones
Lt. Gen. John Pustay
Justice
John Shenefield
Treasury
Robert Carswell
Energy
John Sawhill
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
4. Chemical Warfare. Admiral Turner said there is growing evidence
that the Soviets have used chemical warfare in Afghanistan, but as yet
it is not possible to confirm adequately that this has gone beyond the use
of riot control agents.2 The Soviets have decontamination equipment
the White House Situation Room. In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “Zbig, C.”
2 This allegation was first reported in a situation report prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency, March 1, based on “credible evidence” received in the U.S. Consulate
in Peshawar: “Three separate reports from Afghan refugees who claim to have witnessed
the attacks gave similar descriptions of gas canisters, symptoms of Afghan victims,
and methods used to avoid contamination. The attacks are said to have occurred in
Badakhshan, Vardak, and Takhar Provinces both before and after the Soviet invasion.
The victims apparently experienced loss of control, became unconscious, or died. We
have received a number of other reports of chemical warfare in Afghanistan, mainly
from refugees, but these have been inconclusive and of questionable reliability.” ([report
number not declassified] March 1; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of
Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator

Afghanistan
in Afghanistan, but we believe that is part of their normal equipment.
General Jones said the JCS would like to send a team of experts to
Pakistan to debrief refugees who have experienced or witnessed the
use of chemical agents. Admiral Turner said the Pakistanis will not
permit direct contact of U.S. personnel with the refugees in order to
prevent refugees from being tortured and stating that such direct con-
tacts had occurred while they were in Pakistan. However, indirect
contacts were possible. It was agreed that CIA and JCS would cooperate
on a high priority basis to accumulate the best available information
on use of chemical warfare and report back to the SCC next week. We
do not want to make any charges which could be disproved and thereby
cast doubt on the credibility of future evidence. Mr. Christopher noted
that we also have a large body of evidence of use of chemical agents
in Southeast Asia, although the Afghanistan situation is the first directly
relating the Soviets to use of these agents.3 (S)
With regard to public revelation, it was agreed that State would
contact the Red Cross in Geneva and Pakistan, as well as the UN
High Commissioner on Refugees, to draw their attention to possible
violations and urge them to follow up on reports in the field. In the
meantime, a strategy paper by State is being considered on an inter-
agency basis.4 (S)
3 A reference to allegations that the Soviet Union was supplying Vietnam with
chemical weapons for use in its war in Laos.
4 For the first news report on the allegation of Soviet chemical warfare in Afghani-
stan, see “Chemical Warfare Hinted Against Afghan Rebels,” Los Angeles Times, January
State and the Red Cross or UN High Commissioner for Refugees was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
229.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, March 8, 1980
In reviewing the discussion on Afghanistan which took place at
the SCC meeting Friday afternoon,2 the President noted that the Soviets
might eventually be willing to negotiate seriously, if there is:
—Continuing strong insurgency in Afghanistan.
—Sustained Islam outrage at Soviet actions in Afghanistan.
—Sustained and improved Western solidarity on the issue. (S)
He indicated that he agreed with the SCC’s preference for Option
2 (make clear to others the parameters for neutralization which would
be acceptable to the United States and seek to shape any proposals
before they are launched). He also noted agreement with SCC skepti-
cism about Soviet willingness to negotiate seriously and concern that
the uncoordinated Western approach is weakening both our solidarity
and prospects for a longer run settlement.3 (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
stamped in the upper right corner, indicating that Vance read the memorandum.
2 Reference is presumably to Friday, March 7, on which there was an SCC meeting
where Afghanistan was one subject discussed. The summary of conclusions is in the
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Meetings File, Box 20,
3 For the issue of possible Soviet willingness to negotiate on withdrawing its troops
from Afghanistan, thereby leading to the eventual neutralization of that country, see
Document 216. Carter’s skepticism squared with the dominant view of the intelligence
community. For example, an interagency intelligence memorandum, March 13, con-
cluded regarding Soviet intentions in Afghanistan: “The Soviets will continue for tactical
reasons to suggest a certain receptivity to proposals for troop withdrawals. In the next
two to three months, however, they will probably continue their buildup to a total force
of at least eight division equivalents. Following this spring’s counterinsurgency offensive,
they are likely to conclude that even more forces are needed. Regardless of their success
against the insurgents, the Soviets intend to maintain a significant military presence in
Afghanistan for the foreseeable future to reinforce their broader regional influence.”
(Central Intelligence Agency, History Staff Files, IIM 80–10006)

Afghanistan
230.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
3989. Subj: (C) Ambassador’s Discussion With Arbatov on Afghani-
stan and U.S.-Soviet Relations.
1. (S—Entire text.)
2. Summary: I had a lengthy discussion yesterday with USA Insti-
tute Director Arbatov, who provided no fresh insights into how the
Afghan problem might be solved other than to stress that the Soviets
would never accept an outcome which made it appear that they were
being “punished.” He said the Soviets were convinced that the U.S.
had been providing significant support to the Afghan insurgents, but
he also described the excesses of the Amin regime as one reason for
the Soviet action. He thought stability could be brought about within
a few months if outside interference stopped.
In blaming the U.S. for the deterioration in Soviet/American
relations, Arbatov said that after almost all the other aspects of the
détente relationship had been dismantled SALT II was left in an
exposed position and therefore was also vulnerable. He was not opti-
mistic that a relationship could be rebuilt on arms control alone, though
he agreed on the urgency of getting the SALT process started again.
While he had no specific suggestions on how this might be done, he
mentioned the possibility of a Vance/Gromyko meeting in Vienna as
a desirable beginning. End summary.
3. Mr. Arbatov came to lunch at Spaso House March 10 with his
associate Mr. Zhurkin. The Acting DCM and I represented the Ameri-
can side. Lunch started on an exchange of pleasantries. I had met
Zhurkin at an Airlie House conference which I attended with Marshall
Shulman, so the atmosphere was easy and relaxed. Shortly after sitting
down at the table, we began to get into matters of substance. I men-
tioned that we were trying to find means of changing the present very
low level of Soviet-American relations and getting the relationship
back on track, moving ahead, and improving again. Arbatov expressed
the same general sentiments and indicated his clear understanding that
if we stayed in the present mode very long, an uncontrolled arms race
in the future would be impossible to avoid. He said he thought our
relations could not remain even in their present very bad state for long.
N800004–0400. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. The telegram is printed in full in Foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
If they did not improve soon, they would get much worse. And “many
people here in town” he said, are beginning to have doubts about
the prospects.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
5. On Afghanistan, I made very strongly the argument that the
Soviet press was blaming the whole problem upon the U.S. upsetting
the internal situation in Afghanistan and that we had specifically stated
that we had not been interfering and had done so many times, most
recently in President Carter’s letter to Tito, from which I quoted.2
Arbatov’s answer to this was, “I am not disputing your word, but
perhaps the Agency has been misinforming the State Department.” He
said his government was convinced that the U.S. is in fact training and
sending in Afghans from Pakistan to disrupt the internal situation. He
said that about three million Afghanis moved back and forth between
Pakistan and Afghanistan seasonally with their flocks and that the
infiltration of 200,000 armed Afghans would be relatively simple to be
hidden in this migration—though he added that he had no information
that this was actually happening.
6. While he stressed the role of outside interference, by the U.S. and
also by China and Pakistan, Arbatov discussed the internal situation
in Afghanistan as well as a reason for the Soviet action. He said the
Soviets had gotten along very well with the King and with Daoud and
then talked about the excesses of Amin, whom he compared with his
namesake Idi Amin. He said that the elimination of the Amin regime,
while in the Soviet interest, was also somewhat in the American interest
because they were attempting to remove a bloody tyrant, installing a
more generally popular regime, and bringing stability to the region.
7. As for how long it might take to bring about the stability they
were seeking, Arbatov thought maybe only a few months—provided
outside interference stopped. He did not dispute my point that the
Brezhnev formula seemed like a non-starter, since it was impossible
for us to pledge to stop doing something we are not doing. He did not
seem much interested in talking about other formulas for getting the
Soviets out of Afghanistan, although he thought the idea of having
Mrs. Gandhi and a group of nonaligned nations or others work together
to find some way to guarantee the Pak/Afghan border was an idea
worth exploring.
2 Carter’s February 26 letter to Tito addressed how the Soviet invasion of Afghani-
stan had changed the dynamic of de´tente and offered support to Yugoslavia as an
independent and nonaligned country. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-
zinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 22, Yugo-

Afghanistan
8. The main point he made repeatedly with regard to an Afghan
settlement was that the U.S. seemed intent on “punishing” the Soviet
Union and that they would not under any circumstances accept a
solution that made them look punished. He said that when the U.S.
was willing to cease making Afghanistan a pure propaganda issue the
matter could be treated seriously.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
12. All in all, the luncheon which took over two hours was a quiet,
unemotional exchange of views with each side claiming to understand
the other but with no constructive suggestion on the part of Arbatov
or Zhurkin toward a solution to break the impasse. The two points
that came through most clearly were that the Soviets will not abide by
an indication that they are being punished, and two, that a Vance-
Gromyko meeting might be desirable as a departure point for a new
relationship.
13. However, since there is no movement in the Soviet position
here, I am not hopeful that we as yet have any signal of a direction
for sensible movement in the future.
Watson

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
231.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, March 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and
cover page.]
Alleged Soviet Use of Chemical Warfare in Afghanistan
([classification marking not declassified])
Overview
We believe the evidence is sufficient to conclude that Soviet forces
have used nonlethal chemicals against insurgents in a number of areas
of Afghanistan. The chemicals employed almost certainly have
included irritants such as riot-control agents, probably mixed with
smoke. Continuing allegations of deaths resulting from chemical
attacks lead us to conclude that the chances are about even that lethal
agents, such as nerve gas, also have been used.2 ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
The bulk of the reporting on chemical agent attacks has come
from Afghan refugees in Pakistan and from insurgent leaders. [3 lines,
classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]
The Soviets have deployed chemical defense battalions with the
three motorized rifle divisions in Afghanistan, and Soviet troops in the
Kabul area have been seen carrying what appear to be gas masks in
canvas cases, suggesting that Soviet forces in the country are prepared
to operate in terrain contaminated by chemical agents. These units and
the chemical defense equipment seen in Afghanistan, however, are
standard in all Soviet divisions, and we do not consider it unusual that
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 23, folder 9. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. A statement
on the cover page reads: “The authors of this paper are [name not declassified] Science
and Technology Division, Office of Scientific Weapons Research, and [name not declassified]
Theater Forces Division, Office of Strategic Research. This report has been coordinated
with the Office of Political Analysis, the Office of Imagery Analysis, the Afghan Task
Force, the National Intelligence Officer for General Purpose Forces, and the Directorate
of Operations.”
2 The Soviet Union signed and ratified the 1925 Geneva Protocol prohibiting the
first use of chemical warfare but took a reservation under which the protocol would be
binding on the USSR only with regard to other signatories. Because Afghanistan is not
a signatory, the USSR would not be in violation of the protocol if it used CW agents in
Afghanistan. [classification marking not declassified] [Footnote is in the original.]

Afghanistan
these units moved into Afghanistan with their parent divisions.3 In any
event, if the Soviets were planning fairly widespread use of persistent
chemical weapons and operations in contaminated areas, additional
chemical defense units probably would be required. ([classification mark-
ing and codeword not declassified])
Soviet ground and air units operating against Afghan insurgent
forces have weapon systems capable of delivering chemical agents.
There is no direct evidence, however, that lethal chemical munitions
have been issued to Soviet forces.4 ([classification marking, codeword, and
handling restriction not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
3 [text not declassified] “A large, well-equipped and well-trained chemical-biological-
radiological (CBR) organization is organic to the USSR Joint Service Structure. Each
combat unit down to the regiment level has a sizeable contingent for CBR defense and
chemical specialists are assigned down to company level.” Noting that the Soviet military
was “known to have developed a variety of modern agents, multiple delivery systems,
and the tactical doctrine necessary for large-scale use,” the cable continued: “According
to a former Afghan Army officer who is now a member of the insurgent movement,
Soviet forces first used lethal chemical agents on 27 December 1979 against insurgents
in Badakhshan and the Northern Hindu Kush area. During the week of 13–19 January
additional lethal attacks were reported near Faizabad, Jalalabad, and in Bamian and
Takhar provinces. More recently, attacks on 3 and 11 February took place in Badakhshan
and Nuristan provinces. Aircraft dropped bombs filled with chemical agents that were
dispersed in airbursts. The CW agent was described as a vapor which felt damp against
the skin. Inhalation of the vapor resulted in difficulty in breathing, excretion, vomiting,
blindness, paralysis, and death.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box
4 Attached but not printed is a memorandum from Zellmer to Turner, March 26,
that reported on [text not declassified] study, entitled “Evidence Bearing on the Alleged
Use of Chemical and Biological Warfare Agents by Soviet and Afghan Forces, May 1979–
March 1980.” Zellmer summarized the study, also attached but not printed: “We have
advised [less than 1 line not declassified] of the intelligence community’s increased concern
over the Soviet use of toxic substances in Afghanistan. To date, there is no [less than 1
line not declassified] evidence to conclude that the chemical, microbe, or other toxic
substances the Soviets employed have been lethal.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office
of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
232.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, March 12, 1980
COUNTRY
Afghanistan/Saudi Arabia
SUBJECT
Saudi Financial Aid to Afghanistan Rebel Groups [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[4½ lines not declassified]
1. According to a prominent supporter of the Afghan exile move-
ment, each of the five Afghan political groups which joined together
in early February 1980 to form the United Islamic Liberation Front of
Afghanistan (UILFA) received 1,000,000 Pakistani rupees (approxi-
mately U.S. $100,000) from the Saudi Arabian Government when the
UILFA was formed. UILFA has been promised $6,000,000 more by the
Saudis. (Headquarters comment: See State telegram 035357, 9 February,
for background on the formation of UILFA.)2
2. Many leaders of Afghan tribal paramilitary forces fighting in
Afghanistan are aware of the sums received by the UILFA groups in
Peshawar, and some believe the sums are greater than they really are.
The UILFA’s failure so far to spend any of the Saudi money in support
of the groups fighting inside Afghanistan is creating a credibility gap
between the people of Afghanistan and the exiled political leaders
greater than has previously existed. This credibility gap has been
enhanced by the paramilitary leaders’ observations that some of the
political leaders in exile are prospering by conducting various forms
of trade.
3. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Sup-
(3150470080–3150639980). Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
that the formation of UILFA “marks an important step forward after more than a
year and a half of fruitless efforts to bring unity to the fragmented Afghan nationalist
movement.” The Department cautioned, however, the UILFA was “still a very fragile
organization” whose leaders remained “separated by important ideological as well as
personal differences.” These differences included varying attitudes toward both the
United States and the USSR and the form of government Afghanistan should adopt,
ranging from a Western-style democracy to a fundamentalist Islamic orientation.

Afghanistan
233.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, March 14, 1980
SUBJECT
Likely Soviet Reaction to Use of SA–7s by Afghan Insurgency [classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified]
1. The Soviet reaction to the initiation of attacks against their aircraft
in Afghanistan by SA–7s will depend on (1) their estimate of the level
of military threat that they could anticipate from such attacks (if not
terminated); (2) their estimate of the likelihood that the threat could
be eliminated (or managed) by in-country military measures; (3) their
estimate of the efficacy of threats or retaliatory military actions against
Pakistan for terminating the activity; (4) their estimate of the conse-
quences that such retaliatory actions against Pakistan might produce for
US/Pakistan relations (e.g. driving Pakistan closer to US). [classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified]
2. We assume that the availability of portable surface-to-air weap-
ons to insurgent forces in Afghanistan will make itself known to the
Soviets initially by random and intermittent attacks against its aircraft.
We also assume that the Soviets will believe, or will proceed on the
assumption that, those weapons were being fed into Afghanistan
through Pakistan.2 We believe they will proceed on this assumption
even in the absence of hard evidence unless they believe they have hard
evidence to the contrary (e.g. that the weapons were being introduced
through another country). [classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified]
3. A crucial consideration governing the initial Soviet response will
be their estimate of the scope of the new threat posed to them. If they
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Attached but not printed is a March 17 covering memorandum from Turner to Brzezinski.
Turner wrote that the CIA memorandum, per his conversation with Brzezinski the
previous Friday, March 7 (see Document 229), examined “the most likely Soviet reactions
to the use of SA–7s against their forces in Afghanistan. Clearly the existing pressures
on Zia can be expected to increase significantly; however it should be noted that he is
in control of when these weapons are introduced.” Carter initialed “C” in the upper
right corner of Turner’s memorandum.
craft missiles have reportedly fallen into insurgent hands. An Afghan commando battal-
ion defected on Saturday and took along 24 of its Soviet-made missiles, [1 line not
declassified]. The shoulder-fired SA–7 would be particularly effective against helicopters.”
(Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R:
stan Crisis—March 1980, PDBs)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
become persuaded that they are faced with what would at most amount
to no more than a low-level nuisance threat capable of bringing down an
occasional Soviet aircraft, or embarrassing the Soviets and marginally
encouraging the insurgents, but not capable of materially affecting the
course and outcome of the counterinsurgency campaign, they might
be prepared to confine themselves to harsh threats and minor, or even
ambiguous, retaliatory actions against Pakistan designed primarily to
discourage an enlargement of the activity in Afghanistan.
a. A possible scenario in these circumstances might take the form
of a sharp warning directed to the Paks after several incidents involving
the firing of SA–7s in Afghanistan with a clear implication that if
the activities were not quickly terminated, unspecified but unpleasant
consequences would follow. The Soviets then might wait for a period
of time (up to several weeks) to observe the effect of their warning on
the level of activity on the assumption that the Pakistan government—
even if sufficiently frightened—would probably not be able to control
the use of rockets already in Afghanistan, but that it could take meas-
ures to prevent the introduction of additional weapons or missiles
thereafter.
b. Should the scope and intensity of the use of these weapons
against Soviet forces proceed at the same or similar levels beyond the
stipulated time, the Soviets would probably take retaliatory actions
against Pakistan, e.g. starting low and gradually escalating from more
to less ambiguous forms, employing either Afghan ground forces or
Soviet aircraft with Afghan markings. [classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified]
4. Should the Soviets either conclude at the outset that they faced
a substantial military threat from the rockets, or that the low level of
attacks they initially faced was bound to be raised by the introduction
of substantial numbers of weapons unless the Paks reversed course,
we would not be surprised to see the Soviets deliver a virtual ultimatum
to the Paks followed thereafter by strong, unambiguous retaliatory
attacks against a variety of targets that could directly or indirectly be
said to associate Pakistan and the Afghan insurgents (refugee camps,
real or alleged training sites, military supply depots). If this did not
suffice, the Soviets could step up the pressure by attacking Pakistan
army encampments or airfields for the purpose of severely embarrass-
ing if not destabilizing the Zia government, and demonstrating Paki-
stan’s impotence. [classification marking and handling restriction not
declassified]
5. We would rate Soviet preference as follows:
a. The Soviets would prefer to threaten or coerce Pakistan into
terminating the activity rather than engage in high-level retaliatory
action against Pakistan because Moscow would not wish unnecessarily
to accept the risk that the Paks would reconsider the desirability of a
closer security relationship with the US.

Afghanistan
b. The Soviets might even prefer to accept the low-level nuisance
value of a fairly prolonged series of attacks to the risk of a high-level
military attack on Pakistan with the attendant risk of driving the Paks
back into the arms of the Americans.
c. However, if the Soviets were persuaded that the intensity of the
supply activity from Pakistan could not be controlled by means short
of severe retaliatory military actions, we believe they would, in the
end, take such military actions and would prefer in that case to pose
such a severe threat to the Paks so as to drive them to make demands
for security guarantees and assistance from the US so far-reaching that
the US would be unlikely to comply. [classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified]
234.
Memorandum of Conversation
Washington, March 17, 1980
[Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive
Sensitive I, Jan, Feb, Mar–1980. Secret; [handling restriction not declassi-
fied]. 2 pages not declassified]
235.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin
The conversation started with Dobrynin expressing considerable
pessimism about the longer range trends in U.S.-Soviet relations. He
feels that we are on a spiral—that both sides are becoming increasingly
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezin-
initialed “C” in the upper right corner. The meeting took place at Brzezinski’s residence.
The memorandum of conversation is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
VI, Soviet Union, Document 268.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
antagonistic, and that he does not see much prospect for an early
improvement.
I suspect that this was a deliberate line designed to “smoke me
out.” I made the point in response that he may well be right but that
what happens this year in U.S.-Soviet relations is likely to influence a
great deal the next four years. This is why we both have an obligation
to see if something could not be done in the near future to reverse the
negative trends set in motion by the Soviet action in Afghanistan.
Substance
The discussion then turned more specifically to the question of
Afghanistan. Dobrynin spoke at some length, reviewing recent history.
He said that the Soviets had no intention of moving into Afghanistan
but the deteriorating situation gave them no choice. (Incidentally, he
told me that Babrak returned secretly to Kabul in October of last year.)
The Soviets have no intention of dominating the region according
to him and will withdraw once a “stable government” has been created.
He put a lot of emphasis on organizing a new Afghanistan army which
will carry on once the Soviets have left. In response to a question, he
indicated that it may be up to a year or so before the Soviets can
leave, but he professed great optimism about their capacity to crush
the resistance.
He said that the Soviet Union would be willing to give guarantees
to us that it has no designs against Pakistan and Iran.
I responded by saying that the key issue is whether the Soviet
Union insists on imposing a Communist government on Afghanistan
or whether it desires an Afghanistan that is genuinely non-aligned and
non-hostile to the Soviet Union. If it is the former, conflicts between
us will persist because it will require the Soviet army to maintain such
a regime. But if it is the latter, I am sure that we could work out
international arrangements, including transitionally some neutral
forces from Moslem countries to assure Afghanistan’s genuine neutral-
ity. Communists could participate in such a government, even if they
could not dominate it. (I cited Finland as an example.) In effect, the
Soviets have to decide whether their objective is to make Afghanistan
into a Mongolia or whether they can live with an Asian variant of
Finland. In the latter case, there could be a relatively quick upswing
in U.S.-Soviet relations.
Dobrynin responded by saying that the above is a “harder” state-
ment than made to Moscow by “some of your allies.” He gave me the
impression that my position on this is also harder than he thought the
U.S. position actually was. He maintained that his impression was that
we would be satisfied with Soviet “guarantees” for the region and with
Soviet departure after Afghanistan has become “stable.” Our allies are

Afghanistan
more interested in the region than in Afghanistan and the Soviets can
assure us about the region.
I responded that the President in his letter to Tito made it clear
that we saw neutralization and departure of the Soviet troops as linked,
though we are not insisting that the latter is sequentially a precondition
for the former.2 I drew his attention to the sentence in the letter which
said that we would be prepared to enter into guarantees “with the
prompt withdrawal of all Soviet troops” and I emphasized that the
word “with” implied simultaneity.
I went on to say that the issue is not assurances but arrangements
that can endure. If the Soviets insist on a Communist government in
Kabul, the Soviet army will have to stay in Afghanistan for a long time
and this has objective consequences not only for relations with us but
for stability in the region.
At this point, Dobrynin seemed to hint that it is not to be excluded
that there could be some change in the Afghani government and Babrak
could become non-essential—though he immediately qualified this by
saying that he is not in a position to negotiate on this subject with me.
I responded by saying that the creation of a genuine Afghani gov-
ernment need not be the point of departure for a solution because it
is not our intention to humilitate the Soviet Union, but we do have to
agree in advance on where we will end up (i.e. a genuinely neutral
and independent Afghanistan) and then we can work on the steps of
getting there. (I have to add that the hint about Babrak’s dispensability
was quite vague and I am not certain whether it did indicate some
flexibility on the Soviet part.)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
236.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Iran/Afghanistan
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Warren Christopher
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Harold Saunders
David Aaron
Hedley Donovan
OSD
Joseph Onek
Secretary Harold Brown
W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
NSC
Gary Sick
JCS
Marshall Brement
General David Jones
Lt. General John Pustay
*Present only for Items 1–3
Justice
John Shenefield*
CIA
Frank Carlucci
Treasury
Robert Carswell*
Robert Mundheim*
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
6. Afghanistan. The SCC reviewed a State Department paper outlin-
ing seven elements of a possible policy directed at achieving the neutral-
ization of Afghanistan (attached).2 Dr. Brzezinski said that two addi-
White House Situation Room. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner.
2 Attached but not printed. The paper listed seven possible elements to achieve the
political neutralization of Afghanistan: “1) Withdrawal of all Soviet military forces from
Afghanistan; 2) An Afghan government acceptable to the Afghan people; 3) No interfer-
ence in the internal affairs of Afghanistan by its neighbors or any other state; 4) Non-
alignment in Afghanistan’s foreign policy and permanent neutrality for Afghanistan,
including the obligation to refrain from entering into any military alliance, and to refrain
from allowing any state to have military forces or facilities in its territory except by
agreement of the guarantors; 5) Guarantees by Afghanistan’s neighbors and other inter-
ested states of permanent neutrality for Afghanistan and of non-interference in its internal
affairs; 6) Agreement by the Afghan government and all guarantors on the definition
of Afghanistan’s borders; 7) Arrangements apply only to Afghanistan and not to affect
the sovereign rights of other countries.” Carter made three notations on the paper. He
inserted “prompt” before “withdrawal” in the first item; he bracketed items 6 and 7 and
wrote: “I see no reason to include these,” in the right margin; and at the bottom of

Afghanistan
tional elements needed to be added: (1) Transitional arrangements on
how stability would be maintained in Afghanistan during the turnover
period if the Soviets should in fact agree to withdraw; and (2) Gradu-
ated steps spelling out how we get from here to there, i.e., how would
we present this to the allies and to the Soviets, and how would we
avoid getting involved in a negotiating situation on issues we would
prefer to avoid. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that when he had presented some ideas along
this line to Dobrynin, Dobrynin had remarked several times that that
was not what they were hearing from America’s allies.3 Who was
taking a different view? Mr. Aaron suggested that the original German
paper, which had focused on possible concessions to the Soviets to get
out of Afghanistan, may have been the source of these reports.4 The
French, Warren Christopher noted, had contributed to that paper. (S)
The SCC agreed that the word “prompt” should be added to the
first element in the paper (“Prompt withdrawal of all Soviet military
Mr. Christopher explained that the preparation of the attached
paper had focused on the basic elements of a policy, and had not
addressed a negotiating strategy. That was the reason why the two
additional elements identified by Dr. Brzezinski were not included.
The objective was to put together a reasonable policy package which
would put the onus on the USSR. (C)
Secretary Brown noted that the seventh point was the most danger-
ous since it opened the possibility of negotiating with the USSR about
security arrangements in the region outside Afghanistan. The SCC
agreed that we should not initially raise this point with the USSR—at
least not in this form—but that the principle was essential. It would
be preferable either to redraft the statement or to hold it back for use
if and when the Soviets introduced the idea of negotiating rights for
themselves in the region outside Afghanistan. Warren Christopher
thought it important to include this point in case the package leaked
Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the sixth element did not get us
involved in a negotiation about the location of the Afghan border.
the page, he wrote: “Presumption must be that Soviets will not withdraw under any
circumstances, therefore, how to keep allies with us & win propaganda points.” These
notations were also conveyed in a memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance, March 19.
(Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensitive File, 1979–
see the attachment to Document 240.
3 See Document 235.
4 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Although we recognize the Durand line, and we have recently reaf-
firmed that position, the Durand line is not accepted by the Afghans
and some others. The SCC agreed that the sixth point should be made a
footnote to the third element concerning non-interference in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan. If asked, in that context, what borders would
be guaranteed, we would indicate our recognition of the Durand line
as the border we would recognize. (S)
With those changes, the SCC approved the elements proposed by
the State Department. The SCC recommended seeking Presidential
approval in principle of these elements before proceeding further. (C)
Approve the elements of the policy outlined in the attached
paper, with the changes as suggested above.
As amended.5
The SCC then discussed how this policy could best be handled
with the allies and the Soviets. Mr. Christopher suggested taking it to
the other six allies first, getting their acceptance, and then deciding
together how best to present it to the USSR. We may not want to seek
out the Soviets, but let them come to us. Dr. Brzezinski said he would
go over the points informally with Sir Michael Palliser when he met
with him today. Mr. Aaron said we needed to think about alternative
ways in which we might put the Soviets on the defensive. For example,
it might be desirable to call for an international conference on Afghani-
stan, including the Islamic states, China, and others. Another possibility
might be to go to the UN General Assembly. (S)
All agreed that we should take the leadership on this issue, and
that we needed to have a well-defined strategy before taking it to the
allies. A small group composed of State, Defense, CIA and NSC will
meet to work out the next steps. (S)
5 Carter did not mark either option.

Afghanistan
237.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
4364. Subject: (U) Another Look at Soviet Motives and Objectives
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary. The Soviet argument that their move into Afghanistan
was necessitated by outside interference which threatened Soviet secu-
rity through the replacement of a friendly regime with a hostile bridge-
head on the Soviet Union’s southern border does not stand close scru-
tiny. Nonetheless, the Soviets were genuinely concerned that internal
instability in a bordering country, with a Marxist government, if
allowed to continue, would damage Soviet interests and prestige. They
undoubtedly suspected that the U.S. and China would eventually be
tempted to exploit a sustained anti-Soviet insurgency, that Amin’s
excesses were damaging the prospects for stabilizing the Marxist
regime’s control of the country, and that Amin’s justifiable distrust of
Soviet intentions toward him would tempt him to consider a sharp
turn away from dependence on Soviet support with a consequent loss
of Soviet prestige. They also recognized both the ideological difficulty
of explaining the overthrow of a Marxist regime by an Islamic funda-
mentalist movement and the effect of such an event on Eastern Europe,
the Third World and the Muslim population of Soviet Central Asia.
We have yet to see any hard evidence that the Soviet thrust into Afghan-
istan was part of a larger design aimed at the Persian Gulf, warm
water ports on the Indian Ocean or the encirclement of China through
Pakistan; but Soviet decision-makers were undoubtedly aware of the
opportunities that a stable Communist Afghanistan, subservient to the
Soviet Union, would create for future Soviet exploitation of targets of
opportunity in Southwest Asia and the Persian Gulf area.
3. The Soviet minimal objective was therefore to secure a stable
pro-Soviet Afghan state. Soviet forces were intended to secure the
major population centers and transportation routes in Afghanistan,
1 Source: Library of Congress, Donated Material of Secretary of Defense Harold
information to Warsaw, Amman, Baghdad, Beijing, Beirut, Belgrade, Berlin, Bonn, Bucha-
rest, Cairo, Damascus, Geneva, Islamabad, Jidda, Kabul, Leningrad, London, Vienna,
New Delhi, Paris, Prague, Rome, Sofia, Tel Aviv, Tokyo, and USNATO. Printed from a
copy received in the Joint Chiefs of Staff Message Center, which included additional
handling instructions: “Military addressees handle as Specat Exclusive for Service
Chiefs.”
2 See Document 123.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
while the brunt of counterinsurgency operations would remain with
Afghan armed forces directed by Soviet advisors and planners. Believ-
ing that U.S.-Soviet relations were worsening and U.S.-Chinese
relations improving, even without Afghanistan, and that the U.S.-Ira-
nian crisis would minimize the Islamic countries’ reactions, they were
undeterred by potential damage to their international interests. The
Soviets failed to foresee that their flagrant intervention would accelerate
the disintegration of the Afghan Army, undermine Babrak’s chances of
gaining broad public support, and give new impetus to the insurgency.
They also seriously underestimated the damage to their relations with
the West and the Islamic world, but we believe they would have not
changed their decision to go into Afghanistan had they more accurately
assessed international reactions. In sum, we see no evidence that the
Soviets have abandoned their objective of establishing a stable, pro-
Soviet regime in Afghanistan through military means or that they are
seriously interested at this time, in a political solution that would
necessitate withdrawal of Soviet forces. They are keeping alive the
possibility of negotiations, however, in order to deflect attention from
their pursuit of a military solution, and are watching with detachment
the West-West negotiations on neutralization and other political solu-
tions, hoping that splits among the Western allies will widen and the
U.S. will stand isolated in its measures taken in response to the invasion.
End summary.
4. Two-and-a-half months after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,
many questions remain about Soviet motives and objectives in that
country. Since submitting our assessment of Soviet motives immedi-
ately after the invasion (reftel), we see no reason to alter fundamentally
that analysis. Nevertheless, the intensity of Soviet efforts to justify their
move in terms of an alleged threat to Soviet security caused by U.S.
and Chinese intervention on their southern border, the “signals” they
are sending of interest in a political settlement, and the willingness of
some third parties, such as India, to accept the plausibility of the Soviet
version lead us to take another look at Soviet motives and objectives
and to update our original analysis.
5. The Soviets, in public and private statements, adamantly insist
that their only objectives in Afghanistan were and are the perpetuation
of a stable, friendly regime and preservation of the social achievements
of the April revolution. Soviet charges of U.S., Chinese and other foreign
instigation of the Afghan Muslim rebels, if not made out of whole
cloth, are at the least grossly exaggerated. Nonetheless, the Soviets have
been deeply concerned about the steady growth of an anti-Communist,
anti-Soviet fundamentalist Muslim and nationalistic insurgent move-
ment in Afghanistan since at least the time of the Herat uprising in
March of 1979. Unable to admit publicly the possibility of widespread

Afghanistan
spontaneous popular resistance to a Marxist regime, the Soviets at that
time began to concoct charges of U.S. and other foreign interference.
However, the Soviets undoubtedly did suspect that the U.S. and China
could not be counted on to resist forever the temptation to exploit a
growing anti-Soviet insurgency and that the Soviet Union, if it failed
to act, would eventually find itself faced with a radical Islamic southern
neighbor unfriendly to the Soviet Union and susceptible to potential
overtures from the U.S. and China.
6. Soviet plotting against Afghan Prime Minister Amin in the
months preceding the Soviet invasion has been well documented else-
where, as has Amin’s awareness of Soviet attitudes toward him. The
Soviets clearly believed that Amin’s excesses were primarily responsi-
ble for popular disaffection with the April 1978 revolution, that his
removal was necessary to win the war against the insurgents, and that
Babrak Karmal could be trusted to follow Soviet advice on broadening
popular support for the regime. Moreover, the deep mutual distrust
and suspicion between the Soviets and Amin must have caused the
Soviets to consider the possibility that Amin, like Sadat and Siad Barre,
would suddenly turn against them and order the Soviet advisors out
of Afghanistan.
7. Either an insurgent victory or an anti-Soviet turnabout by Amin
would have been a serious blow to Soviet prestige and foreign policy
interests. Moreover, the Soviets would have had great ideological and
political difficulties in explaining the replacement of a socialist regime
by an Islamic republic, in contrast to the Iranian revolution which the
Soviets portray as a progressive step from monarchy. Not the least of
Soviet concerns were the potentially troublesome effects of the loss of
a neighboring Marxist state, with which the Soviet Union had a friend-
ship treaty including a security commitment, on Eastern Europe, other
pro-Soviet “progressive” governments in the Third World and even
on the Muslim population of Soviet Central Asia. Brezhnev has alluded
to those concerns in a conversation with a Western visitor.
8. We do not accept the thesis occasionally mooted that the move
into Afghanistan was a direct reaction to the NATO TNF decision or
to the growing ties between the U.S. and China. But it is certainly true
that the international situation at the end of 1979 was more propitious
for a Soviet move into Afghanistan than it might be later, if the Soviets
had let matters drift until they were faced with an imminent prospect
of losing Afghanistan. U.S.-Soviet relations were already worsening
as a result of the dispute over the Soviet brigade in Cuba, the U.S.
commitment to increase its defense spending and its military presence
in the Indian Ocean, the NATO decision on TNF rejecting Brezhnev’s
initiative to forestall it, and rapidly improving relations between the
U.S. and China. The Soviets thus saw poor immediate prospects for

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
obtaining SALT ratification, MFN, or other forward movement in U.S.-
Soviet relations. Believing that bilateral relations were unlikely to
improve during a U.S. election year, they were undeterred by the
danger of further damage to those relations. The Soviets were also
aware that potential damage to their relations with the Islamic world
would be lessened by Islamic attention to growing U.S. pressures on
Iran, and that the possibility of driving Iran into a close relationship
with the U.S. was foreclosed by the hostage crisis. Also, they have
made a deliberate effort to deflect attention in the Arab world away
from Afghanistan and onto the Palestine issue where the U.S. is singled
out as the true “enemy of Islam”.
9. We have seen no direct evidence that the Soviet move into
Afghanistan was part of a larger design to expand Soviet military
power to the Persian Gulf, to gain a land route to ports on the Indian
Ocean or to encircle China. For the time being the Soviets have their
hands full in Afghanistan, but the achievement of a stable Afghan
Government subservient to the Soviet Union would create future
opportunities for expanding Soviet influence in Southwest Asia and
toward the Persian Gulf that must have occurred to Soviet decision
makers.
10. The minimal Soviet objectives in sending large numbers of
Soviet combat forces into Afghanistan were to prevent an insurgent
victory, to replace the unpopular Amin regime with a more representa-
tive leader, and ultimately to crush the insurgents and establish a stable
pro-Soviet regime. Aside from removing Amin and installing Babrak
in power, the principal mission of the Soviet forces was to secure the
major population centers, roads and airfields. Babrak would thus be
given time to broaden the revolution’s political base, while the Afghan
Army carried out counter-insurgency operations under Soviet direction
and planning. The Soviets handled the affair clumsily and miscalcu-
lated the effect of their action on Afghan nationalism. The invasion
has accelerated the disintegration of the Afghan Army, increased the
unpopularity of the Kabul regime, and given new impetus to the insur-
gency. The Soviets equally underestimated the long-term damage to
their relations with the U.S. and other countries, particularly the
Islamic countries.
11. We see no evidence, however, that basic Soviet objectives have
changed as a result of their unexpected difficulties or that they are yet
willing to withdraw without leaving behind a secure pro-Soviet Marxist
regime. It is interesting that some of our official contacts with lower
and mid-level Soviet officials have revealed a sense of miscalculation.
For example, they have called the Afghan venture a “snafu”, a “mis-
take”, a move guided by the Soviet Union’s “pretensions”. However,
the reasons which convinced the leadership to make its move are no

Afghanistan
less cogent now than they were before, even if the damage to their
relations with others has turned out to be greater than expected.
12. While the Soviets say they were perfectly happy with their
relations with Afghanistan before the April revolution, we see no possi-
bility of turning back the clock. Antipathy to the Soviet Union and its
ideology has greatly intensified in Afghanistan since April 1978 and
particularly since the Soviet invasion. It is thus difficult to conceive of
a regime friendly to the Soviet Union and preserving the gains of the
April revolution which could survive without the presence of Soviet
forces. Assertions, such as those by USA Institute Director Arbatov,
that the Soviet Union could establish a stable, friendly regime within
a few months, if outside interference is stopped, cannot be taken at
face value.3 The roots of the insurgency are in Afghanistan itself, and
the result of a Soviet withdrawal would be a Muslim victory or, at
least, chaos and dismemberment of the Afghan state.
13. Meanwhile, the Soviets are keeping alive talk about a political
settlement, but our impression is that this is simply a ploy designed
to focus attention on alleged U.S. interference, defuse international
pressures for a prompt Soviet withdrawal, take the steam out of the
Olympic boycott movement, buy time for continuing military efforts
to crush the insurgency, and preserve their options for the future.
They seem to be watching with a certain detachment what one of our
colleagues has termed the West-West negotiations on neutralization
and other political solutions, hoping that splits among the Western
countries will widen and the U.S. will stand isolated in its measures
taken in response to the invasion. Only when, and if, they become
convinced that they cannot achieve their objectives through military
means will the Soviets seriously consider a political settlement that
would bring about a Soviet withdrawal. For now, all available evidence
indicates that they will continue to pursue their objectives through
military means, even if this requires broader use of Soviet forces than
they originally anticipated.
Watson
3 See Document 230.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
238.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Secretary of Defense Harold Brown
Deputy Secretary of Defense Graham Claytor
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff David Jones
Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Hamilton Jordan
David Aaron
MINUTES
The President began by saying that he wanted to try to keep the
meeting short and not go into great detail, but he wanted a general
discussion about what is taking place in our foreign and defense poli-
cies. It was his sense that the last two weeks were the worst since he
has been in office. We are confronted by several important issues which
are not directly related but which are tied together in terms of the
overall posture of the U.S. and the impression that our country is
making at home and abroad. The President said that after a general
review this afternoon, he wished to get together again, perhaps at Camp
David this weekend, after our subordinates have had an opportunity
to clarify the issues and define the options.
The President’s analysis of the current situation was as follows: at
best we have a stagnant situation in Iran and Afghanistan, as well as
in the Israeli/Egyptian peace talks. We have a deteriorating position,
and perhaps worse, with our European Allies. Finally, our relationship
with the Soviet Union is dormant and perhaps deteriorating as well.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
As for Afghanistan, it was the President’s judgment the Soviets
are going to stay in that country for at least a year. He thought they
were making progress against the resistance and they were succeeding
in driving a wedge between ourselves and our Allies—with the help
of the Allies, particularly the French.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
by Aaron. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room.

Afghanistan
The President said it was important to develop a definition, for
ourselves and for our Allies, of a neutralist Afghanistan and try to
build world support for it along with a concomitant condemnation of
the Soviet military occupation. Such a concept would facilitate enlisting
European support for our efforts against the Soviet invasion.2
On the issue of the Europeans, the President thought that now that
we have our COCOM proposals, we have an opportunity to test their
intentions. The French probably will not accept tighter COCOM rules,
but we can put pressure on them as well.
The only bright spot, said the President, is our effort to boycott
the Olympics. That seems to be gaining momentum every day.
As far as the USSR is concerned, the President said that he had
been toying with the idea of a frank and tough letter to Brezhnev. It
would make clear that there would be no resumption of normal trading
and commerce so long as the Soviets are invading Afghanistan. At the
same time, the letter would make clear that we are prepared to take
steps to improve our relationship if the Soviets are prepared to have
a neutral Afghanistan.
In the meantime, they must realize that we will take the steps
necessary to protect our security, particularly since their actions
threaten detente.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
The Secretary of State said he was clear in his own mind what we
want on Afghanistan neutrality, but he did not know whether the
2 In a memorandum to Brzezinski, March 15, in preparation for the NSC meeting,
Brement concluded: “The next nine months are going to be the most critical test we
have faced with the Soviets since the Korean war.” Brement based this analysis on the
assumption that the Soviet leadership, despite its surprise at the initial, vigorously
negative worldwide response to the intervention in Afghanistan, would likely dig in its
troops there and build both international and political acceptance for the intervention
as well as tactical gains in Afghanistan. Brement noted that since January a series of
missteps in U.S. policy had turned the tide in the Soviets’ favor. These included: a split
between the United States and its European allies over how to respond to the crisis
in Afghanistan; ongoing Pakistani susceptibility to Soviet intimidation; and numerous
shortcomings in the U.S. ability to punish the USSR with the Olympic boycott and the
grain and technology transfer embargoes. To mitigate these problems, Brement counseled
that the United States must strengthen Afghan resistance forces with Chinese and Paki-
stani help; increase pressure on the European allies for a united front; challenge Soviet
adventurism elsewhere through covert means; increase the U.S. military presence world-
wide; and explore alternative channels for high-level U.S.-Soviet communication. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 1,
agreed with Brement’s basic assumption that the momentum was with the Soviet Union,
but doubted the efficacy of attempting to reverse it. Instead, Thornton asserted, the U.S.
capacity to defend its “vital interests” in the region were limited: “We cannot, and hence
should not, seek to defend them where the Soviets have an overwhelming geopolitical
advantage. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
French would go along. He thought it was important that we stay close
to the British whom he thought supported our position fully. The
President responded by saying that we should be prepared to go public
with our views on Afghan neutrality. The Secretary of State agreed
and suggested that we could be most effective by staying close to
the British. Dr. Brzezinski then reviewed the points elaborating the
elements of Afghan neutrality which had been developed that morning
in the SCC meeting.3 Harold Brown commented that we should be
clear in our own minds whether the Soviet Union would accept these
principles. The President said that he assumed that they could not, but
he was concerned that the Soviets were getting away with their current
activities in terms of world opinion, indeed, in terms of our Allies’
opinions, too.
The Secretary of State thought that all the other European Allies
would go along with our definition of Afghan neutrality except the
French. Harold Brown added that the French may take the same sub-
stantive position, but do not want to be linked to a collective position.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Secretary Brown said that we have a good case to present to our
Allies on what the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan means to them. When
he tries it out on them, they admit that the oil resources of the Persian
Gulf are more important to them than to the U.S. and that the implica-
tions of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan are more severe for them
than for us. He thought it would be useful for the President to give a
speech supporting the speeches already given by the Secretary of State
and himself on the Afghan issue.4 The Secretary of Defense expressed
concern that the Europeans may be so afraid of the Soviets that they
want to appease them. On the other hand, they may simply be deceiving
themselves. He thought that we should rub their noses in the strategic
facts of life created by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
As for the Soviets, he did not believe that we needed to change
our policy of being prepared to cooperate where possible, and to com-
pete when necessary. When they push, he said, we must push back
3 See Document 236.
4 Vance delivered a speech on Afghanistan at the Chicago Council of Foreign
Relations, March 3, in which he acknowledged that no quick solution to the crisis
was within reach and a U.S. response was required that balanced firmness and “the
indiscriminate confrontation of earlier times.” The speech was reported in Bernard
Gwerzman, “Vance Urging a Balanced Response on Afghanistan,” New York Times, March
Brown delivered a speech on March 6 to the Council on Foreign Relations in New York,
that discussed the Afghan crisis in the context of U.S. interests in the Persian Gulf. An
excerpt from the speech was reproduced in the Middle East Research and Information

Afghanistan
from a position of strength. He added that we also want to move on
arms control, but we cannot do this in the face of actions of the sort
going on in Afghanistan.
Dr. Brzezinski commented that the Europeans understand the
problem. Indeed, Giscard himself had identified the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan as a strategic threat. So it is not that they do not understand.
The fact is that they are afraid of the Soviet Union and they are trying
to preserve detente in Europe, a detente that is divided from Soviet
aggressive behavior in the rest of the world. Their second concern, he
said, is that the Europeans do not believe that we are consistent. So
they do not want to go along with us and then ultimately see us reverse
our position. The Germans are particularly concerned that should this
happen, they will have to pay a very high price for having supported
us and then be left holding the bag.
Dr. Brzezinski thus said he favored a constant, measured and asser-
tive posture. No mixed signals and no radical departures.
As for a letter to Brezhnev, he was against it. Our main problem
is that we have not been able to both communicate effectively and
convey patience. A letter, he said, is a dead instrument. It does not
really convey meanings very thoroughly. He thought that conversa-
tions between Cy and Dobrynin were the best avenue. It was a shame
that we cannot talk to others in the Soviet hierarchy, but Dobrynin
had confirmed to him that Gromyko was now the only interlocutor.
Dobrynin said that Brezhnev might have been able to do it in the past,
but was no longer able to do so. He thought that a letter to Brezhnev
or a meeting with Gromyko that was not well prepared in advance
would not be helpful. The key thing was for all of us in all of our
contacts with the Soviets to be steady in our position.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the neutralization scheme, as developed
by the SCC, put us in good posture. He thought that perhaps the
Islamic Foreign Ministers might be induced to put forward such a
scheme when they met.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Admiral Turner then said that the major emerging issue from his
analysis is whether we are going to stay consistent. Thus he questioned
the idea of any neutrality proposals or any letter to Brezhnev. The
Soviets feel we are falling apart with the Pakistanis and that the Europe-
ans are beating a path to their door on the neutrality proposal. The
Soviets are not suggesting neutrality and for us to do so only under-
mines the strength and credibility of our position. The Secretary of
State disagreed with this analysis. He said that we have to put the
monkey on their back about withdrawing. The President added that
neutrality must be preceded by the Soviet withdrawal. Admiral Turner
replied that he could not see why we had to get into a discussion of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
neutrality simply to put the issue of withdrawal first and foremost.
Secretary Brown said that there is a connection since the Soviets might
withdraw with a subservient regime left behind.
The President said that Soviet withdrawal is not likely within a
year. The question is how to hold the Allies together during this period.
If we only emphasize withdrawal he thought that the Allies would
desert us. He added that Brezhnev had said in letters to himself, to
Giscard, to Indira Gandhi that the Soviets would withdraw when their
reasons for going into Afghanistan had been eliminated.5 That is a
ridiculous position, but we still have to put them on the defensive
politically.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
5 The letter from Brezhnev to Carter is likely a reference to the hotline message of
December 29. See Document 114.
239.
Annex From the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, March 19, 1980
USSR-AFGHANISTAN: SOVIET PROBLEMS
[8 lines not declassified] provided Moscow with a frank and sober
appraisal: they thought the solution lies in improving the effectiveness of the
Afghan Government and military rather than in a substantial increase in the
Soviet military commitment.
[2 lines not declassified] Moscow was told [less than 1 line not declassified]
that the ineffectiveness of the Afghan Government and its lack of popular
support was a major problem. The Babrak Karmal regime is “not governing”
and has not extended its writ. [less than 1 line not declassified] also indicated
there were continuing differences between the USSR and the regime.
The inability of the Afghan Army to carry the brunt of the fighting was
also described as a basic problem. [less than 1 line not declassified] labeled
the Afghan military “an army in name only” whose loyalty could not be
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—March 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The
full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The annex
printed here was found in this form.

Afghanistan
relied on and whose troops were demoralized. The inability of the police and
militia to carry out their everyday functions also troubled [less than 1 line
not declassified].
[4 lines not declassified] They painted a picture of scattered, small Soviet
units who face persistent supply shortages. They reported that flareups could
come in any region [2 lines not declassified].
Recommendations to Moscow
[less than 1 line not declassified] stressed that the Afghan Army must
be made capable of carrying the main burden of combat. They called for a
quick buildup of the Afghan armed forces. [1 line not declassified] called for
an increase of two to four divisions. They were concerned that, otherwise,
Soviet troops would have to carry the brunt of fighting and perform police
functions against “the people.” This threatens to involve the Soviets in a
Vietnam-type conflict.
Apparently in response to such Soviet thinking, the Afghans earlier this
month increased conscription [2 lines not declassified].
Although the Soviets did not urge military action into Pakistan, they did
recommend closing the border. We believe they would be hard pressed to do
this with the forces now available.
[less than 1 line not declassified] recommended that airmobile and airborne
forces be kept in Afghanistan until the situation stabilizes. They also thought
one additional Soviet division should be brought into Afghanistan and kept
there until order is restored. (The Soviets have had two additional divisions
staging on the Afghan border; we have seen signs that elements of one may
be entering the country.) They also wanted more transport units to solve the
supply problem.
Concern Over Future Role
[4 lines not declassified] voiced particular concern that a large additional
Soviet commitment would be a costly drain on resources and have a negative
impact on military morale. [1 line not declassified]
Implications
The new evidence confirms our general analysis of the nature and degree
of the problems the Soviets have encountered in Afghanistan. It also suggests
that [less than 1 line not declassified]. Moscow had not yet decided on how
to proceed.
Even if the key recommendations [less than 1 line not declassified] were
adopted, they would not be easy to implement. In particular, it seems highly
unlikely that Moscow will be able quickly to reconstitute an Afghan military
capable of assuming the primary counterinsurgency mission.
Although we had seen signs of reserve and even opposition to the Soviet
intervention among some Soviet officials, the pessimism expressed [less than
1 line not declassified] could impact on policy debates in Moscow.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
240.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Discussion with Six Ambassadors on a Neutral Afghanistan and Visit of Chinese
Vice Foreign Minister
PARTICIPANTS
Deputy Secretary Christopher
Ambassador Hermes, FRG
Ambassador de Laboulaye, France
Ambassador Henderson, U.K.
Ambassador Towe, Canada
Ambassador Pansa, Italy
Ambassador Togo, Japan
Neutral and Non-Aligned Afghanistan
Deputy Secretary Christopher gave the Ambassadors a paper on
“Elements for a Neutral and Non-Aligned Afghanistan” (attached) as
a basis for discussion and then retrieved the paper later in the meeting.
He said the “Elements” had not been prepared for use at any specific
event but as a contribution to the search for a common position among
us which could (1) develop ultimately into a sound basis for a construc-
tive Western approach and (2) help develop a structure which might
be useful eventually in resolving the problem in Afghanistan. The
Soviets appeared to be uninterested but not closing the door. He noted
the importance of avoiding the appearance of pursuing the Soviets and
the need to watch for shifts in the Soviet line.2 He commented on the
range of upcoming diplomatic events—the Tito funeral, the EC Heads
of Government meeting on March 31, the Islamic Foreign Ministers
meeting in Islamabad in late April, the Venice Summit in June and the
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
Sensitive. Drafted by Vest. Attached but not printed is a March 20 memorandum from
Lake and Tarnoff to Vance forwarding the memorandum of conversation.
2 An article in the President’s Daily Brief, March 24, reported Karmal’s New Year’s
address which characterized Western attempts to neutralize Afghanistan as “reactionary”
and reaffirmed that Soviet troops would remain in Afghanistan until “the smallest signs
of aggression” had been “completely uprooted.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of
the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential
An intelligence memorandum prepared in the Department of Defense, March 25, report-
ing on a conversation between a Soviet diplomat and a Polish counterpart in Moscow,
relayed the former’s assertion that the Soviet Union “rejected totally” the Western Euro-
pean proposal for a neutral Afghanistan. (Washington National Records Center, OSD

Afghanistan
preparations for the UNGA.3 We might need a common position at
any one of these and hence the value of this exchange. The group then
considered the Elements point by point.
Point One was generally acceptable to the group and several called
it essential. De Laboulaye described it as “the ultimate aim,” apparently
thinking that withdrawal might take place sequentially. Mr. Christo-
pher made it clear that all Soviet troops would have to come out first;
otherwise we might expose ourselves to a situation in which the Soviets
would control the transport lines and communication points with a
reduced military force and claim that they had returned the country
to Afghan control.
Point Two drew considerable discussion. Hermes warned that the
search for a government acceptable to the Afghan people could go on
for years and the Soviets would continue to say that nothing was
acceptable. De Laboulaye speculated that there could be a new govern-
ment in place before the Soviet troops all withdrew and it could serve
as a transitional government. Henderson said that Point Two should
be the outcome of Points One and Three, i.e., withdrawal of forces and
non-interference could create a state of affairs which would permit the
evolution of a government which would be acceptable to the Afghan
people.
Point Three led to a discussion of the Afghanistan/Pakistan bound-
ary. Hermes asked if we thought the Pakistanis would accept the Dur-
and Line. Mr. Christopher thought they would. Thereafter there was
some discussion about whether the right words should be “no interfer-
ence” or “no intervention” since a range of activities such as radio
broadcasts could lead to a situation where it would be hard to differen-
tiate between normal contacts and interference. In the end the group
preferred the words “intervention by neighboring other states” rather
than “by its neighbors or any other state.”
Point Four was reasonably acceptable to the group and Henderson
thought it would be acceptable to his government.
Point Five. Henderson was worried that the proposal for guarantees
was too sweeping and implied that the guarantor powers might have
to use force; he did not think Britain would be ready to go to war
automatically in such a situation. Hermes as well thought that the
countries involved could not give substance to guarantees. Henderson
continued that any breach of neutrality or interference would call for
the parties to re-establish the status quo. The group were inclined to
General Assembly convened in New York September 16.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
think that Points Five and Three might be brought together with lan-
guage calling for something along the lines of “respect by neighboring
states for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and neutrality and for
the principle of non-intervention in Afghanistan’s internal affairs.”
Point Six. There was no quarrel with this formulation. De Laboulaye
had some intellectual difficulties, observing that France retained an
open mind on neutralization in Southwest Asia.
There was a brief discussion of next steps. Hermes thought that
the proposal should be kept in the backyard of the Islamic countries.
Pansa reminded that memories are short. De Laboulaye thought we
should proceed bilaterally. Hermes stressed that India is the key coun-
try in this matter.
China—Vice Foreign Minister’s Visit
Mr. Christopher briefed the Ambassadors on the recent visit.4
China had viewed with concern the proposal for neutralization of
Afghanistan, fearing it would lead to permanent Soviet domination
of the country. He had stressed to the Chinese that complete Soviet
withdrawal had to be a pre-condition to any other action and the
Chinese gave the impression that they could live with the approach.
On the Olympics, China wholeheartedly supported the boycott and
the alternative games. On Pakistan the Chinese urged us to be patient
as Pakistan decided its strategy towards its neighbors, and they stressed
the need for other countries to supplement Chinese efforts to provide
military aid to Islamabad. They had expressed a willingness to work
toward improved relations with India but were not sanguine about
the prospects. The Chinese told us that the Democratic Kampucheans
in Kampuchea had done better during the dry season than had been
expected, and were pleased with the outcome of the recent EC/ASEAN
discussions.
4 The visit of Zhang Wenjin, who met with Vance and Christopher March 17, was
reported in telegram 75394 to Beijing, March 21. Regarding European proposals for the
neutralization of Afghanistan, Zhang emphasized that it would not compel the Soviets
to withdraw, that they could distort it for their political gain, and ultimately it was a
decision for the Afghan people. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
vol. XIII, China, Documents 303 and 304.

Afghanistan
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State5
Washington, undated
ELEMENTS
1.
Prompt
withdrawal
of
all
Soviet
military
forces
from
Afghanistan.
2. An Afghan government acceptable to the Afghan people.
3. No interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan by its neigh-
bors or any other state.6
4. Non-alignment in Afghanistan’s foreign policy and permanent
neutrality for Afghanistan, including the obligation to refrain from
entering into any military alliance, and to refrain from allowing any
state to have military forces or facilities in its territory except by agree-
ment of the guarantors.
5. Guarantees by Afghanistan’s neighbors and other interested
states of permanent neutrality for Afghanistan and of non-interference
in its internal affairs.
6. Arrangements to apply only to Afghanistan and not to affect
the sovereign rights of other countries.
(This is seen as a responsive or counter-punching point).
5 Secret; Sensitive. Lake and Tarnoff in their March 20 covering memorandum to
Vance noted that an earlier version of this paper, which was attached at Tab B to their
memorandum and seen by the President, omitted the clause at the end of item 4: “except
by agreement of the guarantors.” They explained “this was originally designed to permit
foreign advisors and peacekeeping forces, on a case-by-case basis, but only by collective
agreement. With the omission of the concept of ‘guarantors,’ L believes this clause serves
no purpose and that any deployment of peacekeeping forces could be dealt with through
over-riding provisions of the UN Charter.” An amended version of these elements was
sent in telegram 88719, April 4, to all NATO capitals and Tokyo. In relaying the elements,
the Department wanted to ensure that posts could “respond coherently” in the effort
to find an “acceptable political solution in Afghanistan.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D880029–1390)
6 If a question is raised as to the geographical scope of Afghanistan, we would refer
to the Durand Line as the international boundary. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
241.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
Alexander Bessmertnykh, Minister-Counselor, Soviet Embassy
Marshall Brement, NSC Staff Member
SUBJECT
Afghanistan and US-Soviet Relations (U)
Bessmertnykh opened the conversation by insisting on the need
to maintain channels of communication between us, a sentiment with
which I readily agreed. (U)
It was particularly important for us to understand, he continued,
the sour view of the US that is now widespread in the USSR, not only
in official circles, but among the general populace as well. He said he
was struck during his recent home leave by the fact that most people
who specialize in foreign affairs were taken aback by the US “overreac-
tion” to Afghanistan. We, of course, understood that there would be
a strong response, said Bessmertnykh. That was unavoidable. But what
surprised us was the vehemence of the response, the language used,
and the willingness to throw away what had been built up painfully
over almost a decade. (S)
This contrasts markedly with Soviet behavior in Vietnam in 1972,
Bessmertnykh went on. When the Americans were blockading Hai-
phong and bombs were falling right next to Soviet ships, the USSR
nevertheless went ahead with the first Moscow Summit and the signing
of the basic agreements which led to the period of detente, a period
which has now ended. There were those who counseled a cancellation
of the 1972 Summit, but their advice was rejected. We had a sense of
balance and knew what was important. It is that sense of balance which
seems to us completely absent in the US reaction to Afghanistan. (S)
The situations are hardly comparable, I replied. The bombing of
North Vietnam was in response to a major direct invasion of South
Vietnam by mainline North Vietnamese divisions supplied by the
USSR. That invasion was planned with the support and foreknowledge
of Moscow. It is not the Soviet Union which deserves praise for entering
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political
Embassy. In a covering memorandum to Vance and Turner (attached but not printed),
March 28, Dodson noted that the memorandum of conversation “should be given tight
distribution within your agency and be sent to Embassy Moscow ‘Eyes Only.’”

Afghanistan
a detente relationship with the US during the Vietnam war, I said, but
rather the other way around. American soldiers were, after all, being
killed and maimed by Soviet-supplied and Soviet-encouraged armies.
Nevertheless, we were willing to conclude the basic arms control nego-
tiations with the USSR which ushered in the period of detente. I pointed
out that from 1964–1966 I had served in our Embassy in Moscow as
the officer in the Political Section covering Soviet relations with Asia,
and could personally attest to the fact that Soviet reaction to the war
in Vietnam was far more offensive to my government and far more
“unbalanced” than Washington’s reaction to the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. Furthermore, I continued, I was surprised to hear him
allude to Soviet behavior in Vietnam in the context of Afghanistan.
Surely he was not proposing that the US model its behavior toward
the conflict in Afghanistan on Soviet behavior in Vietnam? (S)
Such was not his intention, Bessmertnykh acknowledged with an
icy smile. (S)
In fact, despite the extremely unhelpful Soviet attitude toward
Vietnam, I said, both Presidents Johnson and Nixon clearly desired
better relations with the Soviets and regarded this as a fundamental
aim of US foreign policy. I could assure him personally, I continued,
that President Carter had a deep commitment to detente, to improved
US-Soviet relations, and to the establishment of viable, reciprocal, and
mutually beneficial arms control agreements with the USSR. It was
these very goals which had made the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
so disappointing and repugnant to us. (S)
The difference with previous administrations, Bessmertnykh
rejoined, was that they placed US-Soviet relations at the center of
American foreign policy. The great mistake that this administration
had made was to reduce the focus on this vital subject. A supreme
irony is the fact that Afghanistan clearly restored US-Soviet relations
to the primacy it should have had all along for the Carter administra-
tion, and this was clearly shown in the President’s January 4 speech.2 (S)
In any case, Bessmertnykh said, many people in Moscow had given
up on the idea of trying to establish good relations with the US. There
are some, such as Gromyko and Korniyenko, who are genuinely in
favor of restoring US-Soviet relations to an even keel. But such people
only represent 20–30 percent of the policymakers. Those who maintain
that there is no point in going on with such a policy represent 60–70
percent, and this includes not only foreign ministry officials, but people
in the Central Committee as well. Many of my colleagues were really
taken aback by the pointless nature of the American response, Bessmert-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
nykh said. It is “a policy of pin pricks.” Nothing you have said or
done will have any real influence over us. I hope nobody within the
Administration believes that the efforts you have made can accomplish
anything. Such is not the nature of the Russian people. In fact, your
propagandists made a great mistake in announcing that the grain
embargo would affect Soviet living standards. That kind of threat has
a very bad effect among the Russians. We do not like to be menaced
by foreigners. You have lived in Moscow and you know that Americans
are not unpopular there. There is much good will still left over from
the war. Even if the government would want to change the views of
the Soviet people, it cannot do it. (S)
Another real irony is that despite the differences in our two systems
the American government can have a profound effect on public opinion,
which can change overnight, whereas my government cannot reshape
the basic attitudes of the Soviet population, Bessmertnykh said. Never-
theless, I can assure you in all sincerity that both in Lithuania, where
I spent my vacation, as well as in Moscow, quite ordinary people voiced
their indignation to me about this American announcement. After all,
a great many people in the USSR did not even know we were buying
grain from you. They only learned about it when our press carried
reports of your statement. Furthermore, we are not in the least con-
cerned about your various economic measures against us. It has not
exactly escaped our notice that your allies are crawling all over each
other trying to replace the US for commercial benefit, he said. You
have been reading our press and you must know the effect this has
had. Before Afghanistan, both Dobrynin and I had some influence in
toning down the way our journalists treated US affairs. But now they
have full freedom to give vent to their bitterest feelings about the
United States, Bessmertnykh said. (S)
I had indeed noticed the way our leaders have been treated recently
in the Soviet press, I replied, and consider it most unfortunate. Personal
attacks on the President or his close associates do not serve any useful
purpose. I am not sure what your journalists think they are doing, but
they should understand that personal slanders of the President cannot
have a good effect on future US-Soviet relations, and this is not just a
question of the next several months. (S)
I agree that some of our writers may have gone overboard about
some Administration figures and that this really serves no purpose,
Bessmertnykh replied. Nevertheless, you should understand that we
follow what is said about us very closely, and it is difficult to restrain
our journalists. We certainly understand and anticipate that we are
dealing with an administration that will be here for another five years.

Afghanistan
It is our prediction that President Carter will be nominated and
reelected, and our expectation that Dr. Brzezinski will be a part, an
important part, of the new administration. Nevertheless, our feeling is
that the rhetoric you have used about the USSR has exceeded what
was really necessary. You have to understand that we are no longer
living in the world of the 1950s and 1960s. At some point we will
return to a detente relationship. It may be in two years, it may be four
years from now, but we have to live together in this world. We have
no choice about that. But it will never be the same as it was. It will
have to be an entirely different track, Bessmertnykh said. (S)
Based on a close reading of your press and of what I know about
Afghanistan, what is not clear to me, I responded, is whether you fully
understand that the current low state of US-Soviet relations is entirely
the fault of the USSR. It was, after all, the USSR which invaded Afghani-
stan and brought about the very dangerous situation which now faces
both of us in Southwest Asia. (U)
Afghanistan is only the latest in a series of events, Bessmertnykh
rejoined. Relations were on the way down beginning last summer and
they have gotten steadily worse ever since then. We had absolutely no
choice but to take the action we did in Afghanistan. It was a state along
our borders. Our vital interests were involved. Hostile states were
disturbing our security. We have no intention of remaining in Afghani-
stan. We will get out. But we could not let the situation simply fall
You did not use your security needs to justify the invasion, I
retorted. You did not say that this was a vital interest of the Soviet
Union and therefore you had no choice but to invade Afghanistan. On
the contrary, you said you were invited into Afghanistan by the legally
constituted government and that you had every right to be there
because you have a treaty with the Afghans. That kind of justification
can apply anywhere in the world. And if the superpowers arrogate to
themselves the right to use combat forces whenever they feel like it,
then we will truly be living in a dangerous situation in the ’80s and
You say that Afghanistan involved your “vital interests,” I contin-
ued. But you do not explain why it involved your vital interests. The
fact of the matter is that Soviet vital interests were far better served
by the Daoud government, when Afghanistan was a true buffer state.
The President has said that this is the most dangerous situation we
have faced since the Second World War, and I am firmly convinced
that this is an accurate statement. My hope is that the Soviet government
will perceive the danger and that a reasonable solution will be worked
out to resolve this problem. (S)
But your allies are not in accord with your assessment, Bessmert-
nykh interjected. They have said so publicly. More convincingly, they

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
told this to us privately. Nevertheless, I agree with you that the problem
of how to define vital interest is a real one. The heart of our problem
is that we seem to disagree on that definition. We do not understand
how an area halfway around the globe can be a “vital interest” to
another country. (S)
I hope it is very clear, I stated, that the United States regards that
area of the world as a vital interest. The State of the Union speech is
not in the least ambiguous, and I would hope that there was clear
understanding about this very important point in Moscow. (S)
Afghanistan was, of course, a buffer state in the past, Bessmertnykh
said. We were perfectly comfortable with Daoud—and with the King,
for that matter. But one could only seriously regard it as a buffer state
when the United States had 40,000 servicemen in Iran, a country that
is no longer the same. It has changed and changed for good. So Afghani-
stan is no longer a buffer state between us. You no longer control either
Iran or Pakistan. It is Iran rather than Afghanistan that has perhaps
become a buffer state. We are dealing with a changing area, and the
United States always finds it difficult to accept change. (S)
You state that the Daoud government was perfectly acceptable to
you, I rejoined. Nevertheless, you felt it necessary to support those
who had shot and killed Daoud and who had overthrown his govern-
ment. Your response was to prop up the government of Daoud’s killers
by increasing your military personnel and economic assistance tenfold,
despite the fact that the new Afghan government was following policies
which were highly unpopular and which eventually led to the current
destabilizing crisis in the area. (S)
It is true that support for revolutionary movements is a fundamen-
tal aspect of our foreign policy, said Bessmertnykh. We have no choice
in such situations. For better or worse, we feel we have to support
revolutionary movements. “If anyone wants Soviet support, all they
have to do is start a revolution.” (S)
While we might not like your various actions in Afghanistan and
elsewhere, I replied, we nevertheless can accept that the USSR has a
right to assist those governments and political forces with which it is
sympathetic. This could even include military assistance. However,
where one has to draw the line is armed combat. The introduction of
Soviet combat troops, or even the introduction of the troops of Soviet
surrogates, such as the Cubans or Vietnamese, creates situations which
make a detente relationship between the superpowers impossible to
maintain. Furthermore, it makes no sense to view the invasion of
Afghanistan in isolation. In 1975 the USSR shipped a Cuban army to
Angola. In 1977 and again in 1978, Soviet generals commanded Cuban
troops in combat in Ethiopia. Then the Vietnamese attacked Cambodia.
Finally, at the end of 1979, you invaded Afghanistan with Soviet

Afghanistan
troops—the first time in 30 years that Soviet troops have transgressed
the boundaries you achieved as a result of World War II. This is not
something which you could expect the United States or its allies to
ignore. It sets a remarkably dangerous precedent and is an event to
which we have to respond unambiguously, so that your government
does not mistake the depth and gravity of our reaction or what our
reaction will be if this type of behavior continues. (S)
The fact of the matter is, Bessmertnykh replied, that your allies see
the situation entirely differently than you do. Not only do they not
regard Afghanistan as endangering them in any way, they rather see
it as an opportunity to derive commercial advantage in their dealing
with us. Many people in Moscow are aware of this and are trying to
take advantage of it. Dobrynin and I have worked very hard to build
up US-Soviet trade, and now it will all go to the West Europeans and
the Japanese. (S)
More important than trade, I said, is whether the Soviet Union
thinks it has the right to introduce armed combat troops anywhere in
the world to support “revolutionary movements” wherever they exist.
We have the right to do whatever you do, Bessmertnykh replied. There
has been a great change in the world. This is no longer the ’50s or ’60s,
he repeated. And what has changed is that we have achieved military
parity with you not only in the strategic field, but in conventional arms
as well. You have your troops all over the world, half a million of
them. You do not ask our permission to go into places like Korea. Your
troops are there not only to defend that territory, but to prop up the
local government. There is no reason for you to have any rights which
we do not have. We must insist on equality. It is hard for you to adjust
to this, but you must come to realize that it is a new fact of life. You
have lived many years in my country and you understand very well
that we are quite cautious. We do not undertake actions such as those
in Afghanistan without fully realizing their implications. We moved
only to protect our vital interests. We do not consider that Afghanistan
is a precedent for future action. (S)
Although you say this, and might even believe it, I replied, there
is no way that you can know for certain that what you are saying is the
truth. Events have a way of becoming precedents which can ultimately
surprise the people who triggered those same events. It is therefore
essential that Afghanistan indeed not be a precedent for future Soviet
actions. US-Soviet relations cannot stand future Afghanistans. We
therefore must find a viable way to resolve this problem. The President
suggested one such way when he indicated that the US is ready to
support efforts by the international community to restore a neutral,
non-aligned Afghan government that would be responsive to the
wishes of the Afghan people. The essence of a settlement must therefore

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
consist of prompt and complete Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan,
coupled with agreement by all interested parties that such a govern-
ment be installed in Kabul. (S)
The key to a settlement must be the stopping of assistance to the
rebel forces, Bessmertnykh countered. Once such assistance has ceased,
we will be able to resolve this problem quickly and satisfactorily. (S)
The problem does not arise because of outside forces, I rejoined,
but rather because of the Soviet invasion. A genuine national liberation
movement exists within Afghanistan. In fact, it is not one movement
but several, with roots in different regions within the country. Resist-
ance arose through spontaneous combustion, not outside help, and
Afghanistan was aflame before the world knew anything about it.
There were 300,000 refugees in Pakistan less than a year ago. Today
there are more than 600,000. These people left their country because
they could not support the government which existed there. It is their
determination to carry on the struggle which makes a long and bitter
war inevitable unless some means is found of installing a government
in Kabul which is to some degree responsive to their wishes. If your
aim is to establish in Kabul a government that is completely under the
thumb of Moscow, a government similar to the one that exists, for
example, in Ulan Bator, then it is difficult to foresee anything other
than great difficulty in Afghanistan itself and a downward spiral in
US-Soviet relations. And if we are to avoid confrontations, it seems to
me essential that we come to some agreement as to rules of superpower
behavior in the coming decades. We have signed several agreements
on mutual behavior, but the USSR does not seem to abide by such
agreements. (S)
The people of Mongolia are very satisfied with the government
they have. And you should know that the Soviet Union always abides
by agreements which it signs, Bessmertnykh replied. (S)
At that point I read him the following from the Agreement on the
Prevention of Nuclear War:
“The parties agree . . . to proceed from the premise that each party
will refrain from the threat or use of force against the other party,
against the allies of the other party, and against other countries in circum-
stances which may endanger international peace and security.”3
Afghanistan is far away from you, and we do not think that what
has happened there may endanger international peace and security,
Bessmertnykh replied, smiling faintly. In any case, we have to live with
each other and something will be worked out. But I do not see how
3 The U.S.-Soviet Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War was signed in

Afghanistan
anything can happen during 1980, since it will obviously take some
time before we can resolve the Afghanistan question. And 1981 will
also be a difficult year when agreements will be expiring. It may take
two years, it may take longer, but I am confident that reasonable
relations will eventually be restored between us, Bessmertnykh
repeated. (S)
At that point I had another meeting to attend. We agreed once
more on the importance of staying in touch with each other. (U)
COMMENT: Despite the hard edges, the conversation was entirely
non-polemical in tone. Bessmertnykh’s performance was, as usual,
smooth and affable.4 (U)
4 Vance and Dobrynin met the following day and also discussed the deterioration
in U.S.-Soviet relations due in part to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the U.S.
242.
Telegram From the Department of Defense to the
Commander in Chief, Allied Forces Southern Europe1
[cable number not declassified] NATO Secret to NATO addressees.
Subj: Request for Information (Afghanistan Rebels) (U). Ref: SY Sec
1. (C) Afghan insurgent groups can be divided into two major
categories; those groups based and operating within Afghanistan and
those groups (exiles) based in Pakistan but operating in Afghanistan.
The former represents the major ethnic groups (Pushtu, Tajik, Hazara,
Uzbek and Aimak). Little is known of their exact numbers of leaders.
Afghanistan’s tribes, especially the Pushtu tribes, have historically
resisted government encroachments. Resistance is generally confined
to ethnic or tribal boundaries. Islam, resentment of foreign intervention,
and antipathy to Russians serve as unifying motives, however, none
are strong enough to produce a coordinated rebellion. The second
category, exiles based in Pakistan, is comprised of several major groups
whose number changes almost daily with the formation of new groups,
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, JCS Support
Request, 80–81. Secret. Sent for information to SACEUR and SHAPE.
2 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
groups formed by cross-alliances and membership in more than one
group. The major exile groups are: A. (U) the Islamic Revolution Move-
ment, headed by Mohammad Nabi Mohammedi; B. (U) the Afghanistan
National Liberation Front (ANLF), headed by Sebqatullah Mojadedi;
C. (U) the Jamaat-i-Islami Afghanistan, headed by Burhanhddin Rab-
bani; D. (U) the Hezb-e-Islami (HI), headed by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar;
E. (U) the National Front for the Islamic Revolution of Afghanistan
(NFIRA), headed by Sayed Gailani. These groups vary from right-wing
professional revolutionaries to Islamic orientation.
2. (U) Exact numbers for members of each category are virtually
impossible to ascertain since members of tribes operating in Afghani-
stan can be claimed, at various times, to be conducting the insurgency
either independently or as members of one or more of the exile groups
based in Pakistan. However, the NFIRA group, headed by Gailani, has
claimed approximately 70,000 members.
3. (S) The insurgents evince virtually no interest, with minor excep-
tions, in territorial control in a conventional sense. Therefore strong-
holds in the conventional sense are non-existent. Currently the insur-
gents hold no major city. However, with territorial control being highly
relevant to the government, fighting has gravitated towards towns
where government forces are located. The best approach in delineating
rebel areas of operation is by province. The provinces where rebel
activity is currently most severe are Kabul, Paktia, Laghman, Bamian
and Ghowr. Rebel activity has also been severe in Konar and Nangarhar
Provinces, however, recent Afghan/Soviet combined army operations
and continued presence in these areas has restored a modicum of
government control. Conditions suggest that Kandahar, Kunduz and
Baglan are now beset with serious rebellion. In other provinces moder-
ate levels of rebellion occur. The rebellion is currently least serious in
Faryab, Jowzjan, and Bulkh. The arrival of Soviet forces in Takhar and
Badakhshan Provinces has tended to stabilize conditions there.
4. (S) Afghan insurgents use a variety of weapons ranging from
side arms to artillery, the majority of which were either captured or
acquired from Afghan Army units or personnel who defected. These
guns; rocket launchers; English .303, Kalashnikov and Dushka rifles;
bombs; grenades; mines and various side arms. Tactics range from
simple ambushes of convoys to attacks on Soviet and Af Army units
and include H and I fire, mining roads, blowing bridges, opening
floodgates, sabotaging water supplies, cutting telephone lines, and
destroying electric power plants.
5. (U) As stated, the vast majority of the insurgent equipment was
obtained in raids or from deserting Af Army units and personnel.

Afghanistan
Financial support is more difficult to determine. Obtaining funds is
one of the primary aims of the exile groups in Pakistan although their
success is unknown. Egypt has publicly stated that it will train and
arm Afghan insurgents. Iran has also pledged support however, the
form it will take is unknown. Saudi Arabia is allegedly also providing
support. Currently we have no firm evidence to confirm or deny sup-
port from either Pakistan or China.
6. (C) The tenor of the insurgency during the winter months far
exceeded expectations. A lull was expected in both the insurgency and
Soviet/Afghan Army operations in order to refit, retrain and plan
operations for the upcoming summer months. However, this was not
the case and as the weeks progressed the insurgency gained momen-
tum, most recently manifested in the general strike and demonstrations
in Kabul. Historically insurgent operations increase in the warmer
months. This, in combination with the increasing support of urban
populations, continued defections of Afghan Army personnel, innate
hatred of the Russians and the relative successes enjoyed to date por-
tend increased insurgent activity during the summer months.
7. (U) [1 line not declassified]
243.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 28, 1980
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #134
1. Opinion
Afghanistan: An Aberration or a Symptom?
While there is genuinely solid unanimity in your Administration
regarding the measures that you have adopted, and this unanimity
has been strengthened by regular SCC meetings, you should be aware
that in the background there still lurks a fundamental disagreement,
which has potential policy implications. I can best summarize it in
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezin-
Secret. Carter initialed “C” in the top right corner of the memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
terms of two conflicting interpretations of what is basically involved
in the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan: some see it as an aberration
from, and others as symptomatic of, Soviet behavior.
Aberration
Those who see it as an aberration tend to feel that the primary
motive for the Soviet action was defensive, that the Soviets do not have
longer-term regional ambitions beyond Afghanistan, and that they are
likely to consider seriously some mutually acceptable formula for a
solution to the problem generated by their invasion of Afghanistan.
Proponents of this school of thought do not deny that the Soviet Union
occasionally acts aggressively, but see that largely as an expedient
reaction to opportunities rather than as a manifestation of a more
sustained trend. Because of that, one is entitled to nurture hopes of a
relatively early return to more normal East-West relations, including
genuine progress on some of the more important bilateral U.S.-
Soviet issues.
Symptom
Those who argue otherwise feel that the Soviet Union is currently
in an assertive phase of its history, with the acquisition of military
power giving its foreign policy both greater scope and more frequent
temptations to use its power to advance policy goals. Soviet behavior
is still prudent, but it does involve a gradual shift from political encour-
agement of often geographically remote ideological sympathizers, to
more direct support of them through the use of Cuban proxies in the
mid-’70s, to even more direct projection of Soviet military power itself
currently. In other words, Soviet behavior is symptomatic of a long-
term historical drive, with military power supplanting Marxist ideology
as its basic dynamic source.
As you can probably anticipate, I lean to the second school of
thought. I would also argue additionally that there are certain constants
in Soviet foreign policy, and the drive toward the Persian Gulf is one
of them. I am struck by the fact that the draft agreement between the
Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, which was being negotiated secretly
between Molotov and Ribbentrop in 1940, included the following pas-
sage: “The Soviet Union declares that its territorial aspirations center
south of the national territory of the Soviet Union in the direction of
the Indian Ocean.” Moreover, the German Ambassador reported on
November 25, 1940, that Molotov told him that the Soviet Union would
associate itself with the Axis powers, “provided that the area south of
Batum and Baku in the general direction of the Persian Gulf is recog-
nized as the center of the aspirations of the Soviet Union.”
The argument between those who think that Afghanistan is an
aberration and those who think it is a symptom is not merely an

Afghanistan
intellectual exercise. Though we are all in agreement with what needed
to be done, I suspect that there are potential differences among us
about the future (and these differences could complicate planning for
the NATO Summit)2 how long should the present policy be maintained;
to what extent should the Allies be pressed to recognize the wider and
strategic character of the Soviet challenge; how energetically should
we try to reinforce the Western presence in the Persian Gulf/Indian
Ocean area; how important is it to beef up Pakistan; what is the strategic
urgency of moving more rapidly on the Palestinian problem; and,
finally, how fruitful are likely to be any early efforts to improve relations
with the Soviet Union?
On that last point, my view is that in a quiet but persistent way
we need to replicate in this new third central strategic zone (southwest
Asia) what we have done earlier in Western Europe and the Far East:
create a sense of security, and halt Soviet expansionism. Once our
efforts are credible, I think we have a very good chance to return to
detente and to seek the humane and morally imperative goals with
which I hope history will identify you.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
244.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research (Spiers) to Secretary of State
Vance1
Washington, March 29, 1980
Moscow’s Terms for Withdrawal from Afghanistan
The Soviets have not rejected the notion of negotiation about
Afghanistan. But, to the extent that Moscow has developed and elabo-
rated its views, the stated Soviet terms for withdrawal from Afghani-
stan appear to be even stiffer now than they were on December 27.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political
Schwartz, and Baraz (INR/RSE), March 28.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
When the Soviets moved into Afghanistan, they promised simply
to withdraw when foreign interference ceased. Moscow is now close
to demanding a formally negotiated guarantee by the US and Afghani-
stan’s neighbors acceptable to Kabul as a pre-condition for withdrawal,
and has increasingly identified itself with maintaining the current
regime.
Willingness to Talk
Both the British and the French came away from their probes in
Moscow in early March impressed that the Soviets stopped short of
rejecting the notion of negotiations on Afghanistan outright. Gromyko’s
public use on March 14 of much the same language as Zemskov’s
March 3 non-paper to the British—which said that the USSR had no
objection to political efforts to settle questions about Afghanistan—
had the effect of committing Moscow at least to hearing out further
Western demarches.2
Moscow seems to have been surprised by the amount of interest
which Brezhnev’s February 22 reference to guarantees evoked in the
West,3 and the Soviets probably decided not to kill off Western specula-
tion about negotiation in the hope that divergent views might emerge
thus allowing Moscow greater room for diplomatic maneuvering
between the West Europeans and Washington.
What emerged from the French and British contacts was the impres-
sion that the Soviets have not developed an initiative of their own for
settlement or negotiation. In general, their current position seems to
be a piecemeal series of responses to British and French queries on
withdrawal of Soviet troops, guarantees and neutralization.
Soviet Terms for Withdrawal
The original December 27 Soviet position was simply that Soviet
troops would be withdrawn when the stated reason for their dispatch
in the first place—outside interference—had ceased. Over the past
oral note was delivered to the British in both Moscow (by Deputy Foreign Minister
Zemskov) and London; the British Embassy in Washington then provided a copy to the
Department. The main points of the note were as follows: “above all, one cannot speak
seriously about any political solution of the Afghan problem without a complete and
guaranteed cessation of all forms of outside interference, including armed interference,
directed against the Government of Afghanistan, that is without removing the causes
which are that the bottom of the tension around Afghanistan. Thus it is now up to
the countries involved in the subversive anti-Afghan activities and in the aggression
unleashed against Afghanistan to cease that aggression and to respond positively to the
constructive initiatives of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.”
File, P880025–0607)
3 See Document 216.

Afghanistan
month, the Soviets have added the concept of a guarantee that outside
interference, once stopped, will not be resumed.
A. Cessation of Interference
According to the Zemskov non-paper delivered to the British on
March 3, “one cannot speak seriously about a political solution . . .
without a complete and guaranteed cessation of all forms of outside
interference, including armed interference, directed against the govern-
ment and people of Afghanistan.” Thus, there can be no discussions
of any kind until outside interference is stopped.
During the de Leusse visit in early March, the French inquired as
to whether the Soviets expected the US to admit that it was guilty of
interfering in Afghanistan.4 The Soviets replied that they did not require
a formal or public admission of guilt; a de facto cessation of interference
would be sufficient.
In framing their position this way, the Soviets are basically insisting
that the US and Afghanistan’s neighbors accept responsibility for the
insurgency and the Soviet reaction. They are thus arguing implicitly
that the causes of Kabul’s problems are entirely external and that the
yardstick by which Moscow would measure cessation of interference
would be abatement of rebel activity.
B. Guarantee
Cessation of foreign interference in itself would not, apparently,
be sufficient to lead to a Soviet withdrawal. Moscow has added that
there must be “guarantees” that interference would not resume. The
Soviets have not spelled out precisely what they mean by guarantees.
Indeed, it seems unlikely that Brezhnev had any plan in mind, when
4 During a meeting with the Chargé in Paris, March 6, the Secretary General of the
French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, de Leusse, reported on his recent visit to Moscow.
De Leusse recounted his opening statements on French policy toward the Soviet interven-
tion in Afghanistan: 1) France understood the insurgency as “chiefly characterized by
the revolt of an entire people against a foreign intervention;” 2) the situation had com-
pelled the Soviets to become further enmeshed in Afghanistan; 3) Afghanistan threatened
détente between the Soviet Union and Western Europe, and Soviet leadership “must
make a political decision to resolve the situation;” 4) tensions continued to rise as time
passed; and 5) France believed only a “political solution” could resolve the crisis. That
solution would include three elements: “withdrawal of foreign military forces from
Afghanistan,” self-determination for the Afghan people, and “Afghanistan should not
constitute a threat to its neighbors, and guaranteeing in particular that the country cannot
be the stake or the instrument of rivalry of the superpowers.” De Leusse relayed the
Soviets’ point-by-point refutation of his presentation, from which the French concluded
that the dialogue with the Soviets over Afghanistan left them “very puzzled” and had
reached an endpoint for the time being. (Telegram 7809 from Paris, March 7; National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
he first used the term on February 22. The Soviet position which
emerged from their talks with the British and the French is still vague:
—The Soviets see the notion of guarantees as the result of some
sort of negotiation in which the US and Afghanistan’s neighbors would
“guarantee” its security. The participants in any such negotiation would
be the US, Pakistan, China, possibly Iran, and Afghanistan. The USSR
would not be required to give guarantees since—by Soviet lights—it
is not interfering.
—When asked about international or UN mediation, the Soviets
told the French that the Afghan government alone was the judge of
what its security needs were, and that “no international mechanism
was needed.”
Nyet to Neutralization
Given the Soviet position on negotiations and withdrawal, it is not
surprising that Moscow has rejected the notion of the “neutralization”
of Afghanistan raised by the British. On the most basic level, the Soviets
simply refuse to draw a distinction between neutral and non-aligned
or accept the argument that pro-Soviet is not non-aligned.
More specifically, the Soviets have termed the British concept of
neutralization “unacceptable” on the grounds that it is intended to
undermine the legitimacy of the current Kabul regime and thus consti-
tutes interference in internal Afghan affairs. As the British were told
on March 3, questions on the international status and social system of
Afghanistan, as well as the composition of its government, cannot be
a matter for political settlement. In the Soviet view, the pro-Soviet
international alignment and socialist political orientation of Kabul were
fixed by the April 1978 revolution and cannot be the topics of negotia-
tions since this would “constitute inadmissible interference in the inter-
nal affairs of a sovereign state.”
This latter point perhaps reflects the most dramatic shift in the
Soviet position since late 1979. Moscow has now committed itself more
than ever before to the preservation of the pro-Soviet Marxist regime
and not just the maintenance of a friendly regime in Kabul. This point
was underscored by Gromyko during Dost’s visit to Moscow on March
5 The visit of the Afghan Foreign Minister was reported in telegram 4200 from
Moscow, March 15. “Particularly noteworthy,” the Embassy reported, was Gromyko’s
statement during a toast at a luncheon on March 14, during which he offered a “limited
endorsement of a political settlement” for Afghanistan. The Embassy further noted that
Dost, in contrast, took a “much harder line” on the topic of neutralization and quoted
him as saying: “Now, when it has become necessary for imperialists to recognize that their
calculations have been smashed, they have begun to think up ‘plans’ for Afghanistan’s
‘neutralization’, etc. In showing our rejection of this interference, we have made it clear
to all, and particularly to those circles, that we will not let anyone interfere in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Afghanistan
unity” of views between Moscow and Kabul and promised continued
aid and support.
Soviet Tactics
The main lines of Moscow’s tactics in response to a further round
of Western probing are likely to be:
—not to reject discussion of the Afghanistan crisis;
—to refuse to negotiate over the future regime in Kabul; and
—to emphasize the theme of cessation of outside interference as a
precondition to any other moves toward a settlement.
To the extent that the Soviets find they have to elaborate on the
theme of guarantees, they may build a position in which a formally
negotiated guarantee of noninterference, and Kabul’s acceptance of it,
becomes an additional precondition for Soviet withdrawal.
245.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, April 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, a security information page, and a
cover page.]
The Afghan Refugees: An Irritant to Soviet-Pakistani Relations
([classification marking not declassified])
Summary
Afghan resistance efforts are receiving support from families
encamped as refugees in Pakistan and from related tribes who live
in the Pakistani borderlands. Soviet and Afghan military forces may
attempt to curb cross-border activity when weather conditions improve
in April and May. ([classification marking not declassified])
An Irritant to Soviet-Pakistani Relations. Secret. A typed note at the bottom of the page
reads: “The author of this memorandum is [name not declassified] Office of Geographic
and Cartographic Research. This paper was coordinated with the Offices of Economic
Research and Political Analysis, the Afghan Task Force, and the National Intelligence
Officer for Near East and South Asia. Information available as of 1 April 1980 was used
in the preparation of the text. Comments and queries are welcome and may be addressed
to the Chief, East Asia Branch, [less than 1 line and classification marking not declassified]”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
If retaliatory action is taken against refugee groups in Pakistan,
likely danger zones are in the upper Konar Valley in Chitral District,
in Mohmand tribal territory north of the Khyber Pass, and in the area
of Parachinar in the Kurram Valley.2 The Pakistani Government may
choose to reduce the strain in Soviet-Pakistani relations by removing
refugees from the border area. ([classification marking not declassified])
More than 700,000 Afghan refugees are located in the border areas
of Pakistan; most eventually register with government agencies in order
to establish eligibility for relief supplies, and about 650,000 are already
registered in camps ranging in size from 500 to 11,000. Almost all the
refugees are Pushtun tribesmen. ([classification marking not declassified])
Cross-border tribal ties, combined with the tendency to travel in
extended family units, have enabled the refugees to survive until now
without much government support. The need, however, for food, shel-
ter, and sanitation systems is growing. ([classification marking not
declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]
2 An intelligence memorandum prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, March
27, assessed the prospects for cross-border operations into Pakistan conducted by Soviet
forces. The key judgments of that assessment were: “a) The probability that the Soviets
will conduct cross border operations is low until they determine that present military
and political efforts to control the flow of men and material into Afghanistan will not
succeed; b) Soviet efforts to seal the border will not succeed. Therefore, when the Soviets
reach this conclusion and if they are not able to neutralize the resistance in Afghanistan,
the probability that cross-border operations will be conducted will be very high; c)
Soviets have the capability militarily to launch cross-border operations at any time; d)
Political activities, such as increasingly strong, public, diplomatic demarches protesting
Pakistan support to insurgents, are likely to provide the principal indication of impending
cross-border operations.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 1, Cross-
Border Operations—Pakistan)

Afghanistan
246.
Intelligence Appraisal Prepared in the Department of
Defense1
[appraisal number not declassified]
Washington, April 2, 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, a security information page, a cover
page, and a table of estimated Soviet forces required to control
Afghanistan.]
USSR: POST-AFGHANISTAN MILITARY INTERVENTION
CAPABILITIES (U)
Summary
(S) The Soviets have committed some 105,000 troops in support of
their military operations in Afghanistan. This force, albeit substantial,
amounts to only a small portion of the total Soviet military force struc-
ture. Most of the ground and air units involved in the Afghan action
have been drawn from the contiguous Turkestan and Central Asia
Military Districts.
(S) Despite the already sizable commitment, as many as 50,000 to
60,000 additional troops may be required to achieve Soviet goals in
Afghanistan. Furthermore, the Soviets are believed to be willing to
gradually commit these forces during the coming months.
(S) We do not believe that the Soviets can initiate and sustain a
full-scale invasion of Pakistan with the force structure currently in
Afghanistan, or with the projected force structure which may be com-
mitted there within the next 3 to 4 months. Nor do we believe that the
Soviets would consider initiating such an attack until they have better
secured their control in Afghanistan. Furthermore, a major Soviet inva-
sion of Pakistan would require the movement into Afghanistan from
the USSR of a much more substantial combat force than is presently
near the Soviet-Afghan border. A considerable logistic buildup would
also be required to support this force. Nevertheless, limited Soviet
ground force cross-border incursions or “hot pursuit” strafing, bomb-
ing, or artillery bombardment of “Patriot” sanctuaries in Pakistan are
possible during the next 3 to 4 months.
(S) The current and projected level of Soviet involvement in
Afghanistan does not preclude a concurrent military move against Iran.
Sufficient forces are available in the USSR near the Iranian border to
execute either a limited attack, such as the seizure of Azerbaijan, or a
large-scale invasion to seize most or all of Iran.
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 1, Afghan Transport
System. Secret.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
(S) We do not believe that the USSR’s current and projected level
of military involvement in Afghanistan significantly degrades its ability
to initiate direct, simultaneous military actions elsewhere. For example,
presently only 5 of the USSR’s 173 ground divisions have been commit-
ted directly in support of Soviet operations in Afghanistan. Although
there has been some minor siphoning off of troops and equipment
from areas not contiguous to Afghanistan, the Soviet force structure
opposite NATO, Yugoslavia, and China remains essentially intact and
for the most part unaffected by the military incursion into Afghanistan.
Furthermore, the USSR’s military presence in Afghanistan has not
affected the capabilities of the military forces of other Warsaw Pact
nations.
[Omitted here is the body of the appraisal.]
247.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[memorandum number not declassified]
Washington, April 2, 1980
The Supply of Weapons to the Afghan Nationalist Forces
([classification marking not declassified])
The Afghan insurgents have been relatively successful in avoiding
the Soviet offensive in eastern Afghanistan over the past month. While
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Insurgents. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not
declassified]. A typed statement at the bottom of the page reads: “This memorandum
was prepared in the Regional Analysis Division of the Office of Strategic Research.
Comments and/or queries may be directed to [1 line not declassified].” In a covering
memorandum to Brzezinski, April 9, Turner noted: “Pursuant to the tasking arising out
of the Special Coordination Committee meeting on 28 March, I am submitting an analysis
on the Afghan resistance in terms of its effectiveness and how much aid it is receiving
from various sources. As to the question raised at the SCC meeting as to whether it
would be advisable to make public the fact that we are providing that aid, I would
strongly advise against such a course of action; the Middle Eastern countries who are
participating in this effort are already increasingly leery about published reports of
outside aid to the Afghan resistance, and any open, explicit admission of this assistance,
or any allusion to their role therein, could be fatal to the continuation of this assistance.”
(National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–031, Sep–Dec
1980) The summary of conclusions of the March 28 SCC meeting is in the Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 47, Security

Afghanistan
casualties have been high, many insurgents have been able to escape
over the border into Pakistan or to fade into the rugged, mountainous
terrain. From there, they have mounted successful guerrilla operations
aimed at isolated Soviet or Afghan units, lines of communications, and
districts not heavily defended by Soviet or Afghan Army forces. In
other parts of the country, insurgent activity continues at a high level,
and little of the countryside is under government control. ([classification
marking and codeword not declassified])
The nationalists’ ability to sustain such operations will depend
on the continued availability of weapons and ammunition. Needs for
equipment vary widely throughout the country, often depending on
the Soviets’ ability to disrupt supply links across the Afghan border and
on the strength of the Afghan or Soviet forces in the area. Nationalists in
the southwestern provinces, who for the most part face undermanned
Afghan army and police units, are said to have enough weapons but
are short of ammunition. In contrast, in Konarha Province, where insur-
gents have faced a Soviet assault, they reportedly do not have enough
weapons, and those that they do have often have proved ineffective
against tanks and assault helicopters. ([classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified])
So far, the insurgents have obtained the bulk of their weapons—
mostly rifles, mortars, machine guns, and occasionally tanks and
armored personnel carriers—from retreating or deserting Afghan
troops and by ambushing supply convoys. They also obtain weapons
through the local arms market in western Pakistan, where they pur-
chase locally manufactured or imported weapons and arms stolen from
the Afghan or Pakistani armies. ([classification marking not declassified])
Afghan soldiers still with their units have been a continuing source
of material, particularly ammunition. Soldiers regularly cache part of
their allotment of ammunition and sell it to the insurgents for cash;
the Afghan Army has long had difficulty paying its soldiers on time.
Local government officials have struck bargains with nationalist
groups, providing food, medicine, and other supplies as well as free-
dom of movement through government checkpoints in exchange for
protection for their families. ([classification marking and handling restric-
tion not declassified])
The insurgents also receive small amounts of arms from a vari-
ety of outside sources, but so far this aid has had a minimal impact
on the capabilities of the nationalist forces. ([classification marking not
declassified])
—Pakistan has probably provided the most aid so far, although we
have little information on the types or amount of equipment it has given
the insurgents. Most of the equipment delivered to date apparently
has been ammunition, mines, rifles, machine guns, and hand grenades.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The Pakistanis have promised additional aid if the exile groups form
a viable, united resistance effort, and they reportedly plan to support
at least one nationalist group that has already demonstrated above-
average leadership and fighting abilities. ([classification marking and
handling restriction not declassified])
—The Afghan government claims the Chinese are providing arms
and training for Afghan insurgents, but we have been unable to docu-
ment such aid. [less than 1 line not declassified] some assistance has been
moved across the Afghan-Chinese border to insurgents in Badakhshan
Province, [5½ lines, classification marking, and codeword not declassified]
—The Iranians have provided little material aid to the insurgents,
although some humanitarian aid has been given to refugees on the
Iranian side of the border. Afghan [7½ lines, classification marking, code-
word, and handling restriction not declassified]
—Aid from other Middle Eastern states has also been limited. The
Saudis reportedly have provided money for rebel arms purchases, but
insurgents inside Afghanistan claim that much of the funds has lined
the pockets of Pakistani intermediaries and Afghan exile leaders. The
insurgents reportedly have requested arms from Egypt [1 line, classifica-
tion marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]
—Exile leaders have apparently purchased some small arms in
Western Europe through arms dealers [6½ lines, classification marking,
and handling restriction not declassified]
The insurgents almost certainly will continue to try to avoid pitched
battles with Soviet or Afghan government forces. They have not been
deterred by the Soviets, however, and if anything the insurgency may
be more pervasive than at any time since it began. In order to achieve
a measure of success against any large-scale Soviet assault they require
a continuing supply of weapons, mines, and ammunition. [less than 1
line not declassified] the single most effective Soviet weapon has been
the MI–24 helicopter, and few Afghans have weapons to combat them.
A shortage of antitank weapons has also hampered nationalist opera-
tions. ([classification marking not declassified])
To this end, the insurgents would appear to benefit most from the
introduction of man-portable, easy-to-operate weapons such as the
Soviet SA–7 or the US REDEYE surface-to-air missile, heavy machine
guns, antitank weapons such as the French MILAN or the US LAW,
and nonmetallic antitank mines. Coordination of insurgent assaults
could be improved with the delivery of additional communications
equipment; some insurgent groups have set up effective tactical nets
when they have had the equipment. ([classification marking and codeword
not declassified])
The insurgents have a continuing need for money, medical sup-
plies, food, and clothing. Gas masks or other antidotes against chemical

Afghanistan
weapons might also be useful in combatting Soviet or Afghan chemical
attacks. ([classification marking not declassified])
248.
Analysis Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research1
Washington, April 3, 1980
1. AFGHANISTAN: SOVIETS FAIL TO ESTABLISH FULL CONTROL
Three months after coming to power, the Babrak Karmal regime
has failed to win significant support from the people of Afghanistan.
Soviet military tactics, though often brutal, have failed to discourage
popular resistance. Even the introduction of additional Soviet forces
may not assure suppression of the resistance during the spring and
summer months.
Signs of coup plotting against Babrak Karmal and his Parchamist
faction have recently reappeared in both clandestine reporting and [less
than 1 line not declassified] messages. These indications of a continued
intra-party struggle between the Khalq and Parcham factions reconfirm
the instability of the Babrak government, as do further military and
police defections. Information that Soviet advisors have attended con-
spiratorial meetings indicates that they may be reassessing the viability
of the Parcham leadership.
The constant barrage of government propaganda does not appear
to have won converts. The armed resistance to the Kabul government
and the Soviet invaders has grown significantly since December 27, as
previously passive onlookers throughout the country have been won
over to the Mujahedin rebel cause. Increasing supplies of weapons
and ammunition from cross-border support organizations may partly
account for the escalated nationalist activity in many areas. Participa-
tion by experienced Afghan army defectors bringing weapons with
them has also strengthened the resistance movement.
Although Soviet forces are now deployed throughout much of the
country, the government, which for some time has had little authority
in the central Hazarajat region, is on the verge of losing control in
several more provinces. Soviet military engagements have failed to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Nocontract; Orcon.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
produce decisive victories, with the possible exception of Kabul, where
severe repression of demonstrations in February appears to have dis-
couraged further anti-government activities. The massive offensive in
Konarha province retook one military outpost, temporarily relieved
the insurgent siege of another, destroyed many villages and sent thou-
sands of refugees into Pakistan. But the Soviets suffered significant
casualties in the process and reportedly continue to do so as the rebels
have again assumed the offensive in that region.
Both Soviets and Mujahedin hope to profit, although in different
ways, from increased mobility in the spring and summer. The Soviets
will be able to move heavy equipment into areas previously blocked
by winter snows, while the nationalists will be able to disperse higher
up into the mountains.
The Soviets clearly have the advantage of far superior fire power
and the dreaded MI–24 helicopters. However, they are spread thin and
reportedly suffer from at best indifferent morale and discipline. The
nationalists, who can blend into a supportive population, appear to
have excellent morale and are dedicated to their cause. Thus, the
months immediately ahead promise serious fighting, much suffering
for the population, and a continued flow of cross-border refugees.
249.
Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and South
Asia Division, Directorate of Operations, Central
Intelligence Agency (Cogan) to Director of Central
Intelligence Turner1
Washington, April 4, 1980
SUBJECT
Talking Points for Your 8 April Meeting With President Sadat
1. Action Requested: None; this is for your information.
2. The following topics are appropriate for you to draw on in your
meeting with President Sadat scheduled for Tuesday, 8 April:2
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
restriction not declassified] The memorandum was sent through Carlucci and McMahon.
2 No record of the first April 8 meeting between Carter and Sadat was found. For
the memoranda of conversation of other meetings during Sadat’s April 7–10 State visit
to the United States, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IX, Arab-Israeli Dispute, August

Afghanistan
—You may tell President Sadat you are pleased that the purchases
of arms from Egypt for Afghanistan are proceeding smoothly. Training
in the use of the Egyptian-supplied hand held antiaircraft missiles is
nearing completion and the missiles should be moving into Afghanistan
in the next few weeks. It is quite likely Sadat will ask you for a reading
on the present situation in Afghanistan and prospects for the
insurgents.
[Omitted here are items unrelated to Afghanistan.]
—You may tell Sadat that we hope the Middle East briefings which
have been arranged for him have been satisfactory. A joint CIA/State/
DoD team briefed him in October 1979, but another joint team we sent
in February 1980 was unable to see him but briefed Vice President
Mubarak. FYI: Since the beginning of 1978 we have also sent two other
teams to brief Sadat but he was unavailable to receive them.
250.
[text not declassified] Research Paper Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, April 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, a security information page, and a
cover page.]
SUBJECT
The Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan: Aberration or Symptom?
1. A short time ago we were discussing the implications of the
Soviet move into Afghanistan. We asked whether this was an aberration
which, when behind us, will see the Soviet Union revert to its previous
pattern of behavior; or whether it is a symptom of a new phase of
adventuresome policy to which the Kremlin is already committed.2
Subsequently, I asked our Soviet experts to look at these two possible
explanations for Soviet behavior in Afghanistan. They have written the
attached paper which I believe is very helpful in putting these two
explanations into perspective. [classification marking and handling restric-
tion not declassified]
2. It concludes that Soviet behavior in the future will be quite
contingent on the conclusions which the Soviet leadership draws from
the results of their experience in Afghanistan and US reactions to it.
In short, the Soviets are neither committed to returning to detente nor
to pursuing an aggressive policy on a global basis. [classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified]
3. I would only add a personal comment that I would be a bit
more categoric than the paper in stating that the Soviet behavior in
Afghanistan was not an aberration. I agree that we do not have evidence
that the Soviets are firmly committed to continuing as aggressive a
policy in the third world as was this Afghan example. Yet, I do believe
that the Soviet track record over the past five or six years indicates
a definitely greater willingness to probe the limits of our tolerance.
“Detente” was not a bar to their greater assertiveness in Angola, Ethio-
pia, Kampuchea, and Yemen. It need not be so again, even if we return
to detente. As the paper concludes, how assertive the Soviets will be
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
[handling restriction not declassified]. In a note forwarding the attached memorandum to
Turner, Clarke explained: “Herewith the paper on the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan:
Aberration or Symptom prepared by Horelick, [less than 1 line not declassified]. The paper
was requested from you by Brzezinski. It is solely the product of the NIO/USSR office
and has not been further coordinated. I recommend that you send this on to the White
House.” (Ibid.)
2 For Brzezinski’s analysis on this topic, see Document 243.

Afghanistan
in the future will very likely depend upon how “successful” the Soviet
leadership views their intervention in Afghanistan to have been. [classi-
fication marking and handling restriction not declassified]
Stansfield Turner3
Attachment
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency4
Washington, April 10, 1980
[Omitted here is a summary.]
SUBJECT
The Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan: Aberration or Symptom?
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has precipitated a sharp debate
over its significance. On one side, some offer Afghan-specific explana-
tions to argue that the move is an episodic aberration in an otherwise
generally circumspect pattern of Soviet behavior. On the other side of
the debate are those who hold that the invasion represents the opening
of a new and more aggressive phase in what promises to be an escalat-
ing global competition.
Proponents of the first view concede that the invasion represents
Moscow’s first postwar use of combat forces outside the Soviet Bloc.
But they emphasize Afghanistan’s status as a Soviet client and ally and
suggest that the invasion was the result of a reluctant decision by
Moscow that it could not permit the collapse of a proto-socialist allied
regime in a neighboring country which was an incipient bastion of
anti-Communist Islamic fundamentalism, if not a potential client of
the US or the PRC.
Proponents of the second view contend that the invasion is symp-
tomatic of Moscow’s growing willingness to play a worldwide inter-
ventionist role and to resort to the direct use of Soviet military force
in the pursuit of otherwise unattainable ambitions. As these analysts
see it, Moscow is convinced that “the correlation of forces” has shifted
to its side, creating a situation in which actions that it would previously
have rejected as “adventuristic” can now be confidently undertaken.
Some analysts of this persuasion even argue that Moscow’s new found
confidence has led it to embark on a calculated plan to fill the unprece-
3 Turner signed “Stan” above his typed signature.
4 Secret.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
dented vacuum of power in Southwest Asia and consolidate a position
of privileged access to Middle Eastern oil and control over oil supply
routes. In this way, the Soviet Union would be assured of a solution
to its own emergent energy problem, and also win immense leverage
against the West—leverage which, among other things, Moscow could
utilize to forestall the sort of Western military buildup which could
redress the currently favorable “correlation of forces”.
Rather different policy implications flow from these alternative
explanations and expectations of Soviet behavior. The first implies that
if the Soviet Union can be induced to withdraw from Afghanistan in
return for suitable “reassurances” it will revert to a more acceptable
pattern of behavior and may even show a heightened appreciation of
the value (and fragility) of “detente”. According to this view, the pres-
ent Soviet predicament is in large part the product of miscalculation
which is now recognized as such. This has led to a situation in which
the mutual interests of the West and the Soviet Union lie in fashioning
a face-saving solution which will permit the resumption of normal
relations.
The second view holds that the Soviet Union is determined to
maintain a permanent military presence in Afghanistan and will use
it to bolster its geopolitical position in the region, to bring pressure to
bear on neighboring and nearby countries, to discredit or nullify West-
ern security guarantees, and to highlight Western weakness and irreso-
lution. With reference to detente, this view holds that the Soviets are
prepared to write off for the time being what they already perceived
before Afghanistan as unsatisfactory levels of US trade, credits and
technology transfers. Simultaneously, Moscow will seek to preserve
and extend its commercial relations with Western Europe, and Japan
through what it believes can be a successful policy of “differentiated
detente”.
The relevance of the central and regional military balances for the
Soviet decision to intervene in Afghanistan is also at issue in these
contrasting views of Soviet behavior. Members of the aberrationist
school are inclined to believe that shifts in the military balance over
the course of the last ten to fifteen years were essentially irrelevant
with respect to the Afghanistan intervention. Given the identical set
of circumstances, they contend, the Soviets would have intervened in
Afghanistan ten or fifteen years ago, as they did in Hungary in 1956.
In contrast, those who view the invasion as reflecting a higher Soviet
propensity to take risks hold that it was precisely the shift in the
military balances of the past ten to fifteen years that emboldened the
Soviets for the first time to employ military force directly against a
non-bloc state. As these analysts see it, the shifting strategic balance
has created a military environment in which Soviet recourse to force
became both physically possible and politically attractive.

Afghanistan
We believe that each of these divergent viewpoints captures impor-
tant aspects of reality, but that each also omits important considerations.
If taken alone, each has potentially misleading policy implications. Like
those who view the intervention as an aberration, we believe it was
triggered by Afghan-specific events and did not in itself stem from or
reflect a conviction that the time was ripe for a global offensive, let
alone from a belief that it was a necessary (or even a very sensible)
first step in the pursuit of warm water ports or control of Middle
Eastern oil. Like the aberrationists, we also believe that the timing of
the Soviet decision to intervene was critically affected by fear of an
imminent, and possibly irreversible, disintegration of the established
Kabul regime and its replacement by a regime which might even prove
susceptible to hostile external influence. In addition, we share the aber-
rationists’ belief that the invasion of Afghanistan was defensive in the
sense that it was motivated by fear that the loss of a country from
within the Soviet sphere of influence would have an extremely adverse
effect on Moscow’s credibility as a power determined to brook no
challenge to the integrity of its empire or to the irreversibility of “social-
ist” gains.
We are also inclined to agree with some of the arguments of those
who see the invasion as an expression of a more fundamental shift in
global Soviet policy. We believe it is probably the Soviet perception
that their enhanced military posture, especially in the strategic area,
has created a more permissive political environment for the conduct
of foreign policy. It has lowered the perceived risk of Soviet exploitation
of political and social instability in the Third World, and of a more
assertive foreign policy that has included the use of military force,
either directly or through proxies, in some Third World countries.
Growing Soviet military aid efforts have served as the main conveyor
of Soviet influence—in Angola, Ethiopia, Yemen, etc. The calculations
that informed the invasion of Afghanistan, therefore, were not without
precedent. Afghanistan involved the crossing of an important thresh-
old, and was recognized as such by the Soviet leadership. But, as we
have also pointed out, it was preceded by a gradual, decade-long
escalation in Soviet political-military involvement in the Third World.
The decision to solve the Afghanistan problem by an unprece-
dented massive military intervention in a “Third World” country is a
culmination of this process. It reflects a confidence that the shift in the
global military balance, as the Soviets perceive it, guaranteed the USSR
immunity from Western military retaliation, and has created new possi-
bilities to demonstrate the apparent inability of the West to deter Soviet
self-assertiveness. The possibility that Afghanistan represents a qualita-
tive turn in Soviet foreign policy in the region and toward the Third
World is one to be taken seriously. The Soviets recognize that the issue

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
of super-power involvement in a region that stretches from Morocco
to the Indian subcontinent remains the vital question informing the
posture and policies of the nations in the region.
On balance, we tend to disagree with the argument that ascribes the
USSR’s Third World involvement and its involvement in Afghanistan
largely to Soviet feelings of insecurity. We would argue that such
behavior is more the product of confidence in a potentially enduring
shift in the balance of power—a stronger sense of being a superpower
and being perceived by others as such. This status and self-image has
become an important determinant of Soviet behavior; a superpower
would not let an “allied” regime in a bordering country go down the
drain. At the same time, from the Soviet point of view, Afghanistan
probably appeared an extremely low risk venture precisely because it
was preceded by numerous ventures which, though they did not
involve the direct use of large-scale Soviet forces, did involve an active
Soviet military presence in countries remote from the borders of the
Soviet Union, and located well within traditional Western spheres of
influence. The Soviet ability to carry out these ventures without incur-
ring drastic costs enhanced Moscow’s confidence that it could intervene
with relative impunity in Afghanistan. Perhaps to Moscow’s surprise,
this intervention did finally precipitate the sort of Western reaction
that the Kremlin may well have feared, but tended to discount in view
of the relatively passive reaction to its earlier involvements elsewhere.
Even if those who see the invasion as an aberration were completely
correct in their explanation, there would be grounds for skepticism
about the policy implications they often tend to draw: namely, that if
the USSR can terminate its Afghan adventure in relatively short order
and without an undue loss of face, it is unlikely to try to expand its
influence elsewhere in Southwest Asia or to challenge Western Third
World interests militarily. However, unlike the symptomists, we do
not take it to be an almost foregone conclusion that the invasion of
Afghanistan will be followed by comparable acts of Soviet military
self-assertiveness. Like the aberrationists, we consider it possible that
the termination of the Afghan adventure will leave the Soviet Union
willing and eager to resume the process of detente. However, as was
true before the invasion, the Soviets will continue to interpret detente
as permitting active military and quasi-military challenges to Western
Third World interests.
The real issue of this discussion—whether the Afghanistan invasion
represents an aberration or a trend in Soviet policy—is the degree of
restraint which has governed Soviet policy toward opportunities in
the Third World, the nature and sources of that restraint, and changes
in it. Some would acknowledge that while Soviet policies since the
mid-1970’s have been more assertive and probing, such policies also

Afghanistan
reflect caution and risk-avoidance, imposed in part by Moscow’s desire
to preserve its detente and arms control relationships with the US.
While a combination of these motives contributed to the Soviet decision
to invade, one can only explain that decision in the broader context of
Soviet perceptions of a more favorable global military position and a
greater latitude for risk. If one subscribes to the idea that the Soviet
propensity to take risks is higher, however, one must realize that an
ongoing cost-benefit analysis will continue to shape Moscow’s policies
toward the Third World.
While we disagree with those who argue that the Soviets are hence-
forth irrevocably committed to the direct use of their own military
force to aggrandize power in the Third World, we agree with them
that Afghanistan could be a precedent if the Soviets conclude it was
an appropriate solution to the Afghan problem, if they perceive that
it places them in a position from which they can exert pervasive lever-
age in Southwest Asia, and if they conclude that the West is either
incapable or unwilling to frustrate the effort or to oblige the Soviet
Union to pay a counterbalancing military or political price elsewhere.
In short, the answer to the question of whether or not Afghanistan is
a harbinger of things to come will depend importantly on the “lessons”
that are drawn from the Afghan experience by the present incumbents
in the Kremlin and the successors who will shortly replace them.
In sum, we believe that Afghanistan is neither an aberration which,
when behind us, will see the Soviet Union revert to its previous pattern
of behavior, nor a symptom of a new phase of adventuresome policy
to which the Kremlin is already committed. We believe that future
Soviet behavior will be more contingent, the result of conclusions the
Soviet leadership reaches after an analysis of the costs and benefits of
the invasion. A generally assertive Soviet policy will almost certainly
continue, but whether it is more constrained in use of military force
or not will depend importantly on the “lessons of Afghanistan”: the
outcome of the situation in that country, its impact on the region, and
on US allies, but, above all, on Soviet perceptions of US reactions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
253.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
1348. Subject: Coordinating Relations With Afghan Regime. Ref:
State 76559.2
1. (C—Entire text)
2. We share Department’s concern as expressed in reftel about how
long we can continue to avoid diplomatic contact with the Babrak
Karmal regime and still expect to function as a diplomatic mission in
Kabul. We have already seen the kinds of pressure the DRA can apply
to “encourage” us to move towards more normal diplomatic relations:
when we were unsuccessfully seeking consular access to two impris-
oned Americans we were told that “something might be done” if we
took it up at the political level; and we and other Embassies which
refrain from diplomatic dealings with the regime are being subjected
to a more restrictive visa policy than “friendly” countries, and this
could impact on our operations here.3 There are obviously many other
similar ways the DRA could try to pressure us into upgrading our
relations with it.
3. We have been discussing this problem with selected diplomatic
colleagues and on April 13, after a false start or two, I got the UK,
French, Italian, German and Japanese Chargés together for lunch to
discuss it as a group. While everyone agreed that we are on thin ice
here, all seemed to have different (and not very well thought out)
notions of what we might be able to do to improve the situation. All
are under general instructions to refrain from diplomatic contacts with
the DRA. However, except for the UK Chargé, they are unwilling to
exercise the slightest initiative in interpreting that instruction without
referring back to their capitals. (The four EC Chargés have been meeting
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
Ankara, Bonn, Islamabad, London, Moscow, New Delhi, Paris, Rome, and Tokyo. Printed
from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
States could maintain a diplomatic presence in Kabul while avoiding contact with the
Karmal government. The Department stated that U.S. policy on this matter should
be coordinated with its allies. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
detention of Charles Brockunier, a U.S. citizen and rug buyer who was detained by
Afghan police for alleged suspicious activity. The Embassy advised Brockunier to leave
Afghanistan immediately because, as a private citizen, it could offer him no protection.

Afghanistan
regularly twice a week to coordinate their activities in accordance with
instructions from home, and some of them resent it if one of their
number does something out of step with the others; see Kabul 1340/
Notal.)4 My initial impression is that regular monthly meetings like
Sunday’s will have some value in keeping one another informed of
current thinking on these matters in our capitals and in coordinating
our tactics locally to the extent allowed by national policies but will
be of very little use in coming up with innovative ideas to help shape
those policies. These meetings could be useful in reinforcing USG policy
proposals which are also made in the respective capitals or to the
Embassies in Washington, but my guess is that not much would come
of trying to use the Kabul Chargés as a means of channeling USG
suggestions to their governments.
4. The following summarizes the personal views of those at Sun-
day’s meeting on how we can best maintain our diplomatic presence
in Kabul without undercutting our policy of nonrecognition and the
avoidance of diplomatic contact. (Please protect the Chargés in any
discussions with other governments.) The British Chargé believes that
eventually, and probably sooner rather than later, we will have to
expand our contacts with the regime somewhat beyond the current
administrative and consular areas if we are to protect our interests
here. He believes this can be done in an incremental, non-dramatic
way and that if necessary enough disclaimers can be built in to assure
there is no implication that we “recognize” or approve of the regime.
The German, on the other hand, believes we ought not to increase our
dealings with the DRA but wait the situation out. He thinks we should
be able to find ways to reciprocate and make our displeasure known
if the regime does something we can’t put up with, but he wasn’t able
to suggest specific measures when various situations were posed. The
French Chargé felt it was important not to do anything to jeopardize
future good relations while waiting for the “very awkward” political
situation to get better. (Most of the French Embassy staff here, the
largest of any non-Communist country, is concerned with maintaining
and improving cultural ties with France.) The Italian tended to agree
with the British Chargé, while the Japanese didn’t offer an opinion.
5. My own view is that for the time being, at least, we can live
with the present arrangement in spite of the difficulties we may increas-
ingly face in our day-to-day operations and that it is probably worth-
while doing so for the sake of our overall objectives. (Not everyone in
the Embassy agrees; some believe, as the British Chargé does, that if
were experiencing in obtaining exit visas. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800186–1198)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
we want to continue functioning here we are going to have to offer
something to the DRA in return.) In my opinion, the DRA and the
Soviets need us here so they can continue to maintain that everything
has returned to normal in Afghanistan (and the Afghans may also
consider our presence a potentially useful hedge against total depend-
ence on the Soviets), but they want us here on their own conditions
or as close to them as they can get. They want a very small Embassy
so we have a limited capability to do the things they know we are
trying to do; they want to make it difficult for us to rotate TDY personnel
in and out of Kabul because that increases their problems of surveillance
and control; and they want to put obstacles in our way so they can
trade the removal of those obstacles for U.S. concessions. But they do
not want to push us so far that we pack up and leave, and we can use
that knowledge to defend ourselves against their moves. While the
Afghans are unpredictable and often illogical, they have shown that
they understand and respond to firm counterpressure (witness their
back-down when the Pakistani Chargé threatened reciprocal action on
visas), and we should not be afraid to play tit-for-tat with them. Where
there is no exactly reciprocal action we can take, as there is in the visa
field, we should be able to find something else that hurts about as
much. Our hole card is the threat to close down our Embassy and
encourage others to leave as well, demonstrating to the world that
claims of normalcy and legitimacy are pure hogwash. It goes without
saying that we should not threaten this action unless we can afford to
go through with it, and that is a judgment I cannot make from here.
But if, as I believe, the Afghans need us here more than we need to
be here, toughing it out is probably our best policy.
Mills

Afghanistan
254.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research (Spiers) to Secretary of State
Vance1
Washington, April 17, 1980
Afghanistan: The Soviets Settle In
Since their invasion in December, the Soviets have encountered
more resistance and instability in Afghanistan than they anticipated.
Yet, despite several thousand Soviet casualties and continued interna-
tional criticism, there are no indications that Moscow is seriously con-
sidering any change in its basic policy of preserving a pro-Soviet regime
in Kabul. Its words and actions suggest that it hopes to ride out the
present difficult situation, slowly—very slowly—rebuild the Afghan
army and government, and avoid being forced to commit still larger
numbers of Soviet forces to achieve its aim.
Insurgency Continues, Regime Shaky
Three months after the Soviet-engineered coup that brought it
to power, the Babrak Karmal regime has still been unable to garner
significant popular support and remains in power only because of the
presence of Soviet troops. The insurgents continue to threaten major
urban areas, while constantly ambushing and engaging Soviet and
Afghan troops in the countryside. Within the government itself, there
remains a bitter Khalqi-Parchamist rivalry, and recently, new rumors
of coup plotting have surfaced. Internationally, the Babrak Karmal
regime has failed to win any important recognition outside of the Soviet
bloc and its hangers-on.
Although the rebels cannot stand up to concerted Soviet military
strikes, their hit-and-run tactics have thus far made any Soviet gains
temporary. Soviet forces can pacify an area or province, but once with-
drawn, the rebels return. While the Soviets have been able to restore
a semblance of order in Kabul after last February’s riots and general
strike, they have only been able to do so by assuming more and more
of the security burden themselves.2 Even with this greater Soviet role,
however, there is no guarantee that Kabul and other cities will not
erupt again.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political
April 16. An unknown hand initialed for Spiers. A stamp on the memorandum indicates
Newsom saw it on April 18.
2 See Document 217.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The USSR’s growing military and security involvement has been
necessitated by the continued disintegration of the Afghan forces. The
Afghan army currently has little more than 30,000 men; it is question-
able whether it could field more than 10,000 at any one time. Soviet
military officials in Afghanistan have reportedly complained about
the Afghan army’s disarray and have expressed grave doubts about
its loyalty.
No Change in Sight
The current situation in Afghanistan—and the likelihood that it
will continue for some time—raises the question of whether the Soviets
are approaching the point at which they will have to decide to increase
substantially their military commitment in order to eradicate the insur-
gency once and for all or pursue some sort of political solution that
would allow them to extricate themselves from what is quickly becom-
ing the Afghan quagmire. While there are indications that at least
individual officials in the Soviet ministry of foreign affairs and military
have grave doubts about the wisdom of the present Soviet course, there
are no signs that Moscow is now seriously rethinking its policy. Indeed,
the present situation in Afghanistan may well have confirmed the
Soviet leadership in the wisdom of its decision to intervene in the first
place on the grounds that if the USSR had not, the situation would be
far worse.
Despite Moscow’s insistence that it is in favor of a political solution
to the Afghan problem, the Soviets have rebuffed any initiatives requir-
ing compromises on their part and have meanwhile stiffened their
own maximalist position. In discussions in March with the French and
British, for example, the Soviets insisted that the US and Afghanistan’s
neighbors must “guarantee” that all outside interference in Afghanistan
has ceased, and would not resume, before Moscow would even con-
sider withdrawing its troops. Lately, they hinted that any solution must
include the entire region and that “guarantees” of non-intervention
must also include Iran.
Over the last two months, the Soviets have made it clear that the
Afghan Marxist revolution is an historical fact and must be preserved
and protected. Their public support for the Babrak Karmal regime as
the only legitimate government of Afghanistan has been complete,
though rumors abound that they are seeking a more effective Afghan
puppet than Babrak. In reply to Western and Iranian proposals to
discuss the “neutralization” of Afghanistan, Moscow has insisted that
neither the “socialist” nature of the Afghan government nor its interna-
tional status can be open for outsiders to negotiate.
At the same time, the Soviets are attempting to portray the Karmal
regime as the effective government if Afghanistan capable of carrying

Afghanistan
out its international obligations, in a perfectly normal manner. In early
April, the USSR agreed to a $150 million economic grant for Kabul,
and appears to be encouraging the East Europeans to help alleviate
the dismal Afghan economic situation and to give the illusion at least
of socialist solidarity. Soviet propaganda has extolled the reforms of
the Kabul regime and attempted to portray the rebels as, “bandits”
controlled by reactionary mullahs and egged on by outside “imperial-
ist” provocateurs. Hardly a week has gone by in which the Soviet
media have not highlighted the visit of an Afghan delegation or senior
official to the USSR or Eastern Europe. Similarly, the Soviets have
given favorable play to the Cuban foreign minister’s recent trip to
Afghanistan and have used the occasion to re-emphasize Kabul’s
nonalignment.
Soviet Hopes
Although they underestimated the intensity of international and
Islamic criticism, the Soviets certainly anticipated some trouble. How-
ever, they apparently expected it to be short-lived and no greater in
duration and severity than after Czechoslovakia in 1968. In this they
were wrong. But they may be heartened by signs of obvious differences
in tactical approach between the US, the West Europeans, and Japan
on issues of current political, cultural, and economic relationships with
the USSR. Moscow is still probably counting on the stake of America’s
allies in detente in Europe to lead them to accept the intervention as
a fait accompli.
In terms of the regional response to the Soviet action, Moscow may
also believe it has seen the worst. Relations with Iran appear no worse
than they would have been if there had been no invasion, and, in any
case, US-Iranian relations remain in shambles. Similarly, Pakistan has
yet to embrace openly the rebel cause and is hesitating to align itself
with the US. Moscow probably believes that this is a result of its policy
of playing on Islamabad’s fear of Soviet retribution while offering
reassurances and increased aid. Moscow probably also judges that the
damage to its relations with India has been negligible because of New
Delhi’s concern over increased US aid to Pakistan and its suspicions
of China. Further afield, the Soviets are probably still calculating that
they can eventually refocus Arab attention away from Afghanistan to
the Palestinian and Iranian problems and, thus, on the US.
Military Commitment Remains
In any case, Moscow is not backing away from its military commit-
ment in Afghanistan. During Afghan Foreign Minister Dost’s visit to
Moscow in March, the Afghans and Soviets signed an agreement on
the stationing of forces which provides for the “temporary” presence
of Soviet troops in Afghanistan. Presumably, this agreement is similar

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to those which the USSR has with Warsaw Pact countries. The Soviets
have also proceeded with the construction of permanent barracks and
garrison areas and are reportedly restructuring some of their units in
Afghanistan in order to wage a more effective counterinsurgency
campaign.
It can be expected that with the arrival of good weather, Soviets will
step up their operations against the rebels. Operations will probably
be concentrated in the eastern provinces where the insurgents have
been most active. Closing the border with Pakistan to rebel movements
will surely be one of the aims. While this offensive will result in consid-
erable bloodshed on both sides, it will probably not be decisive. The
resistance may be forced to subside momentarily to regain its breath,
but its almost certain revival will continue the attrition of Soviet forces
in Afghanistan.
Limiting the Cost
The Soviets seem prepared to shoulder the Afghan burden for
some time to come, but there are signs that they hope to accomplish
their goals without significantly augmenting their forces. Since late
February, Soviet troop levels have not greatly increased and now num-
ber 85,000 in Afghanistan and another 30,000 involved in the interven-
tion, but held just across the border in the USSR. While they will
probably augment these slowly over the next month or so, there are
no indications they plan a massive increase. Unless the Soviets dramat-
ically increase these forces—which they may have to consider if opera-
tions this spring and early summer falter badly—they remain unlikely
to crush the insurgency quickly. However, for now, they seem in no
hurry and appear to prefer to test their capability to do the job with
their present forces for a full campaign season. Their current game
plan for stabilizing the situation includes the start of a long-term effort
to rebuild the Afghan armed forces, as well as limited combat engage-
ments for Soviet troops which are enough to hold the major cities and
to prevent general deterioration.

Afghanistan
255.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Dobrynin’s Call on Secretary
PARTICIPANTS
Secretary of State
Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin
EUR—George S. Vest
SUMMARY: Dobrynin came in to turn down our proposal to have
arms control talks in connection with TNF. Other subjects covered were
Afghanistan, Iran, the Middle East, SALT, Soviet harassment of our
representatives in Leningrad and future travel plans of the Secretary.
End Summary.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
2. Afghanistan.
Secretary asked Dobrynin to clarify what was indeed the Soviet
position on Afghanistan. Dobrynin said that the Babrak Government
had a good proposal (publicly announced by the Afghanistan Govern-
ment on April 17).2 The first step would be a discussion among the
three neighboring countries—Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan—about
their borders. The Soviets supported that idea because, after all, there
had been historically much trouble about those borders. The decision
could create a peaceful atmosphere and if some countries wanted to
guarantee the results such as the Soviets, the U.S. or European countries,
the Soviets would be prepared for it. A second step would be to enlarge
the discussions leading to a pact of non-interference, disarmament,
etc., among the three neighbors, and of course there could be guarantees
for this as well. A third step, which seemed not likely to be acceptable,
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Secret. Drafted by Vest. The meeting took place in Vance’s office. The main points of
the discussion on Afghanistan were relayed in telegram 107514 to Bonn and other posts,
2 On April 17, the Afghan Government announced its intention to attempt to normal-
ize relations with Iran and Pakistan. News reports quoted unnamed Western diplomats
who characterized the move as a Soviet-directed attempt to mitigate the international
boycott of the Soviet-hosted Olympics and to dampen worldwide condemnation of
Soviet policies in Afghanistan. See Kevin Klose, “Afghanistan Seeks to Open Talks to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
might be to enlarge the discussions and to talk about the military
presence in the Indian Ocean.
Secretary pressed two questions—would the Soviets be willing to
withdraw their forces, and can the Afghanistanese choose their own
government? Dobrynin thought that the Soviet forces would most natu-
rally withdraw after the conclusion of Step I although this might happen
in the course of the discussions to Step II as well. (With further question-
ing, Dobrynin on this point was evasive.) He emphasized that border
crossing on the Pakistan-Afghanistan border was and is a large prob-
lem, but he thought that once the border was agreed and sealed it
would create a situation where the Soviets could withdraw. He then
turned to his proposal and urged, what was wrong with discussing
the Afghanistan idea? The Secretary responded that the Afghanistan
Government in no way represented the Afghanistan people, and
returned to his point asking, can the Afghanistanese choose their own
government? Babrak is no real representative. He pressed then the
question—does an Afghanistan Government have to be acceptable to
the Soviets? Dobrynin responded that obviously the Soviets did not
want a hostile government, but otherwise were quite open about the
form of government. The Secretary responded then that Dobrynin was
insisting on a Soviet-installed government. Dobrynin replied that, you
say it so.
Dobrynin gave a long comment on the nature of Afghanistan, the
social changes. He said that it is a land that where for decades there
has been fighting and discontent. This has been particularly true in
more recent years where the landlords’ holdings have been exploited
after centuries of depression. The Soviets he said had had problems of
a similar nature in the Asiatic areas of Russia, which had continued
right on through until 1930. There were similarities here—of race, of
peoples who move back and forth across borders, of the relationship
between peasants and landlords. Today in Afghanistan he recognized
that perhaps not many of the people are in favor of the Russians, but
they are in favor of the social changes in recent years. A real civil war
is going on in Afghanistan between the old and the new, and it is not
all that simple to define. If the main U.S. concern is that the Soviets are
pushing to the Ocean, the Soviets could settle this by giving guarantees
because they don’t have that objective. If it is a question of borders
and the future of Pakistan, then why not have it talked out along the
lines of the Babrak proposal?
The Secretary said of our concerns that Pakistan was a buffer state
and we could live with it, but now it is not, and the Soviets have 85,000
troops there.3 The fact is that the Soviets are on the borders of Pakistan—
3 An unknown hand bracketed “Pakistan,” and wrote “Afgh” above it and placed
a question mark in the margin to the right of the paragraph; a suggestion that Vest had
inadvertently confused the two countries.

Afghanistan
that much closer to the Indian Ocean and we cannot be certain of
what are the Soviet intentions. Would the Soviets accept a non-aligned
government in Afghanistan? Dobrynin said yes, but it must not be
hostile to the Soviets. The Secretary again questioned, do you accept
the concept of a buffer state in Afghanistan? Dobrynin said yes, but
remember that over the past 15 years there have been changes in the
social structure and land reforms so that a buffer state would not be
simply a reversion to the period of Daoud. The Secretary asked whether
the 3-step proposal of Dobrynin had to take place step by step, or if
some could take place at the same time. Dobrynin replied that it is
probably simpler to proceed step by step, but there was no objection
to a mixture. Sticking to his primary point, he repeated that the Af-
ghanistanese are interested in the first step and the Soviets therefore
support him.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
256.
Special Analysis Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, April 22, 1980
PAKISTAN: The Afghanistan Debate
Pakistan continues to insist that the withdrawal of Soviet troops from
Afghanistan is a precondition for any improvement in its relations with
either country. Islamabad’s position is under constant review, however, and
President Zia is subject to conflicting pressures from within his government.
Some officials favor opposing the Soviets more strongly; others want to appease
Moscow. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not
declassified])
Zia and his advisers are worried about Moscow’s long-term objec-
tives in the subcontinent and about the serious problems Pakistan faces
in the short term as the Soviets try to pacify Afghanistan. Some advisers
believe that a continued influx of refugees could soon lead to a serious
breakdown of law and order along the frontier. ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
restriction not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
If the Soviets make punitive raids against refugee camps or even
occupy territory on the Pakistani side of the border, the Pakistanis fear
they might be forced to choose between a dangerous confrontation
with the USSR and acquiescence in a violation of their country’s sover-
eignty. The Pakistanis believe that the Soviets are already encouraging
leftists as well as separatists, especially in Baluchistan, to oppose Zia
more actively. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
Diplomatic Tightrope
Islamabad has taken a strong diplomatic stand against the Soviet
occupation of Afghanistan, but it is trying to avoid giving unnecessary
offense to Moscow. Zia rejected US aid primarily because he believed
that accepting it would increase tension with Moscow but would not
strengthen Pakistan’s security to a corresponding degree. ([2 lines, classi-
fication marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
Islamabad’s desire to avoid confrontation with Moscow is further
reflected in its reluctance to back publicly exile groups in Pakistan
and its unwillingness to give extensive help to Afghan insurgents.
Pakistan also has tended to avoid publicity on border incidents,
including Soviet overflights. ([classification marking and handling restric-
tion not declassified])
Zia and his advisers nevertheless are not seeking an accommoda-
tion with Moscow. Pakistan’s closest allies—Saudi Arabia, Iran, and
China—would have serious reservations about any significant move
toward Moscow. At home, many Pakistanis—especially the conserva-
tives supporting Zia—would oppose abandoning fellow Muslims in
Afghanistan or any “sellout” to the USSR. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Pakistani policymakers doubt, moreover, that any agreement with
Moscow would bring more than temporary benefits. There also is
considerable sentiment in the military—on which Zia ultimately
depends—for a continued hardline on Afghanistan. ([classification mark-
ing and handling restriction not declassified])
Pakistani leaders seem to agree on their sense of isolation while
facing the Soviets. This has led them to an unprecedented interest in
trying to improve relations with India despite longstanding deep dis-
trust of India’s intentions and of its relationship with Moscow. The
conflicting advice Zia is getting makes Pakistan’s policy unpredictable.
Some aides—notably Foreign Affairs Adviser Agha Shahi—seem to
favor some agreement with the Soviets but most probably would sup-
port an accommodation only if they see no other good alternative.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Domestic Politics
Although foreign developments and the extent of foreign support
will strongly influence Pakistani policy, domestic politics could become

Afghanistan
an equally important factor. The near automatic support that Zia
received after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan—even from many of
his political enemies—is beginning to dissipate. ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
Former Prime Minister Bhutto’s widow has publicly attacked Zia
for failing to accept the Soviet-installed Babrak government and for
allowing insurgents to use Pakistani territory. Many Islamabad offi-
cials, on the other hand, believe that any attempt to placate the Soviets
could turn many in the Army against Zia. ([classification marking and
handling restriction not declassified])
257.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Followup on Security Framework in the Persian Gulf—IX
PARTICIPANTS
State
CIA
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Director Stansfield Turner
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary
Robert Ames, NIO for Near
Near Eastern & South Asian Affairs
East & South Asia
Reginald Bartholomew, Director of
Charles Cogan, Chief, Near
Political/Military Affairs
East
Defense
White House
Secretary Harold Brown
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Deputy Secretary W. Graham Claytor,
NSC
Jr.
Colonel William E. Odom
Robert Komer, Under Secretary for
General Jasper Welch
Policy
David McGiffert, Assistant Secretary
for International & Security Affairs
JCS
Lt. General John Pustay
ing took place in the White House Situation Room. Carter wrote: “Zbig, J” at the top
of the page. The portion of the summary of conclusions on base facilities and military
exercises in the Persian Gulf area is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII,
Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula, Document 74.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Special Intelligence Items: Afghanistan/Pakistan
Turner gave a brief update on the program for Afghanistan. Per
the SCC’s instructions last week he has offered to help the Pakistanis
solve the bottleneck between the Afghanistan border and Islamabad
with a C–130. The Pakistani reply has not yet been received. To Harold
Brown’s question of why they do not use one of their own C–130s,
Turner replied that they prefer an outside source to prevent their own
military from knowing about the program.2 (S/S)
It was agreed to report to the President for his approval the CIA
offer of a C–130 if the Pakistanis desire it.3 (S/S)
Dr. Brzezinski next raised the issue of making support for the
Afghanistan freedom fighters a publicly respectable undertaking rather
than a covert activity which we and other countries feel obliged to deny.
He argued that by maintaining the covert posture, we are allowing the
Soviets to argue cogently the support for the insurgents as wholly
illegitimate while their support for insurgency elsewhere is wholly
legitimate. (S/S)
Some argued that Zia cannot politically afford an overt program.
The Saudis will also protest abandoning the covert mode. Finally, for
the U.S. to take the public lead, the effect would be to “de-Islamicize”
the program. It was also argued that the present support programs
might be jeopardized. (S/S)
Dr. Brzezinski said that we should not “go public” unless Zia and
the Saudis approve, but it might be worth exploring with them. Also,
one might encourage other Islamic countries, such as Morocco, to sup-
port the public stand that Egypt has already taken. (S/S)
Both Christopher and Harold Brown recommended that we no
longer deny support for the Afghanistan insurgents but that we refuse
to comment on the matter.4 Both have resorted to that answer to queries
recently, and they find the no comment line very effective. (S/S)
2 Carter underlined the last sentence and wrote: “not logical” in the margin. The
summary of conclusions of the April 14 SCC meeting is in the Carter Library, National
3 Carter wrote: “I don’t favor this—particularly if Pak military” after this sentence.
4 Carter wrote: “ok” in the margin.

Afghanistan
258.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 30, 1980
SUBJECT
Assistance to the Afghan Rebels: A Vigorous Dissent
At your suggestion, I have looked into the question of whether
our aid to Muslim forces in Afghanistan is effective. I discovered that
those involved in this effort seem to be enthusiastic, motivated, and
convinced that everything reasonable and possible that can be done is
being done. I sharply disagree. The reason that our “operators” in this
area are relatively sanguine about their efforts is that they accept two
basic restrictions—i.e., supply only weapons of Soviet manufacture
and work exclusively through the Pakistanis—which I consider unnec-
essary and unwise. (TS)
It is literally impossible to exaggerate the significance of the out-
come of Soviet efforts to crush the Muslim resistance in Afghanistan. If
the Soviets succeed, as seems likely, this action will become a powerful
precedent within the bureaucracy which will inevitably ensure that we
will be faced with other Afghanistans down the road in the 1980’s.
Particularly sensitive will be Central America and the Caribbean. Could
a United States government, for example, look the other way while a
Soviet or a Cuban force of thousands landed in Nicaragua, Honduras,
or perhaps even Venezuela, in order to save a self-described progressive
government that was going down the drain? Chervonenko, in his recent
speech in Paris, said in referring to Allende that the USSR could tolerate
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezin-
1/80: Soviet Union. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Copies were sent to
Thornton, Odom, Ermarth, Welch, Gregg, and Owen. In the upper right corner, Brzezinski
wrote: “DA—Hold a meeting on this, use Carlucci/Komer/Newsom. I tend to agree
directive was found. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates Aaron saw it.
In a May 2 memorandum to Brzezinski (attached but not printed), Thornton characterized
Brement’s position as valid but problematic. Arguing against a rapid increase of weapons
transfers to the Afghan insurgents, Thornton cited geographic restrictions, increasing
(and unwanted) U.S. visibility in the covert action, and the fact that U.S. goals with
regard to the Afghan insurgency remained poorly defined. Thornton suggested that
Brzezinski hold more meetings to determine the future course of U.S. policy in Afghani-
stan. Both Ermarth and Welch wrote memoranda to Brzezinski, May 2, supporting
Brement’s position. Those memoranda are also attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
no more Chiles.2 The implications of that remark are sobering, to say
the least. (TS)
It is therefore crucial for us to do everything that we possibly can
to make the Soviet adventure in Afghanistan extremely costly to the
Kremlin. The Mujahidin, if they had the right kinds of weapons, could
considerably impede Soviet mobility and “air-cav” tactics, which give
the Soviets an enormous tactical advantage over the resistance forces.
Men on horseback are no match for men in helicopters. (TS)
Our efforts thus far have been tentative, piecemeal, and inadequate.
The Soviets wiped out 372 insurgents in a single operation the other
day. We will be seeing many more such reports in the months ahead
if the Mujahidin are not adequately supplied. We should keep in mind
that SA–7s are hard to get and very expensive and it is for this reason
that we are only planning to supply the Muslims with 85 of these
weapons, literally a drop in the bucket. (TS)
At the same time, we must also keep in mind that the Pakistanis
are not eager to provide weapons to those who could become future
security problems. Punjabis have an inbred reluctance in arming
Pathans. They know that the gun pointed against Kabul today might
be pointed against Karachi tomorrow. (TS)
Furthermore, we have a natural opening in Zia’s public criticism
of the US for not providing greater support to the resistance forces.
We should take him at his word. This is especially the case in that
political opposition to Zia is mounting and opposition leaders are now
calling for rapprochement with the Soviets and the cessation of support
for the Mujahidin. All our eggs should not be in Zia’s basket. (TS)
How to Operate. There are 53 Afghan refugee camps along the
Pakistan border. We should have at least three agents in each of those
camps; ostensibly for refugee relief purposes, but principally to ensure
that the Mujahidin are getting the weapons they need. A similar effort
should be made in eastern Iran. We should not restrict ourselves to
the use of American citizens for this purpose. In addition, we ought
to explore and take advantage of traditional gun smuggling routes,
which have been used in that part of the world for centuries. There
should never be a shortage of the right kinds of weapons in the market-
places of Peshawar. (TS)
nenko, Soviet Ambassador to France. Regarding Afghanistan, Chervonenko hewed to
standard Soviet positions that the crisis there was not relevant to U.S. national security
and that the Soviet military presence was necessary so long as Afghanistan was threat-
ened by external aggression. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Afghanistan
The Right Weapons. Taking into account Afghan tactical needs, as
well as maintenance and delivery constraints, we should make it our
business to supply the Mujahidin with the following light, easily trans-
portable weapons:
—American anti-helicopter missiles, such as Red-Eyes or Stingers
(this would be in addition to the 85 SA–7s. The Mujahidin obviously
need hundreds of anti-helicopter weapons).
—Disposable anti-tank weapons (LAW).
rifles which are no longer used by the US Army and which would be
ideal for the resistance fighters).
—Light mortars, which can be easily disassembled and used effec-
tively by men on horseback.
—Simple short-wave two-way radios. (One of the greatest difficul-
ties of the Mujahidin is that they cannot coordinate their operations).
—Small mines (which could be extremely effective in closing lines
of communications, thereby forcing the Soviets to expend additional
efforts in defending those LOCs).
The Public Line. We could do the above without changing our public
line (i.e., we do not comment about matters of this kind) in the slightest.
The Soviets have already accused us repeatedly of supplying the rebel
forces and have, in fact, used this as their justification for invading
Afghanistan. They and their Afghans will make the same amount of
noise, which will have roughly the same propaganda effect, whether
we are supplying the Mujahidin effectively or ineffectively. I vote for
supplying them effectively. How the world turns may ultimately
depend on our ability to do so.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
259.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 30, 1980
The Pakistani Chief of Intelligence has asked for our assistance in
providing the support of a C–130 to transport arms from Karachi to
the areas inside Pakistan where they are transferred to the Afghan
guerrillas. We understand that his reason for asking us for this support
lies in the extreme secrecy of this entire operation. Within the Afghan
government the army is not knowledgeable of this activity, not even
the entire Cabinet is aware of it.
The Intelligence Chief is concerned that utilization of Pakistani
Army and Air Force C–130’s would blow his cover.2
Stansfield Turner3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
2 At the bottom of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “OK if I am assured that Pres.
Zia approves. J.” In a May 1 memorandum to Turner, attached but not printed, Brzezinski
wrote: “The President has reviewed your April 30 memo on C–130 support for Pakistan.
He has approved this support on the condition that he be assured that President Zia
approves the proposed arrangement.” In a memorandum to Brzezinski, May 13, Turner
reported that a CIA officer had recently met with ISID Director General Akhtar Khan
in Islamabad, who relayed Zia’s endorsement for the C–130 request. Turner concluded:
“After reviewing the Pakistani request in some detail with General Akhtar, we are
convinced that the C–130s can make an important contribution in the objectives of our
Afghan program. We are therefore taking steps to arrange the transfer of two C–130s
from the U.S. Air Force to the Pakistani Air Force in the most expeditious way.” (National
Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–031, Apr–Aug 1980)
3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

Afghanistan
260.
Spot Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
DDO/CS 80–088
Washington, April 30, 1980
SUBJECT
Recent Upsurge in Land Mine and Anti-tank Rocket Incidents Inside
Afghanistan Indicates that Our Weapons Aid to the Afghan Rebels is Having
Some Successes
1. Summary: Preliminary analysis of [less than 1 line not declassified]
indicates that circa mid-March 1980 Soviet and DRA forces in Afghani-
stan began noting significant increases in rebel land mine and anti-
tank rocket attacks. This upsurge in such incidents closely coincides
with January–February 1980 passage to rebels of land mines, RPG–7
anti-tank rockets and RPG–7 rocket launchers.
2. Land Mines: Prior to mid-March 1980 the Soviet and DRA armies
encountered very few land mines, but during the first two and one
half weeks of April 1980 the Soviets alone had 23 vehicles (including
12 tanks and 8 APC’s) damaged or destroyed, with nine Soviets killed
and three wounded. This prompted the Soviets to arrange for priority
air shipment of minesweeping equipment into Afghanistan. The total
land mine incidents suffered by DRA forces is not known (only 10%
of the data has been analyzed), but preliminary information indicates
that the DRA has suffered even more than the Soviets. Various reports
by DRA forces of actual land mine explosions and other indirect evi-
dence show Afghan exile groups infiltrating the land mines all along
the Pakistan border. In addition to the 1,000 Czech land mines supplied
the rebels by 26 February 1980, the Paks have supplied an additional
700 land mines to the rebels.
3. Anti-tank Rockets: Prior to mid-March 1980 DRA and Soviet
armies reported few instances of anti-tank rockets being fired by rebel
bands. However, beginning mid-March 1980 [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] showed a significant increase in rebel anti-tank rocket attacks. For
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Prepared in the Directorate of Operations. Attached but not printed are Cogan’s May
5 covering memorandum to Carlucci and a list of arms deliveries to Afghan rebel forces.
The list was divided into four components. The first listed weapons shipments prior to
April 1, totaling [text not declassified] excluding the cost for the SA–7s that had been
shipped. The second listed weapons shipped or scheduled for shipment from Egypt,
totaling approximately [text not declassified] The third listed weapons shipped from other
unspecified sources totaling approximately [text not declassified] The fourth listed pro-
posed shipment from Egypt (subject to change) totaling approximately [text not declassi-
fied] Also attached but not printed are two maps of Afghanistan indicating the locations
of rebel anti-tank rocket and land mine attacks against Soviet forces.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
the destruction of two APC’s by rebel rocket attack inside the city of
in Herat reported its first rebel anti-tank rocket attack; and two days
later seven armored vehicles struck by anti-tank rockets were seen in
the Herat area. [less than 1 line not declassified] traffic has not been
scanned for reports of anti-tank rockets used against Soviet armor, but
we suspect that the rebels are also using these weapons against the
had been passed to the rebels, with 33 launchers and 1,000 rockets
scheduled for current shipments.
4. Proof of Arms/Ammo Infiltration Success: Two detailed reports by
a source with Gailani’s Peshawar exile group on weapons he actually
saw being funnelled from the Paks to Gailani closely match with reports
from Pakistan liaison on weapons and ammunition passed to Gailani.
5. Combined Soviet/DRA Armor: The Soviet and DRA armies in
Afghanistan now have over 4,000 tanks and other armored vehicles,
plus approximately 20,000 trucks and other vehicles.
and a quantitative increase in rebel capabilities during the past five
weeks,” thus adding some credence to our preliminary analysis.
261.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
[paper number not declassified]
Washington, May 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and
cover page.]
China and Southwest Asia: The Challenge of Afghanistan
([classification marking not declassified])
Overview
China sees the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as both a threat and
an opportunity. It is concerned that Moscow has embarked on a new,
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
Challenge of Afghanistan. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
A statement on the cover page reads: “The author of this paper is [name not declassified]
Office of Political Analysis. This paper has been coordinated with the Offices of Economic
Research and Strategic Research and with the National Intelligence Officer for China/
East Asia and Pacific and for the Near East and South Asia.”

Afghanistan
aggressive global policy that seeks ultimately to obtain a stranglehold
on Western oil supplies. ([classification marking not declassified])
Beijing believes that the outcome in Afghanistan will set the tone
in world politics for years to come and that the Soviet action thus poses
a fundamental test for the West. In Beijing’s view, Western acquiescence
in Soviet action in Afghanistan will only embolden Moscow and will
also lead to international acceptance of the Vietnamese conquest of
Kampuchea, where Chinese security interests are more directly at stake.
([classification marking not declassified])
For Beijing, the Soviet invasion is an opportunity to advance three
key foreign policy objectives: to discredit detente politics in the West;
to drive a wedge between the Third World and Moscow; and, most
important, to prod the United States into a tougher anti-Soviet stance.
With these goals in mind, China is pursuing the same policies in South-
west Asia that it has pushed in the region for several years, although
with new emphasis, along the following lines. ([classification marking
not declassified])
Engage the West in the Region. At the heart of Beijing’s strategy is
its effort to get the United States to renew its close ties with Pakistan.
It wants Washington to give Pakistan a strong security guarantee and
enough military aid to encourage Islamabad to resist firmly the Soviet
presence in the region. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
Reassure Pakistan. China has given Pakistan constant reassurance
of its support since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and has sent
separate high-level political and military delegations to Islamabad.
Although China has publicly stated its willingness to aid Pakistan, it
has not offered a firm security guarantee or given Pakistan any new
military assistance. China is known to be concerned about the stability
and the anti-Soviet steadfastness of the Zia-ul-Haq regime. ([classifica-
tion marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Encourage Regional Harmony. Beijing seeks, over the long term, to
create an informal, Western-backed alliance of Southwest Asian coun-
tries that can firmly resist further Soviet encroachment in the region.
As a key element of this policy, China is encouraging Pakistan to
improve ties with India while itself attempting to mend its own
relations with New Delhi. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
Bog the Soviets Down in Afghanistan. China seeks to make Moscow
pay the highest political price possible for its intervention. It thus
opposes any plan to neutralize Afghanistan or any attempts at a com-
promise solution that would leave the Soviets in control. Beijing is
supporting all international measures to isolate the Soviets and is
encouraging other countries to aid the Afghan rebels. It is not clear what

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
assistance—if any—China has given the rebels; Beijing has reportedly
sought to assist the rebels through Pakistan, but its effort has met
some resistance from Islamabad. ([classification marking and codeword
not declassified])
A number of factors constrain China’s ability to achieve its policy
goals and limit the role that Washington can play in the region. Long-
standing tensions between the major states in the region limit the
cooperation Beijing advocates. China has few positive inducements to
offer and is still regarded with suspicion by India, which is the key to
the success of this strategy. With the possible exception of Pakistan,
there is at present no country that is seeking a greater US security role
in the region. Pakistan, India, and some Iranian leaders believe, to
varying degrees, that a strong anti-Soviet policy is not in their best
interests. ([classification marking not declassified])
Despite these problems, in the months ahead, China will probably
persist in its current policy in the region. Over the longer run, however,
it may make tactical adjustments to those policies that it believes are
not working. One likely area of adjustment is in Chinese policy toward
India, where Beijing seems to be willing to go further toward accommo-
dating New Delhi’s interests than before. The persistent plea for more
US aid to Pakistan, a greater US military presence, and a firm US
commitment to meet any new Soviet action in the region is unlikely
to change. ([classification marking not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]

Afghanistan
262.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
NIC–M–0001–80
Washington, May 2, 1980
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COUNCIL MEMORANDUM2
SUBJECT
Soviet Policy Toward West Europe in the Aftermath of Afghanistan
Summary
Soviet policy toward Europe since the invasion of Afghanistan has
been characterized by elements of defensiveness and of opportunism.
To a great extent, it is a policy of reactive and ad hoc efforts to exploit
what Moscow perceives as significant West European concerns about
the wisdom and predictability of US policy toward the USSR. Moscow’s
policy, therefore, is less a “peace offensive” than a combination of
blandishments and threats intended to undercut West European sup-
port for potential economic sanctions or other retaliatory measures
against the Soviet Union. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
In seeking to influence West European opinion, Moscow has
strongly condemned West European endorsement of US policies.
Threats of a harsh Soviet response have been conveyed directly—as in
President Brezhnev’s letter of 2 March to Chancellor Schmidt—and
have also been evident in the increasingly acerbic tenor of Soviet media
commentaries directed at West Europe.3 At the same time, our reporting
clearly indicates that in private the Soviets have taken care to differen-
tiate between the harsher aspects of Moscow’s public posture and
an underlying flexibility in Soviet policy. ([classification marking and
handling restriction not declassified])
Overtures to the West Germans appear to be the most frequent
and subtle. Brezhnev has sent two letters to Chancellor Schmidt—the
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 7, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options (May 1980). Secret; [handling restriction
not declassified].
2 This memorandum was prepared by the Analytical Group of the National Intelli-
gence Council at the request of the National Intelligence Officer for the Soviet Union
and East Europe. It has been coordinated with the National Foreign Assessment Center
and within the Directorate of Operations. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 The letter, a response to a letter Schmidt sent to Brezhnev in late January, was
described by Schmidt during a news conference as “moderate in tone but hard in content,”
with a “warning undertone” against West Germany following U.S. policy with regard
to Afghanistan. Schmidt was quoted in Bradley Graham, “Brezhnev Warns Schmidt

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
last containing an unexpected invitation to visit Moscow this summer.
By means of private channels, which the Soviets have long believed
useful in communicating with the Chancellery, Soviet representatives
have indicated Moscow’s “interest” in the European Community’s neu-
tralization proposal for Afghanistan, and have also conveyed the mes-
sage to a Chancellery official that West Germany’s expected refusal to
impose economic sanctions on the USSR was much more important to
the Soviet leadership than Bonn’s likely decision to boycott the summer
Olympics. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Although private Soviet overtures to the West Germans and other
West Europeans lack specific substance, it is evident that Soviet tactics
are based on the assumption that US-West European differences are
significant and create openings for the Soviets to exacerbate them. The
Soviets may believe that the worst of the European reaction to the
Afghanistan intervention has passed or that more serious moves—such
as specific economic sanctions—can be attenuated by skillful diplo-
macy. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
In either case, the Soviets have opted for a combination of harsh
public rhetoric with private hints of a more conciliatory Soviet stance
on arms control issues in particular should the West Europeans temper
their support for US “hard line” policies toward Moscow. Thus far,
however, the Soviets have demonstrated little willingness to make
tangible concessions to West European concerns. Nevertheless, West
European reservations with respect to US actions in Iran, the implemen-
tation of NATO’s decision on theater nuclear force modernization,
and diplomatic maneuvering leading up to the November 1980 CSCE
Review Conference.4 All are perceived by Moscow as opportunities
to affect adversely US-West European ties. ([classification marking and
handling restriction not declassified.])
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]
4 Documentation on the November 1980 CSCE Review Conference is scheduled for
publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

Afghanistan
263.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Pakistan1
117572. Subject. Letter From President Carter to President Zia.
1. S—Entire text.
2. Following is text of letter from President Carter to President Zia
dated April 30.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Begin quote: Dear Mr. President: Thank you for your letter
following the visit of Dr. Brzezinski and Mr. Christopher.2 I welcome
the personal attention you have given U.S.-Pakistan relations, and I
hope that strengthened cooperation between our two nations will help
to show the Soviet Union how seriously we view their ruthless and
unprovoked aggression in Afghanistan.
I was deeply impressed by the reports of my emissaries of your
country’s determination to counter the Soviet challenge. Your leader-
ship at the Islamic Foreign Ministers’ Conference in January was vital
in putting the Islamic world on record condemning the Soviet seizure
of a neighboring Muslim country. I hope that Pakistan will exercise
equally firm leadership at the Islamic Foreign Ministers’ Conference
in May to demonstrate that the Islamic world remains united in its
condemnation of Soviet actions.
One particularly effective way to demonstrate opposition to the
Soviet invasion is to boycott the Olympics, and I was pleased to learn
privately of your government’s decision not to go to Moscow. Making
your position public before the beginning of the Islamic Foreign Minis-
ters’ Conference would increase the likelihood that the moral weight
of the Conference will remain behind the boycott.
The struggle of the Afghan people against the Soviet occupation
forces is one of the most stirring events of our time. I attach the greatest
importance to this struggle and know that you share my admiration
for the Mujahidin. Not only does their bravery deserve recognition,
their ability to continue their resistance brings home the cost of aggres-
Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Hornblow (NEA/PAB), cleared in S/S–O, IWG,
NEA, S/S–S, and S/S (by phone); and approved by Saunders.
2 Zia’s letter to Carter, February 7, is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia. For Brzezinski and Christopher’s visit, see Documents

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
sion to the Soviets every day. Such resistance, therefore, is in the interest
both of the Islamic world and of the democratic Western countries.
The United States places a particular value on close consultations
between our two governments in these critical times. We are always
ready to work with you to find mutually acceptable and effective means
of dealing with the problems and concerns that we share. We would
be glad to hold any further consultations that you think advisable and
will also continue to discuss with our allies those matters which are
of interest to you. As you know, those discussions have already helped
to mobilize some assistance.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Muskie
264.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization1
121506. Following repeat Kabul 1521 sent SecState, Ankara, Beijing,
Berlin, Bonn, Colombo, Dacca, Havana, Islamabad, Kathmandu, Lon-
don, Moscow, New Delhi, Paris, Prague, Rome, Sofia, Tokyo,
CINCEUR, CINCPAC, USICA, and USUN on 5 May.2
Quote: Secret Kabul 1521. CINCEUR and CINPAC also for
POLADs. Subject: Two Years of Leftist Rule in Afghanistan; Status,
Prospects and What it Means for the U.S.
1. (S—Entire text) Department repeat as desired.
2. Summary: In the two years since President Daoud was over-
thrown and slain by some of the same leftists who helped him stage
a bloodless coup ousting King Zahir in 1973, the quality of life in
Afghanistan and any sense of security and hope for the future on the
part of the Afghan people have steadily eroded. Fear, trepidation about
the future, and a loathing of the Karmal regime pervade the atmosphere
in this strife-ridden, poverty-stricken country. The “great Saur revolu-
tion,” cautiously accepted by many Afghans in mid-1978, is fraying at
Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Thomas (EUR/RPM), cleared in S/S–O, and
approved by Barry (EUR).
Foreign Policy File, D800225–0428.

Afghanistan
the edges, if not tottering, and is the object of widespread and bitter
ridicule. No one in Afghanistan believes the Karmal regime would last
48 hours if the Soviet troops were to pull out now. The failure of
Karmal and his colleagues in the regime to win the support of any
significant element of Afghan society and the continued crumbling
of the Afghan military virtually guarantee a growing Soviet military
presence here, no matter what the cost to the USSR in global terms.
As they are sucked deeper and deeper into the morass of Afghanistan,
the Soviets will inevitably be faced with new points of basic decision
and ever-increasing frustration, with the concomitant inclination to try
to do everything themselves. No matter what they decide to do, they
will find their Afghan adventure increasingly costly. Their task will
be made no easier by the ongoing rifts among the Parcham and Khalq
wings of the ruling Peoples Democratic Party of Afghanistan. It is
unlikely that they will be able to fashion a broad-based governing
group, and there are few bets that Babrak Karmal will die a natural
death. In these circumstances, the United States and its allies should
continue to treat this regime with circumspection and try to make the
Soviet invasion as costly as possible for Moscow. End summary.
[Omitted here is the body of the telegram.]
Muskie
265.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Belgrade, May 8, 1980
PARTICIPANTS
U.S. Side
French Side
Vice President Mondale
French Prime Minister
Assistant Secretary of State
Raymond Barre
George Vest
French Foreign Minister
Deputy Assistant to the President
Jean Francois-Poncet
David Aaron
Notetaker
Assistant to the Vice President
Denis Clift
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
in the U.S. Ambassador’s residence. Mondale was in Belgrade to attend the funeral of
Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The Vice President greeted his French guests and opened the con-
versation by noting that the Foreign Minister had just met with Soviet
Foreign Minister Gromyko.
Francois-Poncet: Yes, it was one of our regularly scheduled meetings,
and we felt it would have been more complicated to try to cancel it.
Let me report briefly on the conclusions of the meeting. Gromyko had
a general hardness of line, and a harsh tone about US-USSR relations,
using vocabulary I have not heard before. We had three long discus-
sions with Afghanistan taking up about two thirds of our time. The
Soviet objective in Afghanistan is a diplomatic initiative involving Iran,
Pakistan and Afghanistan legalizing the Afghan regime and legalizing
the Soviet presence. It is clear they want a regional legitimization.
When this is done, they then may want to invite outsiders. We told
them that we do not see any outside interference, nothing justifying
the Soviet invasion, and with this the case, we asked why they did not
accept the proposal of having an international body come in. Gromyko
said no, how could they, there was fighting going on. It would be too
dangerous (laughter).
Secondly, we got into a discussion of Giscard d’Estaing’s proposal
for a withdrawal of troops and self-determination.2 Gromyko did not
say this is of no interest. He said he accepted the proposal, but only
in as much as it helped to promote the USSR objective. But the Soviets
say first outside interference must stop. Gromyko balks at a date for
Soviet withdrawal. They want a regional approach to “crack the Paki-
stani nut.” They are embarrassed.
Vice President: Did he express some heat about the Pakistanis?
Francois-Poncet: Yes, he was aggressive and insulting about the
Pakistanis. He said who does this Zia think he is; he should remember
how he came to power.
Vice President: We have just picked up [less than 1 line not declassified]
evidence of construction of a new 9,000-foot air field in southwest
Afghanistan. It has a rationale entirely unrelated to the Islamic problem
they say is at the basis of their invasion. It looks to us as it is a base
for projection of Soviet air power.
Francois-Poncet: Generally, our reading of the Soviet move into
Afghanistan has not been that there was a master plan with the objective
of the Persian Gulf. It is not proven at this stage that they have become
prone to military adventurism, but this does not mean that once they
are there there will not be other military developments.
and Francois-Ponçet. Presumably the proposal was made at that time.

Afghanistan
I have a question. They must get out. We cannot be starry-eyed
about this. It may take a long time, but they have to get out. We feel
local and regional factors will determine whether or not they do so.
Why aren’t the Afghan rebels more effective? Why aren’t they shooting
down Soviet helicopters?
Aaron: They have shot down about a dozen. They are obtaining
SA–7s from defecting Afghan troops. The problem of supply is the
narrow Pakistani funnel. The Pakistanis are cautious. A much more
promising route would be Iran, but of course we know the problems
there.
Francois-Poncet: Our feeling is that the weapons they have are
very limited.
Vice President: Our objective is to get the Soviets out.
Prime Minister Barre: It is important that Russians die in Afghani-
stan. A friend of mine, a businessman, recently visited Kiev, and public
opinion there is afraid of the consequences in Afghanistan. They are
aware of casualties. They are reading newspapers.
Francois-Poncet: We are making a mistake about how we treat the
rebels. They should be treated as a nationalist movement.
Prime Minister Barre: We had an excellent newsreel film on the
rebels on fighting in Afghanistan shown just two or three weeks ago.
It is worth seeing.
Francois-Poncet: On Islamabad II, our feeling is that it would be
rougher than Islamabad I.3
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Vice President: We view the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as a
very dangerous development. We are afraid that if the leaders of the
industrialized world meet and no mention of Afghanistan is made, it
will be taken as a signal that the heat is off.4
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
3 A likely reference to the Islamic Foreign Ministers Conferences. In a weekly report
to Carter, May 9, Aaron noted: “We have found that we have a surprising amount in
common with the French in their analysis of the Afghanistan situation and in their
position that the Soviet approach is totally unacceptable.” (Carter Library, Donated
Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezinski’s Subject Files, Box 41, Weekly
footnote 2, Document 281.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
266.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
AFGHAN FIGHTERS DESTROY SOVIET EQUIPMENT WITH
SOVIET EQUIPMENT
The Soviet Army is being destroyed by Soviet weaponry in Afghan-
istan. For many years the Soviet Union provided military aid to the
Afghan Army. Although there can be political benefit in providing
military equipment to a border state, the sudden change of circum-
stances in Afghanistan has proved that this can also bear bitter
consequences.
After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan last December, the Afghan
Army began to dissolve. Rather than fight their fellow Muslims and
assist the Soviet invaders, Afghan soldiers, and in many cases full
units, began to rally to the tribal forces. When these units changed
sides they took with them critical Soviet anti-aircraft and anti-armor
equipment, particularly anti-tank rockets which can be fired by one
soldier.
Reliable reports reaching Afghan exile leaders indicate that Soviet
armor and vehicle losses have begun to mount dramatically as a result
of the insurgent use of these Soviet weapons. Sources with access to
the rebel forces report, for example, that Soviet units in the Herat area
of western Afghanistan in April lost several armored vehicles due to
attacks by anti-tank rockets. One rebel source described a particularly
successful but simple technique used by the Afghans as they become
accustomed to the anti-tank weapons. Some Soviet armored vehicles
have rubber tires. The rebel soldiers fire on the tires thereby immobiliz-
ing the vehicle. Once immobilized, the vehicle is destroyed by the
rebels with their new rocket ability. Soviet vehicle losses have reached
rates which reportedly are beginning to alarm Soviet leaders.
Rebel sources also report that the Afghan fighters are beginning to
enjoy increased success against the once feared Soviet MI–24 helicopter
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
May 9 covering letter to Komer, attached but not printed, Carlucci wrote: “Dear Bob:
Try this one on for size.” In a routing sheet addressed to Carlucci, May 8, also attached
but not printed, [text not declassified] Deputy Chief of the Near East Division, Central
Intelligence Agency, wrote: “Per your request this morning, suggest the attached might
be of use. We can live with the substance of something like attached which contains the
guts of the Spot Report (insurgents’ effective use of anti-armor and anti-aircraft weapons)
but protects our equities (no appearance of government leak and protection of the
sensitive ultimate source). Our only suggested caveat is that no US source be identified.”
The Spot Report is printed as Document 260.

Afghanistan
gunship. When first introduced into the fighting, the weapon appar-
ently was very successful in intimidating many of the tribal forces.
However, as the more experienced Afghan Army defectors swell the
tribal ranks, the fighters have learned the helicopters’ vulnerability to
anti-aircraft ground fire. Refugee reports increasingly tell of gunships
being downed by the simple expedient of the rebels firing down on
the helicopters’ vulnerable tail rotor from gun implacements high in the
mountains. The rebels have discovered, thanks to their newly acquired
army allies, that while the helicopter is effective firing at the ground,
it is vulnerable to fire from relatively immune positions above the
aircraft. Rebel sources indicate that at least nine Soviet helicopters have
been lost in the past 60 days.
One of the many dilemmas confronting the Soviets in Afghanistan
is what to do with the remainder of the Afghan Army. If the Soviets
hope to conclude their Afghan adventure successfully, they will eventu-
ally need a reliable Afghan force. To build this force, they will have
to equip it with weapons which could continue to get into the hands
of the rebels.
267.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research (Spiers) to Secretary of State
Muskie1
Washington, May 9, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghanistan Covert Action Program
On December 28, 1979—two days after Soviet troops marched into
Afghanistan—we expanded the already initiated U.S. covert action
program there to include for the first time the supply of lethal weapons
to the insurgents.2 Prior to that date, our program had consisted essen-
tially of covert media efforts (radio broadcasts and leaflet distribution
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Special Caption Docu-
Box 1, Not for the System: Jan–Jun 1980. Secret; Sensitive; Not for the System. Drafted
by Mark. Sent through Newsom. The memorandum was presumably meant to brief
Muskie, who became Secretary of State May 9, on the Afghan covert action program.
2 See Document 107.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
within Afghanistan), as well as of the provision of some food, medicine,
and tactical radio equipment (for field combat use) to various guer-
rilla groups.
The arms being furnished currently are Soviet-made rifles, subma-
chine guns, machine guns, ammunition, mines, and anti-tank launchers
and rockets. These items, at first drawn from CIA reserve stocks, but
now bought by CIA on the international arms market, move in USAF
C–141 aircraft [less than 1 line not declassified] to Saudi Arabia, and then
by Saudi C–130s to Pakistan. No American personnel in Pakistan are
in any way involved in the logistics machinery or in training Afghans,
though a few Egyptian Specialists may be present. The training function
is performed by Pakistani personnel, who, if necessary, have received
special training from Americans in Saudi Arabia. The CIA Station Chief
in Islamabad works out all of the operational details with Pakistani
intelligence and President Zia.
The most critical gap in Afghan rebel armament has been the
absence of means to shoot down Soviet helicopters and aircraft. Egypt
has now donated 15 Soviet-made SA–7 shoulder-held anti-aircraft
rocket launchers, with a small supply of missiles. CIA is purchasing
additional such weapons on the international market, through devious
cut-outs, from a Bulgarian source. As of one week ago, Pakistan had
not yet taken the final decision on whether to transfer the SA–7s,
because Zia recognizes that this would be a major escalation of outside
support to the insurgents, which could trigger a sharp Soviet reaction.
However, CIA believes that Zia will bite this bullet too.
Pakistani cooperation in the program has been exemplary—and
completely divorced from the troubles that bedevil the US-Pakistani
political relationship. However, this collaboration was put into jeop-
ardy in mid-January [mid-February] by reports on the program, attrib-
uted to White House officials, which appeared in the Washington Post
and New York Times. Zia was outraged and has made it perfectly clear
that Pakistan will stop all participation if there are any further leaks.3
Background. Interagency consideration of covert action in support
of Afghan elements in opposition to the Marxist Taraki regime first took
place in the Special Coordination Committee for Intelligence (SCC–I)
Presidential findings and notifications to the Congress under the
Hughes-Ryan Act were dated July 3.5 One covered media activities,
the other propaganda operations and provision of cash or non-lethal
4 See Document 48.

Afghanistan
supplies in a total amount of $695,000. Further SCC–I reviews on July
31 and in mid-October led to a Presidential finding, dated November 7,
authorizing cash, communications equipment and procurement advice
worth [amount not declassified].6 The December 28 finding on lethal
weapons related to another [less than 1 line not declassified] authorization,
and an additional [amount not declassified] to be matched by a like sum
from the Saudis, was authorized in February.
Notification of Congress. Congressional notifications pursuant to
Hughes-Ryan were made for each finding. A Subcommittee of the
House Select Committee on Intelligence held hearings on the program
on December 20, at which the Department was represented.7 The
[amount not declassified] authorized after the February 27 SCC–I meeting
necessitated replenishing [less than 1 line not declassified] which led to
hearings before the Defense Subcommittee of the House Appropria-
tions Committee at which a Department representative appeared.8
6 See Document 76.
7 Not found.
8 Not found.
268.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghan “Neutralization” (U)
We don’t have much success these days in getting Afghan material
to the world’s attention. The story is getting old and we, frankly, don’t
offer much in a positive sense (i.e. we can produce atrocity stories but
no clear policy line that might yield a satisfactory outcome.) (S)
We need to seize some high ground, especially after the failure of
the rescue attempt in Iran. Fortunately there is some readily available
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Presi-
In the upper right corner of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “We will keep pushing
this—I talked to Commission.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
high ground. In fact we are there already, although nobody seems to
notice it very much for we are sharing it with some noisy types. (S)
Specifically, we should double track our current strategy (make
the Soviets pay heavily) with a strategy that portrays us as the party
urging a peaceful settlement on reasonable terms. We should be the
moving spirit of a “peace offensive”—and define its terms. At present,
we are in the apparent position of grudgingly accepting the idea of a
peaceful settlement while harping on things that people don’t like
to hear. And, given our evident lack of interest in a peaceful negoti-
ated outcome, when we do say something positive it tends to be
discounted. (S)
What is needed is a change in emphasis. We should be talking
long and loud about the need for a peaceful settlement in Afghanistan.
We should be pointing out at every opportunity that the Soviets are
frustrating this outcome not only by their actions on the ground but
also because of their unreasonable and unjust refusal to commit them-
selves to prompt and total withdrawal. (S)
Clearly we would keep up (and if possible intensify) our drumfire
of propaganda along the present lines. And we would not yield an
inch on our conditions. But we would try to become identified with
the goal of peace rather than the goal of punishing the Soviets (largely, it
might be noted, at the price of dead Afghans and unhappy athletes.) (S)
This theme should also be featured in our talks with the Soviets.
From what I have seen of the reporting, we have been growlingly
negative. We should be challengingly positive. Put Moscow more and
more on the defensive. Sure, it won’t make much difference in bilateral
negotiations (and none of this will likely budge the Soviets out of
Afghanistan), but the fact of our emphasis on peaceful settlement will
leak out, and play back into our public strategy. (S)
The public strategy should be founded on statements by the Presi-
dent, Muskie and you. The Philadelphia speech, for example, should
have had an impassioned plea for peace and a truly non-aligned
Afghanistan “if only the Soviets would see reason and meet conditions
that are universally supported.” It should have stressed that we have no
preferred outcome in Afghanistan as long as the Afghans are content.2
Incidentally, a strong push by us in this way could generate increased
public support in such countries as India. (S)
2 Carter addressed the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia on May 9. Concerning
Afghanistan, he said: “Our goal is the withdrawal of Soviet occupying troops, the neutral-
ity or non-alignment of Afghanistan as a nation, and the encouragement of the formation
there of a government acceptable to the Afghan people.” For the text of his speech, see

Afghanistan
There are a few bureaucratic pitfalls. You and the President may not
want this to appear as a big Muskie initiative to correct past mistakes—
which it could, since Muskie sounded positive on neutralization in his
SFRC hearings.3 Muskie is probably going to pick this one up and run
with it anyway though, so the issue for you is how best to shape what
he is doing. Obviously, this whole thing should be discussed and
coordinated at the highest level. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you raise this subject with the President and Muskie.4 If you
do, please ensure that there is feedback to me so that I can push this
in Brement’s committee. (C)
3 Muskie’s confirmation hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
was held on May 7.
4 No record of a meeting covering this subject was found.
269.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, undated
OVERVIEW
—The Pakistani and US intelligence appraisals of the Afghan war
are remarkably similar. Both sides believe the Soviets have encountered
unanticipated difficulties, or as General Akhtar said, “the Russians are
stuck.” The identity of views is particularly noteworthy because we
arrived at our conclusions by different routes. Much of the US judgment
is based on sensitive signals intelligence not available to the Pakistanis.
The Pakistanis have based their judgment not simply on appraisals we
have provided them but on intelligence they received directly from
Afghan rebels. The Pakistanis conclude that the Afghan “Freedom
Fighters”—as they call them—are doing surprisingly well and will in
all likelihood continue to do so.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For
restriction not declassified]. The author of the memorandum is not identified. In a May
15 covering memorandum to Brzezinski, Turner noted that he was following up on the
meetings between a CIA officer and Pakistani ISID Director Akhtar, which he first
memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig, p. 3” and initialed “C.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—Neither side had a good estimate of insurgent strength. The
Pakistanis feel the Afghan situation is a classic Mao’s “Peoples’ War.”
As a Pakistani colonel observed: if an Afghan has a rifle and a bullet
he is a soldier; when he loses one, he becomes a civilian. It is therefore
not possible to reach a reliable estimate of insurgent strength. Drawing
further on Mao, the Pakistanis say the rebels are the fish in this sea.
The rebels are careful not to undertake actions which would damage
the people’s interest and risk weakening the insurgents’ link with their
mass base. They want to damage a bridge and force the Russians to
expose themselves during its repair rather than to destroy the bridge
and injure for years the surrounding economy. Thus, explained the
Pakistanis, they cannot, and indeed should not, control the insurgency.
The Afghans control it and the Pakistanis support it with materiel,
which the Afghans accept, and advice, which may or may not be
accepted. This fact establishes the parameters within which the covert
support must operate.
COVERT ACTION PROGRAM
—Barring a change in the internal or international scene, the Paki-
stanis are committed to covert support to the Afghans. General Akhtar
expressed his concern about lack of US security guarantees but did
not pursue the subject and did not make continued support contingent
on such aid.
—The Pakistanis are providing unilateral weapons support from
their stockpiles to the insurgents, support which predates our involve-
ment. When we offered to provide some of the materiel now being
provided by Pakistan (e.g., .303 ammunition), General Akhtar waved
aside our offer stating he preferred to use Pakistan money for things
available in Pakistan and to use our resources for external procurement.
—The Pakistanis attempt to control any unilateral exile weapons
procurement. They do not want weapons entering Pakistan outside
their control and have so informed the Peshawar exile leaders. The
Pakistanis share our surprise at the vigor of the insurgency in northeast-
ern Afghanistan (Badakshan and Qonduz Provinces). The Pakistanis
suggested some aid may be coming over the mountains from China
or that Tadzhik ethnic groups resident in the four border area could
be providing support.
—General Akhtar described how the support mechanism works.
Our weapons arrive at Rawalpindi airport by Saudi C–130 approxi-
mately twice a week at dusk. Officers of Akhtar’s organization oversee
the unloading. Fortuitously we happened to witness one such unload-
ing while awaiting our aircraft departure. A Pakistani Army tank trans-
porter backed up to the C–130 ramp and the unmarked crates rolled
on to the transporter. The whole process took less than an hour. From

Afghanistan
the aircraft the crates are taken to a warehouse controlled by Akhtar’s
organization where they are opened and the weapons inspected and
inventoried. The Pakistanis have excellent records which coincide with
ours; what we are buying in Egypt is being delivered in Pakistan. The
munitions are distributed through eight different exile organizations
which are responsible for transporting the materiel in Afghanistan.
There is no Pakistani distribution system in Afghanistan. Akhtar unilat-
erally monitors the distribution of the weapons and is confident that
most of the materiel is indeed going to Afghanistan. Akhtar is distribut-
ing weapons into all parts of Afghanistan, not just the eastern area
bordering Pakistan. We said we had noted the appearance of anti-
tank rockets and land mines around Herat and encouraged Akhtar to
continue to distribute the weapons in western Afghanistan through
any means he deemed appropriate (i.e., via Iran).
—The arms mix has been about right. The Pakistanis had a list of
24 items needed by the insurgents. These items divide basically into
four categories: anti-armor, anti-aircraft, AK–47 rifles and ammunition,
and miscellaneous equipment such as time detonators, gas masks and
wireless equipment.
—Akhtar said the present weapons delivery schedule of two
C–130’s per week is about the right pace. We emphasized we stand
ready to increase the flow whenever he can handle it and we are
prepared to fly C–141’s directly into Pakistan under cover of the regular
embassy resupply flight.
—The Pakistanis need two C–130’s. Akhtar explained that overland
transport is too slow and unreliable. The Pakistan Air Force has been
helping but due to the loss of two C–130’s they can no longer do so
and meet their other obligations. The request for a loan of two aircraft
is legitimate.
SA–7 MISSILES
—Akhtar said the Pakistani Government had made the political
decision to use the SA–7’s, “fully aware of its implications.” The Paki-
stanis forecast three levels of Soviet reaction. The least serious would
be no reaction at all; second would be a ground incursion into border
areas of Pakistan; and most severe would be a Soviet air strike at
Pakistani airfields. We took no exception to his estimate. Soviet retalia-
tion, to a certain extent, will depend on how and where the missiles
are used. Akhtar explained that two Afghan groups had been trained
in the use of the weapon. Each of these groups will take three missiles
and one launcher. The targets will be Shindand and Bagram airfields.
Akhtar refused to reveal any timing. The second group is scheduled
to complete its training on 17 May.
—In reply to Akhtar’s request for more SA–7’s we explained the
difficulty finding these in the international market. We told Akhtar

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
that we understood the Chinese may have SA–7’s. If the Pakistanis
could give the appropriate political signal to the Chinese, we would
be prepared to do whatever necessary to purchase and deliver the
missiles to Pakistan. Akhtar seemed to like the idea and said he would
discuss it with President Zia.
PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE
—The US side gave a one hour slide presentation on worldwide
Soviet and Free World psychological warfare activities. Akhtar was
obviously interested in what was going on outside his borders and
confessed Pakistan was probably not doing enough in the psywar field.
We agreed that the issue was beginning to fade from international
attention and that we should work both jointly and separately to insure
that the Afghan story continues to be told.
SECURITY
—The Pakistanis would vigorously oppose any surfacing of the
covert action program and would probably consider it reason for termi-
nation. The program is highly compartmented within Pakistan—even
within the intelligence service.2 Akhtar is particularly anxious that
there be no publicity if and when the SA–7’s are fired. Akhtar registered
the anticipated complaint about Washington leaks.
2 Carter placed a bracket in the left margin beside this sentence and wrote: “Zbig.”

Afghanistan
270.
Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State
Muskie’s Delegation in Vienna1
127465/Tosec 30031. For Secretary’s party—pass Amb Shulman
Political Solution.
1. (Confidential—Entire text).
2. TASS has broadcast text of March [May] 14 Afghan Government
statement on elements of a regional political solution to Afghanistan
crisis. You will be receiving text septel.2
3. Analysis: Our preliminary analysis of new proposal is that it
contains main points of April 17 “Babrak” plan with embellishments
along the lines of Dobrynin’s April 19 comment to Secretary Vance
(your briefing material contains background on the “Babrak plan”).3
Specifically, the statement contains the following “new” elements:
—explicit identification of the U.S. and USSR as guarantor of any
political settlement; and
—recognition of the need to resolve “in the context of political
settlement . . . the question of withdrawal from Afghanistan’s territory
of the Soviet limited military contingent.”
4. On withdrawal, the statement repeats standard Soviet and
Afghan formulation that “an end to armed invasions and guarantees
that neither invasions nor any other forms of interference in Afghani-
stan’s internal affairs will be resumed would eliminate the causes which
made Afghanistan turn to the USSR.” The statement also notes that
“in concrete terms, the withdrawal . . . will depend on the resolution
of the question of effective guarantees of bilateral agreements” with
Pakistan and with Iran. Thus, as in previous proposals, withdrawal is
made contingent on a prior end to hostilities in Afghanistan on Soviet/
DRA terms and on prior direct negotiations with and hence legitimiza-
tion of the Babrak regime.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
7/80. Confidential; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Also sent Immediate to the Embassy in
Vienna for Watson, Jidda, Rabat, and Islamabad. Sent for information Immediate to
Moscow, Kabul, and the White House. Drafted by Parris and Barry (EUR/SOV); cleared
in S/MS, EUR, NEA, S/P, EUR/SOV, S/S, and S/S–O; and approved by Newsom.
2 The text was transmitted in telegram 127922 to the Secretary’s delegation, May
3 See Document 255.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
5. The timing of the statement suggests its purpose is to take the
heat off Kabul at the Islamic Conference meeting starting today in
Islamabad and running through May 21.4 The DRA is doubtless aware
of the intent of Conference Secretary General Chatti to introduce at the
meeting a “new” neutrality proposal along the lines of the Carrington
plan previously shrugged off by Moscow.5 The Soviets may also intend
to push the new Afghan formulation at the Warsaw Pact meeting.
6. Press guidance—Following press guidance is being used by the
Department:
Q. What is your reaction to the Afghan Government’s proposal
that it hold talks with Pakistan and Iran regarding the withdrawal of
Soviet troops from Afghanistan?
A. We have seen press reports of the proposal. Our initial assess-
ment is that it is not substantially different from previously articulated
positions, is aimed at the legitimization of the Babrak regime rather
than anything else, and is obviously timed to attempt to influence
discussions at the Islamic Conference.
7. We regard this initiative as a propaganda device designed to
affect the outcome of the Islamic Conference and prevent condemnation
of the Soviet action and the actions of the puppet Babrak government.
While we think it important to downplay this new proposal and Soviet
efforts to describe it as a means of reaching an acceptable political
solution to the problem of Afghanistan, we recognize the importance
of allied support for our position. This is particularly true regarding
the French, British and Germans who have been discussing possible
neutrality proposals with us. We suggest the following talking points
which could be used with key Islamic countries by ourselves and allies
who have been in touch with attendees at Islamic Conference.
adopted a resolution that condemned the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and estab-
lished a committee to consult with all concerned parties and resolve the situation on
the basis of Soviet troop withdrawal; recognition of the Afghan people’s right to choose
their own form of government; respect for the independence, integrity, and non-aligned
status of Afghanistan; and creation of conditions that would allow the refugees to return.
(Marvine Howe, “Islamic Conference Ends; Afghanistan Talks Proposed,” New York
that the USSR “quickly rejected” the proposals on Afghanistan arising from the confer-
ence. The brief characterized the proposals as calling for the formation of a “broad-
based” government that could still be headed by Karmal, followed by Soviet withdrawal
to be monitored by an international force; and selection of a national committee of tribal
leaders to determine the future form of Afghan government. (Central Intelligence Agency,
Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presiden-

Afghanistan
—We welcome this first explicit mention of the withdrawal of
Soviet troops which in our view must be the central focus of any
acceptable political settlement of the Afghan problem.
—Unfortunately, withdrawal element appears to be only cosmetic
in nature, following as it does recognition of Babrak government, legiti-
mization of Soviet invasion and an end to the resistance of the Afghan
nationalists.
—This first Afghan mention of withdrawal in the context of a
political settlement may indicate that they and the Soviets are feeling
the costs of their action. If so it is important all concerned countries keep
political pressure up to attain prompt and complete Soviet withdrawal.
—In our view this can best be achieved by continuing to emphasize
Soviet responsibility for the crisis and by continuing to insist that only
proposals which focus on withdrawal deserve discussion.6
8. For Jidda, Rabat and Islamabad: You should make available
foregoing analysis and draw on the talking points in para 7 in discus-
sions with host governments and suggest in the case of Jidda and Rabat
that they may wish to convey our thoughts to their delegations at the
conference.
Christopher
6 An article in the National Intelligence Daily, May 16, assessed the Afghan statement
as follows: “The new plan does not substantially change Moscow’s longstanding position
that Soviet forces cannot be withdrawn until the insurgency has ended and a government
friendly to the USSR is firmly in power. Moscow recognizes that a pro-Soviet regime
could not survive after a Soviet withdrawal, and the proposal is little more than a Soviet-
sponsored attempt to promote international acceptance of the Afghan regime and Soviet
intervention.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 7, Afghanistan Crisis—May 1980, NIDs)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
271.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Iran and Afghanistan
PARTICIPANTS
State
Justice
David Newsom
Attorney General Benjamin
Peter Constable
Civiletti
Richard Cooper
White House
OSD
Zbigniew Brzezinski
W. Graham Claytor
David Aaron
Frank Kramer
Lloyd Cutler
Henry Owen
JCS
Ray Jenkins
Lt. Gen. John Pustay
Joseph Onek
CIA
NSC
Frank Carlucci
Gary Sick
Treasury
Alfred Friendly
Deputy Secretary Robert Carswell
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
1. Afghanistan. The discussion focused on ways to increase media
attention on Soviet activities. CIA is providing cameras to go in with
the rebel forces. State will contact major U.S. news organizations to
attempt to encourage more U.S. correspondents to cover the story on
the ground. The U.S. Consulate in Peshawar can provide assistance to
journalists who want to travel with rebel groups. VOA will be
instructed by State to increase their interviews with journalists who
have been inside Afghanistan, with particular emphasis on foreign
reporters such as Indians. ICA will prepare a report on their efforts to
publicize the story. The Public Information Committee has been meet-
ing regularly to review material, sanitize intelligence information
where possible, and get the material to the press. They have had some
success in getting stories out in the past week. CIA will examine the
possibility of sanitizing recent SIGINT information on Soviet defeats.
The Committee will prepare a paper on the systematic preparation and
release of information to the media for discussion at the next SCC
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
in the top right corner. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.

Afghanistan
meeting.2 CIA will use its resources to encourage more European corre-
spondents to cover the story on the ground. (S)
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
2 See Document 273.
272.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Vienna, May 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Meeting between Secretary of State Muskie and Foreign Minister Gromyko
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.: Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie
William D. Krimer, Interpreter
USSR: Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko
Viktor Sukhodrev, Interpreter
Foreign Minister Gromyko opened the conversation by suggesting
that he and Secretary Muskie conduct their talks in compact form since
they did not have much time at their disposal. It was his understanding
that there was no formal agenda for this meeting; thus they would be
free to choose whatever topics they wanted to discuss.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Afghanistan
Gromyko now wanted to turn to the subject of Afghanistan. He
would deal with it in the context of how this problem had affected other
problem areas between us. First of all, he would like to demonstrate
the complete untenability and absurdity of an argument current in the
U.S. today. He had not yet heard it from Secretary Muskie in so many
words (in this respect being a new man was an advantage), but he had
certainly heard many statements on the U.S. side to the effect that the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
right corner, an unknown hand wrote: “ZB, The approved version. Muskie has asked
that it be very closely held.” The meeting took place in Hofburg Palace. For the full text
of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet
Union, Document 278.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Soviet Union wanted to dig in in Afghanistan. It was said that the
Soviet Union wanted to occupy Afghanistan in order to target the oil-
rich regions in the Gulf of Iran, thereby either depriving the U.S. of
the possibility of buying Iranian oil, or making it more difficult to
produce and to transport oil from the Persian Gulf to the U.S. Gromyko
wanted to emphasize as strongly as he could that such a view was
possible only as a result of a very low level of understanding of Soviet
policy, a very low level indeed. Some people were talking of some sort
of “Arc of Crisis” which started no one knew where and ended perhaps
in Africa or perhaps even in the Atlantic.2 The Secretary should realize
that such an “arc” existed only in the thinking and imagination of
those who talked in this manner. The Soviet Union did not need any
kind of Iranian oil. The very manner of looking at the question from
this standpoint could only be regarded as schoolboyish, nothing more.
He believed it important to explain the Soviet position on this subject
to the Secretary. He did not know whether he would be able to convince
the Secretary, but such was the Soviet position nevertheless. He would
state it on behalf of the entire Soviet leadership and L.I. Brezhnev
personally.
Now to the substance of the Afghanistan question. The Soviet
Union had introduced its forces into Afghanistan at the request of the
Afghan Government in order to assist it in repelling outside aggression
against that country. That request had been made not only by the
present Afghan leadership, but had also been made repeatedly earlier
by Amin and before him by Taraki. The Soviet leadership had reflected
on that request for a long period of time, hoping and expecting that
the external intrusion would cease. Under the UN Charter such inter-
vention could only be qualified as aggression. When the Soviet leader-
ship saw that this aggression was being expanded, when it saw that
forces were being trained and armed on the territory of Pakistan and
then sent into Afghanistan, the Soviet Union had sent in its contingent
of troops. The Secretary surely knew that the border between Afghani-
stan and Pakistan runs through a mountainous region and that there
were literally hundreds of passages through the unsecured border.
Each year at least 100,000 people crossed through them. When forces
crossed from Pakistan, where they had been armed and trained, the
Soviet Union had come to the conclusion that it must send in its own
forces to put an end to the threat to Afghan independence. At the very
outset, the Soviet Union had stated that as soon as the reasons for
which it had sent in its forces ceased to exist, and as soon as the Afghan
Government was in a position to ensure its country’s independence,

Afghanistan
the limited Soviet troop contingent would be withdrawn from the
territory of Afghanistan. The Soviet Union had stated that on the very
first day of its action, and the U.S. Government had the text of the
relevant Soviet statement. He would repeat that statement today and
add that there was no need for the Soviet Union to say anything else
in clarification. There had been no zigzags in Soviet policy. If anyone
on the Western side believed that the Soviet Union would comply with
the wishes expressed in several capitals, and withdraw its forces as a
precondition for a political settlement in Afghanistan, he would have
to tell the Secretary very frankly that those who had such expectations
were very poorly informed of the actual situation. They had their heads
in the clouds and were engaging in fantasy and unrealistic polemics.
Nevertheless, statements continue to be made, calling upon the
Soviet Union to withdraw its forces. That is totally ruled out. He would
repeat that as soon as aggression against Afghanistan from the territory
of Pakistan and to a lesser extent from that of Iran was halted, the
Soviet troop contingent would be withdrawn. He was availing himself
of the opportunity to clarify Soviet policy for the Secretary.
Gromyko said that the Secretary might want to ask the question
(and he had encountered such questions in his talks with others): was
it really true that there was a massive invasion into Afghanistan from
the territory of Pakistan or Iran for the purpose of fighting against the
present Afghan regime? He would ask the Secretary to look into this
matter more thoroughly. He would suggest that he ask President Carter
and Zia ul-Haq, President of Pakistan, that he ask if there are dozens
of camps on the territory of Pakistan where forces are being assembled,
trained and equipped, and whether incursions into the territory of
Afghanistan are taking place. Even President Carter had recently said
publicly: “Yes, we do assist those forces and will continue to assist
them.” He had called this assistance, but in fact it was a struggle against
the regime in Afghanistan. President Zia had confirmed this and said
that he was aware that this was taking place, but that he could do
nothing to stop it. It was strange, indeed, that the President of Pakistan
cannot stop all this, although it was taking place on the territory of
his country; that he was unable to put his house in order. Gromyko
wondered if the Soviet Union should offer its assistance to Zia to
accomplish that purpose. However, he had not heard Zia make such
a request of anyone. As for the domestic affairs of Afghanistan, one
thing had to be said firmly: questions of the internal leadership of
Afghanistan were internal affairs of that country and could only be
resolved by the Afghans themselves. No one had the right to interfere
in these matters. The President of Pakistan had said that he did not
wish to negotiate with the President of Afghanistan, Babrak Karmal.
Gromyko wondered whether Zia had asked himself the question of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
how many people liked the present leadership of Pakistan. Many peo-
ple recalled that Zia himself had come to power at the point of a rifle
or bayonet; but now Zia did not want to talk to these people, although
people did talk to him. Gromyko wanted to emphasize that the core of
this problem was that any settlement had to be arrived at in negotiations
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, that there must be peace between
these two countries. The Afghan leadership agreed with this premise
and was prepared to enter into negotiations. Naturally, Iran must be
involved as well, but first and foremost this was a matter of relations
between Afghanistan and Pakistan. Just two days ago the Afghan
leadership had once again made its proposal, but Zia says that he does
not want to sit down at a table with them. Gromyko would urge the
Secretary to try and persuade Zia to enter into negotiations. If he
genuinely wished to settle this matter peacefully, Zia must be per-
suaded to enter into negotiations. The Soviet Union was certainly in
favor of a political settlement, and believed that such a settlement was
necessary and possible. Thus, it was necessary to persuade Zia. As soon
as the invasion of Afghanistan was halted and a settlement reached,
and relations between Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran returned to a
peaceful basis, Soviet forces would be withdrawn and Afghanistan’s
neutrality would be guaranteed. Of course, guarantees would be
required and, as Brezhnev had said, one such guarantor power could
be the U.S., perhaps also the Soviet Union and some other countries.
That question, too, should be discussed between Pakistan, Afghanistan
and Iran. Gromyko could not understand why this was not acceptable
to the U.S. He had explained his position to the Secretary. He had
explained that the Soviet Union favored a peaceful solution, but no
one should demand that Afghanistan conduct its affairs to suit some
other capital, whether it be London or any other. In conclusion, he
would point out that this was an internal matter for Afghanistan. He
would urge the Secretary to reflect on this matter. In the Soviet view
it was something well worth reflecting on. If such a course is followed
and a settlement reached, the question of Afghanistan will simply
disappear and disappear completely. It was currently being used in
an artificial manner to stop progress on other issues. While the Secretary
might not agree, Gromyko was certain that it can and must be resolved
in a political manner.
There were two more issues Gromyko wanted to address briefly—
China and Iran.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]

Afghanistan
273.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Iran and Afghanistan
PARTICIPANTS
State
ICA
Warren Christopher
Robert T. Curran
David Newsom
White House
Peter Constable
Zbigniew Brzezinski
OSD
Hedley Donovan
W. Graham Claytor, Jr.
Office of the Vice President
Frank Kramer
Denis Clift
JCS
NSC
Lt. General John Pustay
Gary Sick
Justice
Marshall Brement
John Harmon
Thomas Thornton
Judge Charles Renfrew
Alfred Friendly
Treasury
Robert Carswell
Robert Mundheim
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner
[name not declassified]
Charles Cogan
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
5. Public Information on Afghanistan. The Public Information Com-
mittee, which is responsible for insuring public awareness of Soviet
activities in Afghanistan, presented a report on its activities and some
recommendations. It has had more success recently in attracting media
coverage. Nine recommendations were considered by the SCC, as
follows:
—Strengthening the USG presence in Peshawar, having ICA send
back an officer who, while technically charged with running the Cul-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meet-
mary of Conclusions was filed in an incorrect folder or the folder was labeled with an
incorrect date. Carter wrote: “Zbig” and initialed “J” in the upper right corner. The
meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
tural Center, will be highly competent in helping newsmen obtain
stories on Afghanistan and develop their own news networks inside
and outside that country. (Approved)
—Systematically encourage editors at home offices in Europe and
the U.S. to send reporters to tap the real resources available among
the refugees in Peshawar. (Approved)
—White House and State Department spokesmen should repeat-
edly indict the Afghan Government and their Soviet mentors for refusal
to allow in Western reporters. (Approved)
—Instruct Embassies Delhi and Islamabad to give regular back-
ground briefings to large U.S. and foreign press corps on Afghanistan,
and to locate any local films and still pictures which can be channelled
to European and U.S. TV. (Approved)
—CIA to organize having pictures taken on the ground in Afghani-
stan that can be circulated to the world media through refugee organiza-
tions in Peshawar. (Approved)
—The President, Vice President, and Secretary of State include
statements on Soviet actions in Afghanistan in public statements (Secre-
tary Muskie’s press conference May 20 offers a good opportunity).
(Approved)2
—Immediate funding for six new positions for VOA so that within
90 days one-half hour in Dari language can be broadcast each day to
Afghanistan. (This will be examined with OMB at a separate meeting
tomorrow.)
—Encourage members of Congress and their staffs to make state-
ments, and supply them with same background materials provided
the press. (The Congressional Liaison staffs of State, NSC and CIA will
cooperate in briefing the Hill.)
—Encourage the Senate Foreign Relations and House Foreign
Affairs Committees to hold hearings on Soviet actions in Afghanistan.
(The SCC disapproved this recommendation on the grounds that hear-
ings are too uncontrollable and would probably focus on U.S. clandes-
tine activities rather than Soviet activities.) (S)
Concur with SCC recommendations as indicated above.3
Other
2 In his May 20 press conference, Muskie said that Gromyko provided no indication
of a Soviet military withdrawal from Afghanistan during their meeting in Vienna, May
16. (John K. Cooley, “Muskie Targets Giscard, too,” Christian Science Monitor, May 21,
p. A.
3 Carter checked this option.

Afghanistan
274.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
4900. For Secretary Muskie from Amb Hummel. Subject: (S) The
Pakistan Dimension in the U.S. Response to Soviet Aggression in
Afghanistan.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. I address you directly, Mr. Secretary, to suggest that we need
to have a whole new look at our policies and actions in Pakistan,
especially as they relate to the Afghan situation. As things now stand,
we state publicly, and privately to our friends, that strengthening Paki-
stan is a central element in our response to the Soviet invasion next
door. But we are doing almost nothing to carry out that declared policy.
3. Unless we narrow this gap between our public stance and the
concrete actions we intend to take, it will shortly become so conspicuous
that I fear sharply adverse consequences for our national objectives
and prestige.
4. The Pakistanis have asked us explicitly for economic assistance.2
However, we will shortly have to tell the Paks and others (at an aid
consortium meeting June 12) (A) that we have no economic help to
offer in the current fiscal year, (B) that we plan for none at all in fiscal
’81 and (C) that even in fiscal ’82 it is doubtful that we will give
substantial economic help. The Agency for International Development
(AID) has strongly resisted putting any funds at all into its budget
request for fiscal ’82.
5. The Paks have asked us to give top priority in our economic
assistance to re-scheduling their debt repayments to us, which amount
to over $130 million per year. Given present USG attitudes in Washing-
ton, it is very doubtful that we will make any meaningful move toward
debt rescheduling. Thus our friends, and the Pakistanis, will draw their
own adverse conclusions about our real intentions despite what we
say our policies are.
6. I am very much aware that we have genuine problems in getting
resources with which to carry out our foreign, and indeed our domestic,
policies, and that Pakistan is by no means the only country where our
objectives are not supported by adequate resources. There are no easy
Secret; Immediate; Nodis.
2 Documentation on Pakistani requests for economic assistance is scheduled for
publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
solutions, but I hope you and others in Washington will consider
whether, and how, a special effort should be made to avoid the predict-
ably adverse results for USG interests if we persist in our present
courses with Pakistan. I see these results here and world-wide to be
(in priority order):
A. A USG failure to give meaningful support to Pakistan could
very well cause the Soviets to conclude that the USG does not have
the serious intention to counter further Sov expansionist moves in this
region or elsewhere. And a weak Pakistan, without substantial support,
would likewise tempt the Sovs to increase their pressures on Pakistan—
such as raids on Pak territory—that would pose new challenges for
the region and for the USG that would be difficult or impossible for
us to counter.
B. A number of our important friends will find it impossible to
understand why we withhold support for Pakistan. We placed heavy
pressure on the Europeans, Saudis, and Japan to increase their aid to
Pakistan, which many have already done. Others, including the PRC,
are watching us closely to see whether we will respond effectively to
the many global challenges that beset us. No matter how carefully we
explain our very real budgetary problems and our domestic economic
difficulties, many will conclude that the USG lacks the capability, and
perhaps also lacks the will, to play the role in the world that they want
us to play and that we say we want to play.
C. More parochially, and of lesser importance, is the severe effect
on U.S.-Pak bilateral relations if we withhold support. President Zia
and many others will conclude that we are so unhappy with him that
we are deliberately trying to topple his government so we can deal
with another, perhaps elected, govt more to our liking, and perhaps
more responsive to our anti-nuclear views. Many Pakistani leaders will
also suspect, bizarre though it may seem, that the USG, the Sovs, and
India have some secret understanding that involves keeping Pakistan
weak. Whatever the exact content of these unjustified Pak suspicions,
we can be sure that there will be a sharp rise in anti-Americanism
and an even greater Pak disposition to espouse leftist “nonaligned”
positions. These public manifestations of a Pakistani turn away from
the USG will in turn have deleterious effects on the attitudes of other
countries who will see them as evidence of USG mishandling of
relations with Pakistan.
7. Actions that it is possible for us to take to remedy these conse-
quences are few, and at best palliative. I do not recommend that we
re-structure our existing security agreement of 1959, because I do not
see it in our interest to tie ourselves too closely to this Pak Government,
which is hardly a strong and reliable partner, and which has nuclear
and other policies [with] which we profoundly disagree. No foreseeable

Afghanistan
alternative to Zia would pursue policies any more successful or favora-
ble to our interests than his government at this time. But I believe, and
USG policy papers state, that we have important interests here, in
promoting regional stability, avoiding conflict, countering Soviet
expansionism, and not least in seeing that the USG is perceived as
actually carrying out its professed policies. I therefore hope that we
can examine anew the possibilities for economic assistance to Pakistan,
and come to some better decisions before the aid consortium meeting
June 12.
8. I would give top priority to debt rescheduling, which all the
other members of the consortium are ready to do, and where we are
the only hold-out. Given our very real budget constraints, congressional
attitudes, and Treasury and OMB policies, only a directive from the
President has any chance of changing the present USG hard-line stance.
9. I have been told that there is no possibility of finding funds,
and authorizations, for economic assistance to Pakistan in the upcoming
FY 81 budget. I hope that this can be tested out again, to see whether
priorities can be rearranged.
10. P.L.–480 sales of agricultural commodities are being projected
at low, or very indefinite levels. These should be examined, and raised
substantially.
11. A substantial grant of funds for relief of nearly a million Afghan
refugees would be useful and logical, and would help to avoid a totally
negative USG stance at the consortium meeting. Substantively, too, our
interests will be served by helping the Paks avoid the disruptive and
destabilizing effects of this large number of Afghans in its border
provinces.
12. The FY 82 budget request, now being constructed in Washing-
ton, should be carefully considered, to see that economic assistance to
Pakistan is adequate to match our policies, particularly in aid inputs,
in [garble] and in P.L.–480.
13. None of these suggestions will be new to Washington policy-
makers, and none of them will be easy. You will hear strong and cogent
reasons why they are impossible or at best difficult. Still, I hope that
you will use your influence to see that our important policy goals
are not made unattainable by essentially procedural difficulties, real
though they are, within our own government.
Hummel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
275.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
8285. Subject. Soviet Concern About Spill-Over of Islamic Funda-
mentalism From Afghanistan.
1. (C—Noforn—Entire text)
2. During a May 14 reception for members of the Incidents at Sea
(INCSEA) Delegations, Acting Political Counselor engaged a Soviet
Navy Captain 1/R Valentin Alekseyevich Serkov in a conversation on
Afghanistan. After remarking that it was heartening to learn that the
INCSEA talks were proceeding well, A/PolCouns referred to the over-
all state of bilateral relations and commented that the Soviet action in
Afghanistan had undermined détente.
3. Serkov responded along the following lines: “You Americans
must understand Soviet history in order to understand our actions in
Afghanistan. It took the Soviet Government twenty years to suppress
the Muslim resistance in Central Asia and to establish the Soviet Repub-
lics there. It was a bloody and costly struggle. Accordingly, we were
not going to just stand by and see a Soviet-supported government on
the borders of the Soviet Union overthrown by the same forces of
Muslim fundamentalism which we had conquered in the Soviet Union
earlier. This is the major reason we sent our troops into Afghanistan.”
4. Comment: Serkov is the Deputy Head of the Soviet INCSEA
Delegation. He has been involved in INCSEA matters since before the
agreement was signed in 1972, and is familiar to U.S. members as an
extremely serious, dedicated party member. He is thought to be the
controlling member of the Soviet delegation, often cowing higher rank-
ing members. His influence appears to far outstrip the rank he wears.
Serkov is not given to thoughtless, emotional or inadvertent remarks.
5. It is unusual to hear an official Soviet make so explicit his concern
about the possible spill-over of Islamic militancy into Central Asia
should the anti-regime forces in Afghanistan not be checked. Period-
ically Soviet media try to “sell” the intervention in Afghanistan by
drawing a parallel between these forces and the “Basmachi” movement
which carried on guerrilla war against the Soviet authorities in Central
Asia until well into the 1930’s. Pravda on March 7, for example, pub-
Confidential; Noforn. Sent for information to USICA, DIA, CNO, COMNAVINTCOM,
Warsaw, Beijing, Belgrade, Bucharest, Budapest, Hong Kong, Islamabad, Kabul, Lenin-
grad, London, New Delhi, Munich, Paris, Prague, Sofia, and USNATO.

Afghanistan
lished a letter from a Frunze resident (probably a Kirghiz) citing his
own upbringing in an atmosphere of “Basmachi” violence and his
support for Soviet aid to Afghanistan, a “victim of outside aggression”
like the Soviet Union in the interwar years.2 More recently, during a
television broadcast, Literaturnaya Gazeta editor Aleksandr Chakovskiy,
recalled to viewers the Basmachi movement and, in the next breath,
stated that the USSR cannot permit its Afghani border to become a
springboard for attacks against the USSR.
End comment.
Watson
2 The Basmachi movement refers to the Muslim insurrection against Soviet domina-
tion in Central Asia, particularly Turkistan, approximately 1917–1926.
276.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs (Newsom) to the Director of the Policy Planning
Staff (Lake)1
Washington, May 26, 1980
SUBJECT
Approaches to the Afghan problem
Much of the future of our relationship to the Soviet Union and to
Europe hinges on the evolution of the Soviet presence in Afghanistan.
The marker has been laid down by us, by the Europeans, and by the
Islamic countries that the Soviets must withdraw their troops.
The Soviets, however, have made it clear that they will not with-
draw their troops as long as the Parchamist government is threatened.
Some type of compromise will ultimately be necessary if we are to
avoid a long-term Soviet presence and a gradual erosion of the policies
we have adopted in response to the Afghan invasion.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political
were sent to Saunders, Tarnoff, and Barry.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
We should, I believe, be doing more thinking on how the Soviet
forces can be moved out of Afghanistan. I attach one possible approach,
which obviously has flaws. There may be others.
I would appreciate your comments and your recommendation on
whether we should get a small group together to look further at this
issue.2
David D. Newsom3
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State4
Washington, undated
A Possible Way Out for Afghanistan
Here, for consideration, is a possible approach to resolving the
Afghan crisis. It would propose the establishment of a four power
commission with two non-aligned Islamic states and two Warsaw Pact
states as members, the withdrawal of Soviet troops and their replace-
ment by troops of non-aligned Islamic and Warsaw Pact nations, the
establishment of a more broadly-based government under a Parchamist
president, and a guarantee of Afghanistan’s non-alignment by the states
of the commission and the U.S. and the USSR.
Assumption:
—The primary U.S. interest is to get Soviet troops out of proximity
to the Persian Gulf in southern Afghanistan and to reduce Soviet influ-
ence in that country.
—Sanctions and other measures against the Soviet Union are not
likely to result in their withdrawal from Afghanistan. The US faces an
erosion of support for Afghan-related sanctions against the Soviet
Union and of opposition to the Soviet presence in Afghanistan in the
Third World unless there is genuine momentum toward a solution.
—The Soviets would probably like to find a way to reduce their
direct involvement in Afghanistan, but they are not likely to withdraw
if it means the destruction of the Parchamist revolution. A compromise
2 No response from Lake was found.
3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
4 Secret; Sensitive.

Afghanistan
solution which protects Soviet interests as they see them is, there-
fore, necessary.
—A direct US initiative is likely to be rejected by the Soviet Union.
A successful initiative must not have a U.S. label.
—An accommodation between the Parchamists and at least some
of the Islamic revolutionary forces in Afghanistan cannot be ruled out.
(Intelligence suggests that Babrak may already be in touch with some
Islamic leaders.)
Elements of a Solution
1. A four power commission consisting of two non-aligned nations
which are members of the Islamic Conference, two Warsaw Pact
nations, and, as non-voting members, Pakistan and Iran. All member
nations should have diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. (One
possible composition: Hungary, Poland, Indonesia, and Sudan.) The
functions of the commission would be to:
—Bring about an immediate cease-fire
—Supervise the replacement of Soviet troops by Warsaw Pact
troops north of the Hindu Kush and non-aligned Muslim troops south
of the Kush with mixed forces in Kabul. Such replacement to be com-
pleted within six months.
—Supervise the retraining and reforming of the Afghan army and
their replacement of both Warsaw Pact and non-aligned forces; this to
be accomplished within one year.
—Supervise the return of refugees.
—Oversee the establishment of and functioning of a broadly-based
acceptable government.
—Oversee the resumption of international development aid to
Afghanistan.
2. A government under a Parchamist (Babrak or another) as Presi-
dent with a Prime Minister and at least one-half of the cabinet to
be appointed from non-Parchamist Islamic elements acceptable to the
commission. The nominees for Prime Minister, Foreign Minister,
Defense Minister, Interior Minister and Minister of Information must
be agreed to by all members of the commission.
3. Creation of an Afghanistan rehabilitation fund by the Islamic
nations.
4. Guarantee of Afghanistan’s non-alignment and neutrality by the
powers in the commission, plus the Soviet Union and the United States.
Procedure
1. The United States would float the idea with a friendly power
which would then carry it forward without a U.S. label. We could

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
do this either directly to an Islamic country (Pakistan, Bangladesh,
Indonesia, Tunisia) or with one of our European allies which would, in
turn, discuss the question with the Islamic countries directly concerned.
2. The idea would be proposed and adopted by the council of the
Islamic nations which would choose a group to present it to Babrak.
(Supplementary approaches would be made to the USSR.)
3. When agreement is reached on an approach by all parties con-
cerned, it would then be put before the Security Council for approval.
The four-nation commission would report to the Security Council.
Arguments
Pro
—If approved, it would expedite the departure of the Soviet forces
from Afghanistan.
—It would remove the Afghan matter as a major obstacle to cooper-
ation with the Soviet Union in other fields. (e.g., arms control)
—It would avoid the almost certain erosion of support for our
present policies on Afghanistan.
—It would remove Warsaw Pact military presence to north of the
Hindu Kush.
Con
—Communist influence would clearly be established and recog-
nized in Afghanistan by the international community.
—Such a solution would mean the end of the open armed opposi-
tion to the Parchamists and of international support for that opposition.
—The proposal contains elements difficult to achieve, such as the
introduction of non-Parchamist elements into the government and the
agreement of the Soviets to permit non-communist forces to replace
theirs in the South.
—A proposal of this kind at this time could conceivably undercut
the recent resolutions of the Islamic Conference which called for the
complete and unconditional withdrawal of Soviet forces.5

Afghanistan
277.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
8339. Special encryption. Subject: Ambassador Watson’s Call on
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Summary: I had a wide-ranging discussion with Gromyko on
various issues affecting U.S.-Soviet relations and, drawing on Depart-
ment’s instructions, made a general presentation of our views on these
subjects. On the overall state of U.S.-Soviet relations, Gromyko repeated
the Soviet position that responsibility for normalization of relations
and repairing the damage is that of the United States administration.
He took an uncompromising line on the Afghanistan question and
urged the U.S. to “be more or less objective” so that “a common lan-
guage can be found” to resolve this issue. He said the U.S. underesti-
mated the significance of the May 14 Afghan proposal.3
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
5. Afghanistan4
You emphasize that Afghanistan is the main event which has
brought about the deterioration in relations between the U.S. and the
Soviet Union and which is responsible for the general deterioration in
the international situation. We categorically reject this. We believe that
the problem has been artificially exaggerated. Afghanistan is not the
main problem, especially if it is viewed factually. In any event, Afghani-
stan should not be viewed as a problem resulting in negative conse-
quences for U.S.-Soviet relations and for international relations in gen-
eral. The U.S. completely distorts the meaning of Soviet actions and
the introduction of Soviet forces into Afghanistan. We introduced those
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
other posts, May 24, the Department provided policy guidance for discussions with
Eastern European governments in response to a “tough speech” delivered by Bulgarian
Foreign Minister Petar Mldanov that was highly critical of U.S. policy. With regard to
Afghanistan, the Department emphasized: “There should be no doubt about the cause
of the current heightened tension in the world. It is the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
which has challenged the premise of international relations and had a profoundly nega-
tive impact on U.S.-Soviet relations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
3 See Document 270.
4 The following is a continuation of Gromyko’s remarks.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
forces to help Afghanistan repel aggression and did so according to
the UN Charter and our treaty with the Government and leadership
of Afghanistan. We have not violated anything by that action and have
acted in accordance with international law. We categorically reject all
these distortions of the situation which are made by Washington. We
shall withdraw our forces after we are requested to do so from the
Afghan Government and, of course, if there is such a request. Also,
our withdrawal is dependent on whether or not interference and inter-
vention cease from Pakistan and Iran and they stop fighting against
the legitimate Government of Afghanistan. The withdrawal of our
forces will be accomplished also when an agreement is reached and it
is guaranteed. The question of a withdrawal of our forces before that
is beside the point. Those who raise such questions are wasting not
only their time but our time. We have expressed our position publicly
and Leonid Brezhnev has done so on more than one occasion. Our
position has been explained to the United States and I repeated it the
last time in my meeting with Secretary Muskie.5 Our position should
be clear to you. Why does the U.S. continue to take such an unrealistic
position on Afghanistan after all these explanations? We are aware of
what Washington and the West wish to see happen (in Afghanistan)
but are you prepared to take a realistic position? If the U.S. were
prepared to be more or less objective, a common language can be found
but, I repeat, only if you are prepared to look objectively at the situation
and take an objective position.
Concerning the Afghan proposal which was recently made and
which the U.S. has been critical of, it seems to us that the U.S. underesti-
mates the significance of that proposal. If you do wish to settle the
situation around Afghanistan, your attitude would be different. The
Afghan proposal is aimed at normalizing the situation around Afghani-
stan, including Pakistan. It is a good basis for normalizing the situation.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
14. Upon the completion of Gromyko’s remarks I told him that I
would, of course, communicate what he said to my government and
that it would be useless at this point to try to address each point he
had made, many of which I took strong objection to. I then singled
out some of his key statements for rebuttal and made the following
comments.
15. Since the beginning of our relationship with the Soviet Union
we think there has not been anything that parallels the Soviet Union’s
invasion of Afghanistan which was recognized as a non-aligned state.
I stressed the importance of the historical implications of the Soviet
5 See Document 272.

Afghanistan
Union’s actions and that they had endangered international stability
and peace. The Soviet Union must understand this. It is now necessary
to find a way to make some progress in removing tensions lest the
world situation become even more dangerous. In this respect the Soviet
Union must live up to its responsibilities as a world power.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Watson
278.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
Pakistan/Afghanistan/USSR
SUBJECT
Continued Government of Pakistan Covert Support to the Afghan Islamic
Nationalist Insurgents [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[2 lines not declassified]
1. During a meeting of senior Pakistani military officers on 24 May
1980, General Zia-ul Haq was given a briefing by the Master General
of Ordnance and Lt. General Akhtar Abdul Rahman Khan, Director
General of the Inter Services Intelligence Directorate (ISID), on weapons
covertly supplied by the Government of Pakistan (GOP) to the Afghan
Islamic nationalist insurgents (INI’s). Weapons recently supplied were
listed as follows:
A. 300,000 rounds of .303 rifle ammunition
B. 500 .303 rifles
C. 50 anti-tank hand-held 75 mm rocket launchers
D. 30 field radio communications sets
E. an unknown quantity of plastic explosives and other demolitions
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Pak Support for
Insurgents. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
2. Commenting on the method of supply, General Akhtar said that
he and the Director of Military Intelligence coordinate these activities
through their own agents, that all markings on the equipment were
erased and that all ammunition supplied is without markings. All
ammunition and equipment is moved into Afghanistan through small
groups of trusted agents.
3. Lt. General K.M. Arif, Chief of Martial Law Administration Staff,
objected to these activities and said that such actions would provoke
the Soviets and invite their retaliation. By undertaking such activities,
the GOP was moving into a confrontation policy with the Soviet Union.
4. General Akhtar disagreed with General Arif and commented
that the INI’s are stronger now and they should receive continued
GOP support.
5. General Zia basically agreed with Akhtar’s position, commenting
that the Saudi Arabian Government had recently asked about the extent
of GOP support to the INI’s. General Zia closed the discussion by
stating that because of the sensitive nature of the issue he told the
Saudis at the Islamic Conference that he would provide King Khalid
with all the details at their next meeting.
6. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
8. Washington Dissem:
To [less than 1 line not declassified]

Afghanistan
279.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Chairman of the Special Coordinating Committee on
Intelligence (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Possible Increased Aid to Afghanistan Freedom Fighters
1. It may be possible to use Pakistan’s close intelligence connection
with Iran to increase the flow of weapons to the Afghanistan fighters.
Pakistani Intelligence Chief General Akhtar has made several veiled
references to connections with his Iranian counterparts. He has refused
to identify this link or provide any elaborating data, but he recently
provided one example of its use. We provided intelligence to the Paki-
stanis on a bloody Soviet offensive in the heavily Shi’ite areas of central
Afghanistan. The intent was to place the material in the Islamabad
press at the time of the Islamic Conference. Time factors made this
impossible, but General Akhtar, acting on his own, used the material
to prepare a report for his Iranian contacts on the suffering of Shi’ites
in Afghanistan.2
2. The Pakistanis are presently receiving all the weapons that they
can distribute through their mechanisms. It is possible that the Paki-
stanis, through their Iranian links, could arrange for the delivery of
additional weapons to fighters in western Afghanistan. We propose to
suggest to General Akhtar that he approach his Iranian contacts and
offer to fly Soviet weapons to Iran for onward distribution in Afghani-
stan. The weapons could be flown directly from Islamabad to airfields
in eastern Iran on the C–130’s to be loaned to Pakistan. Neither the
origin of the weapons nor our role in their procurement would be
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For
[handling restriction not declassified].
2 An intelligence information cable prepared in the CIA reported on a meeting
between Zia and Qotbzadeh at the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers in Islamabad,
May 24. Regarding Afghanistan, Qotbzadeh was quoted as saying: “some appeasement
time in delaying tactics” would be required in dealing with the Soviet Union, and that
the Soviets had intimated to Iran that they could cause trouble in Baluchistan, which,
Qotbzadeh told Zia, neither Iran nor Pakistan could afford. In response to Zia’s assertion
that the Afghan insurgency was gaining strength, Qotbzadeh said that Iran would
increase its support of the insurgents by 30 percent in June. Both Zia and Qotbzadeh
agreed that at some point their respective countries would have to talk with the Karmal
regime, but doing so should be delayed as long as possible given the possibility that
the Afghan Government would collapse within the next two months. (Department of
Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Pak Support for Insurgents)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
mentioned. We believe Pakistan would honor a proviso not to use our
aircraft to deliver embargoed items to Iran.
3. Given the political sensitivity of shipping U.S.-procured arms
via Iranian authorities and our inability to control the weapons once
they reach Iran, we request your prior approval of this proposal.3
Stansfield Turner4
3 In his reply to Turner, June 2, Brzezinski approved Turner’s proposal, “provided
adequate assurances can be obtained that such weapons will not be diverted by the
Iranians to other purposes (including retention by the Iranians themselves).” Noting
“the extreme importance of the Afghanistan resistance effort,” Brzezinski requested semi-
monthly reports on the status both of U.S. involvement and what was known of U.S.
involvement by other parties. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of
80, Afghanistan)
4 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above his typed signature.
280.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, May 1980
Afghanistan: Factions in the Ruling Party
([classification marking not declassified])
Summary
The ruling People’s Democratic Party (PDP) of Afghanistan, in
which Moscow has a substantial stake, is beset by longstanding divi-
sions. President Babrak Karmal’s regime would have fallen apart by
now were it not for constant Soviet pressure on the feuding factions—
Babrak’s Parcham (Banner) and the Khalq (People’s) of former Presi-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
Party, An Intelligence Memorandum. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A typed
note at the bottom of the page reads: “The author of this paper is [name not declassified]
of the Near East-South Asia Division, Office of Political Analysis. It was coordinated
with the Offices of Strategic Research and Central Reference and the National Intelligence
Officers for the Near East and South Asia and the USSR and Eastern Europe. Comments
and queries are welcome and may be directed to the Chief, Southwest Asia Analytic
Center, [less than 1 line not declassified]. Research for this paper was completed on 23
May 1980.”

Afghanistan
dents Amin and Taraki—to work together. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Still, personal enmity and the settling of old scores between the
more numerous Khalqis and their Parchamist adversaries continue in
spite of Soviet attempts at mediation. Moreover, as the intraparty strug-
gle erodes the authority and saps the energies of the PDP’s leaders,
the Soviets will become even more involved in the regime’s day-to-
day decisionmaking process. ([classification marking and handling restric-
tion not declassified])
The strains in the regime are the same as those that weakened the
governments of Amin and Taraki before the Soviet intervention. Soviet
military intervention and political interference, far from bringing the
two party factions together, have sharpened the antagonisms dividing
them. Moscow could engineer yet another coup, but the Soviets are
unlikely to come up with a new leadership that will achieve Moscow’s
objective of restoring stability under a Soviet-dominated regime. ([clas-
sification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
As they try to deal with the infighting, the Soviets are concerned
that Babrak’s faction in the military is weaker than its Khalqi rival. If
the Soviets are ever to disengage from Afghanistan, they must first
rebuild the demoralized Army and ensure its loyalty to the regime.
Babrak’s weak position in the military is a serious vulnerability Moscow
must confront and probably will be an important factor in any Soviet
consideration of an alternative leadership. ([classification marking and
handling restriction not declassified])
Babrak recognizes that he remains in power only as long as Moscow
believes he can serve Soviet interests. As he and the Khalqis vie for
Soviet backing, Moscow will face difficult choices in estimating the
prospects for each faction in holding the regime together and, over the
longer term, governing effectively in the absence of Soviet occupation
forces. For the foreseeable future, however, Moscow will not be able
to look to its clients in Kabul to shoulder the burden of protecting
Soviet interests in Afghanistan. ([classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified]).
[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
281.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
U.S. Relations with the Allies (S)
PARTICIPANTS
State
Secretary Edmund Muskie
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Mr. George Vest, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of European Affairs
Mr. Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Near Eastern and South
Asian Affairs
Treasury
Deputy Secretary Robert Carswell
OSD
Ambassador Robert Komer, Under Secretary for Policy
Mr. Frank Kramer, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for International
Security Affairs
Agriculture
Secretary Bob Bergland
Dr. Dale Hathaway, Under Secretary for International Affairs and Commodity
Programs
Commerce
Deputy Secretary Luther Hodges (Acting Secretary)
Mr. Homer Moyer, General Counsel
JCS
Lt. General John Pustay, Assistant to the Chairman
Mr. Bruce Clarke, Director, National Foreign Assessment Center
Mr. Joe Zaring, NIO for Western Europe
USUN
Ambassador Donald McHenry
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. David Aaron
Ambassador Henry Owen
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezin-
ski’s Geographic Files, Box 17, Southwest Asia/Persian Gulf—General (William) Odom’s
In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “Zbig. J.”

Afghanistan
NSC
Mr. Robert D. Blackwill
Brig. General William Odom
Mr. Marshall Brement
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
In opening the discussion, Secretary Muskie asked CIA if our lack
of success with the Allies in persuading them to respond vigorously
to the Afghanistan crisis was an indication that they disagreed with
our strategic analysis of the situation. He noted that our original ration-
ale had been to try to persuade the Soviets to withdraw and to deter
repetition of the Soviet invasion. The Secretary asked if the Europeans
had in effect accepted a permanent Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.
CIA said yes, Ambassador Komer thought that was indeed the case, and
David Aaron added that there was an important train of thought in
Europe that argued that we would in the end have to trade Western
acceptance of the Babrak regime for eventual Soviet withdrawal from
Afghanistan. (S)
Responding to Secretary Muskie’s observation that these issues
should be discussed at the Venice Summit, Dr. Brzezinski stressed that
it was important for the leaders of the West to talk together in detail
about the strategic challenge, either formally or informally at dinner.
Before going to the Summit, the President would have to decide if he
wished to pose sharply and directly the strategic issues we confront,
or to soft-pedal them. Dr. Brzezinski thought that the President should
use the Venice forum to portray the Soviet challenge as he saw it and
to make clear that palliatives such as a partial Soviet withdrawal from
Afghanistan would not work. With this approach the President would
stress that if we did not act to meet the Soviet threat in Southwest
Asia, a fundamental tipping of history would occur. Giscard, Schmidt
and Ohira all had said that they more or less concurred with our
strategic assessment, but it was important to get their collective agree-
ment at Venice to our view of the implications of Afghanistan. If we
could do that, the individual measures we had proposed would then
be easier to achieve. Therefore, the President should make a tough-
minded, forceful statement at Venice.2 (S)
at the Summit issued a statement on Afghanistan that called for “a world in which the
rule of law is universally obeyed, national independence is respected and world peace
is kept.” The statement continued: “We therefore reaffirm hereby that the Soviet military
occupation of Afghanistan is unacceptable now and that we are determined not to accept
it in the future. It is incompatible with the will of the Afghan people for national
independence, as demonstrated by their courageous resistance, and with the security of
the states of the region. It is also incompatible with the principles of the United Nations
Charter and with efforts to maintain genuine détente. It undermines the very foundations
of peace, both in the region and in the world at large.” The text of the statement is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Secretary Muskie observed that if we fell back from any of our
efforts so far to apply punitive measures against the Soviets, we would
inevitably have reduced in European eyes the urgency of our evaluation
of the crisis and made it easier for them to minimize their own contribu-
tions in meeting the crisis. He thought the President should make a
statement in Venice in a way to force the Allies to face up to the issue.
The President should ask whether the Allies agreed with our strategic
evaluation or not. Dr. Brzezinski agreed and said that it was important
to set a higher standard for European action than we thought they could
probably meet. This would show U.S. leadership and also realistically
recognize that we had to ask for more in order to get the minimally
acceptable. (S)
In beginning to go through the individual measures we had pur-
sued relating to Afghanistan, Secretary Muskie asked Secretary Bergland
to address the issue of the grain embargo. Bergland observed that this
matter would be decided by something over which we had no control—
weather. If the Soviet Union could harvest 225 metric tons of grain this
year, it could muddle through with minimal grain imports whatever
we did. We would not know until late June or July how the Soviet
crop would turn out. Under Secretary Hathaway added that Argentina
would not cooperate with us in this endeavor and that the key to
holding at last year’s export level to the Soviet Union was Canada. If
Canada cooperated with us, Australia would follow. (S)
Hathaway stressed that in order to gain Canadian cooperation, Presi-
dential intervention would be necessary. The Canadian bureaucracy
was dead set against our approach. In stressing that the Allies were
generally against us on this matter, Henry Owen said that the chances
of Canadian cooperation were less than 50–50. Moreover, if the Soviets
had an average crop year, our efforts to reduce grain exports would
not make much difference anyway. In any case, the Canadians would
make a decision on this issue in the next week or so and if we intervened,
it would have to be soon. Bergland agreed and stressed we had only
two alternatives—to pressure the Canadians or to abandon this effort
altogether. He thought the Canadians could be pressured but we must
act now. Secretary Muskie, observing that this issue was a centerpiece
of our post-Afghanistan measures, said if we dropped it this would
signal to the Europeans and the Soviets that we were in effect dropping
our anti-Afghanistan effort. We would be saying that the problem was
too tough. That would be perceived abroad as a relaxation of our
determination to respond to the Soviet invasion. Dr. Brzezinski agreed
and said that we had no choice except to go to the Canadians. It would
be better to fail because Ottawa did not agree than to drop the effort
ourselves. The consensus at the table was thus that talking points
should be urgently drafted for the President to use in a telephone

Afghanistan
conversation with Trudeau asking that the Canadians maintain their
grain exports to the Soviet Union at last year’s level.3 (S)
Noting that the Allied response to our efforts to restrain export
credits to Moscow was very bleak, Secretary Muskie asked if we should
nevertheless press ahead on this issue. Dr. Brzezinski said he thought
that tactically we should continue to pressure the Europeans on credits
even though we knew we would not get their complete cooperation.
To do otherwise would send the wrong message to the Allies. At the
same time, Dr. Brzezinski stressed that we should keep our efforts
private since we did not wish to inflate this matter publicly to a point
at which our lack of success became a public defeat for the President.
Secretary Muskie registered the participants’ agreement that we should
continue to push the Europeans on credits. (S)
Moving on to COCOM, Komer emphasized that this issue had long-
range strategic implications and that we should press the Europeans
hard. The JCS agreed. Secretary Muskie thought reduced technology
transfer to the USSR had the greatest potential for giving pain to the
Soviets over time. The group thought that we should do our best to
expand the COCOM list, recognizing that the Europeans would re-
sist. Again, all concurred that this should not be a matter for public
discussion. (S)
On the Olympics, it was agreed that we should send messages this
week to ensure that there is no slippage among those who had already
decided not to go to the Olympics and to try to persuade individual
federations not to attend the Moscow Games. Near the time of the
Moscow Games, we should also emphasize to those who would be
attending that we hoped they would insist on reduced ceremonies (no
flags, anthems, etc.) at Moscow. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we try
to think of ways to give more credit to those governments which would
not be going to the Olympics. Secretary Muskie agreed, and thought
perhaps the Senate might do something in this respect, as might the
UN and public groups in the U.S. Aaron wondered whether we might
schedule bilateral games—track with the Kenyans, swimming with the
Australians, and the like—and it was agreed that these suggestions
would be followed-up. (S)
On the remaining issues before the group, it was agreed that we
should make clear to the Allies that, aside from political-level contacts,
we intended to maintain our basic practice of minimal contacts with
the Soviets and hoped they will do the same; State promised an options
paper on the issue of debt relief for Pakistan; and all thought it would
3 In the right margin at the end of the paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK—An official
cable should also be sent.” No cable was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
be useful to press the Allies harder on the NATO defense response to
Afghanistan, especially the Belgians and Dutch who were apparently
not going to make their three percent defense commitment. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then reminded the participants that the President
had endorsed the following division of labor concepts for coordinating
U.S. and Allied contributions to the security of the Persian Gulf region:
1. Most important is that our Allies increase their commitments to
NATO’s defense. This is the greatest contribution they can make while
the U.S. is building a security system for the Persian Gulf region. (S)
2. Facilitating U.S. enroute access for military contingencies in the
region is the next most helpful thing the Allies can contribute. They
should be pressed to provide that access. (S)
3. On military exercises and deployments, we should encourage
our Allies to go through with those they have already planned but not
to do more at this time. (S)
4. We should encourage the British, French, and Australians to
improve their rapid deployment capabilities, but we should not encour-
age them to go beyond their current plan. (S)
5. We should encourage the Allies to expand their security assist-
ance to key regional countries, particularly Turkey, but also Oman,
Somalia, Djibouti, and Sudan. We should encourage them to maintain
at least the same level of economic aid to Egypt, Turkey, and Pakistan
and to expand economic aid with the smaller countries in the region. (S)
Finally, David Aaron observed that another matter of transatlantic
concern in the next months was CSCE and the CDE. It was agreed that
there would be a follow-on to this meeting next week which would
discuss how this issue might affect our relations with the Allies and,
if required, what steps we should take after the President’s call to
Trudeau on Canadian grain exports.4 (S)
4 At the bottom of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “We must convince the Allies
that there will be no business as usual until they help us force the Soviet troops out of
Afghanistan. They must face up to this choice. Otherwise, we will all fail, & the Soviets
will win this struggle—(They will still have a bear by the tail in Afghanistan). J.”

Afghanistan
282.
Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1
Report No. 1387
Washington, June 2, 1980
POLITICAL FEUDING IN AFGHANISTAN:
A DILEMMA FOR THE SOVIETS
Summary
Intensifying infighting between the Khalq and Parcham factions
of the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) is significantly
complicating efforts to legitimize and popularize the Soviet puppet
Babrak Karmal regime. The struggle has its roots in early personal and
ideological differences, greatly exacerbated by the events of the two
years since the April 1978 coup, which brought the PDPA to power in
Afghanistan. Should the present uneasy truce continue to erode, there
could be another major upheaval in the Afghan political scene. Already,
reports abound that each group is plotting to unseat the other.
The situation presents the Soviets with a dilemma. The continuing
feud is paralyzing government operations and strengthening the ranks
of the countrywide resistance. But if the Soviets should espouse the
cause of one faction to the exclusion of the other, they could further
undermine their own base of support. While neither faction could
remain in power without Soviet backing, keeping the peace between
them may prove to be a goal beyond the Soviet reach.
Importance of a United PDPA
The government installed by the Soviets after their December 27
invasion signaled a reuniting of Khalqis and Parchamis under the
leadership of long-time Parcham head, now President, Prime Minister,
and Secretary General of the PDPA, Babrak Karmal. The government
is a carefully contrived mix of Khalqis and Parchamis. There are two
Deputy Prime Ministers—one a Khalqi, Assadullah Sarwari, and the
other a Parchami, Sultan Ali Keshtmand. The dominant Parcham fac-
tion outnumbers the Khalq in all the government and party organiza-
tions—but only by a margin of four to three in the important Politburo.
Collaboration between the two groups, functioning as a united
PDPA, is important from the Soviet viewpoint for two reasons. First,
it confers legitimacy on Babrak Karmal, the Soviet puppet, as a natural
successor to the previous Khalq regimes of Nur Mohammad Taraki
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 1, Afghan Politics.
Unclassified. Drafted by Van Hollen (INR/RNA/SOA) and approved by Harris (INR/

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
and Hafizullah Amin and supports the claim that this is merely a new
phase in the natural evolution of the Saur (April) revolution. Second,
it helps establish as broad-based a political appeal as possible. The
Soviet Union gambled that Babrak would appear more politically
attractive than his predecessors and that it could effect a reconciliation
between the estranged Khalqis and Parchamis which would provide
a base on which to build a broader national front. The building of such
a front is considered essential for overcoming the present widespread
hostility to the succession of Marxist governments.
The Soviets also apparently believed that the 85,000 troops they
brought into Afghanistan to support Babrak would quickly discourage
the countrywide opposition to the government, thus giving it time
and breathing space to become established and to win support with
conciliatory programs. To date, most of the Soviets’ original judgments
appear to have been in error. The overwhelming popular resistance,
which has grown appreciably since the December invasion and is now
directed primarily against the Soviets themselves, makes a mockery of
any claim to legitimacy. Likewise, the deep-seated hostility between
the Parcham and Khalq factions is proving to be irreconcilable.
Early Stages of Rivalry
The rivalry between the Khalqis and the Parchamis has its roots
in an early split in the Communist-styled People’s Democratic Party
of Afghanistan when Babrak led a splinter group out of the party in
1967, two years after it was founded by Taraki. The present organization
was then known popularly as the Khalq party after the name of its
short-lived publication Khalq (“The Masses” or “The People”) and the
Babrak group became known as the Parcham (“Banner”) party from
the name of its paper.
The reasons for the original split appear to have been more personal
than ideological as both groups were dedicated to the principles of
Marxism-Leninism. However, certain philosophical and policy differ-
ences separated them from the beginning and are important factors in
the current struggle. The Parchamis have always been considered closer
to Moscow than the more independent Khalqis. This is currently sym-
bolized by the Parchamis’ blatant status as a Soviet puppet. Also, the
Parchamis have consistently been more pragmatic and have favored
temporary alliances with progressive movements as an intermediate
step on the path to socialism, whereas the Khalqis have favored class
struggle and a hard line. This approach led the Parchamis to team up
with Mohammad Daoud for the coup against his cousin, King Zahir,
in July 1973 and for the early stages of his Presidency.2 Currently, it
Document 4.

Afghanistan
means that the Parchamis are advocating a gradual approach to politi-
cal, social, and economic change in order to appease the inflamed
populace. This policy appears to have the full support of the Soviets.
Recruitment and organization patterns also differed from the
beginning of the Afghan leftist movement and are important factors
in the present conflict. The Parchamis, although more in the public eye
because of the dynamism of Babrak, were a relatively small and loosely
organized group. They were intellectuals drawing their support from
the urban middle class, professionals, and students and have been
described as Afghanistan’s “Communist Aristocracy.”
The Khalq group stayed more in the background, but eventually
came to be much larger and much better organized than the Parchamis.
It recruited primarily among the civil service, the military establish-
ment, and in the countryside. It was also considered to be more Push-
tun-dominated than the Parcham party, which, although smaller, reput-
edly had a broader ethnic base. One member of the Khalq inner circle
who was a particularly effective organizer and had special responsibil-
ity for recruiting in the military was Amin.
No official current membership figures are available. According
to a recent Reuters article from Kabul, there are an estimated 25,000–
50,000 Khalqis, while it is believed there were fewer than 10,000
Parchamis at the time of the December coup. These figures give a sense
of relative size. They may have been valid for an earlier period, but in
light of overwhelming current alienation, they are probably highly
inflated.
Feuding Intensified After Successful 1978 Coup
The predominant cause for the current hostility lies in the events
of the past two years after the Khalq and Parcham groups, having
reunited in 1977 following 10 years of estrangement, jointly overthrew
President Mohammad Daoud in April 1978.
The unity which brought them to power proved to be short-lived.
The Khalqis quickly outmaneuvered the Parcham group and forced
Babrak and his closest associates first into diplomatic exile as ambassa-
dors in July 1978 and later into real exile, when they were dismissed
from their posts. Other high-ranking Parchamis suffered an even more
disagreeable fate in the summer of 1978 when they were accused of
plotting against the government, imprisoned, and tortured. During the
course of the Taraki and Amin regimes, most of the Parcham leadership
and hundreds of lower ranking members were imprisoned.
When the Soviets invaded in December 1979 and overthrew Amin,
who had won out in a power struggle with the subsequently murdered
Taraki, they brought the exiled Parcham leadership group with them
and reinstated it as the dominant element in the new government. All
other Parchamis were subsequently released from imprisonment.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Against this background, it is understandable that the current
attempts to reconcile past differences are not succeeding. Parchamis
who suffered torture from their current Khalq colleagues cannot forget
and forgive. One of the most hated figures is Khalqi Deputy Prime
Minister Assadullah Sarwari, who was head of the secret police during
the Taraki presidency and who is held personally responsible for the
torture of some of the Parcham political prisoners, including the other
Deputy Prime Minister, Sultan Ali Keshtmand.
Current reports indicate a good deal of maneuvering by each group
to discredit and hopefully eliminate the other. The differences are now
becoming so acute that they are breaking out into the open and are being
reported in the press with increasing frequency. Recently a prominent
Parchami newspaper editor, who is a younger brother of Parchami
Deputy Prime Minister Keshtmand, was arrested after his paper ran
an article and a cartoon critical of former President Taraki. While former
President Amin is now treated as an aberrant and responsible for all
the mistakes and suppression of the past two years, Taraki is still
honored and the Khalqis in the present government are loyal to him.
The Khalq faction is apparently opposed to the current Parcham
policy, which emphasizes moderation and a respect for Islam designed
to placate the hostile populace. The Khalqis reportedly were particu-
larly opposed to issuing the new, less inflammatory flag.
Most important of all, it has been reported by the Press Trust of
India correspondent in Kabul that the recently signed Afghan-Soviet
treaty covering the status of Soviet troops in Afghanistan has caused
sharp divisions within the government and the party. Khalqis are now
said to be increasingly opposed to the continued presence of Soviet
troops.
On the surface it might appear to be in the Soviets’ interests to
dispense with the Khalq faction altogether and rely solely on the more
amenable and beholden Parchamis. However, Babrak Karmal has failed
to win popular support and strongman Khalqi Assadullah Sarwari is
said to be a Soviet favorite. Even more important, the superior numeri-
cal strength of the Khalq group, and particularly its strength in the
military, makes this a less appealing option. If the Khalqis were to
go over to the resistance en masse, it would make the Soviets’ job of
pacification even more difficult than it already is.
Some lower ranking Khalqis may already be joining the resistance
ranks, however, and it certainly appears that the Soviets will find it
increasingly difficult to keep the lid on the explosive feuding.

Afghanistan
283.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 4, 1980
SUBJECT
Zia and Support for the Rebels (C)
You know, of course, that we are taking a beating in the press
and abroad even (especially France) for our “failure” to support the
mujihadin with weapons.2 This could easily become a campaign issue
(although there are obvious ways to counter it). (C)
You may have noted that Zia is climbing on this band wagon.
Beginning in Salisbury and most recently in his meeting with Lester
Wolff, he is deploring the failure of the US to provide him with the
kind of support that would enable Pakistan to provide a conduit for
support to the mujahidin.3 This is a clever approach for him to take
of course, and I certainly don’t blame him for doing it. It is the best
way of covering his tracks in a difficult situation. But it certainly doesn’t
help us with our public relations problem. (S)
In addition, I am beginning to wonder just what we are getting as
a result of our efforts to provide covert assistance to the mujahidin.
CIA is confident but coy when I ask them. I haven’t heard of any of
the SA–7s bringing anything down however, and Kramer’s articles in
the Inquirer suggest that, at least in the part of the country where he
was, there is nothing even resembling an anti-tank weapon.4 (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For
Sent for action. In the upper right corner, Aaron wrote: “ZB—I agree with this. Every
time we push for details we get a limp leg. We should ask for a full-scale briefing for
2 See, for example, Daniel Southerland, “France hints US should do more to aid ill-
3 Zia, who was in Salisbury to celebrate Rhodesia’s independence, gave a press
conference April 17, during which he called on the United States to pursue a stronger
military response to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. (Carlyle Murphy, “Pakistan
man Wolff, who led a congressional delegation to Pakistan, met with Zia in Islamabad
Zia was quoted as saying: “we cannot convince the U.S. that Afghanistan should be top
priority,” and “in superpower terms, we have already been passed over to the other
4 A reference to a series of articles by Richard Ben Cramer on the Afghan resistance
Prize for International Reporting in 1981 for the series.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
This may all be in the nature of things and our program may be
moving along quite adequately, given the Pak constraints. Unless you
know a lot more about it than I do, however, I suggest that you or
David grill CIA pretty exactingly on the effect that our program is
having. If you want, I could follow this up with the Station Chief in
Islamabad when I am there. I have no particular desires in this regard,
but if I were to do so to any effect, he would have to have gotten
instructions from Headquarters to level with me. And those instruc-
tions will not be forthcoming without a push from you. (I do not,
incidentally, believe it would be advisable for me to meet with Akhtar
or his people.) (S)
RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. That you or David press CIA for exact details of the performance
of their CA program in support of the Afghan rebels. I think this should
be done in a smaller group, even, than the SCC(I). I would like to sit
in, but it might be more effective one-on-one.5 (S)
2. If you want me to probe in great detail with the Station Chief,
that you ask Carlucci to tell Islamabad that they should level with me
completely. (S)
5 Brzezinski approved the recommendation. In the left margin next to his approval,
he wrote: “I will do it,” from which he drew a line to the bottom of the memorandum,
where he wrote: “Prepare me a memo to ST, asking relevant questions.” The reference
is to Turner.

Afghanistan
284.
Letter From Secretary of State Muskie to Soviet Foreign
Minister Gromyko1
Washington, June 5, 1980
Dear Mr. Minister:
Since our meeting in Vienna, I have given a great deal of thought
to your views on the situation in Afghanistan and to our own concerns
about events there. I noted your indication of an interest in continuing
an exchange on this issue and on the importance of improving relations
between our two countries.2
It is the position of the United States that any viable solution to
the problem of Afghanistan must be based on the principles of non-
intervention and non-interference in the domestic affairs of sovereign
nations. Accordingly, with the prompt withdrawal of all Soviet forces
from Afghanistan, the United States will be prepared to join in assur-
ances and arrangements to establish a truly independent and non-
aligned Afghanistan, administered by a government acceptable to the
Afghan people.
The United States has no interest in interfering in Afghanistan’s
internal affairs. We will not endorse arrangements designed to perpetu-
ate a government imposed upon Afghanistan through foreign arms.
Nor could we agree to conditions which affect adversely our own vital
interests in the area or those of Afghanistan’s neighbors.
If the foregoing approach is accepted by the Soviet Union, the
United States would be prepared to explore some transitional arrange-
ment, to be implemented along with the prompt withdrawal of all
Soviet troops from Afghanistan, for the purpose of ensuring that peace
and tranquillity are restored in Afghanistan. The creation of an interna-
tional peacekeeping force could be considered in this connection.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
right corner. In a memorandum to Carter, May 28, Brzezinski noted that he gave Muskie
some proposed language for the letter during a breakfast meeting the previous Friday,
May 23. Referring to a draft of the letter, Brzezinski added that he made some changes
so that the Soviets could not infer from the letter that the United States accepted the
“puppet regime” in Kabul. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
telegram 9449 from Moscow, June 12, the Embassy reported that Muskie’s letter was
delivered by Watson during his meeting with Gromyko that day. In Gromyko’s reaction
to the letter, the Embassy noted that he said it “offered no prospects for reaching a
settlement, stating that insistence on prior withdrawal of Soviet troops is a dead end.”
2 See Document 272.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
It is the US view that a solution based on such principles would
facilitate the restoration of more cooperative relations between the
United States and the Soviet Union.
Sincerely,
Edmund S. Muskie
285.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
COUNTRY
Afghanistan/USSR
SUBJECT
Developing Situation Within Afghanistan [less than 1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
This is a field appraisal. It represents the views of this Agency’s senior officer on
the scene. It is an interpretation based on previously reported information. It is
disseminated in the belief that it may be useful to intelligence analysts in their
own assessment of the situation.
1. The security situation throughout Afghanistan continues to dete-
riorate. Main roads leading south and east out of Kabul city are being
interdicted by the Islamic nationalist insurgents (INI). The Afghan
military continues to experience desertions, and recruiting drives have
been unsuccessful. Kabul city has become the scene of repeated assassi-
nations and other terrorist acts. The population of the city appears to
be almost totally disaffected from the regime, and there is the potential
for serious civil disturbances. Kandahar, Jalalabad, and Herat are con-
tested cities with the government on the defensive. In these latter cities,
party workers continue to be attacked and killed. The Afghan military
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room. In a June 7 covering
memorandum to Brzezinski, attached but not printed, Thornton noted that the situation
report from the Station Chief in Kabul was “worth reading.” He continued: “It is particu-
larly interesting, incidentally, that the COS’s views have changed quite a bit over the
past several months. Previously, he was much more bearish about the near term prospects
for the insurgents standing off the Soviets. He is now more in the mainstream of analysis.”

Afghanistan
officers corps is coming under increasing pressure by the INI. Officers
are now being targeted for assassination throughout the country,
including attempted attacks on senior officers in Kabul. Reports indi-
cate that the morale of the Afghan military is crumbling. The Parchamist
clique and the Khalqi clique of the People’s Democratic Party of
Afghanistan (PDPA) are attacking each other and are in turn attacked
by the INI. Party workers live in constant fear for their lives in Kanda-
har, Jalalabad, and Herat; this pattern is beginning in Kabul. Mazar-i-
Sharif is not as chaotic, but the situation in that city is also tense.
2. Afghan Army units are operating in the field, but with decreasing
competence. Increasingly, the Soviet forces have been called on to rout
the INI from strongholds they occupy. Soviet attacks on the INI have
been militarily successful. The Soviets are taking losses, probably at a
much higher level than they originally anticipated. But when the INI
elects to confront the Soviets in static battles, the Soviets prevail. When
the INI has resorted to more classical guerrilla tactics, they have
inflicted significant losses on the Soviets. Ambushes, minings and assas-
sinations by the INI are taking a steady toll of Soviet forces. Once the
Soviets leave an area from which they have cleared the INI, the insur-
gents successfully reinfiltrate and cause the returning Afghan Army
units considerable grief. The lesson the Soviets must be learning is that
if they plan to control an area, they must keep Soviet forces there
because the Afghan military cannot handle the job. This leads to the
conclusion that the Soviets will have to increase their overall strength
levels inside Afghanistan and be prepared to become even more overtly
an army of occupation.
Regime’s forces.
3. The INI, while demonstrating sophistication in guerrilla tactics,
remain disunited and unable to coordinate their sometimes effective
actions against the regime and the Soviets. There appears to be little
coordination among the groups in Peshawar and those doing the actual
fighting; and there appears to be little coordination within Afghanistan
among the groups doing the fighting.
4. The INI continue to make good use of the weapons available to
them. The average INI soldier is deadly when using an Enfield 303.
The INI have been making good use of mines and anti-tank weapons
against both the Soviets and the Afghan regime forces. During the last
several weeks, there have been confirmed reports that the INI have
successfully shot down Soviet MI–8 and MI–24 helicopters with con-
ventional arms.2 The MI–24 gunship helicopter has been particularly
harmful to the insurgents, however, and it has proved to be a difficult
2 An unknown hand underlined “conventional arms.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
weapon to destroy in the air by conventional anti-aircraft weapons. If
the insurgents can work out a way to destroy MI–24s with some regular-
ity, there is the possibility that the Soviets’ effective use of this weapon
can be curtailed.
5. The Soviets have been increasingly barbarous in their responses
to INI attacks. There are several reports that the Soviets have killed
tribal non-combatants and destroyed villages in areas the Soviets see
as still hostile. More of this kind of reprisal is beginning to develop and
it appears that village destruction, as retaliation, may be Soviet policy.
6. The Soviets appear to be trying to seal the borders of Afghanistan.
When Soviet troops are in the border areas, they appear to be relatively
successful in this effort. They can only continue to prevent the move-
ment of most supplies across borders, however, by committing addi-
tional men so that they have a permanent force in the border areas.
Even with an increase in manpower, the total prevention of cross-
border infiltration from Iran and Pakistan will be possible.
7. This has been the wettest spring in Afghanistan in twenty years.
The rains were to the INI’s advantage. The wet weather was almost
immediately followed by hot weather in the plains. Because of the
altitude of most of Afghanistan, the dust and the heat, helicopter opera-
tions are difficult in the summer months. Thus, because of weather,
the Soviets have not been able to fully utilize this equipment which
gives them an advantage. The Soviets are behind schedule in their
pacification operations, we believe, because of these weather factors
and their miscalculation of the intensity of the INI’s resistance. We
have not seen signs that the Soviets have decided to discontinue their
pacification plans; rather they have repeatedly gone back into several
areas on search and destroy missions where resistance has reemerged.
8. There appears to be little likelihood that the Soviets will agree
to a political settlement which includes their withdrawal because if
they withdraw, the Babrak Karmal regime will fall and chaos will
follow. For the Soviet side, there is nothing to be gained by a with-
drawal. The situation would not return to pre-1975; the regime would
be destroyed; the Soviets would be isolated from any new government;
and the new government would probably be a fundamentalist Islamic
government. There is no indication that a compromise government
acceptable to both the Soviets and the various factions in the INI could
be constituted. The positions of the opposing sides are too divergent
at this time; therefore, the Soviets’ only course of action is to destroy
the INI forces in the field. A military victory in the field will alleviate
the need for a political solution. It is not possible for the INI to defeat
the Soviets; rather the INI can only hope to conserve their forces’ while
continuing to make the Soviet forces’ situation difficult and painful.
To date, the Soviets have not taken unacceptable heavy casualties,

Afghanistan
relative to their manpower pool and equipment resources. Probably
the most painful element has been that the Soviets’ pride has been
badly hurt. The Red Army is being hit hard by bands of irregulars and
we doubt if the Soviets considered it possible that such groups could
operate so successfully against their forces.
9. Given the resources the two sides have at their command, it
seems probable that the Soviets will prevail, but the cost will be higher
than they calculated both in military and political terms. The longer it
drags out, the more painful it becomes for the Soviets.
10. Chargé’s comments: I agree entirely with this appraisal’s
description of the current situation in Afghanistan (paras. 1–7) and
with the general thrust of paras. 8 and 9. However, I am a little more
optimistic than the COS that the Soviets can eventually be brought to
the point where totally destroying the INI forces is not their “only
course of action.” If the INI can keep enough pressure on the Soviets
for a long enough period of time, and if in the meantime the Soviet
diplomatic offensive to bring about acceptance of the status quo can
be made to fail, the Soviets might reach the point where a compromise
solution seems more attractive to them than an endless continuation
of the blood-letting. This will probably require that the INI receive
more and better military equipment from the outside than it is now
getting, and that carries with it the chance that the Soviets might lash out
in frustration at Pakistan, Iran or indirectly at the other “aggressors,”
including this Embassy.
If the point is eventually reached when the Soviets are ready for
a genuine compromise solution, I do not believe their prospects are
quite as bleak as para. 9 implies. It is not a given, for instance, that
“the Soviets would be isolated from any new government;” Gailani and
other resistance leaders have publicly acknowledged that any Kabul
government would have to be on good terms with the USSR. Through
tribal manipulation and bribery, the Soviets could probably ensure that
someone minimally acceptable to them takes over when the point is
reached that they are willing to withdraw their troops and the INI is
exhausted from years of fighting.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
286.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest) and the Assistant Secretary of
State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to
Secretary of State Muskie1
Washington, June 7, 1980
SUBJECT
A Political Solution for Afghanistan: Next Steps
SUMMARY
There are a number of proposals being floated for a political solu-
tion to the Afghan problem. While the Soviets do not seem seriously
interested now, we think it worthwhile to keep alive proposals which
are broadly consistent with our own views. Tactically, we recommend
that in the weeks immediately ahead we focus attention on the Islamic
Conference initiative and encourage the Europeans to do likewise. The
purpose of this memorandum is to obtain your approval for a positive
approach to the Islamic Conference Committee and your guidance
on the posture we should take with our allies as we prepare for the
Venice Summit.
ISSUES FOR DECISION
1. Your approval of the attached cable informing members of the
Islamic Committee other than Ghotbzadeh of the approach contained
in your letter to Gromyko, expressing interest in the Islamic Conference
initiative, and suggesting that you would be prepared to meet with
the Pakistani Foreign Minister if he comes to New York. (The approach
would also be conveyed to the Indians and Chinese.)2
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political
Drafted by Coon; concurred in by Shulman, Kreisberg, and Barry. A typed notation in
the top right corner of the memorandum reads: “DepSec took action for Secretary. 6/13/
80.” Below that, an unknown hand wrote to Newsom: “DDN—Urgent. See Secretary’s
decision on p. 4.” An unknown hand circled and crossed out both notations.
2 The Islamic Conference Standing Committee (ICSC) was established by a resolu-
tion of the Conference of Islamic Foreign Ministers in May; see footnote 4, Document
270. The cable was not attached, but was found in the National Archives, RG 59, Central
and Beijing, June 12. The telegram informed the posts that Department officials had

Afghanistan
2. Your broad agreement that in preparing for Venice, we seek to
encourage the Europeans to focus their efforts on the Islamic Confer-
ence Committee rather than push competing proposals of their own
in their contacts with the Soviets.
3. Your consideration of a recommendation to instruct Swiss
Ambassador Lang to convey to Ghotbzadeh in more general terms the
thrust of our approach to the Soviets.
BACKGROUND
There are several initiatives, contemplated or underway, designed
to advance a political solution for the Afghan problem. Tom Watson
will shortly be delivering your letter to Gromyko.3 The Islamic Confer-
ence Committee (Pakistan, Iran and Islamic Conference Secretary
General Chatti) has been meeting in Tehran to formulate their
approach. Schmidt will be going to Moscow and will be discussing
Afghanistan. The British are continuing their dialogue in Moscow
despite public Soviet rebuffs and could be slightly softening their
position.
The Soviets are evidently not prepared at this time seriously to
consider a solution which involves their early and total withdrawal
from Afghanistan. On the contrary, the Soviets are seeking to turn the
notion of a political solution to their own advantage in an effort to
gain recognition of the Kabul regime, to divide the allies and soften
Third World condemnation. Nevertheless, there is value in keeping
alive the idea of an acceptable political solution in order to keep the
door open should the Soviets wish to withdraw from Afghanistan and
in the meantime keep them on the defensive politically. The allies place
particular importance on this tactic.
notified the Soviet Union of the latest U.S. views on the Afghanistan issue. The Depart-
ment instructed the Ambassadors to convey the following points: 1) a viable settlement
in Afghanistan required the withdrawal of the Soviet military, after which the United
States would be prepared to help “establish a truly independent and non-aligned Afghani-
stan;” 2) the United States “has no interest in interfering with Afghanistan’s internal
affairs;” 3) the United States is “prepared to explore some transitional arrangement, to
be implemented along with the prompt withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Afghanistan,
for the purpose of ensuring that peace and tranquility are restored in Afghanistan;” and
4) a settlement in Afghanistan would “facilitate the restoration of more cooperative
relations between the U.S. and USSR.”
3 See Document 284.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Your letter to Gromyko clearly keeps the door open and lays out
our basic conditions for a solution. At this stage, we think our allies
should be encouraged to help to shape and encourage the Islamic
initiative rather than proposing their own variants which the Soviets
can pick and choose among in an effort to escape pressure for with-
drawal. The allies are generally sympathetic to the Islamic Conference
Committee’s initiative. We have already encouraged the FRG to discuss
the Islamic initiative with Agha Shahi, who will be visiting Bonn
next week.
The Committee’s terms of reference are quite close to our own
principles, although we cannot be certain how the Committee will
proceed in its work and we will certainly have no control over it. There
is, however, a good bit of value in having the Soviets confront an
Islamic initiative. The Committee may build a record of Soviet intransi-
gence which we could point to later, particularly in the UNGA. How-
ever, you should be aware that according to press reports on June 7,
the Committee has authorized Chatti to ascertain the views of the
Soviets, Afghan authorities and resistance leaders regarding a politi-
cal solution.
We have not made known our attitude toward the Committee. A
public embrace would probably be unwelcome and counterproductive.
Unpublicized contact, however, could be useful in indicating our sup-
port and perhaps even influencing the process of negotiation.
The President has authorized us to convey to the Islamic Committee
members the approach contained in your letter to Gromyko. We pro-
pose in addition to express our interest in the work of the Committee
and our hope that we could quietly stay in touch at least with Chatti
and Pakistan Foreign Minister Agha Shahi. In this connection, we sug-
gest that we tell Shahi that you would welcome an early opportunity
to exchange views with him on Afghanistan. (Shahi may be coming to
a meeting at the UN in the next few weeks and could come down to
Washington for a brief undramatized meeting.) Such a meeting would
give you an opportunity to brief Shahi on your conversation with
Gromyko, provide an assessment of Soviet intentions and other initia-
tives for a political solution, and exchange views on the Islamic Com-
mittee’s work. The meeting with Shahi could also have a collateral
benefit in terms of our bilateral relations with Pakistan.
Finally, we realize that Ghotbzadeh is in a different category from
Chatti and Agha Shahi, but we think there is some advantage in giving
recognition to the important role Ghotbzadeh has played in this issue
and the parallelism of U.S. and Iranian interests on Afghanistan. Since
Ghotbzadeh is the Iranian official working most vigorously for release
of the hostages, to establish this common interest could have some
benefits for us.

Afghanistan
Recommendations:
1. That you approve the attached cable informing the two Islamic
Conference Committee members of the approach to the Soviets con-
tained in your letter to Gromyko, expressing support for the work of
the Committee and suggesting a meeting with Agha Shahi. (The cable
also instructs Embassies Delhi and Beijing to convey our approach, as
suggested by the President.)4
2. That in our preparations for the Venice Summit we develop a
line which would encourage the allies to focus on the Islamic initiative
rather than putting forward new ideas of their own.5
3. That we also convey in more general terms via the Swiss to
Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh the thrust of our approach to the Soviets.
If you approve this recommendation, we will provide a separate tele-
gram for Ambassador Lang. (NEA supports this recommendation.)6
4 Muskie approved the recommendation.
5 Muskie approved the recommendation.
6 Muskie disapproved the recommendation.
287.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
NICM–80–10003CX
Washington, June 10, 1980
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COUNCIL MEMORANDUM2
SOVIET CASUALTIES IN AFGHANISTAN
Summary
Overall US intelligence collection capability on Soviet casualties in
Afghanistan is considered only fair. Our evidence comes primarily
from [1 line not declassified]. These sources rarely agree and often contain
conflicting information. In consequence it is impossible to provide
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job
Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]
2 This memorandum was prepared under the aegis of the National Intelligence
Officer for the USSR and Eastern Europe at the request of the Near East Bureau of the
Department of State and was fully coordinated within the Intelligence Community.
[Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
anything more than a range of plausible estimates. At the bottom of
the range we are fairly confident that Soviet casualties to date total at
least 4,000. At the top of the range we can find reasonable grounds for
entertaining the possibility that these casualties may have been as much
as two or three times higher.3 Whatever the number, it is important
to bear in mind that a high proportion of injured soldiers are probably
returned to duty.4 ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restric-
tion not declassified])
Combat Casualties
[1½ lines not declassified] These reports provide information on the
number of Soviet troops killed or wounded in combat during a specified
period, often with a breakdown by individual unit. Although incom-
plete, these data indicate that Soviet military forces suffered at least
late December and mid-May. Among individual ground units [less than
1 line not declassified] casualties during this period were as low as 2
percent but generally approached 5 percent and in one instance reached
13 percent. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
[less than 1 line not declassified] do not provide continuous coverage
on all combat units in Afghanistan. [1½ lines not declassified] indicate a
consistently low level of casualties, perhaps no more than a total of
4,000 from late December to mid-May if the actual figures obtained
are doubled. Additional casualties on which we do not yet have a
complete assessment [less than 1 line not declassified] have undoubtedly
been incurred in late May, when combat continued to expand into
new geographic areas. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling
restriction not declassified])
Other Casualties
There are instances of casualties not specifically covered [1 line not
declassified] other reporting addresses types of noncombat casualties
that are not covered in the [less than 1 line not declassified] cited above.
This includes casualties among combat support personnel, off-duty
troops, and advisers who are killed or wounded by insurgents, by
deserting Afghan Army troops, or by angry civilians. These reports
3 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assistant
Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force; and the Director of Intelligence,
Headquarters Marine Corps believe that there is inadequate intelligence data on which
to treble the 4,000 minimum Soviet casualty figure. [Footnote is in the original.]
4 Army medical intelligence estimates that typically 60 percent would return to
duty in about two weeks after hospitalization. [less than 1 line not declassified] emphasizes
the validity of the World War II experience that in the long term 70 percent of all
wounded are returned to military duty. [Footnote is in the original.]

Afghanistan
frequently provide details of how and when casualties occurred—for
example, that 120 Soviets died at the hands of rebellious Afghan soldiers
on 17 January; that 25 Soviets were killed in one part of Kabul during
the demonstrations in late February; and that 17 Soviets were killed
on 16 or 17 May in a firefight between Afghan and Soviet soldiers
around Pol-i-Charkhi prison. These and numerous other similar reports
raise the possibility that total Soviet casualties in Afghanistan may be
two or three times higher than the 4,000 minimum. ([classification mark-
ing and handling restriction not declassified])
288.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, June 11, 1980
instructed CIA to provide military equipment to the Afghan freedom
fighters,2 CIA has ordered approximately $30 million worth of equip-
ment of Soviet origin delivering it at a rate controlled by Pakistan’s
ability to absorb and distribute it. Approximately $10 million worth
of arms have been distributed through Pakistan to the Afghans. The
remaining $20 million worth will be delivered prior to 30 September
1980. The attachment lists the weapons delivered and those still in
the pipeline.
2. The delivery mechanism involves five nationalities. The arms
originate in Egypt, are flown on USAF C–141’s to Dhahran, Saudi
Arabia, where they are transferred to Saudi Air Force C–130’s for
delivery to Islamabad, Pakistan. Finally, the arms are sent into Afghani-
stan by the Pakistanis primarily through eight Afghan exile organiza-
tions headquartered in Peshawar. Until recently the Pakistani distribu-
tion mechanism could only absorb one C–130 load approximately every
five days. The Pakistanis now are able to distribute the material more
quickly. CIA will supplement the existing mechanism with direct
C–141 Cairo-Islamabad flights. This will represent about a 40 percent
increase in delivery. Supplementary delivery systems via [less than 1
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
In a June 11 covering memorandum to Carter, attached but not printed, Turner wrote:
“Attached is the memorandum you requested on Afghanistan.” Carter initialed “C”
in the upper right corner of Turner’s memorandum.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
line not declassified] and/or by sea are also under investigation. We can
deliver arms as fast as Pakistan can distribute them.
3. There are several indications of the effectiveness of the arms
program:
—Sensitive [less than 1 line not declassified] and Afghan messages
in mid-March 1980 began noting a significant upsurge in rebel landmine
and anti-tank rocket attacks against Soviet armor. The [less than 1 line
not declassified] description of the equipment was in part identical to
that being delivered in our support program. [1 line not declassified] “A
quantitative and qualitative increase in Afghan rebel activity started
in late March and early April 1980.” This phenomenon coincides with
predicted battlefield arrival dates for CIA-provided weaponry.
—A [less than 1 line not declassified] CIA source [less than 1 line not
declassified] with an exile group actually saw weapons being funneled
to the Afghans by the Pakistani military. The number and type of
weapons distributed coincided with the report given to CIA by Paki-
stani liaison.
—The US Consul in Peshawar recently reported from his Afghan
sources on the availability to the Afghans of many Soviet-originated
weapons.3
—A separate CIA source also saw Egyptian-originated weapons
being distributed from Peshawar to the Afghan exile groups.
In sum, independent evidence, plus developments on the battle-
field, support Pakistani guarantees that the equipment is being deliv-
ered to Afghanistan. There is no evidence of Pakistani siphoning.
4. Our partners in the covert action program, Pakistan and Saudi
Arabia, are extremely sensitive to this program. The Saudis have com-
mented favorably on the efficiency and security of the program; Saudi
Arabia has never been mentioned in any press leak. The Pakistanis are
less pleased because they have been mentioned. We have committed
to them to protect the security of the program. We have generally
briefed [less than 1 line not declassified] on the program and they have
provided propaganda support. [less than 1 line not declassified] is aware
that there is a general support program. There has been no discussion
with [less than 1 line not declassified]. We believe the program can be
generally reviewed with [1 line not declassified] as an indication of US
commitment. We would discourage any discussion of mechanism
amounts or partners.
3 The United States Consul in Peshawar was Douglas A. Archard.

Afghanistan
Attachment
List of Military Equipment for Afghanistan4
Washington, undated
DELIVERED
AK-47 Rifles
- 3900
AK-47 Ammo
- 6.133 million rounds
12.7 mm HMG
- 115
12.7 mm Ammo
- 547,040 rounds
14.5 mm Ammo
- 15,000 rounds
82 mm Mortars
- 50
82 mm Ammo
- 2500 rounds
RPG–7 Launchers
- 150
RPG–7 Rockets
- 3902 rounds
AT Mines
- 2700
AP Mines
- 1000
Fuse
- 1800 feet
AT Grenades
- 1250
Hand Grenades
- 6000
C–4 Explosive
- 637 lbs
TNT Sticks
- 2000
SA–7 Launchers
- 5
SA–7 Rockets
- 15
Sniper Rifles
- 121
Sniper Ammo
- 36,000 rounds
Lee Enfield Rifles
- 1200
.303 Ammo
- 300,000 rounds
Walkie-Talkie
- 100 units
Base Radios
- 6 units
IN THE PIPELINE
AK–47 Rifles
- 6600
AK–47 Ammo
- 6.6 million rounds
RPG–7 Launchers
- 594
RPG–7 Rockets
- 14,190
12.7 mm HMG
- 88
12.7 mm Ammo
- 316,800 rounds
82 mm Mortars
- 88
4 Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
82 mm Ammo
- 4400 rounds
AT Mines
- 4000
AP Mines
- 4000
14.5 mm AA Gun
- 10
14.5 mm Ammo
- 50,400 rounds
Firing Devices
- 1000
SA–7 Launcher
- 10
SA–7 Rockets
- 50
289.
Memorandum From Acting Director of Central Intelligence
Carlucci to Secretary of State Muskie and the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 16, 1980
SUBJECT
VoA Broadcast of CIA Activities
1. The Voice of America recently broadcast a summary of a Philadel-
phia Inquirer article alleging clandestine CIA support to the Afghan
Freedom Fighters. A copy of the broadcast is attached.2
2. U.S. Government support of the Afghan Freedom Fighters is an
extremely sensitive subject. Our Saudi and Pakistani partners have
made it clear that their continued participation is contingent upon the
program being kept secret. Periodic leaks in the U.S. press about the
Afghan covert action program invariably produce questions from the
Paks and Saudis. In response, we can only explain the role of the press
in U.S. society.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For
[handling restriction not declassified]. In the upper right corner, Brzezinski wrote to Aaron,
June 17: “DA hold a meeting on this with Carlucci & Reinhardt. ZB.”
2 For the series of articles by Richard Ben Cramer published in the Philadelphia
Inquirer, see footnote 4, Document 283. The text of the broadcast was not attached; it
noted that the CIA “has been secretly supplying modest amounts of foreign manufactured
arms to Afghan rebels;” that the arms were of German, Belgian, and Israeli origin, and
were funneled through Pakistan; and that the Carter administration rejected plans to
supply the Afghan rebels with more sophisticated weaponry due to the possibility that
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For President or

Afghanistan
3. Broadcast of these allegations over official U.S. Government
facilities elevates the problem to a new plane. Despite our denials, the
Pakistanis and Saudis will probably conclude that U.S. policy is to
surface the Afghan support program. It should be understood that
any further broadcasting over U.S. Government facilities about CIA
activities in Afghanistan can result in the termination of the program.
4. Such official broadcasts also increase the risk that Afghan terror-
ists could strike at U.S. Government officials abroad.
Frank C. Carlucci
Acting Director
290.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, June 16, 1980
SUBJECT
US-Soviet Relations
PARTICIPANTS
USSR: Anatoliy Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador
US: Secretary of State Muskie
Marshall D. Shulman, Special Adviser to the Secretary
Ambassador Dobrynin had originally requested the meeting before
the Vienna meeting with Gromyko but, because of the press of business,
it had been deferred until today.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Afghanistan
The Secretary said he had been disappointed with the reply Gro-
myko had given Watson to his (Muskie’s) letter.2 The reply had not
been as responsive as we had expected, perhaps because it had been
given “off the cuff” on first reading. The Secretary expressed the hope
that Gromyko would digest the letter more thoroughly, and might then
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Secret. Drafted by Shulman. The time and location of the meeting are not noted on the
memorandum of conversation.
2 See Document 284.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
be in a position to give a more detailed response to some of the elements
in the letter.
The Secretary went on to mention two points in particular which
concerned him in the report of Gromyko’s reply: (1) we continue to
have difficulty with the Soviet view that the principal aggression comes
from Pakistan. It remains our view that the principal aggression is that
created by the Soviet invasion. In any case, we would like to see both
the Soviet aggression and any intervention from abroad brought to
an end. (2) Gromyko emphasized at length his objection to what he
apparently understood the letter to suggest, that a government should
be established in Afghanistan acceptable to the neighbors of that coun-
try. This was a misunderstanding: what the letter said was that a
government should be set up in Kabul which was acceptable to the
people of Afghanistan. He added that this could be done “with the
prompt withdrawal of all Soviet forces from Afghanistan,” emphasiz-
ing that the word “with” had been carefully chosen.
Dobrynin asked how the word “with” was to be understood, and
whether it could be a significant departure from the word “prior,”
which he had understood to represent the US position. The Secretary
replied that this could be a matter for discussion. [In view of the
problem of translating “with,” which had arisen at the Gromyko-Wat-
son conversation, Dobrynin was asked what Russian word had been
used in the copy of the letter sent to him by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. He replied: “nariadu s,” which conveys the proper sense of
simultaneity.]3
The Secretary emphasized forcefully that so long as Soviet troops
continued to occupy Afghanistan, this fact would continue to be a
matter that affected our vital interests, and it would also be a barrier
to the establishment of an independent and non-aligned Afghanistan.
His letter, he said, had been worked out carefully with the President
in the hope that it would open the way to a solution of the problem
that would meet both Soviet and American interests fairly, and would
remove this unfortunate and dangerous problem.
Dobrynin said he thought a solution could be found which would
meet both Soviet and American security interests.
Dobrynin said that Gromyko had asked him to obtain any further
clarification possible on what the American side had in mind in refer-
ring to “some transitional arrangement.” The Secretary replied that he
had reference to the point in this regard which the President had made
at his press conference on Feb. 13;4 he did not propose at this stage to
3 Brackets are in the original.

Afghanistan
assign too detailed a meaning to the term, but to raise a general point
which, if accepted, could be worked out in the course of further negotia-
tions. What we were seeking to do, he said, was to find the outside
limits within which negotiations might be possible.
Dobrynin made a further effort in behalf of the Afghan plan.5 Why,
he asked, could not Zia and Babrak sit down together to work things
out, as a way of getting things started? The Secretary reviewed the
objections previously expressed to the plan, emphasizing that under
it, Soviet troops could remain in Afghanistan forever, and this was our
main concern.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Other Subjects
Dobrynin said he hoped future negotiations with Gromyko could
cover a broader range of subjects than Afghanistan. He asked, as an
example, whether the US could not find a way of working together
with the Soviet Union on Middle East problems, adding that Soviet
and American interests were not as far apart in that area as some
people seemed to think. He also suggested, on a purely personal basis,
that a compromise solution could be found for the TNF issue. In this
context, he repeated his regret that no formal answer had been given
to Brezhnev’s proposal, other than the decision to proceed with the
deployment. The Secretary probed to see whether Dobrynin was imply-
ing that the Soviet Union was prepared to postpone its theater deploy-
ments, but Dobrynin repeated that this was his personal view, and
no more. Both agreed, however, that the Afghanistan issue was an
unfortunate barrier to the resolution of many issues between the
two countries.
5 See Document 270.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
291.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, June 23, 1980
SUBJECT
Covert Operations In Afghanistan (S)
I will be doing a full trip report shortly,2 but want to fill you in
on a few points of particular interest on the covert side. (S)
I got an (apparently) good and candid briefing from the Station
Chief in Islamabad. He is very satisfied with the Pak performance
now; the earlier bottlenecks have been dissolved and now the Paks are
prepared to pass through more equipment than we can get to them.
The COS claims that he has several unilateral sources who confirm
that the Paks are telling him pretty much the truth. (It is noteworthy,
though, that the Paks tell him very little. They hold this entire operation
extremely closely and I am impressed by their ability to keep it all
secret. Wish we could do as well.) (S)
On the SA–7: There are two launchers and (I believe) 15 missiles
in country, headed for the Kabul area. The Paks insisted that they not
be used, initially at least, in areas near Pakistan since that would be
too obvious and provocative. That is understandable but unfortunate,
since the border area is where they are needed most. If things go well,
we should soon be hearing of mysterious downing of aircraft. There
is no report-back capability from the people who have the SAMs; we
will have to read it out of battle reports. (S)
The Paks are extending the arms flow now to groups operating
out of Quetta as well as Peshawar. This is another good step, since the
operation should not be too dependent on the faction-ridden Peshawar
leadership. (S)
Both Afghans and Paks with whom I spoke (and none of the latter
at least would have been aware of the operation) commented very
favorably on the increased readiness of the GOP over the past two
months or so to provide assistance to the mujahidin. I don’t know to
what extent this represents our involvement, but it is a good sign. (S)
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
2 The full trip report was not found.

Afghanistan
By chance, I sat on the plane to London next to one of the resistance
leaders. He made the usual complaints about the lack of US support
(I was noncommittal) but then said that they did expect to get some
SA–7s soon. Word must be seeping out. He also went on at length
about the stupidity of the VOA in carrying the Inquirer story.3 I know
that there has been an exchange between Zbig and Reinhardt on this.
I am writing to Mary Bitterman to add my own cry of dismay and
point out that this sort of thing is hurting the people we want to
These were the highlights; if you have any other specific questions,
I may have the answers to them since I had a long talk with the COS. (U)
You may want to pass this to Zbig on his return.5 (U)
3 See Document 289.
4 Mary Bitterman was the Director of Voice of America.
5 Brzezinski was in Italy with Carter and Muskie as a member of the delegation to
the Venice Economic Summit. No evidence was found to indicate whether Aaron passed
the memorandum to Brzezinski.
292.
Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Barry) to the Under Secretary of State
for Political Affairs (Newsom) and the Special Adviser to the
Secretary of State on Soviet Affairs (Shulman)1
Washington, June 27, 1980
SUBJECT
Soviet Maneuvering on Withdrawal and a Political Settlement in Afghanistan
The Soviets are currently engaged in an increasingly active cam-
paign to spread the idea that their withdrawal announcement demon-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
strates a serious interest in a political settlement.2 While the odds are
very high that this is simply a new tack in their effort to divide us from
the Allies, it is barely conceivable that the Soviets might be beginning
to look for a way out.3
The campaign to demonstrate the sincerity of their withdrawal is
going on in public and private in a way which is very reminiscent of
the anti-TNF campaign and the “unilateral troop withdrawal” from
the GDR designed to head off the December 12 NATO decision.
—The withdrawal has become a media event in the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe.
—Authoritative Soviet commentaries underline that the with-
drawal demonstrates the sincerity of Soviet interest in a political
settlement.4
—Soviet Press Counselor Kamenev gave John Wallach of the Hearst
chain a background interview stressing Soviet sincerity.
2 The Soviet statement on a partial withdrawal from Afghanistan, June 22, made
through the official news organ, TASS, was first reported in telegram 9988 from Moscow
article in the President’s Daily Brief, June 23, asserted that the statement “seems aimed
primarily at influencing the Venice Summit and preparing the ground for Schmidt’s
visit to Moscow. The announcement implied a reduction in the overall Soviet troop level
in Afghanistan, but was not explicit on this point and did not discuss the possibility of
further withdrawals.” The article further noted that the withdrawing troops, numbering
approximately 5,000, were “largely ineffective against the guerillas.” An article in the
July 7 President’s Daily Brief surmised that the announcement of the troop withdrawals
possibly suggested Brezhnev’s interest in assuaging domestic critics apprehensive of
Soviet Afghan policy. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central
Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for
Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of
1980, PDBs, respectively)
3 Analysis in the Central Intelligence Agency concurred with this assessment. For
example, a memorandum, July 11, forwarded by Turner to Muskie, Brown, Brzezinski,
and General Jones, July 14, asserted that the Soviet troop withdrawals “were largely a
political ploy; they do not affect Soviet military capabilities in the country.” (National
Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–031, Apr–Aug 1980)
The Bureau of Intelligence and Research came to a similar conclusion. A research paper
on Afghanistan, July 18, observed: “Moscow’s June 22 announcement that it was with-
drawing some forces from Afghanistan appears to be part of a larger diplomatic strategy
aimed at giving the appearance of Soviet flexibility and willingness to talk while extract-
ing recognition of the regime in Kabul as the legitimate government of Afghanistan.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West,
on the Soviet troop withdrawal by USA Institute Director Arbatov as indicative that the
Soviet leadership “was anxious to find a way out of Afghanistan which would not
appear to be a Soviet capitulation to the U.S., but that they have no idea how to do it.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the

Afghanistan
—Soviet and East European diplomats are coming to us to under-
line that we’re making a mistake by thinking the Soviets don’t really
want to talk seriously about a political settlement.
—Embassy Moscow has picked up a story that Brezhnev overruled
Gromyko on the withdrawal question.5
All of these indications are consistent with the interpretation that
the Soviet withdrawal is strictly a propaganda move which Moscow
hopes to exploit to further divide the US and the West. This interpreta-
tion is strongly buttressed by the nature of the Soviet withdrawal and
the way they let the French in on the news first.
At the same time, there are a few straws in the wind which suggest
that there may be more to this than a purely propaganda move.
—Brezhnev appears to be preparing the way for declaring a victory
in the style suggested by Senator Aiken for Vietnam. Brezhnev’s state-
ment that the situation in Afghanistan is returning to normal came at
a time when the Soviet security situation in Afghanistan appears worse
than ever.6 Whatever his intention, his statement creates the assumption
within the USSR that Soviet involvement is winding down.
—Even the kind of phantom withdrawal the Soviets have
announced would seem to indicate that they have abandoned one
of the options open to them—doubling or tripling of their force in
Afghanistan, coupled with a major effort to defeat the Afghan National-
ists throughout the country.
—Insignificant though the withdrawal might be, it does create the
presumption of a lower overall ceiling and possible further withdraw-
als. Thus, their action creates new constraints for the future.
—It is unlike the Soviets to reverse themselves like this on the
withdrawal question. Gromyko told us and the Germans privately that
we were wasting our time in talking about withdrawals before there
had been recognition of the Babrak government and an end to the
Nationalist resistence. He made the same point publicly at a lunch for
the Indian Foreign Minister earlier this month.
—The fact that the withdrawal announcement was not made a
couple of days before the Venice Summit when it might have had more
effect on deliberations there would seem to indicate that it was a subject
of internal debate and that the opposition was significant. Such a debate
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
6 Speaking at a June 23 meeting of the Central Committee, Brezhnev declared: “Life
in Afghanistan is now gradually coming back to normal.” A resolution passed by the
Central Committee approved the December 1979 intervention in Afghanistan. (Craig R.
Whitney, “Brezhnev Says His Side Won Afghan War,” New York Times, p. A6)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
would logically occur in any case before a Plenary meeting of the Party
which was called upon to set the line for the next Party Congress in
foreign policy.
—Embassy Moscow speculates that the uncertainties stemming
from US and allied economic countermeasures related to Afghanistan
are forcing the delay in producing a new full-year plan as the question
on future dependence on technology and food from the West is debated.
In the Embassy’s view it is barely conceivable that our actions are
having more policy bite than is apparent, and that Brezhnev may
therefore take his withdrawal initiatives more seriously than is
apparent.7
Of course, the Soviets can justify their stated interest in a political
settlement by clinging to the May 14 Afghan proposals as they have
done so far. But they could have had more success in pursuing this line
without any withdrawal announcement, following Gromyko’s time-
tested pattern of complete inflexibility. The kind of iron-pants strategy
is at least as effective in stirring up European doubts about the US as
Soviet hints of flexibility.
The President’s toast at the Yugoslav State Dinner and subsequent
discussion of “transitional” arrangements demonstrate our willingness
to discuss a political settlement seriously.8 Gromyko’s response to the
Muskie letter is a very authoritative indication that the Soviets are not
now ready for such a discussion.9 If the situation has changed since
the “withdrawal” decision, presumably they will find a way of letting
us—or more likely Schmidt—know unambiguously.
However, the passage in the Resolution of the Party Plenum which
comes out for “a political settlement of the situation that has formed
around Afghanistan which is pursuing the policy of nonalignment”
seems to suggest some flexibility in considering a broadly based
arrangement without preconditions or assurances that the gains of the
“socialist” revolution there will not be reversed.
In the meantime, we will presumably be hearing a lot more from
the Soviets about the importance of our making a reciprocal gesture
such as relaxing some of the post-Afghanistan sanctions. Were we or
8 Carter visited Yugoslavia at the conclusion of the Venice Summit. During his
dinner toast, Carter deplored Soviet actions in Afghanistan and declared: “We would
be prepared to explore a transitional arrangement, to be implemented along with the
prompt withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Afghanistan, for the purpose of restoring
peace and tranquility in that suffering country.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book II,
p. 1212)
9 See Document 293.

Afghanistan
our Allies to accommodate them on this, it seems safe to predict that
we will hear no more from the Soviets about negotiating a political
settlement involving complete withdrawal. If the Soviets are serious,
a little stalling on our part should produce additional indications that
the Soviets are willing to take the steps which will make real negotia-
tions possible. If not then we will have avoided giving ground in
response to a Soviet ploy.
293.
Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko to Secretary of
State Muskie1
Moscow, June 27, 1980
Dear Mr. Secretary,
I have carefully read your letter of June 5, which is a continuation
of the exchange of views we started in Vienna.2 As we agreed at that
time the purpose of this exchange is to promote the improvement of
Soviet-U.S. relations, to seek solution on a wide range of bilateral and
international problems of mutual interest.
Now about the specific problem you raised in your letter: that of
Afghanistan.
As you know, a few days ago we withdrew from Afghanistan, in
agreement with the Government of the DRA, some Soviet military
units. It was done in view of the fact that the present situation does not
make it necessary to maintain in Afghanistan our military contingent
of previous strength.
It goes without saying that the Soviet Union will continue to render
necessary assistance to Afghanistan against any action aimed from
outside at depriving it of independence and territorial integrity. You
must be well aware of that, though, from the report by L.I. Brezhnev
at the recent plenary meeting of the Central Committee of our Party
and from the resolution on international questions adopted by that
meeting in connection with the report of the Minister of Foreign Affairs
on international situation and foreign policy of the Soviet Union.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
telegram 175021 to Moscow, July 2. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
2 See Document 284.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The substance of our position with regard to a political settlement
of the situation around Afghanistan is that it is necessary to ensure the
cessation of armed incursions from outside into the Afghan territory,
to reach appropriate agreement on normalizing relations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, between Afghanistan and Iran, and to guar-
antee non-recurrence of all forms of outside interference aimed against
the Government and the people of the DRA. It is precisely in this
context that the question of withdrawal from Afghanistan of the Soviet
military contingent, stationed there to help in repulsing outside aggres-
sion, could be also solved.
These are the considerations I wish to state in connection with your
letter in addition to what has been already said in the conversations
with the US Ambassador in Moscow.
In conclusion I deem it necessary to stress the following: in order
to place Soviet-U.S. relations into normal tracks, so that they would
not be subject to fluctuations of political expediency but develop to
the benefit of both our peoples and strengthening peace they cannot
be built otherwise than on the basis of equality, mutual respect for
each
other’s
legitimate
interests,
compliance
with
agreements
already achieved.
The Soviet leadership has proceeded and intends to proceed in
future exactly from this premise. We would like to hope that the US
side will also act likewise.
Sincerely,
A. Gromyko3
3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

Afghanistan
294.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, July 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and a
cover page.]
The Intervention in Afghanistan:
Ramifications for Soviet Interests Abroad
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
Soviet interests abroad have suffered because of the intervention in
Afghanistan—and especially the USSR’s failure to consolidate control.
Although things now look better to Moscow than they did a few months
ago, the negative reaction to the invasion was greater than the Kremlin
anticipated and, though now diminished, remains of considerable con-
cern. ([classification marking not declassified])
The desire to consolidate control in Afghanistan at any cost may
prove overriding, but Moscow has been given important incentives to
try to achieve this objective with a minimum of forces. A major escala-
tion that did not produce victory in the field or obtain accommodations
to strategic Soviet goals in Southwest Asia would result in further harm
to Soviet external interests. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
The Soviets have made several gains and avoided some poten-
tial losses:
• Moscow has derived comfort from West European desires to
maintain a dialogue with the USSR and to avoid heightened tensions
in Europe; the significance attributed by US allies to normal trade with
the Soviet Union; and the uneven Western support of US policies
toward the USSR in the wake of the invasion.
• In Southwest Asia, Soviet ability to bring pressure on Pakistan
and Iran has been enhanced, although neither country has reacted by
accommodating Soviet objectives thus far.
• India, although distressed by the intervention, shows no present
inclination to alter its security ties with the USSR; Iraq’s dependence
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options (May 1980). Top Secret; [codeword
and handling restriction not declassified]. A statement on the cover page reads: “This assess-
ment was prepared by Stephen S. Kaplan USSR/EE Division, Office of Political Analysis.
This paper has been coordinated with the Offices of Strategic Research and Economic
Research.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
on Soviet armaments and other aspects of the alliance with the USSR has
deterred Baghdad from abrogating the Soviet-Iraqi treaty and normal
working relations. Saudi Arabia, meanwhile, has become even more
anxious about US capabilities and resolve.
• The nonaligned movement has been unable to condemn the
USSR except implicitly within the forum of the UN General Assembly.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Nonetheless, Soviet interests have suffered considerable damage:
• The political center of gravity in the West has shifted in ways
generally adverse to the USSR; belief in Soviet expansionism has been
reconfirmed; openmindedness about Soviet intentions and favorable
attitudes about the USSR are voiced infrequently and receive scant
hearing.
• US defense efforts have been accelerated, the European allies have
pledged to fulfill the NATO Long-Term Defense Plan more rapidly,
and a strong impetus has been given to increased Japanese defense
spending and military cooperation with the United States.
• The United States has affirmed its readiness to use military force
in the Persian Gulf, Western security cooperation with China has
increased, and Western willingness to maintain military deployments
in the Indian Ocean has been increased. Local opposition to forward
US military deployments also has been undermined.
• Western economic sanctions have impaired Moscow’s ability to
satisfy Soviet consumer demands for meat and dairy products and will
probably further retard Soviet efforts to secure sophisticated technology
and massive investment credits. Although Western support for the
sanctions is eroding, Soviet economic weaknesses have been pointed
up anew, both within the USSR and externally.
• The Olympic boycott has seriously damaged Moscow’s ability
to use the games for propaganda domestically and internationally.
• The Kremlin has received uneven support from Eastern Europe,
which has felt a strong identity of interests with Western Europe.
Moscow has sensed vulnerability and shown less than full control over
the Warsaw Pact states and has new reason to doubt the reliability of
these allies.
• The interests of Cuba and Vietnam have been adversely affected
by the Soviet move into Afghanistan, and North Korea has been upset
by the invasion. Havana’s international position has been hurt; accept-
ance of the Heng Samrin regime in Kampuchea has been at least slowed;
and relations between Pyongyang and Moscow have become even
more strained. The Kremlin is further concerned about the opening it
may have afforded the United States for undermining its positions in
Angola, Ethiopia, Mozambique, and South Yemen.

Afghanistan
• Finally, the USSR has tarred itself as an imperialist aggressor in
the Third World. Most of the Muslim nations have formally condemned
Soviet oppression in Afghanistan. The Kremlin’s ability to persuade
the nonaligned movement to accept the USSR as an ally and to manipu-
late the movement against Soviet adversaries has been undermined.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
295.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[memorandum number not declassified]
Washington, July 1980
Afghanistan: Iran’s Role in the Crisis
([classification marking not declassified])
Summary
Iran has become increasingly involved in the Afghanistan crisis in
the last few months. Tehran has provided important diplomatic support
to the insurgents fighting the Soviets. The central government has
apparently not lived up to its promises to provide material aid, but
Tehran continues to assert its willingness to do so if the Soviets do not
withdraw from Afghanistan. The Afghan insurgents have received
material aid, however, from the Iranian clergy, elements of the Revolu-
tionary Guard, and local officials—aid that reflects the general consen-
sus in Iran in support of the rebel cause. ([classification marking not
declassified])
The Afghans have established a significant presence in Iran. The
insurgents train fighters in camps along the border that house more
than 100,000 refugees and have offices in Tehran, Qom, and Mashhad.
We have reports of training in all three cities, and some Revolutionary
Guard units apparently are providing support for cross-border opera-
tions. ([classification marking not declassified])
Role in the Crisis; An Intelligence Memorandum [memorandum number not declassified].
Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. A typed note at the bottom
of the page reads in part: “The author of this memorandum is [less than 1 line not
declassified] Office of Political Analysis. It was coordinated with the National Intelligence
Officer for Near East/South Asia. Research for this memorandum was completed on 27
June 1980.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Iranian involvement with the insurgents seems certain to increase.
Domestic pressures will incline the government toward more active
support of the rebels. For their part, the insurgents will probably con-
tinue to find Iran an attractive base of operations, especially given the
small number of Soviet forces located in the border area. ([classification
marking not declassified])
Since early June the Soviets have become increasingly alarmed by
Iran’s role in Afghanistan. They have taken a tougher line toward
Iranians who have taken outspoken public positions favoring the insur-
gents. Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh has, for example, been character-
ized as an agent of the United States and China, and local authorities
in Mashhad have been accused of cooperating with the CIA. But Mos-
cow has avoided direct criticism of the Khomeini government. ([classifi-
cation marking not declassified])
The tougher Soviet posture is not likely to dissuade Tehran, and
the Soviets may be forced to step up their pressure. They could do
so—but only at the cost of a significant deterioration in ties with Tehran.
([classification marking not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]
296.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
Chinese Aid to the Afghan Insurgents: Why So Little
There are a number of reasons why Beijing, despite its claims to
the contrary, might not now be willing to make a serious effort to aid
the insurgents:
—Beijing may be disinclined to make a major effort in the absence
of a greater effort on the part of the West. China confronts the Soviets
directly along its own border and indirectly in Southeast Asia and
may not wish to lead the effort in Afghanistan and risk yet another
confrontation with Moscow in Southwest Asia. Heavy involvement
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Insurgents. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not
declassified]. Attached but not printed is a note [text not declassified] to Turner, July 2,
which identified the author of the paper as [text not declassified] a China analyst in the
Office of Political Analysis.

Afghanistan
with the resistance now could also retard China’s effort to improve
ties with India, a major goal.
—Beijing may also believe that, on the one hand, its own resources
do not allow a larger effort, and, on the other, the insurgents are not
capable of effectively utilizing anything more than small arms anyway.
Some Chinese officials have criticized the insurgents as disorganized
and unsophisticated.
—It is conceivable China never intended to do more than it is at
present. In Beijing’s view of “labor sharing” with the West in the global
anti-Soviet struggle, China’s main effort should be in Southeast Asia.
Because of its strained military resources, geographic limitations, and,
perhaps, because of Islamabad’s failure to cooperate, China may have
decided that the task of thwarting the Soviets in Afghanistan belonged
to the West and countries of Southwest Asia. Its own frequent expres-
sions of support for the insurgents and assertions that it is rendering
aid are thus tactics meant to arouse more tangible support from
other sources.
—The Chinese have been discouraged by Pakistan’s reluctance
to assist them in aiding the insurgents. [3½ lines not declassified] The
Pakistanis, however, have recently claimed that they are willing to
cooperate with China in aiding the insurgents.
—China lacks an easy direct supply route to the insurgents. The
Chinese-Afghan border is extremely rugged and the main trail through
the region (the Wakhan Corridor) passes close to Russian border posts.
Undetected use of this route would be difficult, if not impossible, and
the trail seems ill-suited for the transport of significant amounts of arms.
Comment
On balance Beijing may have been willing initially to make a signifi-
cant effort to aid the rebels on the assumption that it would do so in
cooperation with Pakistan and the West. After signs that Pakistan and
the West did not respond as forcefully as hoped, China may have
embarked on a small scale program to support groups in the northeast,
perhaps by sending supplies through the Wakhan corridor or northern
Pakistan. Now, with some experience in aiding the insurgents, Beijing
may have concluded that the risks involved in a more ambitious pro-
gram outweigh the potential benefits.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
297.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to President Carter1
Washington, July 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Report on My Recent Trip Through Four African Countries and Saudi Arabia
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
2. Additionally, on 22 June I paid a quick visit to Jidda, Saudi
Arabia. I had an excellent two-hour session with Crown Prince Fahd.
I reviewed [less than 1 line not declassified] the covert action [less than 1
line not declassified] on which we are working jointly with the Saudis.
Fahd gave his unstinting support [less than 1 line not declassified].
The fact of getting him to do that in front of Prince Turki, the
intelligence chief, should impart new momentum to these programs.
Fahd was particularly strong in his support of our joint program to
provide weapons to the Afghan insurgents [3 lines not declassified] and
to have us provide regular intelligence briefings to him personally.2 (S)
Stansfield Turner3
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
declassified].
2 In a memorandum for the record, July 7, Turner reported that he briefed Brzezinski,
July 3, that [text not declassified] had decided to support arms shipments to Afghan rebels.
(Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00112R:
Subject Files, Box 15, DCI/DDCI Memrecs/Memos, Agendas of Brzezinski/Aaron Meet-
ings, January–December 1980) In a memorandum for the record, September 4, Turner
noted that he briefed Brzezinski that the CIA had a prospect to supply arms to the
Afghan rebels through Iranian Baluchis. The supply would come clandestinely [text not
declassified] through the Straits of Hormuz. Turner added: “this seemed all right” to
Brzezinski. (Ibid.)
3 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above his typed signature.

Afghanistan
298.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordinating
Committee (Intelligence) Meeting1
SUBJECT
Summary of Conclusions: SCC (I) Meeting on Pakistan (C)
PARTICIPANTS
STATE
JCS
David Newsom, Under Secretary
Lt. Gen. John Pustay, Ass’t. to the
for Political Affairs
Chairman
Ronald Spiers, Director, Bureau of
Intelligence and Research
Adm. Stansfield Turner, Director
Peter Constable, Deputy Assistant
Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director
Secretary for Near Eastern-
Charles Cogan, Chief, Near
South Asian Affairs
Eastern Division
DEFENSE
OMB
Robert W. Komer, Under
John White, Deputy Director
Secretary for Policy Affairs
WHITE HOUSE
Daniel Murphy, Deputy Under
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Secretary for Policy Matters
David Aaron
JUSTICE
NSC
Judge Charles Renfrew, Deputy
Thomas Thornton
Attorney General
The SCC (I) met to discuss three CIA proposals regarding Pakistan
and Afghanistan. (S)
The first proposal was unanimously recommended. It provides for
an increase from [less than 1 line not declassified] to [less than 1 line not
declassified] in covert support for the Afghan insurgency.2 We and the
Saudis would split the costs. The earlier bottlenecks in Pakistan have
been overcome and both the Pakistanis and Saudis are anxious to
increase the level of support. Admiral Turner noted that this may be
needed quickly if the Soviets undertake an expansion of their military
activities in Afghanistan after the Olympics are over. (S)
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–020, SCC Minutes and S/C, 1980. Secret; Sensitive. In the upper right corner, Carter
wrote: “Zbig, J.” The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. The full
text of the Summary of Conclusions is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
2 The proposal originated in a memorandum from Turner to Brzezinski, June 30,
reporting on Prince Fahd’s “unequivocal endorsement” of ongoing Saudi participation
in the Afghan program. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office
Document 297.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
RECOMMENDATION: That you approve the increase in support
for the Afghan insurgents from [less than 1 line not declassified] to [less
than 1 line not declassified], the cost to be shared equally with Saudi
A second proposal was also unanimously supported, albeit with
qualifications. It involves a finding (attached at Tab A for your signa-
ture) that would have us share with the Saudis the cost of up to [amount
not declassified] for Soviet or other hand-held anti-tank and anti-aircraft
launchers (100 each). CIA would provide necessary training. The Paki-
stanis want this covertly because of their earlier problems with our
assistance offer. According to CIA, they see this as an integral and
necessary part of their ongoing support for the Afghan insurgents.
State and NSC expressed concern that the Pakistanis are using this
method as a means of increasing our political commitment to them,
and noted that there should be no major problem for the Pakistanis
simply to buy the equipment. Nonetheless, in view of the urgent Paki-
stani desire (and the fact that they control distribution of our material
and can skim off whatever they want anyway) it was agreed to recom-
mend that you approve the finding. The finding was changed, however,
to exclude the provision of US-origin equipment. The Pakistanis do
not want it for political reasons and there is a real danger that it might
find its way across the border. SA–7s are preferred, but these are in
short supply; European equivalents may be available. (S)
RECOMMENDATION: That you sign the attached finding.4
A third proposal, to provide jointly with the Saudis some [amount
not declassified] in assistance to the refugee families whose breadwinners
are fighting in Afghanistan, was found to have a number of problems
and was withdrawn. The same effect can be achieved through other
The SCC (I) also further directed that by next week DOD and CIA
should come up with specific proposals for the manufacture of SA–7s.
It is clear that we need an additional source since the supplies available
in Europe are pretty well dried up. There are three apparent options
3 Carter approved the recommendation and initialed “J” in the right margin.
4 Not attached. Carter signed the Finding on July 8. Its scope was Pakistan, with
the description: “Provide directly to the Government of Pakistan, or via third countries,
lethal military equipment of Soviet or other foreign manufacture for defensive purposes
along the Afghan border. As necessary, provide cash, procurement advice and weapons
training. Encourage other countries to discreetly supply funds or lethal military equip-
ment directly to Pakistan.” (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence

Afghanistan
for manufacture—in the US [less than 1 line not declassified] in Egypt
[less than 1 line not declassified].5 (S)
5 In a memorandum for the record, June 17, Carlucci stated that in his view there
were only two possible routes to procure SA–7s for Pakistan: Foreign Military Sales or
a Presidential Finding. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central
of Brzezinski/Aaron Meetings, January–December 1980) In a memorandum to Brown,
July 7, Komer noted that during the SCC(I) meeting he had “insisted” that the SA–7
issue be decided “promptly” and that the CIA and Department of Defense provide
proposals in a week in which it would be decided if the SA–7s would be of Egyptian
2, Afghanistan, Jan–Feb 1980) No proposals were found. An undated memorandum
from Turner to Brzezinski reviewed a proposal for a program sponsored by the Depart-
ment of Defense in which SA–7 clones would be manufactured in Egypt and in exchange
Egypt would receive Redeye missiles from the United States. Turner noted that Egypt
appeared uninterested in this deal, which remained inconclusive at the end of the Carter
administration. (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–031, Sep–Dec 1980)
299.
Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State
Muskie’s Aircraft1
ter. For the Secretary From Warren Christopher.
1. (S—Entire text)
2. Below is a revision of the draft which I forwarded to you over
the weekend. The paragraph in brackets has been added to take into
account suggestions made by Zbig in his memo to the President on
Gromyko’s June 27 letter. The revised text has been cleared by Mar-
shall Brement.2
3. Begin text. Dear Mr. Minister:
In the interest of continuing our exchange on Afghanistan and
U.S.-Soviet relations, I would like to comment on your letter of June 27.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR
Nodis; Cherokee. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation
Room.
2 The revisions Brzezinski made were not found. For Gromyko’s letter, see Docu-
ment 293.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
We have carefully considered the implications of your announce-
ment of the withdrawal of some Soviet military units from Afghanistan.
Your letter indicates that there has been a reduction of the overall
number of Soviet troops in Afghanistan, although neither your public
announcement nor our own analysis indicate that this is necessarily
the case. We will carefully watch for evidence of such a reduction.
As the Venice Summit communiqué makes clear, the U.S. and the
other Summit participants would regard such withdrawals as a useful
contribution to the solution of the Afghan crisis if they are permanent
and continue until there is a complete withdrawal of the Soviet troops.3
We would welcome as a significant step an indication of your intention
to undertake a process leading to complete withdrawal and a political
settlement.
We recognize that the Soviet Union has legitimate interest in the
security of its borders and in friendly relations with Afghanistan. In
our view, an independent and non-aligned Afghan Government pre-
pared to maintain friendly relations with all its neighbors would be
consistent with Soviet interests. Such a government would have to be
acceptable to the Afghan people, for otherwise there can be no restora-
tion of peace and tranquility in Afghanistan. Any legitimate concern
you may have regarding outside interference in Afghanistan could be
met by mutual and reciprocal guarantees of non-intervention and non-
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan by all concerned
parties.
Begin brackets. We have taken note of the Soviet position on a
political settlement as set forth in your letter. In our view, that formula-
tion leaves a number of important questions unanswered. For example,
it offers no indication of what the Soviet Union would regard as satisfac-
tory assurances of nonintervention, and it does not indicate whether
and when all Soviet forces would withdraw if such assurances were
provided. In addition, it does not address the problem created by the
resistance of the Afghan people to the policies of the present regime.
End brackets.4
I would like to reiterate our strong interest in an improvement in
U.S.-Soviet relations based on reciprocity and mutual restraint. The
key to an improvement in this relationship remains a political solution
to the Afghan crisis which I believe can be achieved with the complete
withdrawal of Soviet troops, pursuant to appropriate transitional
arrangements. If you are prepared to discuss such a solution seriously,
4 This paragraph was not included in the final text.

Afghanistan
you will find us fully and immediately cooperative. Sincerely, Edmund
S. Muskie. End text.
4. I am assuming that if the text is approved, you will hand it over
to Dobrynin next Monday.5
Regards.
Christopher
that the letter was handed to Dobrynin that day. The talking points included in the
telegram indicate that the letter did not undergo subsequent revisions. (National
300.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, July 1980
[Omitted here are a title page and cover page.]
The Soviet Military Position in Afghanistan:
Problems and Prospects
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
After six months of fighting, the Soviets have not achieved any
lasting military success against the Afghan insurgency. A review of
operations to date shows that the 80,000 Soviet troops in Afghanistan
are no more able to control the countryside than the Afghan Army
was in 1979. ([classification marking not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. A statement on the cover page
reads: “This assessment was prepared by the Office of Strategic Research.” In a memoran-
dum to Turner, August 1, Brzezinski observed that the Soviets could escalate military
operations in Afghanistan after the Olympics and requested an analysis of Soviet troops
both in Afghanistan and those either supporting the campaign or poised to enter it.
(Ibid.) Clarke forwarded this assessment to Carlucci, August 5, noting that it satisfied
Brzezinski’s request. (Ibid.) Carlucci responded to Brzezinski on August 6, attaching the
assessment and noting that since publication, the Soviets planned to send in an additional
550-man airborne unit. (Ibid.) Brzezinski wrote to Turner, August 11, calling the assess-
ment a “first-rate analysis.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The first major Soviet counterinsurgency campaign, which ran
through mid-March and employed conventional march tactics and area
sweeps, failed to trap or destroy any large insurgent bands. The insur-
gents, who easily eluded these operations, sabotaged roads and struck
government outposts to the rear and on the flanks of the road-bound
Soviets. Furthermore, they reinfiltrated after the Soviets withdrew from
operational areas. This forced the Soviets to garrison many disaffected
areas. As a result, their forces became thinly spread, making them more
vulnerable to ambushes, reducing their ability to mount operations
without regrouping, and creating logistics problems. ([classification
marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
By early April 1980, senior Soviet military officers in Afghanistan
had become pessimistic about their situation and short-term military
prospects. [2½ lines not declassified] tactical and organizational adjust-
ments were begun. For example, the Soviets organized hybrid brigades
that combine airborne, infantry, and helicopter units. They also created
regiment-sized task forces composed of motorized rifle units heavily
reinforced with area-saturation artillery, such as multiple rocket
launchers. In addition, they formed small airborne detachments able
to respond quickly to targets of opportunity. ([classification marking,
codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
Although it is too early to judge the effect of these changes, results
have been limited so far. The new brigades have been used in several
recent operations, one of which resulted in large Soviet losses, suggest-
ing that the Soviets have not yet mastered airmobile tactics. Nor have
the Soviets trapped any large insurgent groups in decisive battles
despite several sweep operations. The infantry-artillery task forces have
not suffered any setbacks, but the Soviets have not yet demonstrated
that such organizations will be mobile and flexible enough for counter-
insurgency operations in difficult terrain. Soviet patrols may be achiev-
ing some modest success in slowing border infiltration from Pakistan,
and their sweeps may have some effect on the ability of insurgent
forces to concentrate for operations against Soviet and Afghan units.
The Soviets probably will continue to emphasize and improve their
airmobile and infantry-artillery task force tactics this summer. ([classifi-
cation marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
There are several persistent impediments to responsive counterin-
surgency operations which the Soviets so far apparently have not
resolved. [3½ lines not declassified] In addition, the slow pace of Soviet
tactical adjustments in Afghanistan suggests that approval for opera-
tions must be obtained from Moscow. ([classification marking, codeword,
and handling restriction not declassified])
The Soviet forces now in Afghanistan appear to have little prospect
of substantially reducing the insurgency unless the Afghan Army can

Afghanistan
be turned into an effective force that can clear and maintain security
in major areas of the countryside. The Soviets attribute their inability
to rebuild the Afghan Army to the failure of the Babrak regime to
develop political support. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling
restriction not declassified])
In planning the size and structure of their initial intervention force
in Afghanistan, the Soviets probably assumed that the Afghan Army
would be both willing and able to bear the brunt of counterinsurgency
operations. For their part, the Soviet forces were to secure a few key
cities and supply routes and to provide forces for limited counterinsur-
gency operations in the countryside in support of the Afghan Army.
Soviet leaders also probably expected the introduction of Soviet combat
troops to stiffen the resolve of the Afghan Army and intimidate the
insurgents. Instead the opposite has occurred. The insurgency has
grown while the Afghan Army has deteriorated at an increasing rate.
As a consequence, Soviet forces in Afghanistan have had to shoulder
responsibilities that had not been anticipated. ([classification marking
not declassified])
It is unlikely that the performance of either the Afghan Government
or the Afghan Army can quickly be improved. Discord between the
political factions making up the Afghan regime is preventing effective
administration, and the prospects of resolving the contention are poor.
Efforts to recruit new men for the Afghan Army are having poor results
and currently cannot even make up the continuing losses through
desertion. It probably will be impossible to find the men to create the
several additional Afghan divisions that the Soviets want until there
is considerably more administrative control over the population. More-
over, Afghanistan’s borders cannot be sealed by the Soviet and Afghan
forces now available. ([classification marking not declassified])
Despite the difficulties they have encountered, the Soviet field
command in Afghanistan now appears to be optimistic about the results
of their recent operations. At least some commanders apparently
believe that the insurgents have suffered serious setbacks and are now
on the defensive. Large insurgent bands are reportedly dispersing into
groups of 50 men or less and seeking refuge among the population.
[1 line not declassified] The Soviet command in Afghanistan apparently
believes that it may be possible to establish the Afghan Government’s
authority in some contested areas and that the Afghan Army may
be able to defeat the smaller insurgent bands. ([classification marking,
codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
This optimism clashes with earlier Soviet views and contradicts
recent information available to us as well as views expressed by inde-
pendent Soviet observers. [4 lines not declassified] There is no evidence
that the Afghan Government is able to take hold in the countryside—

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
even after Soviet sweeps. Moreover, the Afghan Army continues to
deteriorate and to perform poorly. The Soviets reportedly have lost
confidence in it and do not trust it to perform security duties. ([classifica-
tion marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
We do not know what pressures, if any, might be responsible
for the apparent optimism of at least some Soviet commanders in
Afghanistan. Nor do we know how Moscow might view it, especially
in light of less sanguine reports and other conflicting evidence. Never-
theless, any Soviet perception that military prospects may be improving
could affect the choice of options the Soviets see ahead in Afghanistan.
([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
Through the fall of 1980, the Soviet forces now committed to opera-
tions in Afghanistan are unlikely to reduce the rebellion permanently.
They probably will become more adept in the operational environment
of Afghanistan, but the insurgents are improving their arms, apparently
increasing their numbers, and adopting small-unit guerrilla tactics that
will make them more elusive and difficult to counter. Furthermore,
the insurgents’ zeal for the fight so far apparently remains high despite
the casualties and hardships they have endured. ([classification marking
not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment]

Afghanistan
301.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Memorandum of Conversation between President Carter and Premier Hua
July 10
PARTICIPANTS
PRC
U.S.
Premier Hua Guofeng
President Jimmy Carter
Deputy Foreign Minister Han
Secretary of State Edmund Muskie
Nianlong
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Special
Minister Counselor (Deputy Chief
Assistant to the President for
of Mission of the PRC Embassy
National Security Affairs
in Japan) Wang Xiaoyun
Michael Mansfield, U.S.
Deputy Director of Asian Affairs of
Ambassador to Japan
the Foreign Ministry Xiao
Michael Armacost, Deputy Assistant
Xiangchuan
Secretary of Bureau for East
Sun Ping: Notetaker
Asia and Pacific Affairs
Chun Hui: Interpreter Director of
Donald Gregg, National Security
Secretariat of Foreign Ministry
Council Staff Member
Vivian Chang (interpreter)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Turning to Afghanistan, the President said that some limited assist-
ance was being given to the Afghan freedom fighters who are struggling
for their independence against the Soviet invaders. The President noted
that much of the Afghan army has defected to the freedom fighters,
taking their weapons with them. The President said that the U.S. consid-
ers it important to give assistance to those who struggle for their free-
dom. The President noted that Pakistan, even though under Soviet
pressure, was participating to some degree in efforts to support the
Afghan freedom fighters. The President said that these actions are very
sensitive, and that it is difficult to discuss them in complete candor.
He also noted that the U.S. is willing to exchange intelligence with the
PRC on the situation in Afghanistan, and that we have benefitted from
some information received from the Chinese side.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the U.S. has not been indifferent or passive
in responding to the difficult situation in which the Afghan freedom
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Japan to attend the memorial service for Japanese Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira, July
1980, vol. XIII, China, Document 313.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
fighters have found themselves. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the freedom
fighters have one need which the U.S. has not been able to satisfy. This
is a need for SA–7 ground-to-air missiles, which would be highly
effective in reducing the efficacy of the Soviet helicopter gun-ships.
Dr. Brzezinski said that he had heard that the PRC either has or is
producing the SA–7 missile, and that if such weapons could be given
to the freedom fighters, an important contribution would have been
made to their resistance.
President Carter said that we can deliver such weapons “indirectly
but effectively” to the freedom fighters. The President noted that we
had been careful not to send any weapons of U.S. origin into Afghani-
stan, as the Soviets would use such weapons for propaganda purposes.
Premier Hua said that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the
attack on Kampuchea had not happened by chance. Hua described the
attack on Afghanistan as a premeditated plan by the Soviets, designed
to give them control of the country. Hua then sketched the events in
Afghanistan that led up to the Soviet attack. He noted that three Afghan
presidents had been murdered in a short time. He said that this was
a series of events almost without parallel, and that the murders had
been the direct result of Soviet intervention. Hua said that the attack
into Afghanistan was part of a thrust to the South by the Soviets, and
that if they succeed in controlling Afghanistan, they will then move
on toward the Indian Ocean and the oil-producing regions of the
Middle East. Hua noted that the American CIA has predicted that
Soviet oil production will decline, starting about 1985, and that the
Soviets feel the need to seize oil producing regions. Hua commented
that even if the Soviet oil production were not to decline, they would
still undertake the same sort of strategic effort.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Returning to the subject of Pakistan, Hua said that he had met
General Zia recently, and that Zia said he hoped for more aid from
the U.S. Hua paid tribute to the two Islamic conferences, which he said
had been helpful. He cited the three-man committee set up by the
Islamic Conference as performing good work. Hua said that the Soviets
have been putting pressure on Pakistan, even threatening it with
“another dismemberment.” Hua praised Pakistan’s courage in standing
up to the Soviet pressure. President Carter said that he agreed the
Pakistanis have been courageous.
Referring to Iran, Hua said that the PRC has stated its opposition
to the holding of the hostages. He said that he believes the Soviet attack
into Afghanistan also threatens Iran. He noted that the Iranians have
called upon the Soviets to withdraw from Afghanistan, and that the
Iranians have said they will support the Afghan rebels if the Soviets
do not pull out. Hua noted that the Iranians are keeping their word

Afghanistan
on this matter. Iran has refused to recognize the Soviet puppet regime
in Kabul, and at the recent Islamic conference, the Iranians accepted
six Afghan rebel groups as part of their own delegation. President
Carter noted that the Iranians have also told the Soviets to reduce their
presence in Iran, and that some of the 2,000 Soviet “advisors” will have
to move out.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan and remarks
by Carter and Hua agreeing to exchange visits in the future.]
302.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin
The Ambassador opened by saying that he wished to ask me two
questions prior to his return to Moscow, because he will be asked them
by the Politburo: (1) who will win the elections; (2) what outcome
would be better for U.S.-Soviet relations?
I responded by saying that my objective judgment is that Reagan’s
lead will evaporate as the public nears the moment of decision regard-
ing who ought to be the President of this country, especially since
Reagan will not be able to withstand close press scrutiny, and that the
reelection of the President is obviously better for U.S.-Soviet relations
because the President can pursue both a policy of firmness in dealing
with Soviet expansionism and arms control as well as detente. Accord-
ingly, his reelection can avoid the decade of the 80’s being a repetition
of the unmitigated Cold War of 1945–1955.
Dobrynin responded by saying that he fully agrees but wanted to
know what, in that case, prevented an improvement in our relations.
I told him that there is no point in playing games with each other, that
Afghanistan was clearly the issue because it not only posed a strategic
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
took place at Dobrynin’s residence. Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum of conversa-
tion to Muskie on July 12.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
challenge to our interests but also because it has become a symbol of
what is perceived in this country as Soviet expansionism.
This led to a discussion of whether the Afghanistani problem can
somehow be solved. I explained to him what we mean by the “transi-
tional arrangements” designed to create a government in Afghanistan
which is not hostile to the Soviet Union but which is not dependent
for its survival on the presence of a Soviet occupation army.
Dobrynin maintained that we are in effect insisting that Babrak
Karmal has to go, whereas the Soviet Union is willing to solve the
problem on the basis of withdrawal of Soviet forces, once an Afghan
army that is capable of sustaining Karmal has been created. “Why not
accept then a solution based on the principle of neutrality and non-
intereference?” he asked.
I pointed out that Babrak Karmal is part of the problem that needs
to be solved and hence cannot be the solution. To govern he has to
have a Soviet army of occupation. Moreover, to govern without Soviet
troops, there would have to be a massive and inevitably brutal counter-
insurgency operation which would further poison U.S.-Soviet relations.
This is why it is in our mutual interest to try to find an accommodation
soon, perhaps through more extensive explorations of what a transi-
tional arrangement would involve. If such a solution could be found,
it would be a real breakthrough, making possible rapid progress on
other issues, notably arms control.
Dobrynin then asked me about the prospects for SALT. I told him
that the President and the Secretary of State are fully committed to it and
that we will seek its ratification. However, (1) if the present situation
in Afghanistan continues, ratification will be difficult; (2) if there is a
massive Soviet counter-insurgency after the Olympics, ratification will
become even more difficult because public emotions here will be further
aroused; (3) but if there is some genuine progress on Afghanistan,
pointing toward the withdrawal of all Soviet troops and involving
perhaps some transitional arrangements, then the public would wel-
come SALT and ratification would be facilitated.
I added that the public wishes a firm policy toward the Soviet
Union but also desires accommodation with the Soviet Union. It is our
task to make that accommodation possible and I hoped that Dobrynin
would impress the Soviet leaders with this thought.
He tried to discuss TNF and the Middle East with me but I told
him that TNF had been discussed with Christopher, that on the Middle
East I did not have anything new to say, and that in any case, I knew
that he would be having a more formal and comprehensive discussion

Afghanistan
on Monday with the Secretary of State. (I did not mention the fact that
there will be a letter to Gromyko.)2
issue was not raised, but Dobrynin received Muskie’s letter to Gromyko. See Document
299. The full memorandum of conversation of Muskie’s July 14 meeting with Dobrynin
is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
303.
Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Minutes—PRC Meeting on Pakistan (C)
PARTICIPANTS
State
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Secretary Edmund Muskie
General David Jones, Chairman
Warren Christopher, Deputy
Lt. General John Pustay, Ass’t. to the
Secretary
Chairman
David Newsom, Under
Central Intelligence Agency
Secretary for Political Affairs
Admiral Stansfield Turner, Director
Harold Saunders, Ass’t.
Robert Ames, NIO for Near East and South
Secretary
Asia
Defense
International Development Cooperation Agency
W. Claytor Graham, Jr., Deputy
Guy Erb, Deputy Director
Secretary
Frederick Schieck, Deputy Ass’t. Adm. for
Ambassador Robert Komer,
AID-Bureau of Asia
Under Secretary for Policy
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
7/80. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Office of Management and Budget
White House
John White, Assistant Director
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Edward Sanders, Assistant
David Aaron
Director for Nat’l.
Henry Owen
Security & Internat. Affairs
National Security Council
Arms Control and Disarmament
William Odom
Ralph Earle, Director
Thomas Thornton
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy
Director
Muskie: Expressed his appreciation for the opportunity of consider-
ing our current policy towards Pakistan to determine if it is relevant
to the problems that we may be facing. He asked Adm. Turner to begin
with an estimate of Soviet intentions.
Turner: Summarized the CIA paper which is Tab A of the package
for the meeting.2 He reiterated that the Soviets are likely to concentrate
their efforts on the Afghan side of the border. We have noted the use
of a large number of land mines already and a strong pressure on
food supply. He believes that they will also continue to probe against
Pakistan on a small scale but the degree of Pakistan resistance is likely
to be the measure of how aggressive they get. (That is, if the Pakistanis
resist effectively, the Soviets will hold back.) He does not expect a
change in that policy barring a drastic further deterioration of the
situation in Afghanistan or a belief that the western countries are back-
ing the insurgents more openly.
Muskie: To what extent are the Olympics a factor? After they are
over will the Soviets increase their pressure within Afghanistan or in
cross-border raids?
Turner: They certainly will within Afghanistan, although we have
not yet seen any build-up yet. I do not think that the end of the Olympics
will have much impact on their intentions towards Pakistan.
Jones: Said that he agreed with Turner’s estimate. The Soviets would
be very ruthless internally and would try hard to seal the border. There
might then perhaps be some increase in incursions after the Olympics.
Turner: Estimated that the Soviets would need from 200,000 to
250,000 men to suppress the insurgency in the major border areas. It
would take them from six to twelve months to achieve that kind of a
build-up. He also noted that October–November is the beginning of
the bad weather.
Muskie noted that a build-up of Soviet forces within Afghanistan
would be likely to trigger an enlarged flow of equipment to the insur-
2 The briefing package for the meeting was not attached and not found.

Afghanistan
gents, hence increasing the importance of control of the border. Would
that sequence of events be likely to trigger a stronger Soviet reaction?
Turner: Possibly. The issue seems to be more what the Soviets think
is the flow of weapons to the insurgents from outside. They probably
overestimate that considerably today. The bulk of the equipment being
used is acquired within the country. In an escalating situation ammuni-
tion would be an increasing problem.
Muskie: A substantial Soviet build-up would seem to be counter
to the diplomatic initiatives they are taking with regard to claims of
withdrawal, SALT, TNF, etc. How would this affect their thinking?
Turner: We think they will probably take a middle course. The
drain on their resources is not unbearable. They are very intent on
playing the European card and are unlikely to risk this by a dramatic
upswing in their activity. We think that they are following a long
haul strategy.
Muskie: If the Soviet small scale probes meet only soft Pakistani
resistance, might this expand the Soviet probes?
Turner: Perhaps, but these are raids, not an invasion. We have
noted that the nationalists are using Pakistan increasingly as a base of
operation rather than simply as a refuge. We expect that small Soviet
incursions are a likely response.
Muskie: Is there a possibility of an interplay arising out of this that
would generate momentum towards an invasion? Should we not take
this into account in our current activities?
Turner: Certainly, but I still think that the Soviets will show a lot
of patience.
Jones: We agree that they will be ruthless internally and perpetrate
some incursions. If that doesn’t work then they are likely to escalate
their attacks.
Turner: Also notice that there is an air option available. It is a less
clear-cut kind of aggression and the Pakistanis have less capability to
meet it.
Muskie: There probably will be a need for increased help to the
insurgency. Does this mean that we should help the Pakistanis more?
Are they likely to ask for substantial increase of that assistance?
Komer: If the Saudis come through, we will be able to supply quite
a bit of equipment in sales. So far we have only had tentative probes
from them asking what sort of equipment might be available.
Turner: We do not think the Paks have any expectation of military
aid from the United States unless things get much worse for them.
Komer: There is a modest flow of material now in sales and a fairly
big pipeline.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Saunders: We should remember that there was a large exercise
earlier this year to respond to Pakistani concern.3 Since then they did
not want to continue along this line with us. We have very little
exchange with them now in terms of discussions of military matters.
Muskie: If we assume the most probable scenario as set forth by
CIA, should we not now be considering a shift to a more overt program
of assistance to Pakistan and the Afghan insurgents?
Claytor: One possibility will be to earmark a regional contingency
fund in FY 1982 to take care of Pakistani requirements should they
arrive.
Christopher: We would still however have to get a waiver to the
Symington Amendment.
Aaron: Why don’t we try to get some IMET money for Pakistan
and then use that as a vehicle to seek a waiver of the Symington
Amendment. Perhaps we would get more support on the Hill for
that approach.
Muskie: It is not only a question of what the Congress wants. We
would also have to consider how a more open supply program would
affect our relations with the Soviets. We are now in a dialogue with
them on a number of matters; open assistance to the insurgents and
the Pakistanis would have some effect on that.
Turner: We can avoid being seen as giving open help to the insur-
gents. The controlling factor there is Pakistan; they are unwilling to
take greater risks by being a conduit for equipment.
Muskie: Should we therefore give up the idea of a more open
involvement?
Turner: The issue is, if Pakistan is put under more pressure by the
Soviets are they likely to respond by retrenching their efforts or by
going open in their support of the insurgents?
Christopher: Let us ask what the action forcing events might be that
would cause us to increase our aid to Pakistan, and how we can be
ready in that case. I see the critical event as a threat to the independence
and integrity of Pakistan. We need to define perhaps more exactly
what that would involve. If there is a possibility of such a threat, what
steps should we then take and how can we plan for them?
Saunders: Also, what steps should we take if we see danger looming
on the horizon but not quite imminent?
Aaron: I don’t agree with the CIA estimate. I think that the Soviets
will continue their program internally until they have subdued the
insurgents and then they will lean hard on Pakistan. The best way to
3 See Document 151.

Afghanistan
do that would be to create a major incident inside Pakistan. Do we
think that Zia would be able to withstand such an incident? Pakistan
needs some firm signs of assurance from us as Hal Saunders suggests.
Jones: They will seek to intimidate Pakistan.
Newsom: One unknown is what the Pakistanis may think of all of
this. Perhaps we should raise this question with Agha Shahi when he
comes here and Hummel could speak directly to Zia. Pakistan may
prefer a non-military response in case of a Soviet threat—for instance
recourse to the UN or to the other Islamic countries.
Muskie: Is the requirement for us to give a signal to the Soviets?
What should we be considering in the way of a US response including
military supply? There are a number of aspects—the attitude of Con-
gress, the governing law, allies, our relations with the Soviets, etc.
Should we be considering specific steps now or should we wait until
we have had consultations with the Pakistanis?
Brzezinski: In addition to speculating on what the Soviets and Paki-
stanis might think we should ask what we want to do in order to
influence the Soviets and what we want the Pakistanis to do. I see two
things: First, we want to deter Soviet political intimidation of Pakistan.
Second, we want Pakistan to continue its role of maximum support to
the Afghan resistance. If this is correct then we should take actions
that first, send a message to the Soviets that would threaten escalation
should they put too much pressure on Pakistan (this might not necessar-
ily imply a military response), and second, give the Pakistanis a political
and psychological sense of assurance that we will respond if they turn
to us. This will fortify them. Both of these objectives can be served by
the same policy, specifically a greater predisposition to help on military
supply. I do not think there is any basis for approaching the Soviets
now with warnings about actions against Pakistan.
Muskie: I agree with that. But what are we prepared to do?
Brzezinski: The State Department paper (Tab B of the briefing pack-
age) outlines a number of steps to be taken in the military supply area.4
Erb: The Congressional attitude is also vital. How can we best
handle the Symington problem—the way David Aaron suggests?
Aaron: Pakistan may not want military assistance from us; IMET
may be the best path for both of us to take.
Brzezinski: Consultations with Congress would in themselves be a
desirable signal.
Owen: I agree that pursuing IMET is the best route.
4 The State Department paper was not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Aaron: The danger is however that Congress might just change the
law only to deal with IMET and not give us a broader waiver.
Muskie: There would certainly be no point in having to go to Con-
gress twice if we could avoid it.
Owen: But would you not be able to explain to them what we are
trying to do?
Muskie: If we go and ask for a waiver of the Symington Amendment
this will be seen as a major signal of increased US involvement with
Pakistan. Are we ready to take that step?
Brzezinski: What do you think the chances are of Congress cooperat-
ing with us?
Muskie: It would depend on how hard we attempt to sell it. We
would have to make the contingency of Soviet pressure seem real and
serious. This would be the Tonkin Gulf Resolution of the Middle East.
Brzezinski: But let’s look at it the other way around. What would
the response be if the Soviets were to crush resistance in Afghanistan
and successfully intimidate Pakistan?
Newsom: We can help Pakistan without lifting the Symington
Amendment if the Saudis are prepared to pay the bill in an emergency.
We have the airlift authority as we have used in Thailand.
Muskie: But the Saudis are pressing us to increase our aid to Paki-
stan. Will they help us out if it means that we can avoid increasing
our aid because of their help?
Saunders: The Saudis would be likely to help us if there were a
real emergency, but it would be harder to get their assistance if we
were simply trying to fend off a future Soviet action.
Newsom: We have to accept the fact that we will get no help from
the Pakistanis in this area in terms of their moderating their nuclear
program.
Aaron: Are there perhaps ways to diminish the image of a major
commitment and the symbolic qualities? Congress after all was pre-
pared to act earlier; could we not go back to them in September to
take a “modest step”? Perhaps we could provide some continuing role
for Congress if we were to take further steps in waiving the Syming-
ton restriction.
Muskie: The environment has changed. It would have been easier
in January but now Congress is less concerned about a Soviet attack
on Pakistan and more worried about US involvement. They remember
that “modest steps” led us into Vietnam.
Brzezinski: But we are already in July now and moving on towards
August. Perhaps in the near future you and Harold Brown could start
consultations quietly explaining that the post Olympic period may

Afghanistan
bring the Soviets into a direct confrontation with Pakistan. You could
ask for Congressional views and point out the various ways in which
we might have to respond. If we did this it would become public
knowledge through leaks, and this would be a useful signal in itself.
Muskie: That might be a useful approach. We would not want to
take steps now that assume there will be a Soviet action after the
Olympics. Bear in mind that there are restraints on the Soviets. Discus-
sions would however be good to forewarn Congress and educate it
about a possible future danger. We would keep the consultations lim-
ited (they would leak anyway). This will of course prompt the Con-
gressmen to ask the very kinds of difficult questions that we are asking
around this table here today. We will have to have our responses
worked out in advance. They, too, will leak. It is hard to decide now
but at some point we are going to have to determine what our future
responses would be. Would a major invasion of Pakistan call for a US
military response? The 1959 Agreement does not of course force us to
make an automatic response.
Brzezinski: If they ask that kind of a question, remind them of the
trouble that Dean Acheson got into on Korea by answering that kind
of a question.
Muskie: Of course, but you should have the answer formulated in
your own mind.
Brzezinski: I think it would be good to make Congress think this
issue through, just as we are doing today.
Muskie: Also, let us consider that the assistance that we have pro-
vided to the insurgents has helped generate the very problem we are
facing. If we provide more help, it will lead to more tension. Thus, our
own actions are moving us along towards the ultimate question. I
wonder if Pakistani steadfastness would warrant such action on our
part? We have not faced this question in any serious discussions since
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Turner: We have to ask ourselves how important it is for us to
frustrate what the Soviets are trying to do in Afghanistan.
Christopher: Having consulted with Congress often before, I am not
sure it is in our interest to raise this question with them before an
election. We would have to talk to people such as Church, Javits, and
Lugar as well as Howard Baker. Congress is getting very gun-shy on
the question of Pakistan; they note our general lack of money and the
great distance that Pakistan is from us. We should do our full contin-
gency planning before we go to Congress. The non-proliferation ques-
tion also is going to be a difficult one as we know from our current
experience on Tarapur. I am very skeptical about conditional consulta-
tions unless there is a new threat and we have a program that we want
to sell.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Jones: Pakistan’s military deficiencies are so glaring that only a
large input of Saudi funds could provide them with a military capability
to withstand Soviet pressures.
Komer: We have never really explored the option of going to India
to ask them to provide assurances that they will not attack Pakistan.
This would enable the Pakistanis to move any of their forces from the
border with India to the Afghanistan side.
Muskie: What kind of leverage do we have with India?
Komer: The Indians are very nervous about our military assistance
to Pakistan. We could point out to them that the level of our assistance
to Pakistan will to a considerable extent depend on how much the
Pakistanis need. That in turn could be affected by Indian behavior. The
Indians giving assurances to us might not do much for the Pakistanis.
Assurances to third parties such as the Saudis and others might be
more credible.
Thornton: I am dubious about this sort of an approach; it has never
been helpful before when we tried it.
Brzezinski: In any case it doesn’t get to the gut issue—how do we
warn the Soviets and reassure the Pakistanis? Precisely at the time of
an election we might be forced into doing more than we expect. There-
fore there may be some utility in showing now that we are concerned
and thereby heading off the danger.
Christopher: Shouldn’t we ask the Pakistanis what they want?
Brzezinski: No, we would probably get the wrong answer. We want
to convey our own level of concern. Congressional consultations would
be useful; preliminary discussion is better than waiting and having to
respond quickly to a rapidly evolving crisis.
Aaron: We have up until now tried to keep ourselves in the back-
ground of this effort. The discussion today doesn’t seem to reflect that
fact. We are trying to keep the Muslims in front. The Soviets have not
been able to make us the issue and we don’t want them to. We are
talking today too much about US involvement.
Muskie: Perhaps, but this group should discuss these issues in order
to keep precisely that from happening.
Brzezinski: David Aaron may be correct in the present context but
this would not be true in face of a Soviet threat of the kind discussed
in the cable from Ambassador Hummel which triggered this meeting.5
reported on a meeting between Peck and MFA Director General Khan. The discussion
centered on the acute food shortages faced by the Afghan insurgents, and the possibility
of Soviet forces escalating their military campaign against the rebels. (National Archives,

Afghanistan
Aaron: I just want to emphasize that we may not have to be in the
front line of response. We should certainly try to keep out of it.
Brzezinski: We need to give a signal to everybody that it would be
unwise to internationalize the conflict.
Newsom: I think it might be better if we entered our consultations
with the Pakistanis through intelligence channels rather than directly
with Zia or Agha Shahi. Can we do this?
Turner: Yes.
Muskie: Given the most probable scenario as described by CIA, do
we have a clear idea of what Pakistani requirements would be? Could
we meet these requirements without taking the matter up with Con-
gress? Is there a scenario that we should discuss with Congress?
Turner: The Pakistanis have told us what their needs are in terms
especially of man-held anti-aircraft and anti-tank weapons. They have
not however defined their own requirements precisely. They do not
want to make a request to us on an overt basis because of the past bad
experience they had with the $400 million offer.
Muskie:
We
have
to
understand
the
full
impact
of
their
requirements.
Jones: The basic level of assistance needed for correcting the most
glaring deficiencies is about $600 million. If you add fighter aircraft to
this the figure goes up to $1.3 billion and there are incremental packages
you wanted to reach.
Brzezinski: The State Department paper lists various kinds and
types of equipment. Would that represent the $600 million package?
Would that not be the kind of package to talk to Congress about as
the requirement if there were a Soviet military threat?
Christopher: The Senators we would have to talk to would respond
poorly to such a suggestion.
Newsom: But if we were to decide that we had to respond we will
have to get a 36B waiver if we are to respond quickly, even using Saudi
money.6 Therefore we should forewarn Congress.
Muskie: But deterrent action vis-a-vis the Soviets raises the risk of
escalation. Congress will automatically assume that you are underesti-
mating the dangers.
days advance notice prior to a Presidential administration concluding a government-to-
government sale of military equipment valued at $14 million or more, defense articles
or services valued at $50 million or more, or design and construction services valued
at $200 million or more.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Aaron: If a major contingency were to come about could we deter
it? What should we do best to strengthen the response?
Turner: The likelihood of intense Soviet pressure on Pakistan is
very high; a major ground force attack is not a very likely case. The
main deterrent is the Pakistani will to resist. Therefore our help to
Pakistan will be the main deterrent to Soviet action.
Owen: We will have to be very careful that the Congress does not
say the wrong thing about Pakistan and thereby weaken, rather than
strengthen, its resolve.
Muskie: At very most I think I would talk to the Majority leader
by himself. But I will want to consider doing even that. We have
explored all the points so far. I’d like to meet again on the basis of
this discussion and continue on. In the interim we can crystallize our
thinking. Let us meet next week on Monday or Tuesday.7
Newsom: Could the military contingency package be better refined?
Jones: We have it in hand. We can reduce our paper to something
specifically related to State’s options.
Brzezinski: Yes, let us cost out the military package that State has
suggested.
Muskie: At our next meeting, let us try to reach a consensus on
these issues.
The meeting concluded at 12:20 p.m.

Afghanistan
304.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 21, 1980
SUBJECT
PRC on Pakistan (Continued) (U)
I was rather bemused by Muskie’s performance at the first session
of the PRC last Thursday, including his coy disclaimer at the end.2
One observer suggested that he was demonstrating his doubts about
“your” policy of bolstering the rebels. He continually returned to the
question of whether we were not, in effect, helping create precisely the
situation we are worried about (i.e. a Soviet attack on Pakistan). (S)
There is of course considerable truth in this but it is not much use
for policy planning. First of all, there doesn’t seem to be much of any
alternative that promises success for our policies. Also, we are not the
only ones stoking the fire; the Arabs, Chinese and, of course, many
Paks themselves are enthusiastically involved. Finally, the Afghans are
going to carry on, and as long as they do the Soviets psychologically
have to believe that foreign assistance is the reason for the insurgency
no matter what the truth. (S)
In the area of difficult questions, let me commend one more to
your conscience. At what point does our rhetoric and covert assistance
to the Afghans simply encourage them to get themselves killed use-
lessly? I don’t think we have reached the point yet and may not for
quite a while. Perhaps never. It is something we have to keep in mind
and review periodically, however, since a policy of using Afghans “to
make the Soviets pay” is morally defensible only as long as it does not
lead to avoidable and unnecessary bloodshed. (S)
The second broad question that Muskie raised is how far do we
want to go in committing ourselves to Pakistan? Would we commit
military forces? Are we whistling in the dark? Do we risk misleading the
Pakistanis to their great detriment? These questions make me extremely
uneasy. I am not convinced that the American people and Congress
have had their consciousness raised to the point where we would really
sent to Odom and Owen. In the upper right corner, Thornton wrote: “Note particularly
the starred items.” A stamped note at the top of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
2 See Document 303. Reference is apparently to something Muskie said off the record.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
stand behind Pakistan. There will be too many “good reasons” to
renege on whatever commitments we make. (S)
This is related to an issue that Muskie did not directly raise: How
much effort do we want to put into our relationship with Pakistan?
This is something that the PRC should address, especially as regards
economic assistance. You probably have a greater sense of urgency in
this matter than anybody else around the table and will have to articu-
late it if the message is to be gotten through. (The issue is not so much
substantive as overcoming bureaucratic inertia.)3 (C)
The following are some more specific questions that arose from
the Thursday meeting and will probably recur. (The list draws, in part,
on the internal State briefing memo for this meeting.) (U)
1. What steps can we take to signal our concern to the Soviets and
encourage Pakistani support of the insurgents? (Arms sales is the only
item on the horizon.) (S)
2. Should the US be more openly involved with the insurgents?
(Muskie asked this several times; the answer is that our role is limited
by Pakistani sensitivities.) (S)
3. How can we ensure that we do not get out front too far and
that we keep the Muslims in the lead? (Or, put another way, how do
we keep this in the East-South, rather than East-West context?) (C)
4. When (and how) will we know that the Soviets have overstepped
acceptable bounds in their dealings with Pakistan? (S)
5. How can we best consult on these matters with the Paks? Agha
Shahi-Muskie this week? Hummel-Zia while Shahi is out of the coun-
try? Intelligence channels? (Probably all three in varying degrees but
I like the Hummel-Zia channel best if Zia is willing to commit himself
without Shahi. This also raises the question of what Hummel is sup-
posed to tell Zia. You should urge State to produce some instructions
to Hummel for our clearance.) (C)
6. Related to this, what should Muskie tell Agha Shahi when they
meet?4 State will probably brief him to stick to Afghanistan and third
country issues; should he raise the bilateral relationship? If so, in what
terms? (C)
7. If Muskie consults with Byrd, what should he say? State will
point out to Muskie that the conversations could soon get off into War
Powers considerations and the like. I am concerned that this is likely
to scare off any but the most intrepid supporter of Pakistan. If it is the
case, however, we had better face it now. Incidentally, in the Thursday
3 Thornton placed a star in the left margin beside this paragraph.
4 Thornton placed a star in the left margin beside this sentence.

Afghanistan
meeting you indicated that it didn’t matter whether the Paks would
like the idea of our consulting with Congress with the attendant leaks.
It could matter very much if the Paks found it necessary to repudiate
the position that we had taken with the Congress. We don’t need
another affair like that. (C)
8. DOD is supposed to come in with a pricing for the military
equipment package that State postulated. (See my comment on the
general pricing question, below.) Press State on the question of rapid
funding in an emergency—especially if the Saudis are uncoopera-
9. Make sure that contingency planning proceeds apace between
State and DOD—chaired, if necessary, by Odom.5 (S)
10. Perhaps the single most important specific thing you can do for US-
Pakistani relations at this meeting is to raise the issue of price quotations
on F–15s.6 (You will have to raise it; State won’t.) The Paks have asked
us how much 40 or so F–15s would cost. State is unwilling to tell them
(or if so, to tell them in a negative way) on the grounds that by quoting
prices we are conveying a willingness to sell. That is nonsense, if we
make ourselves clear to the Paks. They need data for planning purposes
and if we want to be seen as a credible friend to them, this is the
minimum we can do. The country director, just returned from a trip
to Pakistan, underscores this as the most important single item pending
with Pakistan. (S)
11. Further to the question of whether to tell Zia where the Persian
Gulf is: According to a CIA report, Zia told the Chinese that “The US
appeared to be interested in the security of the Persian Gulf but not
of Pakistan.” This reflects his apparent assumption that Pakistan is not
included in the US security perimeter. (S)
Attachment
List of Recommended Actions7
Washington, undated
Suggested Follow-up Actions
1—State and DOD refine the paper on intermediate level contingen-
cies and diplomatic/military responses.
5 Thornton placed a star in the left margin beside this paragraph.
6 Thornton placed a star in the left margin beside this sentence.
7 No classification marking.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
2—DOD refine its planning on equipment availability and review
its arrangements—with the goal of faster reaction time—for a short
notice military supply operation.
3—The Secretary of State reaffirm to Shahi, during his visit to
Washington next week, our willingness to discuss intermediate level
contingencies with the Pakistanis whenever they wish to do so.8
4—Ambassador West be instructed to ask the Saudis the status of
the Saudi/Gulf States assistance package for Pakistan.9
8 Brzezinski drew an arrow in the right margin beside this sentence. He crossed
out “intermediate level contingencies,” and wrote several words above the phrase, but
the text is illegible. Muskie and Shahi met on July 23. For their remarks to reporters
9 At the bottom of the list, Brzezinski wrote: “indicate willingness to expedite
[illegible].”
305.
Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence (Carlucci) to the Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs (Newsom)
Washington, July 22, 1980
[Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelli-
page not declassified.]

Afghanistan
306.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
196087. Subject: Gromyko Letter on Afghanistan.2
1. Confidential—Entire text.
letter on Afghanistan.3 (Text para 3 below.)
3. I would like in continuation of our exchange of views to express
some considerations in connection with your letter of July 14.
We have noted the interest of the U.S. Government expressed in
your letter in improving Soviet-U.S. relations. As is well known to you,
this is consistently favored by the Soviet leadership. However, it is
important to act precisely along these lines in practice. We, on our
part, are ready to do so provided there is a similar readiness on the
part of the United States.
Given such an approach and being guided by broad goals of
strengthening peace and security, our two countries, as was proved
on more than one occasion in the past, are quite capable of developing
constructively their relations and finding mutually acceptable solutions
to most complicated questions of mutual interest for the USSR and
the U.S.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Confidential; Immediate; Nodis; Cherokee. Drafted by Shulman, cleared in S/S, and
approved by Muskie.
2 In an attached action memorandum to Muskie, July 23 (not printed), Vest stated:
“The most notable feature of the Gromyko letter is its insistence on Soviet unwillingness
to discuss any change in the Babrak government.” Vest argued: “presumably Moscow
wants to avoid any hint of readiness to talk about replacing Babrak because they fear
this would only fuel factional infighting in Kabul.” Vest made three recommendations
in the memorandum, all of which Muskie approved: 1) send Gromyko’s reply to the
Embassy in Moscow (this telegram); 2) send a telegram to the Embassies in London,
Paris, and Bonn relaying the substance of Gromyko’s letter (the draft is attached but
In a memorandum to Brzezinski, July 23, Brement summarized Gromyko’s letter, charac-
terizing it as a “rigid restatement of the Soviet position,” and agreed with Vest that
there was no need for an immediate reply. Brement suggested U.S. policy going forward
should be based on the concept that a “complete Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan
must be the basis for a genuine political solution to this problem.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meetings File, Box 86, Sensitive XX:
3 See Document 299.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
This, to use your own words, is the key to everything. Attempts
to reduce the whole matter to any one single question, to tie to such
a question the prospects of our relations as the whole, are not only
wrong but also non-productive. You are aware of our assessment of
the causes that led to the present state of Soviet-U.S. relations. This
was also the subject of detailed discussions at our meeting in Vienna.4
Therefore, I will not restate this assessment.
Now with regard to Afghanistan. We note the recognition in your
letter of the legitimate interest of the Soviet Union in ensuring the
security of its borders and in friendly relations with Afghanistan as
well as of our concern about an outside interference in Afghanistan.
This would seem to be a realistic premise.
However, this premise is directly contradicted by your persistent
notion about the government, which exists in the Democratic Republic
of Afghanistan, being unacceptable to the U.S. and by raising in this
connection the question of “transition” to some other government. Here
a complete clarity is in order: We do not intend to and will not engage
even in discussions on posing the question in such a way.
I may as well note here that no useful purpose either can be served
by the attempts to put in doubt the fact of the recent withdrawal of
some Soviet units from Afghanistan. Why are you doing this? After
all, you know—as, by the way, the whole world knows,—that such
doubts are groundless.
As to your question what assurances of non-interference in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan would be considered by us as satisfac-
tory, the answer thereto is contained in the known proposals of the
DRA Government of last May 14.5 An adequately full discussion was
devoted to it also in our previous exchanges of views. The guarantees
of non-interference must be an integral part of the general political
settlement, the path to which goes through direct negotiations of Paki-
stan and Iran with the Government of Afghanistan with the aim of
normalizing relations between them with simultaneous cessation of
armed incursions into the territory of Afghanistan as well as of all
forms of interference in the internal affairs of that country in general.
It is Pakistan and Iran who, by continuing to refuse to conduct
negotiations, are bringing the task of the political settlement to an
impasse. This is why, if the United States is genuinely interested in
such a settlement, it could, as we have already pointed out, exert
appropriate influence on the Pakistan leaders and induce them to hold
negotiations with the Government of Afghanistan.
4 See Document 272.
5 See Document 270.

Afghanistan
We would like to hope that the U.S. side will be able to make a
realistic assessment of the situation and will take steps to facilitate
in practice the process of political settlement of the situation around
Afghanistan.
You may have no doubt that such a position will be met with
appropriate understanding on our part.
Sincerely,
A. Gromyko.
End text.
4. Secretary’s response: The Secretary noted that on the face of it,
he did not see any new elements in Gromyko’s letter, but he did not
want to give a reaction before studying it more carefully.
5. Instructions will follow septel on how you should brief the
Quad.6
Muskie
6 That is, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. See footnote 2, above.
307.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
204570. Subject: Letter to Gromyko.
1. (S—Entire text)
2. You should deliver the following letter from Secretary Muskie
to Gromyko as early as possible next week. You should seek an appoint-
ment with Korniyenko for this purpose and at the same time make
the démarches on MBFR and Iranian hostages which you are being
instructed by septel to make.2
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
in NSC and S/S, and approved by Muskie.
the Secretary’s letter to Korniyenko, Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister, who “carefully
read the letter and stated mildly that he would not attempt to respond immediately but
would transmit it to Gromyko.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
3. Begin text:
Dear Mr. Minister:
—Your letter of July 22 raises questions concerning the Soviet
position on withdrawal from Afghanistan.3 Since this is a central issue
in our discussions of a possible political settlement in Afghanistan, I
would appreciate any clarifications you can offer.
—We obviously differ on the significance of the military with-
drawal you have announced. Our analysis indicates that this was part
of a tactical redeployment designed to make Soviet units more effective.
I would be interested in knowing whether there has been a reduction
in the overall number of Soviet troops in Afghanistan, whether these
withdrawals are permanent and whether you are prepared to under-
take a process which would lead to complete withdrawal and a political
settlement.
—In your letter of July 22, there is no reference to ultimate Soviet
withdrawal from Afghanistan. Is this a change in the Soviet position?
If satisfactory assurances were provided would there be a simultaneous
withdrawal of all Soviet troops?
—As we have said, we would be prepared to explore some transi-
tional arrangement to facilitate such a solution. A government accept-
able to the Afghan people would be essential.
—Finally, your letter of July 22 stresses that normalization of
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbors should take place
simultaneously with the cessation of “armed incursions into the terri-
tory of Afghanistan as well as of all forms of interference in the internal
affairs of that country in general.” This implies that the Soviet Union
would withdraw all its forces from Afghanistan to coincide with nor-
malization of relations between Afghanistan and neighboring states.
Is this your position?
—The questions I have posed in this and my last letter represent
serious efforts to gain a clearer understanding of your position. I hope
you will give them careful consideration.
—Sincerely, Edmund S. Muskie
End text.
Christopher
3 See Document 306.

Afghanistan
308.
Letter From Senator Moynihan to Secretary of State Muskie1
Washington, August 1, 1980
Dear Ed,
At our lunch Tuesday we talked about the problem of maintaining
the security of information in foreign affairs.2 I told you I had become
deeply depressed by our seeming inability to maintain any confidences
and our further inability to see what this tells us about the condition
of our principal institutions. I promised to send you the specifics of
the Afghanistan example which I cited.
In the course of 1979 the President began to move toward support-
ing the low-level insurgency that appeared to have developed against
the pro-Soviet Amin government in Kabul. In July and again in Novem-
ber, Presidential Findings directed that small amounts of nonmilitary
aid be passed to these groups.
On December 19, 1979, Izvestiya charged that “U.S. is stepping up
interference in Afghanistan’s internal affairs, supporting the insurgents
who are waging an armed struggle against this country’s legitimate
government.” Izvestiya cited “the latest issue of the magazine COUN-
TERSPY.” (I am informed by staff of the Intelligence Committee that
this journal is or was associated with the Institute for Policy Studies.)
On December 24 the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, overthrowing
Amin. As it happens a Presidential Finding was then making its way
through the bureaucracy calling for a stepping up of the earlier program
directed against Amin, providing some $2 million in lethal military
equipment. This Presidential Finding was signed December 28. It had
begun as a project directed against the previous regime, but now of
course took place in the context of the full-scale Soviet intervention.
On January 1 Izvestiya charged that, “The CIA is directly involved
in training Afghan rebels in camps in Pakistan and maintains contacts
with counter-revolutionaries and reactionaries in Afghanistan itself.”
The journal Counterspy is mentioned.
On January 5 the Boston Globe reports that the Carter administration
has undertaken an unannounced “hush-hush decision that the
U.S. . . . will do everything possible to slip weapons to the Moslem
indicating he saw it. Moynihan’s letter is on the stationery of the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence, of which he was a member.
2 The previous Tuesday was July 29. No record of that meeting was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
insurgents in Afghanistan to ensure the Russian invasion there will be
long, bloody and expensive.”3
On January 9 the Presidential Finding of December 28 was pre-
sented to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. The date and
subject of this meeting was reported in the New York Times Magazine
On February 15 the Washington Post reported that “the U.S. is
supplying weapons to rebel forces battling Soviet troops. . . .” The
report is attributed to “reliable sources.”5 On February 16 the New York
Times reported, “The U.S. began an operation to supply light infantry
weapons to Afghan insurgent groups in mid-January, White House
officials said today. . . .”6 On February 17 the New York Times reported
from Moscow that, “The Soviet press gave prominent display today
to American newspaper reports confirming the Soviet contention that
the U.S. was supplying arms to the Afghan rebels.”7
And so through the spring and summer. I remarked to you that
the July 21st edition of the New York Times reported on page 2 that
Hodding Carter accused the National Security Council staff of leaking
to the Times, a matter which no doubt distressed the White House,8
and on page 3 carried a story “Aides Disagree on Level of U.S. Arms
Aid to Afghans” which included the paragraph:
“White House officials said on Feb. 15 that the United States had
begun an operation to supply the insurgents with light infantry weap-
ons. . . . The CIA, the White House source said, had been assigned to
carry out the covert mission.”9
And so why ought Mr. Gromyko not be berating you with these
charges? I think it may be agreed that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
was a decisive moment in modern history: the first such event since
the Second World War. It had the potential to restore a measure of
clarity and balance to American views of the present world situation.
3 See William Beecher, “News Analysis: What He Didn’t Say,” Boston Globe, January
p. SM7.
5 See Michael Getler, “U.S. Reportedly Is Supplying Weapons to Afghan Insurgents,”
6 See David Binder, “U.S. Supplying Afghan Insurgents with Arms in a Covert
7 See Craig R. Whitney, “Soviet Press Plays Up U.S. Reports on Help For the Afghan
8 See “Hodding Carter Says U.S. Aides See Press as Enemy,” New York Times, July
9 See Drew Middleton, “Aides Disagree on Level of U.S. Arms Aid to Afghans,”

Afghanistan
In particular it made it possible for almost anyone to see the elemental
mendacity of Soviet statements about their activities and intentions.
They lie. But then what happened? Almost immediately the United
States Government (evidently the White House itself) gave out informa-
tion to the press which supported, even confirmed, the Soviet lie.
Could there have been a greater disservice to our nation? What is
to be said of those who did it?
More importantly, what is to be said of the state of our institutions
when such things can happen? What does it mean when men charged
with the responsibility for this information find it more rewarding to
break the confidence than to keep it? This goes to profound questions of
institutional loyalty and morale. An organizational theorist, observing
such symptoms, would almost certainly judge that such institutions
were in deep trouble.
This surely is my view. After almost four years on the Intelligence
Committee I have come to the conclusion, for example, that the Central
Intelligence Agency is practically defunct and is in many ways a liabil-
ity. (I mentioned to you that earlier this year I placed the National
Intelligence Estimates in the Congressional Record,10 by which I mean
the reports of them that had by then appeared in the Post and the
Times.) Clearly we need an intelligence system that can keep its secrets
and, in a general way, its identity to itself. We have neither.
Nothing will avail less than running about with lie detectors look-
ing for leakers. If I were the President, I would look upon this as a
problem of institutions, not people. It is a profoundly serious problem.
(Thus: if it is impossible to keep secrets, perhaps the government should
not try to do anything that depends on secrets being kept.) This is a
subject about which political scientists, for example, might very well
have something useful to say. It is a subject that can be studied. If you
would like to pursue the matter, I am at your disposal, as nothing
troubles me more just now.11
Best,
Daniel Patrick Moynihan12
10 See, for example, Senator Moynihan speaking on “The Role of the Central Intelli-
11 Muskie replied to Moynihan on September 19. Regarding the problem of leaks,
Muskie wrote: “I doubt we will ever be entirely free of the problem, for as you would
agree, the Draconian measures necessary to ensure total security of information would
be basically incompatible with our system. We could improve, however. We continue
to look for ways to ensure better security, and would welcome any additional thoughts
12 Moynihan initialed “DM” above his typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
309.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
[memorandum number not declassified]
Washington, August 8, 1980
THE STATE OF THE AFGHAN INSURGENCY ([classification
marking not declassified])
Our information on the status of the insurgency—[2 lines not declas-
sified]—is extensive but uneven in quality and far from complete. We
have difficulty getting enough good information on such basic ques-
tions as how the insurgents are organized, how many there are, how
they cooperate, and how many casualties there have been. The limits
on such information have made it difficult, for example, to arrive at
confident judgments about the insurgents’ ability to stand up over time
to increasing Soviet pressure. (See Annex A [1 line not declassified])
Insurgent Activity
Perhaps our best information comes indirectly through the Soviet
and Afghan reaction to insurgent activity. [1 line not declassified] we
can establish that the insurgency has spread to every Afghan province
since the Soviet invasion. Insurgents harass traffic on the main roads,
attacking military and civilian convoys and sometimes setting up their
own checkpoints. They attack isolated Soviet and Afghan army units,
occasionally slipping inside security patrols to hit garrisons. Although
they usually attempt to avoid clashes with large units, the insurgents
have inflicted heavy casualties on them in a few engagements. They
have organized strikes and demonstrations in cities, particularly Herat,
Qandahar, and Jalalabad, but also Kabul. They have killed numerous
Soviets and Afghan officials on the streets of Afghan cities. Sabotage
and arson—particularly the burning of schools—are common. In rural
areas, their threats and killings have disrupted civil administration and
prevented the implementation of government programs. In some areas,
except for a few isolated garrisons, the insurgents are in complete
control, dispensing justice and raising taxes.
The insurgent hold is strongest in some mountainous areas where
terrain inhibits Soviet military operations. These areas are generally
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed
are a covering memorandum from Carlucci to Brzezinski, August 8, indicating the
memorandum was prepared in response to a request from Brzezinski, and a memoran-
dum prepared in the CIA, July 25. A typed note on the first page reads in part: “The
author of this paper is [name not declassified] Southwest Asia Analytic Center, Near East
South Asia Division, Office of Political Analysis. It was coordinated with the Office of
Strategic Research and the Directorate of Operations.”

Afghanistan
also the least important to the Soviets and the Afghan Government,
and no serious counter-insurgency operations have been attempted
in some of them. Even less remote areas where the insurgents have
eliminated government authority, government garrisons still hold the
main towns. On the other hand, there is resistance in areas where
Soviet troops are concentrated and the government has a fair degree
of control.
The insurgents have not taken over a major Afghan city or even
a provincial capital for more than a few days, although they are a
pervasive presence in most urban areas. The Soviets have shown in
Kabul that they will deal firmly with any popular uprising, and the
threat of Soviet reaction has almost certainly been important in keeping
the urban areas from getting totally out of control.
There is some evidence that the Soviets believe the situation is
improving in Afghanistan—perhaps stabilizing—and they clearly
show no sign of withdrawing from Afghanistan. The evidence shows
that they are there for a long haul and are beginning to emphasize
political consolidation as well as military operations. Although only a
very small part of the population supports the government and insur-
gency continues at a high level, the Soviets may have been successful,
at least temporarily, in keeping the insurgence from getting worse. (In
Annex B, we discuss the level of insurgency province by province.)
Insurgent Organization
The insurgents in Afghanistan are organized into a large number
of distinct groups, probably several hundred. [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] reports that there are 79 insurgent leaders among the Pathan
tribesmen alone, each presumably heading an independent band. There
are probably as many more in the remainder of the country. A few of
these insurgent groups—primarily in urban areas—are based on politi-
cal ideologies or programs. The overwhelming majority, however, rep-
resent tribes or geographic areas, and ridding their areas of the foreign
invader is their principal motivation.
The first loyalty of most Afghans is to their villages or extended
families. The basic insurgent unit is headed by a village or family leader
and rarely consists of more than 50 men. Such units, however, seem
to cooperate closely when necessary with others from neighboring
villages and frequently coalesce in large insurgent groups numbering
several hundred men. The membership in the basic units fluctuates;
men leave the battlefield because they have more important business
at home, but may return when fighting becomes more intense. One
insurgent leader in Konarha province, for example, reportedly has 200
to 300 men under his command most of the time, but for a major
operation can count on 1,000.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Cooperation among the larger groups is inhibited by the difficulties
of communication and travel in a rugged country, by suspicion of
outsiders—even men from the next valley—and by the reluctance of
most Afghans to take orders from anyone, especially another local
leader with no greater claims to leadership.
There have nevertheless been some operations involving more than
one insurgent band, sometimes even bands from different ethnic
groups. On occasion, the failure of such operations has led to fighting
between the bands, each blaming the other for defeat. Since the Soviet
invasion, there has been growing cooperation both among insurgents
in Afghanistan and between Afghan insurgents and exile groups in
Pakistan. Some of the insurgents engaged in the fighting outside Kabul
in June reportedly came from provinces near the Pakistani border. The
fighting probably would not have extended over as large an area had
a number of insurgent groups not coordinated their activities. Predomi-
nant Pathan exile organizations and the Hazaras of central Afghanistan
are establishing contact with each other. New weapons and tactics
seem to pass quickly to tribes in the interior. In general, however, each
insurgent group continues to operate with little reference to others
fighting in the same cause.
The degree of cooperation also seems to vary by ethnic group. It
may be least among the fiercely independent Pathans along the Paki-
stani border. Among the Nuristanis of Konarha province, however,
there was considerable cooperation even before the Soviet invasion.
The Hazaras of central Afghanistan may even have a rudimentary
overall organization, comprising two umbrella groups over several
smaller insurgent organizations.
The best known—but perhaps the least important—of the insurgent
groups are the exile organizations. There are six main groups (five of
them united in the Islamic Alliance for the Liberation of Afghanistan)
and a number of smaller groups, most of them based in Pakistan. The
exiles have served as a channel for aid to those fighting in Afghanistan,
their propaganda has probably encouraged the resistance, and some
of them have men actually engaged in fighting. There is however, little
basis for their claims that they have large followings in Afghanistan,
that they speak for the insurgents, or that they have much control over
insurgent activities. (See Annex C for a fuller treatment of the exiles.)
Insurgent Strength
There is no reliable information on which to base an estimate of
insurgent strength. Our guess is that it lies somewhere between 50,000
and 100,000. Most of the country’s 15 million people resent the Soviet
occupation, but only a small percentage is actively engaged in the
fighting.

Afghanistan
We probably have more complete reporting about insurgent
strength in Konarha province than in any other part of the country. Even
so, the information available does not permit us to estimate insurgent
strength there more precisely than several thousand.
[1 line not declassified] there are as many as several hundred thou-
sand insurgents in the country. [5½ lines not declassified]
[less than 1 line not declassified] put the number of insurgents in
“main groupings” at about 28,000. [1 line not declassified] had uncon-
firmed reports of a similar number in the Kabul area alone. [less than
1 line not declassified] reported the destruction of the main insurgent
groups in Badakshan, Baghlan, Qonduz, Nangarhar, Ghazni, Qanda-
har, Helmand, Herat, and Bamian provinces, and may no longer include
still active insurgents there in the strength estimated for the main
groupings. Soviet pressure has broken some of the larger groups into
smaller bands, but these might actually be more effective in guerrilla
warfare.
Other methods of estimating insurgent strength are equally unsatis-
factory. We do not know the number of insurgent bands nor the average
size of a band. Some groups are well over 1,000, others less than 100,
and almost nothing is known about most. Assuming, however, that
there are around 200 insurgent groups, and that the average size of
each is about 300—groups of this size appear to be fairly typical—
there would be on the order of 60,000 insurgents.
Estimates of insurgent strength also depend on the definition of
an insurgent. At any given time few of the insurgent bands are at their
greatest possible strength, and in large areas of the country potential
insurgents have no Soviets to fight. Although there might be about
50,000 men opposing the Soviets at any one time, this strength could
double if the Soviets were to conduct simultaneous military operations
throughout the country. The number of men who have participated at
one time or another in fighting against the Soviets or Afghan Commu-
nists during the past two years may be several times greater.
Estimating insurgent casualties is also difficult. Afghan military
claims are clearly exaggerated, [less than 1 line not declassified] deal with
only a few engagements, and even [less than 1 line not declassified] are
suspect. Those based on body counts are probably no more valid than
US reports from Vietnam, [2 lines not declassified]. The Soviet Ambassa-
dor in Kabul told other ambassadors that 25,000 “counterrevolutionar-
ies” have been eliminated since the invasion. Our extrapolations from
[1 line not declassified] indicate that casualties have been on the order
of 20,000, but the reports may inflate insurgent losses. [2 lines not
declassified] forces in Afghanistan to go out on the battlefield and actu-
ally count bodies. Civilian casualties probably have been higher,
although not 200,000 as one exile spokesman has charged.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Insurgent Arms and Supplies
Although outside help has become increasingly important, the
insurgents rely primarily on weapons they had when the Marxists took
over in April 1978 or have since captured from the Afghan military,
obtained from deserters, or purchased on the local black market. (The
sale of ammunition and occasionally arms is widespread in the Afghan
Army, and some Soviet troops reportedly have also been involved.)
We have no statistics on the number of weapons the insurgents have
obtained from sources in the country, but there have been tens of
thousands of deserters and defectors from the Afghan Army, many of
them taking their weapons with them, and we know of many raids on
garrisons, police posts, and convoys in which the insurgents cap-
tured weapons.
The insurgents appear to have sufficient small arms, but frequently
run short of ammunition. Because of its range and the availability of
ammunition, the British World War II Lee-Enfield is their favorite
weapon. Large numbers of Soviet-made AK–47 assault rifles have come
into insurgent hands since the Marxist takeover, as have a growing
number of West German designed G–2 rifles (manufactured in Pakistan
under license for the Pakistan Army and also a standard Iranian Army
weapon). The insurgents have also captured machine guns, mortars,
anti-aircraft weapons, and even tanks and artillery from the Army,
but these are generally in short supply. The difficulty of moving and
maintaining heavy equipment such as tanks and artillery severely limits
their usefulness. The insurgents also produce some of their own mate-
rial—for example they convert plumbing pipe and pressure cookers
into landmines and refill old shell casings to make new ammunition.
The insurgents have used their weapons effectively, quickly adapt-
ing their tactics to new arms—such as antitank rockets—and using
unfamiliar captured heavy weapons with some effect (partly because
soldiers trained in their use defected). They have even had a technical
advantage over the Soviets in one area—rifle accuracy and range.
Although the Lee-Enfield’s rate of fire is much slower than the AK–
47s, its accuracy and range makes it superior in the typical clash in
which only a few shots are exchanged.
Some of the most effective insurgent weapons—notably antitank
rockets and modern landmines—can only be obtained abroad. In addi-
tion, the gradual drying up of the Afghan Army as a source of weap-
ons—controls on weapons and ammunition seem to be tightening, and
desertions are slowing down as the army becomes smaller—has made
foreign sources more important even for small arms and ammunition.
Pakistan has been the major outside source of arms. The gun mar-
kets in tribal areas near the border have supplied weapons to both
Afghan and Pakistani tribesmen for decades. Most of the weapons

Afghanistan
made by the tribal gun makers are rifles and pistols, but they also
produce mortars and heavy machine guns in small quantities. Weapons
produced in foreign countries—including captured Soviet weapons
sold to gun dealers by insurgents—and weapons presumably stolen
from the Pakistani military and police are also available.
The insurgents have been supplied with arms by private Pakistanis
and Pakistani religious organizations, although the tribal gun markets
have apparently been the source of much of this equipment as well.
The Pakistani Government has furnished limited quantities of
ammunition, rifles, antitank rockets, and mines. Saudi Arabia and sev-
eral of the smaller Gulf oil producers have provided funds for purchas-
ing arms, although apparently not the arms themselves. Egypt has
also offered help to the insurgents, and some Egyptian-made weapons
reportedly are being used in Afghanistan. There are persistent, but
unconfirmed, reports of Chinese assistance, either directly or through
the Pakistani Government.
Some military supplies—most from stocks sold to Iran by the US—
have been supplied through Iran. Despite its announcements of support
for the insurgents, the role of the Iranian Government appears to be
slight. The weapons apparently are supplied primarily by religious
organizations.
Hundreds of passes are available to the insurgents to move weap-
ons into Afghanistan over the mountainous border with Pakistan. The
border with Iran and the western part of the Pakistani border are
largely inhospitable desert, most of it unpatrolled. The government
forces have firm control of only the few main border crossings, such
as the paved road from Iran to Herat, and the road through the Khyber
Pass. Soviet mining efforts along the border in Konarha province have
made cross-border movement there considerably more difficult, but so
far at least, most of the border remains virtually unpatrolled.
Within Afghanistan, military supplies move slowly, by animal or
man, over mountain trails, the same ones used before the war by
smugglers, or sometimes by bus or truck. The process can be slow—
insurgents in Vardak province report it takes two weeks to a month
to receive arms from Pakistan. Despite efforts to impede movement in
some provinces, government and Soviet forces do not seem to have
much success in interrupting insurgent arms shipments in the country.
Only rarely do government reports reflect the interception of an
arms shipment.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Annex A2
[2 pages not declassified]
Annex B3
Insurgency in Afghan Provinces
Badakshan
Government control of Badakshan, perhaps the most remote of
Afghanistan’s provinces, has always been tenuous, and the government
and the Soviets appear to control only the main road from Qonduz to
Feyzabad, the provincial capital, and the valley from Feyzabad south to
Jorm. Even this degree of control, however, represents an improvement
from the government position at the time of the Soviet invasion. The
government then controlled only Feyzabad, where the garrison was
surrounded and close to surrendering before Soviet troops came to
their relief in early February. A major clearing operation in June—
possibly the largest staged so far by the Soviets—extended control
beyond the Feyzabad area.
Konarha
At the time of the invasion, the government position in Konarha
was desperate. The few isolated posts it held were besieged and in
danger of falling. The major garrison in the province—at Asmar—had
defected in August after being besieged intermittently for six months.
The Nuristanis of the province resisted the government primarily out of
religious beliefs, although cultural differences with most other Afghans
probably made them even more resentful of control from Kabul than
most tribesmen.
Since that time, at least two major Soviet sweep operations in March
and May in the Konar Valley in the southern part of the province have
improved the situation. Asmar has been retaken, and the main villages
in the province are in danger from insurgents. In the main valley,
movement along roads is still hazardous but is at least possible for
armed government convoys. Although insurgent activity resumed
quickly after each Soviet sweep, the insurgents have not been able to
regain their complete control in the countryside. The more rugged and
2 Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
3 Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].

Afghanistan
less important northern part of the province has been untouched by
Soviet or government forces.
Laghman
Much of the fighting in Laghman province has been a spillover
from other provinces. For example, during the Soviet sweeps in the
Konar Valley, there were parallel operations by Afghan and Soviet
forces in Laghman. Although the government controls the provincial
capital and most main towns, the bulk of the province is in rebel
hands. Rebel fortunes have fluctuated there, depending on the degree
of government pressure. The main significance of the province has
been its use by the insurgents as both a base and a supply route for
operations in the Kabul area. The Alisang Valley has been particularly
important as a route for insurgents moving to the Panjshir Valley, from
which they can threaten important installations—the main road to the
USSR and Bagram air base—in the northern Kabul basin.
Parvan
The Soviets have been able to maintain control over the most impor-
tant areas of Parvan province—the northern part of the Kabul basin
and the Salang tunnel on the road from Kabul to the USSR. The insur-
gents have failed to block or destroy the tunnel, the most vulnerable
part of the Soviet supply line, and their attacks on Bagram air base as
well as mutinies by Afghan airmen there have not seriously interfered
with Soviet operations.
Elsewhere in the province, the insurgents have more than held
their own. According to one Afghan official, they control nine of the
province’s 10 districts. Several Afghan and Soviet efforts to clear the
road running west into Bamian province have brought no lasting bene-
fits. Attempts to eliminate the threat to the Kabul basin posed by
insurgents at the Panjshir Valley in the eastern part of the province
have been unsuccessful. In April, [less than 1 line not declassified] the
insurgents—perhaps for the only time since the invasion—were able
to force Soviet troops to retreat.
Kabul
Insurgents have been active in the mountains around the Kabul
basin, but the basin itself has been under firm control of Soviet and
government forces. Clearing operations in the mountains in June
seemed to have removed the threat of an insurgent attack on the
nation’s capital, if any such threat ever existed. The Soviets may have
reacted quickly and forcefully because they feared that increased raids
from the mountains would inspire new outbreaks in the city.
The capital was fairly calm before the Soviet invasion, although
the first stages of an insurgent assassination campaign had already

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
begun a few weeks earlier. Since December, assassinations have become
commonplace, some estimate 10 to 15 every day, and there have been
a number of significant civil disturbances. The most serious was a six-
day general strike in late February which involved serious rioting and
forced the Soviets to move troops into the city. Student demonstrations
in May and June were less serious, and the Soviets left most of the
responsibility for putting them down to Afghan police and soldiers.
Adding to the unsettled conditions in the city is the fighting between
the two factions of the ruling party, and a fair proportion of the incidents
are probably attributable to their feuding, rather than to the insurgents.
Vardak
Except for a few main towns and the Kabul-Qandahar road, almost
all of Vardak province is under control of the insurgents. Soviet opera-
tions there seem to be increasing, probably both to ensure control of
the road and to weaken the threat to Kabul. Insurgents from the prov-
ince almost certainly were involved in the fighting around Kabul in
June.
In February, the US Embassy acquired far more detailed informa-
tion about the insurgency in Vardak than has been available for any
other province. Insurgent leaders—calling themselves governors—
were in complete control there; the population supported the fight
against the Soviets as a holy war. The Soviet invasion had ended the
longstanding rivalry between the Hazaras in the west and the Pathans
in the east. There was, however, apparently little thought of cooperation
with insurgents elsewhere in the country, despite a belief that all
Afghans would rise and drive out the invaders. Arms and ammunition
were obtained from Pakistan by Vardakis dispatched to the tribal gun
markets. Afghan exile organizations evidently did little more than act
as middlemen in the sales.
Lowgar
Insurgents in Lowgar province have been able to block roads there,
and have probably contributed to forces operating in Kabul province.
Aside from some road clearing operations—designed to keep open
communications with Gardez in Paktia province—there has been little
significant fighting there.
Nangarhar
Prior to the Soviet invasion, insurgency in Nangarhar was limited
primarily to the northern and southern fringes of the province, where
fighting in Konar, Laghman, and Paktia provinces spilled over. The
situation was growing more critical late last year, however, with insur-
gents for the first time able to block traffic on the road from Kabul to
the Khyber Pass for extended periods. (The main insurgent activity

Afghanistan
against the road, however, was near Sarubi in eastern Kabul province.)
Conditions in Jalalabad had also begun deteriorating, and part of the
Jalalabad garrison mutinied in October 1979. Nevertheless, Nangarhar
was the most peaceful of the provinces along Afghanistan’s eastern
border and the scene of one of the few unqualified Afghan Army
successes, the defeat of a large band of Pathan Mohmand tribesmen
who had invaded the province from Pakistan in June 1979.
The Soviet invasion brought a major increase in insurgency both
in Jalalabad and in the countryside. Jalalabad airport was attacked
several times, the city was unsafe for Soviet or Afghan soldiers for
weeks at a time, and rural insurgents seized control from government
officials in most districts. The Soviets stationed troops permanently on
the outskirts of Jalalabad to keep the main road to Pakistan open, to
assist Afghan troops in rural districts, and to support operations in the
Konar Valley. Insurgents have been driven from some districts, and
the road is now usually open. Government authority in Jalalabad city
has increased, but unrest in the province is greater than before the
Soviet invasion.
Paktia4
The first resistance to the Marxists broke out among the Mangal
tribe in eastern Paktia province within a week of the coup in April
1978. Fighting quickly spread, and prior to the Soviet invasion, the
government’s counterinsurgency problems were more serious in Paktia
than in any other province except Konarha. Control was limited to a few
garrisons. In October 1979, Afghan troops—apparently commanded
by Soviet officers—staged the only major Afghan offensive of the war.
Although Afghan units reached their geographic objectives, they estab-
lished no permanent control. Within days the insurgents were once
again in control of most of the province, and government forces were
besieged in a few isolated posts. Some analysts have argued that the
failure of this offensive was one factor in Moscow’s decision that
Afghanistan could be saved only by Soviet troops.
Since the invasion, there has been little military activity in the
province. Government garrisons are isolated and seem to do their best
to avoid actions likely to bring an insurgent response. In June, however,
there was a significant Soviet incursion into the province, probably in
battalion strength, in an apparent effort to open roads to the main
garrisons. The Pathans responded by ambushing Soviet columns at
4 Since the Communist takeover, there have been changes in provincial boundaries,
the most important of which was the formation of Paktika province from parts of Paktia
and Ghazni provinces. To avoid confusion, the pre-Communist provincial boundaries
have been used throughout this paper. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
several places and inflicting some casualties. Since then, the province
has remained fairly calm.
Ghazni
The Pathans of Ghazni province did not become a serious problem
for the government until the spring of 1979, but by late that year
the city of Ghazni was besieged, and several smaller garrisons in the
southern part of the province were forced to surrender or defect. The
insurgents were able to block the main road from Qandahar to Kabul
at will; some government officials traveling on the road did so only
after buying passes from insurgent representatives.
Since the invasion, the Soviets have staged two major clearing
operations in the province aimed primarily at securing the road. The
first was in April and May, and the second is still under way. The
first, according to Afghan exiles, inflicted severe casualties on innocent
villagers in the southern part of the province. The current operation,
both larger and with a larger proportion of Soviet troops, began in
mid-July, and its initial stages were apparently complicated by a mutiny
in the Afghan garrison at Ghazni. The Soviets have been able to keep
the road open for convoys most of the time, and there has been no
serious insurgent threat to Ghazni city since the invasion.
Zabol
The Soviets have made little effort to deal with insurgency in most
of Zabol province and have left most of the responsibility for keeping
the Kabul-Qandahar road open to Afghan forces. As a result, insurgents
control most of the province and have been able to block the road in
the Qalat area repeatedly.
Qandahar
Insurgency in rural Qandahar has been less serious for the Soviets
than unrest in the provincial capital, the country’s second largest city.
For much of the time since the invasion, the city has been unsafe
for government officials and has been virtually under control of the
insurgents, especially after dark. At least twice, despite Soviet reluc-
tance to engage in urban fighting, Soviet troops have been sent in
to restore some semblance of government control. Elsewhere in the
province insurgency has been greatest along the Pakistani border north
of Spin Baldak and along the border with Oruzgun province. The
government has tended to ignore the desolate southern part of the
province.
Bamian, Oruzgun, and Ghowr
Bamian, Oruzgun, and Ghowr provinces in central Afghanistan
are inhabited largely by Hazaras, a Mongolian Shiah minority long the

Afghanistan
object of discrimination on both ethnic and religious grounds. The area
originally fell to the insurgents almost by default. The Afghan military,
concentrating on Pathan insurgency in the east, could spare few troops
to hold the Hazara area, and since the summer of 1978, all of the area
except for the main towns has been in insurgent hands. Government
operations were largely confined to the relief of threatened posts and
a few half-hearted efforts that opened the road between Kabul and
Herat for only brief periods.
There has been little change since the invasion. The Hazaras have
kept up pressure on government forces. For their part, the Soviets have
left the area primarily to the Afghan Army. Their one major incursion
into the area, a multibattalion offensive in late April, may have been
designed partly to demonstrate that the Soviets could move into the
area. Within a few days after the end of the clearing operation, the
Hazaras appear to have regained all they held previously.
Despite their control of the countryside, the Hazaras have been
unable to take major towns. Tarin Kowt in Oruzgun has been under
pressure for well over a year, Chaghcharan has been isolated as long,
and insurgents have penetrated Bamian’s defenses, but none of the
three provincial capitals has been taken and held.
The motivation of the Hazaras in fighting the government and the
Soviets is somewhat different than that of other Afghans. It results
in part from past discrimination, and from their resentment of the
dominance of the Marxist governments (as well as all their predeces-
sors) by Sunni Pathans. The Hazaras also have probably been inspired
and influenced more by the Iranian revolution than other Afghans,
apparently gaining renewed pride in their Shiism. Iran has, however,
been an inspiration to Sunni Afghans, too; pictures of Ayatollah Kho-
meini have been posted in Sunni cities such as Qonduz. Hazara resent-
ments have played a part in urban unrest in Kabul, where Hazaras
have been in the forefront of anti-government activity.
Baghlan
In Baghlan province the insurgents have staged sporadic attacks
against Soviet convoys and, despite Soviet clearing operations, they
control the relatively unimportant eastern part of the province. The
Soviets, nevertheless, have been able to keep the main road open—
their major objective in the province—to control all major towns, and
to establish a major logistic base at the important crossroad at Pol-
e-Khomri.
Takar
Takar province was not a serious problem for the government prior
to the Soviet invasion, but insurgency has increased there since. In

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
late June, the provincial governor reported that most districts were
in insurgent hands and that an attack on the provincial capital was
imminent. Judging by military operations there, the situation has not
been quite so critical recently—the Soviets have been able to rely largely
on Afghan troops—and insurgency is strongest in the remote southern
part of the province.
Qonduz
There was only minor insurgency in Qonduz province before the
Soviet invasion, but since then it has been a serious problem for the
Soviets. Although the province is important because it contains the
major river port at Shir Khan on the Soviet-Afghan border and the
road south toward Kabul, the Soviets initially left security there to
Afghan forces. By March, insurgents had taken control of most of
the countryside, and urban dissidents were in virtual control of the
provincial capital. In April Soviet troops moved into the capital, con-
ducted clearing operations in the province, and restored some sem-
blance of order. Insurgency, nevertheless, is at a considerably higher
level than before last December. At no time does there appear to have
been a threat to Shir Khan.
Samangan
Samangan was one of the country’s quieter provinces before the
Soviet invasion. By June, faced with weak Afghan forces, the insurgents
were strong enough to attack the provincial capital twice in a single
day. Insurgent control appears to be strongest in the south, in part
because of the presence of Hazaras from neighboring Bamian.
Balkh
Balkh has been among the quietest of Afghanistan’s provinces
despite sporadic dissidence, especially in the southern part of the prov-
ince. There have been assassinations, strikes, and sabotage in Mazar-
i-Sharif, the provincial capital and the country’s fourth largest city, but
much less unrest than in Kabul, Herat, or Qandahar.
Jowzjan
In Jowzjan, like most of the northern provinces, the most serious
insurgency has been in the south. The weakness of government forces,
however, has allowed the insurgents to gain control of much of the
province and on occasion threaten the provincial capital.
Faryab
The situation is much the same in Faryab, where the government’s
main military concerns have been with insurgency along the southern
part of its border with Jowzjan province, and the threat from insurgents
in Badghisat.

Afghanistan
Badghisat
A sudden burst of insurgency in Badghisat province in March 1979
caught the small government forces off guard. Since then the insurgents
have controlled much of the province, but not the major towns. They
apparently tried to advance on Meymaneh, in Faryab province, but
troops rushed from Mazar-i-Sharif stopped them near the provincial
border. A Soviet clearing operation in July 1980 appears to have won
some ground for the government, but the gain may be only temporary.
Herat
In March 1979, the city of Herat was the scene of the first major
urban uprising against the Afghan Marxists. Crowds using tactics pat-
terned after those that brought down the Shah were joined by part of
the local Afghan Army garrison. Although the rising was suppressed
in a few days, calm never returned completely to the city. Following the
Soviet invasion, it was reduced to anarchy by strikes, demonstrations,
assassinations, and armed clashes. Soviet troops have held important
installations there, such as the airport, but have moved into the city only
on a few occasions to prevent insurgents from gaining complete control.
Insurgency has been less a problem in the remainder of the prov-
ince. Small bands—some operating from Iranian territory—have
clashed with government forces, sometimes taking isolated posts, but
Afghan forces, with only some help from the Soviets, have prevented
significant insurgent success.
Farah
The Soviets have established a major military base at Shindand air
base, and have some degree of control in the central part of the province.
Nevertheless, insurgent attacks on convoys on the Herat-Qandahar
road have become so serious that most Afghan truckers refuse to use
it. Soviet control is more tenuous along the Iranian border, and Soviet
clearing operations in the eastern part of the province have met
strong resistance.
Nimruz
Sparsely settled Nimruz experienced almost no insurgency before
the Soviet invasion, but in March the insurgents—opposed mainly by
demoralized police—gained control of most of the countryside and
almost seized the provincial capital. The dispatch of a few companies
of Afghan troops and a smaller number of Soviets prevented further
insurgent gains. The Soviets apparently are planning a more ambitious
clearing operation, but it is unlikely they consider the province impor-
tant enough to spare enough troops to do more than relieve pressure
on a few posts.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Helmand
The settled farmers along the Heland river have engaged in little
antigovernment activity. Although they are Pathans, their tribal martial
tradition is much weaker than among mountain dwellers. Because they
depend on government irrigation projects—largely funded by the US—
they are among the few Afghans who regard the central government
as a benefactor instead of an enemy. Since the Soviet invasion, attacks
on government installations have increased, the government has lost
control of many of the non-riverine districts, and local officials fear
that the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, may be attacked.
Annex C5
Afghan Exile Organizations
There are dozens of Afghan exile organizations, most of them based
in Pakistan, some in Iran, and the rest scattered throughout the world
(the US, Western Europe, Egypt, India). Apart from those in Pakistan
and Iran, they have a very limited impact on the insurgency.
Pakistan-Based Organizations
Islamic Alliance for the Liberation of Afghanistan (IALA). This umbrella
organization was formed by the six most important exile groups in
Peshawar in January 1980 to enable the exile groups to present a united
front at the special Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference held in Islama-
bad in late January. It also hoped to encourage aid from Muslim coun-
tries that objected to the fragmentation of the insurgent movement.
One group, the Islamic Party, left the Alliance while it was being
established. The IALA is headed by Abdul Rasoul Saif, who was appar-
ently chosen because he posed no threat to the ambitions of the leaders
of the five remaining member organizations.
—The Afghan Islamic League (Jamiat-Islami-Afghani). The League is
headed by Burhanuddin Rabbani, a former professor at Kabul Univer-
sity. The organization reportedly receives financial support from a
small, conservative political party in Pakistan and is closer to the
Afghan National Liberation Front than to the other members of the
Alliance. Rabbani’s group reportedly has a military arm, but its capabil-
ity is unknown.
—The Afghan National Liberation Front (Jabhe-i-Negat-i-Melli). The
group’s leader, Sebqatullah Mojededi, is a member of an important
religious family that has a following in Kabul and other urban centers
5 Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].

Afghanistan
of eastern Afghanistan. An Islamic scholar, Mojededi reportedly has
good contacts in Saudi Arabia and Libya. He claims to represent the
Front’s “real” leader, Prince Abdul Wali, cousin and son-in-law of King
Zahir, currently in exile in Rome. Abdul Wali’s insurgent activities,
however, are centered in Western Europe.
—The Afghan Islamic and National Revolutionary Council (Surah-i-
Melli-Inqilabi-Islami-Afghanistan), also known as the National Islamic
Front of Afghanistan. It is headed by Sayed Ahmed Gailani, an impor-
tant religious leader who traces his family from the prophet. He claims
to have a large following in the eastern provinces. Although he is
probably the exile Muslim leader with the most modern outlook, Gai-
lani’s political strength is based on his religious following.
—The Islamic Party (Hezbi Islami—Khalis Faction) is a splinter
group of Hekmatyar’s organization (see below). Its tough, combative
leader, Younis Khalis, is reported to be admired by other exile leaders
for his courage in leading his band in cross-border operations into
Afghanistan. Conservative and reputedly without political ambitions,
he has prodded other groups to become more involved in the fighting
in Afghanistan.
—Movement of the Islamic Revolution of Afghanistan (Harakat-i-Inqi-
labi-Islami-Afghanistan), led by Maulana Mohammad Nabi Moham-
medi, a mullah, from the Khowst area of Paktia province. Mohammedi’s
base of operations is at Miram Shah in North Waziristan. The other
members of the Alliance have their headquarters in Peshawar.
The Islamic Party (Hezbe Islami), led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar,
broke away from the IALA soon after its formation. Hekmatyar is
fiercely ambitious and independent and has been conducting guerrilla
operations, with the aid of the Pakistan Government, since before the
Marxist revolution in 1978. One report alleges that he has 15,000 guerril-
las in Afghanistan. This is probably an exaggeration, but the Islamic
Party is one of the best organized and most active exile organizations.
Hekmatyar’s group has its roots in the area between Ghazni and Qanda-
har, and it is active there as well as in the Kabul area and in the eastern
provinces bordering Pakistan. The Islamic Party has an office in Tehran,
as well as its main office in Peshawar. Hekmatyar rejects the monarchy
and is reportedly impressed by the fundamentalist revolution in Iran.
The Revolutionary Council, established by the Afghan Loya Jirgah
(Grand Assembly) that met in May in Peshawar prior to another Islamic
Foreign Ministers Conference, is the closest Afghan equivalent to a
government-in-exile. For centuries, the Jirgah has been convened by
rulers to legitimize their political authority. The group that met in
Pakistan in May claimed to represent all parts of the country, although
it most likely did not. In late July Hassan Gailani, nephew of Sayed
Ahmed Gailani, was appointed President of the Council, indicating
that it will probably become little more than an arm of the IALA.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Iran-Based Organizations
The Islamic Revolution Liberation Front of Afghanistan (Jabhe-Azadi-
bakshi-Inqilabi-Islami-Afghanistan), led by Sheikh Mohammed Asif
Mohsini. At the Islamic Foreign Ministers conference in Islamabad in
May, Iran’s Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh included Mohsini (as well
as five leaders from the IALA) in the Iranian delegation. Mohsini’s
front is a grouping of some 10 smaller bands, primarily Hazaras, that
operate in the central provinces of the country. Some of the Front’s
groups may also belong to one of the two Hazara umbrella organiza-
tions, the National United Front of Afghanistan (Jabhe-Mujahed-Melli-
Afghanistan) and the United Front of Freedom Fighters in Afghanistan
(Jabhe-Mobarazin-i-Mujahed-Afghanistan), which together subsume
some 15 insurgent bands, operating in the central and northern
provinces.
Thunder (Radh) is led by Sheikh Zadeh, based in Qom. It is a
revolutionary organization comprising Hazaras operating in the moun-
tains of central Afghanistan. It probably has ties with other Hazara
organizations.
310.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
8306. Subject: (S) Chemical Warfare Allegations in Afghanistan:
Need for Reflection? Ref: State 220611.2
1. (S) Entire text.
2. I do not wish to appear the Cassandra on this issue, but I would
like to introduce a note of caution into our planning to exploit allega-
tions of Soviet use of chemical warfare agents in Afghanistan, as illus-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
was received in the White House Situation Room.
the posts that the United States, working in concert with both allies and non-aligned
countries, was interested in co-sponsoring a resolution on chemical warfare at the upcom-
ing UN General Assembly meeting. The telegram directed the recipients to explore this
proposal with their counterparts. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
[no film number]) For an overview of UN activity relating to the control of chemical

Afghanistan
trated in reftel. I would like nothing better than to be able to see the
Soviets nailed on this matter in a way which would not only condemn
them for their use of chemical weapons but dramatize their butchery
of Afghans/Muslims in Afghanistan. But we must be sure of our
ground lest our planned campaign backfire and discredit other activi-
ties aimed at keeping Soviet aggression in Afghanistan prominently
before the conscience of the world.
3. Thus, although we were not asked for comment by reftel, I would
like to offer the following thoughts:
—Reports of the use of chemical agents in Afghanistan have never
been conclusive, at least those we have seen. Our own sourcing and
that of our Consul in Peshawar has never been direct or first-hand; we
have relied heavily on the nearly identical accounts by refugees who
have come across the border from different places, all of which point
to some sort of canisters dropped by Soviet aircraft and the emission
from those canisters of some gas or cloud which appears to debilitate
those in the area for several hours. Deaths, if any, seem an accidental
by-product for those too close to the source of the emission, and thus
far we have no hard evidence of burning or other longer-term effects.
—We have had no such reports recently, i.e., in the last two months;
moreover, our efforts to obtain a canister have borne no fruit.
—We have proposed to the GOP the despatch of a team of medical
specialists whose efforts will be directed at attempting to document
such use of chemical agents by the Soviets; that documentation effort,
if successful, is not likely to be available for some time.
4. I have also some concern that the Pakistan Representative in
Geneva may not fully reflect the position of his government on Paki-
stan’s willingness to play a prominent role in international forums on
the chemical warfare issue or be willing to co-sponsor resolutions in
the UNGA or elsewhere on this subject. I would feel somewhat more
confident were I to be instructed to approach the Foreign Ministry here
for general review of this subject before we seek active Pak cooperation.
5. Given the lack of conclusive evidence, at least in the public
domain, I think we (and the Government of Pakistan) should reflect
hard about how wise it is to push this subject so that we do not, by
the deficiencies of our public case on chemical warfare in Afghanistan,
undermine the more persuasive case we have on aggression, brutalties,
and atrocities perpetrated by the Soviets during their Afghan
adventure.
6. Dept please pass Geneva, USUN, Kabul and Moscow.
Hummel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
311.
Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko to Secretary of
State Muskie1
Moscow, August 25, 1980
Distinguished Mr. Secretary,
I accquainted myself with your letter of August 5, in which You
again return to the questions concerning Afghanistan.2
Let me be frank, the way You are posing these questions can not
but elicit puzzlement. For instance, what is the reason for the persistant
attempt of the American side to cast doubt on the fact of withdrawal
from Afghanistan of certain Soviet units? It is clear after all, that such
ignoring of facts not only serves no constructive purpose but voids the
dialogue of any sense altogether.
Nor can in any way the progress in the political settlement of the
situation around Afghanistan be facilitated by the persistently repeated
assertion that “central factor” of the settlement is the question of
complete withdrawal of Soviet forces.
What, indeed, is and continues to be the central question is the
question of cessation and guaranteed non-resumption of military incur-
sions from outside into the territory of Afghanistan and, generally, of
all forms of interference in its internal affairs. It is in this context, as
has been stated by us on more than one occasion, the solution of the
question of withdrawal of the Soviet military contingent from Afghani-
stan can be achieved. In other words, this question is of a derivative
and not of a principal nature at all. For the Soviet troops to be with-
drawn from Afghanistan the reason which induced the DRA Govern-
ment to ask the Soviet Union for military assistance must be eliminated.
There have been and can be no changes in our position in this respect.
A specific program of political settlement which, if realized, would
lead to normalization of relations between Afghanistan and its neigh-
bors as well as to solution of other pertinent questions, was, with
utmost clarity, spelled out in the known statement of the DRA Govern-
to that program.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
classification marking. Text of the letter was transmitted in telegram 228778 to Moscow,
2 See Document 307.
3 See Document 270.

Afghanistan
This is, Mr. Secretary, what I would like to tell You in regard to
Afghanistan.
[Omitted here is a portion of the letter unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Sincerely,
A. Gromyko4
4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
312.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[memorandum number not declassified]
Washington, August 1980
Soviet-Afghan Incursions Into Pakistan
([classification marking not declassified])
Summary
Moscow is able to launch small-scale air and ground incursions
into Pakistan at any time, but this does not appear to be Soviet policy
at present. Since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in late December,
two ground incursions and 14 air incursions have been confirmed, only
one of which appeared to be deliberate. Moreover, high-level Soviet
authorities have expressed concern about some of the confirmed inci-
dents and as late as mid-May were investigating them. In fact, the
Soviet presence appears to have reduced the number of air and ground
incursions into Pakistan to below the number allegedly made by
Afghan forces before the invasion. ([classification marking, codeword, and
handling restriction not declassified])
Pakistani officials, however, believe that at least some of the inci-
dents were staged by the Soviets to put pressure on Islamabad. On 3
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
Incursions Into Pakistan. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. A
typed statement on the first page reads in part: “This memorandum was prepared by
[less than 1 line not declassified] of the NFAC Southwest Asia Analytic Center, Office of
Political Analysis. It was coordinated with the Directorate for Operations, the Office of
Strategic Research, and the National Intelligence Officers for the USSR, and the Near East
and South Asia. Information available as of 29 August 1980 was used in its preparation.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
March, they made strong diplomatic and public protests following an
air violation in which a Soviet aircraft apparently penetrated some 20
to 40 kilometers into Pakistan. Subsequently, in mid-May, Pakistani
personnel reportedly fired on intruding aircraft and on Soviet-Afghan
forces in confirmed ground incursions. Pakistan has steadily but dis-
creetly increased its military readiness opposite Afghanistan in hopes
of deterring more serious Soviet and Afghan incursions. ([classification
marking and handling restriction not declassified])
The Soviets probably will increase their efforts to seal the Pakistani
border on the Afghan side rather than alter their policy of restraint. If
this fails, the Soviets may authorize a campaign of sustained small-
scale air penetrations or border incursions to force Pakistan to stop
supporting the insurgents. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
Pakistani authorities expect a Soviet-Afghan ground incursion; a
few believe it might occur as early as this fall. Pakistan’s efforts to
reinforce the Afghan border will probably continue but may be compli-
cated by a shortage of military equipment and by substantial high-
level Army resistance to redeployments that would weaken Pakistani
defenses on the Indian border. ([classification marking and handling
restriction not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]
313.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, August 30, 1980
USSR-PAKISTAN: Increased Soviet Pressure
Moscow appears to be increasing its diplomatic and propaganda pressure
on Pakistan. ([classification marking not declassified])
In his speech yesterday, President Brezhnev again accused Pakistan
of allowing itself to be used as the principal channel of support for
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
restriction not declassified].

Afghanistan
Afghan “counterrevolutionaries.”2 Soviet media in recent days have
sought to heighten Islamabad’s fears of Soviet meddling in Pakistani
internal affairs by emphasizing the alleged widespread domestic op-
position to President Zia’s Afghan policy. ([classification marking not
declassified])
[less than 1 line not declassified] Soviet threats against Pakistan, often
via third parties, also have resumed. [6 lines, classification marking, code-
word, and handling restriction not declassified]
Moscow’s increased pressure on Islamabad may stem from a belief
that the Pakistanis are increasing their support to the Afghan insur-
gency. In recent months, the insurgents appear to have received heavier
weapons and to be using them with greater effectiveness. Moscow
could also be reacting to the Pakistani crackdown on Soviet diplomatic
and propaganda activity inside Pakistan and could be seeking to dis-
suade Pakistan from taking the lead in condemning the USSR at forth-
coming UN and Islamic Conference meetings. ([classification marking
not declassified])
The new Soviet Ambassador in Islamabad reportedly has been
instructed to inform the Pakistanis that Moscow will provide substan-
tial economic and military assistance to Pakistan and will encourage
Afghanistan to recognize the disputed Pakistani-Afghan border if Zia
will negotiate with the regime in Kabul. ([classification marking, codeword,
and handling restriction not declassified])
2 In his speech at Alma-Ata on August 29, Brezhnev gave an overview of world
affairs. Concerning Afghanistan, he affirmed Soviet readiness to negotiate a political
settlement. (Anthony Austin, “Brezhnev Urges U.S. to Aid Normalization,” New York

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
314.
Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1
Report No. 1453
Washington, September 8, 1980
(U) CHINESE AND US OBJECTIVES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA
Summary
(C) China and the US have some common objectives in Southwest
Asia, the most important of which is coordination of international
efforts to oppose Soviet actions in Afghanistan and prevent further
destabilization of the area. During recent months Beijing has consulted
extensively with Washington on the Southwest Asian situation, and
Washington has expressed support for certain Chinese policies. The
US has agreed, for example, that the Chinese should encourage Pakistan
and Iran to coordinate their efforts to oppose the Soviet presence in
Afghanistan. It has also agreed with Beijing’s attempts to improve ties
with New Delhi and advise Southwest Asian states to compose their
differences and move toward regional security cooperation.
(S) But China displays a considerably more confrontationist style
toward the Soviet Union than does the United States. Beijing has
pressed the US in recent months to adopt policies, such as security
guarantees to Pakistan and military support to the Afghan resistance,
that Washington considers unwise. Other differences are evident
between Chinese and US policy perspectives. For example, Beijing has
made clear that its confidence in US perceptiveness and resolve is low
and that China fears that US action in Iran, or inaction in Afghanistan,
will encourage Soviet aggression.
(S) Thus, despite China’s statements that it is willing to take parallel
actions in Southwest Asia when Sino-US views are identical, as a practi-
cal matter it has been careful to avoid too close an identification with
even those US policies it fully supports.
(C) The US has preferred to pursue Sino-US cooperation in the
form of agreements and mutual consultation rather than by joint action.
Indeed, owing to differing views of the Soviet Union and to China’s
emergence as a regional power, the confluence of Chinese and Ameri-
can objectives in Southwest Asia could prove to be a temporary
phenomenon.
[Omitted here is the body of the report.]
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Subject Files,
als: Not Releasable to Contractors or Contractor Consultants; Dissemination and Extrac-
tion of Information Controlled by Originator; [additional handling restriction not declassified].
Drafted by Lillian Harris (INR) and approved by Carol Baumann (INR).

Afghanistan
315.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
Alexander Bessmertnykh, Minister-Counselor, Soviet Embassy
Marshall Brement, NSC Staff Member
The Elections. After some mutual comparison of recent vacation
travels—his in the Baltic and mine in California and Arizona—the
conversation turned to the current campaign. As far as the USSR was
concerned, it made little difference who won in November, Bessmert-
nykh said. When I expressed surprise at this statement, given Governor
Reagan’s position on the Soviet Union and on a whole range of security
issues, Bessmertnykh conceded that the President was logically the
preferable candidate for Moscow because of his approach to arms
control questions. “Reagan directly opposes SALT, Carter does not,”
Bessmertnykh said. But as seen from Moscow the difference between
the two candidates on defense matters is unimportant. Soviet defense
analysts feel that the Carter Administration has done as much as any
American government can do to increase defense expenditures and
strongly doubt that Reagan would allocate more for defense over the
next two fiscal years than Carter has, Bessmertynkh said, and particu-
larly if he cuts taxes. (C)
It is true, Bessmertynkh continued, that a sober and straightforward
comparison of the positions which the two candidates have adopted
would seem to make Carter preferable for us. But speaking entirely
informally and off the record, it is simply a fact that the President is
viscerally disliked in Moscow and that this dislike is widely shared
both by the general Soviet public and by official circles. There were
two recent events that strongly influenced this Soviet attitude. The first
was the decision to try and implement a world-wide boycott of the
Olympics. This was very bad, and it was deeply resented because it
was not seen as a serious way for the superpowers to do business. In
fact, it engendered a feeling of national resentment within the Soviet
populace, who were then extremely gratified at the great success of
the Olympics. The other matter which was a subject of great irritation
within the USSR was the President’s statement that Brezhnev had lied
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to him over the hot line.2 It received attention at high levels. It was only
after this that the Soviet media was allowed to portray the President
any way it chose. (C)
This was extremely shortsighted, I replied, and was not appropriate
behavior for a great power. I have been reading the Soviet press for
twenty years and I had never seen Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson,
Nixon, or Ford castigated in such terms as the Soviet press has adopted
toward the President. This was foolish not only because of the umbrage
which American officials feel when we read such distortions, but in
terms of the effect which such tendentious reporting can have within
the USSR itself. I find it really deplorable, I said. (C)
Bessmertnykh answered that he entirely agreed with me. Within
his memory he also had never seen anything like it. It was unnecessary
and gratuitous and he had personally complained about it to Moscow,
characterizing it as an unwise policy. But once Soviet journalists are
given their head in a matter like this, they can really go to extremes.
And the constant barbs and pricking points which have been directed
at the USSR since this administration took over have had their effect,
he added. (C)
I asked whether the Soviet Embassy keeps in touch with Reagan’s
foreign policy advisers. They had made no attempt to do so, Bessmert-
nykh replied, although a Soviet diplomat had attended Richard Allen’s
briefing for the diplomatic corps. The point of the briefing, according
to Bessmertnykh, was to reassure foreign diplomats that the Reagan
administration would adopt a responsible course of action in world
affairs. In any case, the Soviet embassy had been in contact with a
great many Republicans during previous administrations and was sure
that such acquaintanceships could be renewed in short order. US-Soviet
relations are the most important elements of international relations,
Bessmertnykh said, and the Soviets were confident that they could work
with any American administration, no matter who was President. (C)
Afghanistan. Turning to Afghanistan, Bessmertnykh stressed that
the image being conveyed in the United States of the Soviets being
“mired” in a hopeless Vietnam-like mess in Afghanistan was totally
incorrect and very unfortunate. It leads to a widespread hope that
Soviet forces would soon be withdrawn and all talk of a Soviet with-
conference on April 13, Carter, noting several nations’ calls for Soviet troop withdrawal,
said: “We would support this effort. But the Soviets, contrary to the assurance given to
me by Brezhnev and given to, I know, at least, President Giscard by Brezhnev, have
not withdrawn their troops. In my judgement, they have no inclination to withdraw
their troops; they’ve shown no evidence of that.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book
I, p. 674)

Afghanistan
drawal is illusory, he said. It will simply not take place, except perhaps
in the very distant future. To base United States policy on the hope of
achieving a near term withdrawal was, to say the least, ill-advised.
Such a policy has the effect of freezing US-Soviet relations for the
indefinite future. Furthermore, the repeated insistence on a “transition”
period in various letters from Washington to Moscow on this subject
really raises hackles in the upper levels of the foreign ministry, includ-
ing Gromyko. By “transition” you obviously mean the replacement of
the Babrak Karmal government. But Babrak is stronger every day.
There is not the slightest chance of the Soviet Union abandoning him.
If you think otherwise, then the intelligence you are receiving is highly
suspect. (S)
Everything we receive, from whatever source—including various
statements made by the Kabul Regime itself—contradicts the assertion
that Babrak is growing stronger, I replied. Not only did he not seem
to be in control of the country, but his dominance of the Party was
very much in doubt. Our intelligence analysts believe that the Khalq
faction of the Party clearly outnumbered Babrak’s Parchamists. It was
therefore our assumption that if the Soviet Union withdrew its support,
Babrak would immediately be thrown out on his ear. In any case, it
seems apparent to us that Babrak entirely lacks a popular base, and
only has the support of a miniscule percentage of the population. (S)
People used to say the same thing about the Bolsheviks, Bessmert-
nykh rejoined. I am no expert in this area, but I can assure you that
the intelligence we receive is encouraging. We control a great deal
more of the countryside than your press would have you believe. It is
obvious to us that the United States will have to accept this sooner or
later. In order to achieve a resolution of the situation, you will have
to stop supporting rebel elements through some of your Muslim
friends. Once the rebels stop receiving outside assistance the problem
is resolved. During the Vietnam War the USSR adopted a wise policy
of initiating and continuing on with an era of detente no matter what
was taking place in Southeast Asia. (S)
The Soviet Union should recognize, I replied, that we are exercising
enormous restraint in Afghanistan. If the United States wished to
upgrade the equipment, the training, and the overall effectiveness of
the Muslim forces over what they are at present, it could do so easily.
As for the Vietnam War, it was the USSR which supplied the where-
withal for the Vietnamese to inflict enormous casualties, including
45,000 dead, on United States forces. It was therefore not the Soviet
Union which exercised restraint in carrying on with detente during
the Vietnam War, but rather the United States. (S)
In any case, in Afghanistan all we ask is that you accept reality
and not base policy on wishful thinking, said Bessmertnykh. There

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
may be those within the United States bureaucracy who argue that it
is in your interest to see the Soviets “mired down” in Afghanistan. We
had people like that in Moscow who made the same argument regard-
ing the United States during the Vietnam War. But the whole thrust
of our policy was nevertheless to end that war. We behaved as a
superpower should, Bessmertnykh said. You think that you will be
able to get these people to work together. But it cannot be done. We
had to deal with our own Basmachi rebellion, which lasted all through
the 20’s.3 These are the same people. One simply cannot trust them or
get them to work together. They will lie to you. They will take your
money and they will not keep a bargain. We know that. We could use
money to buy them out if we wanted to. But we do not intend to do
so because we have great experience with them and know they are
totally untrustworthy. We have told you repeatedly that our action in
Afghanistan is limited in time and in scope and that it is unrelated to
any other country or any other region. You should accept our state-
ments and work constructively to find a solution to the current impasse
between us. Afghanistan in no sense infringes on the interests of the
United States. (S)
What many observers, and not just those within the United States,
fear about the Soviet adventure in Afghanistan, I replied, is that if it
is successful, if it is regarded by the Soviet leadership, and the Soviet
military, and the Soviet foreign policy bureaucracy as having been a
great success, then it will inescapably become a precedent for the USSR
and an argument to encourage similar actions in other places. Several
Soviet officials have asserted in the context of Afghanistan that there
will be “no more Allendes.” Given the Soviet military buildup, the
marked increase in its ability to project its forces to distant places, and
the volatility of the world of the eighties, this type of irresponsible
statement must give any observer of the USSR pause. If Moscow could
contemplate taking the same kind of action in a place as far away as
Chile as it did in Afghanistan, then this will inevitably lead to the kind
of confrontation that neither of us desires. (S)
Soviet policy has been clearly enunciated, Bessmertnykh rejoined.
You should not place too much significance on isolated remarks taken
out of context. We realize, of course, that you have painted yourself
into a corner on Afghanistan and that it is very difficult for the Carter
Administration to take the kind of actions that will lead to a constructive
resolution of the problem of restoration of US-Soviet relations. This is
true for us as well. Nevertheless, we cannot remain isolated from each

Afghanistan
other forever, and if we cannot return to business-as-usual, then at
least let us return to business. (S)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
316.
Analysis Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research1
Washington, September 12, 1980
1. PAKISTAN: PRESIDENT ZIA STANDING FIRM ON
AFGHANISTAN
Pakistan, with a view toward the Islamic Foreign Ministers meeting
in New York, October 6–7, is searching for ways to retain the initiative
on the Afghan crisis. The three-man Islamic Conference Standing Com-
mittee (ICSC) is no longer a useful vehicle. Pakistan’s diplomatic activ-
ity has led the British to conclude that Zia may be wobbling, a view
we do not share. While Pakistan is deeply concerned about the degree
of support that Islamabad would receive if the Soviets pressed it both
militarily and diplomatically, Zia and Foreign Minister Shahi are not
prepared to abandon their goals of a broad-based regime in Kabul and
the withdrawal of Soviet troops.
Pakistan is focusing on action in the UN to keep pressure on the
Soviets to withdraw their troops. Islamabad feels compelled to come
up with feasible proposals since Pakistan, which inscribed the Afghan
issue on the agenda of the UN General Assembly, does not want an
“unreliable” nonaligned state (e.g., Cuba or India) to seize the initiative.
Current Pakistani thinking, as reflected in [less than 1 line not declas-
sified] seems to be that the best alternative to the now defunct ICSC is
a small international conference under UN aegis. This conference might
include the five permanent Security Council members, Afghanistan’s
regional neighbors, and representatives from the Karmal regime.
The Romanians, who have been trying to obtain agreement on
holding an international conference, told the Pakistanis that the Soviets
could accept the notion of such a meeting. Zia and Shahi believe that
Moscow has tacitly accepted this scheme.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
It is not clear, however, if the Soviets would go along with the
type of conference that the Pakistanis are advocating. The Soviet
Ambassador in Islamabad told the Pakistanis that his government
rejected the concept of an international conference; he reiterated the
initial Soviet opposition to the Islamic Conference resolution in May
proposing such a gathering. Among the objectives of the Pakistani
diplomatic delegation scheduled to arrive in Moscow this weekend
(and led by Foreign Secretary Piracha) is clarification of Soviet views.
317.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, September 15, 1980
AFGHANISTAN: THE MILITARY SITUATION
**In the 10 months since the invasion, combat between Soviet and insur-
gent forces in Afghanistan has increased considerably. Neither side probably
will be able to inflict any major military setback before the end of good
weather in late October. If insurgent claims of impending food shortages for
the resistance are accurate, the winter combat season could pose more problems
for them than for the Soviets.**
The Insurgents
**The information on the condition and morale of the insurgents is hard
to come by and our judgments are necessarily somewhat tentative.**
**Some Pakistani officials believe the insurgents may be losing their will
to resist, but this view is not shared by Zia and is not borne out by the
evidence available to us. To be sure, the insurgents are no better organized
than when the fighting began, and they are taking heavier casualties. But
there are also more of them, they have better weapons, and they have learned
how to use them. Moreover, they usually confront the Soviets only when they
enjoy the military advantage.**
*Government control in many of Afghanistan’s provincial cities is more
tenuous than before the invasion. US journalists who visited Herat in the
last week of August, for example, confirmed [1 line not declassified] that the
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 7, Afghanistan Crisis—September 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only.
The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The
article printed here was found in this form.

Afghanistan
city virtually belongs to the insurgents. Insurgent activity in or near Jalalabad,
Qandahar, and Ghazni has been intense, despite the government’s imposition
of martial law. Soviet forces have been used to blockade provincial towns but
security in the towns themselves has been left primarily to the Afghans, who
usually have failed at the task.**
The Afghan Army
[1½ lines not declassified] there have been roughly 30,000 Afghan Army
desertions or defections out of a preinvasion total of 80,000. Afghan Govern-
ment casualties since December reportedly have been only 1,800—at least a
third lower than our most conservative estimate of Soviet casualties. This
suggests that even those troops remaining have been reluctant to fight.**
**The Soviets are upgrading the Afghans’ equipment and have stepped
up political and military training, but improvement is likely to be slow. Last
month the Soviets reportedly were again forced to confiscate equipment—
particularly antitank and antiaircraft weapons—because too much of it was
falling into insurgent hands. Moscow has also had to scrap—for the time
being—plans to expand the Afghan Army. It is also reorganizing existing
divisions because of the dearth of Afghan manpower.**
The Soviets
**The decline in Afghan Army performance and the increase in insurgent
activity has forced the USSR to assume more and more of the burden of
counterinsurgency. Beginning last June, Soviet forces stepped up operations,
presumably hoping to bring the Afghan Government some surcease from
insurgent pressure.**
**The Soviets had not operated long in Afghanistan before they concluded
that their forces were inadequately organized, trained, and equipped for a
guerrilla conflict. [8 lines not declassified]
**Helicopters have been valuable. The number in use in Afghanistan has
quadrupled to some 240 since the invasion.*
**The insurgents initially were terrified of the helicopter gunships, but
in recent months they appear to have improved their tactics. In July they
reportedly shot down at least 14. The Soviets are improving the armor and
weaponry on the helicopters and are using flares to divert heat-seeking missiles.
[4 lines not declassified]
**Soviet efforts to curtail insurgent traffic have been concentrated along
the Pakistani border in the Konar Valley region. They have laid more than
60 minefields, established an acoustic sensor detection system, and conducted
two major and several minor sweep operations. Even so, insurgents in the
area still are quite active.**
**Since early August, Soviet units have been conducting their most sus-
tained effort to date to seal the Iranian-Afghan border near Herat and to
eliminate insurgent bands in northwestern Afghanistan. The forces appear to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
have run into more resistance than anticipated; three additional battalions
have been sent to the area since the operation began.**
**Other Soviet sweep operations are currently under way in the Panjshir
Valley northeast of Kabul and near Soviet garrisons in Ghazni, Jalalabad,
Feyzabad, Qandahar, and Qonduz.**
Prospects
**The last two winters in Afghanistan brought the government no relief
from insurgent pressures; in fact the insurgency grew steadily. The coming
winter probably will impair the activity of both sides. Soviet forces will confront
the insurgents with a kind of sustained military pressure not heretofore experi-
enced. This, coupled with possible food shortages, could ultimately affect the
insurgents’ ability to continue the struggle at its present level.**
318.
Editorial Note
On the morning of September 15, 1980, Soviet Army Private Alex-
andr V. Kruglov arrived at the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan apparently
requesting that the Embassy provide him asylum until he could depart
either for the United States or another country. At the time, no Russian-
speaking officials were on hand to communicate with Kruglov. During
a meeting in Washington later that day, Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs David Newsom told Soviet Ambassador Anatoliy
Dobrynin that the United States wanted to be responsive to the Kruglov
case, while at the same time it sought to ensure that the matter would
not “unduly aggravate U.S.-Soviet relations.” Newsom further noted
that the issue should be resolved under the auspices of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and that the United States
held the Soviet Union responsible for the overall security and safety
of the U.S. Embassy in Kabul. Newsom reported that the Soviet Ambas-
sador to Afghanistan, Fakriat Tabeev, and U.S. Chargé d’Affaires Haw-
thorne Mills were meeting in Kabul regarding the situation, and should
the Ambassador request a meeting with Kruglov, the United States
would be amenable under appropriate circumstances. Dobrynin
responded that he knew nothing of the Kruglov matter, but would
check in with Moscow. (Telegram 245452 to Kabul, September 15; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
On the evening of September 17, Newsom and Dobrynin met again
to discuss the Kruglov matter. Newsom asked Dobrynin to relay the

Afghanistan
request that the Soviet Union use its influence to compel the Afghan
Government to remove a blockade of the U.S. Embassy in Kabul, and
cease subjecting Embassy personnel entering and exiting the premises
to searches, in an apparent effort to ensure that Kruglov would not
leave surreptitiously. Dobrynin protested that this request should be
made directly to the Afghan Government. Newsom repeated his earlier
desire that this issue need not damage U.S.-Soviet relations, which in
his assessment were “already strained.” Newsom reported that once
a Russian-speaking U.S. officer arrived in Kabul it would be possible
to arrange a meeting between Kruglov and Soviet officials. (Telegram
248878 to Kabul, September 18; Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West, Brement, Subject
An item in the President’s Daily Brief, September 19, noted that [text
not declassified] either Soviet paratroopers or a Soviet-trained Afghan
counterterrorist group might attempt to shoot or capture Kruglov if
he was observed outside the U.S. Embassy. The CIA Station in Kabul
thought any military response would be limited to preventing Krug-
lov’s removal from Embassy grounds; Chargé Mills believed an assault
on the Embassy was unlikely because Kruglov was not “important
enough to warrant such a blatant violation of diplomatic immunity.”
(Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
gence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordi-
PDBs)
In preparation for the meeting between Kruglov and Soviet offi-
cials, the Department of State instructed the Embassy in Kabul that it
should “not lead Kruglov in any direction” and should remind him
that any decision he made was his alone. The Department further
instructed that a meeting should not take place if it was possible that
Kruglov would attempt to bargain for his safety in exchange for his
pledge not to reveal Soviet military secrets. Such a bargain was
“extremely dangerous not only to him but also to the future of the
Mission” because such a bargain would only “increase Soviet determi-
nation to get him back at all costs.” Should a meeting occur, Kruglov
should be made aware of his options: he could remain in the Embassy,
leave with the Soviet officials, or delay until he made his decision.
Kruglov should be permitted to leave with the Soviets, the Department
instructed, only if Embassy officials were convinced he was doing so
on his own accord and was willing to provide a handwritten statement
attesting to this fact. (Telegram 250588 to Kabul, September 20; National
On September 21, Kruglov met with Robert F. Ober, a senior Politi-
cal Counselor in the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, who had travelled to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Afghanistan to deal with the matter. Kruglov agreed to a meeting with
Soviet officials later that day. He agreed he would not attempt to make
a bargain for his safety in exchange for withholding military secrets,
and Ober assured him that U.S. insistence on this point was of benefit
to both Kruglov’s well-being and the security of the Embassy. Kruglov
shared that he was considering bargaining for Soviet assurance that
he would be allowed to emigrate from the USSR subsequent to serving
whatever sentence the authorities handed him. Ober counseled that
Kruglov should attempt to publicize whatever assurances he received
for his emigration to ensure they would be met following his sentence.
(Telegram 252721 to Moscow, September 21; Carter Library, National
Kruglov’s meeting with Soviet officials took place as scheduled,
September 21, in the U.S. Embassy in Kabul. The U.S. side was led
by Chargé Mills, and Ambassador Tabeev led the Soviet side. Before
Kruglov was brought in, the Soviets produced a tape recording of a
woman they claimed was Kruglov’s grandmother, as well as letters
from friends and relatives of Kruglov. Finding nothing objectionable,
Ober approved their presentation to Kruglov. When Kruglov was
brought in, Ambassador Tabeev addressed him: “We are surprised
by your actions. Please tell us what happened.” (Telegram 252736
to Moscow, September 21; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Kruglov responded: “What prompted me was the bad relations
between our officers and enlisted men. Before I came into the army I
was convinced by what I had read and seen on the television program
‘Serve the Soviet Union,’ that it would be a wonderful life. It all sounded
good. But it turned out to be difficult in fact. It is difficult for me to
discuss this, but I could tell you lots about the humiliations and indigni-
ties forced upon Soviet troops.” (Ibid.)
Noting that he too served in the military, Tabeev empathized with
Kruglov’s complaints and promised that he could return to the Soviet
Union and resume his academic studies without punishment, on the
basis that he had not actually deserted the army, nor had he sought
asylum. Tabeev further offered to personally correct abuses Kruglov
had suffered while serving in Afghanistan, and both Tabeev and Krug-
lov expressed their appreciation for the U.S. Embassy’s assistance in
allowing the meeting to occur. (Ibid.)
Upon reflection, Kruglov decided that he would leave with the
Soviet officials. Mills asked: “Was the decision made without pressure,
of your own free will?” Kruglov replied affirmatively and committed
his response to a handwritten statement. Following this exchange, Mills
asked Tabeev what could be done about the Afghan Government’s
blockade of the Embassy. Tabeev gave a “double guarantee” of his

Afghanistan
pledge to Kruglov and expressed his “hope that the blockade issue
would improve following a talk with his Afghan counterparts. (Ibid.)
In telegram 2670 from Kabul, September 23, the Embassy reported
that the Afghan Government’s barricades surrounding the Embassy
were “magically” removed less than an hour after Kruglov’s departure
on September 21, thus concluding the episode.(National Archives, RG
on Kruglov’s subsequent treatment by Soviet authorities were found.
319.
Telegram From Secretary of State Muskie’s Delegation to the
Department of State1
Secto 8020. Subject: (C) Muskie-Gromyko Bilateral.
1. C—Entire text.
2. The Secretary’s bilateral meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister
Gromyko in New York took place the morning of September 25 at the
Soviet Mission.2 Late that afternoon Ambassador Shulman provided a
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
Moscow, Canberra, Tokyo, Wellington, USNATO, USUN, Brussels, Copenhagen, Bonn,
London, Paris, Oslo, Reykjavik, Athens, Ankara, Ottawa, Rome, Luxembourg, The Hague,
and Lisbon. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
Muskie was in New York to attend the UN General Assembly meeting.
2 A summary memorandum of conversation of the meeting is printed in Foreign
sion with Gromyko, Muskie exchanged memoranda with Carter concerning a range of
issues affecting U.S.-Soviet relations. He wrote Carter, September 13, regarding Afghani-
stan: “I intend to emphasize the continuing damage the invasion is doing to the interna-
tional environment and to the prospects for relieving bilateral tensions. I will stress that
Moscow should be under no false illusions that we will be prepared to return to business
as usual as long as the occupation continues. I will review with Gromyko our exchange
of letters on Afghanistan, making clear that, for us, the central element in any satisfactory
settlement must be a complete Soviet withdrawal. I will nonetheless reiterate our contin-
ued preparedness to explore the possibilities for a peaceful settlement which takes into
account the legitimate concerns of all parties.” In the left margin of that memorandum,
Carter wrote: “Neutral—No dealing c¯ Babrak = transitional arrangements, ok.” (Depart-
ment of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensitive File, 1979–1983,
22, Brzezinski wrote: “The President would like you to register that our objective is a
neutral Afghanistan; that to achieve that end we would be prepared to consider some
‘transitional arrangements,’ designed to ensure stability as Soviet forces withdraw; and
that we cannot deal with the Babrak regime since it is a regime artificially maintained
by a foreign power.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
briefing at USUN for Allied Reps from NATO, ANZUS, and Japan.
(All were represented except the Turks, who were unable to attend
because of schedule conflicts.) Highlights of the briefing follow:
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Afghanistan
8. What Gromyko said was basically no different from his earlier
statements on Afghanistan. He expressed support for the May 14
Afghan proposals and stressed the importance of getting talks going
between Afghanistan and Pakistan and Iran.3 There was some uncer-
tainty as to whether he was still referring to two sets of bilateral talks
as previously, or whether he was suggesting tri-lateral negotiations.
He stated that, if an agreement proved possible between those three
countries and there were an end to outside interference and guarantees,
then and only then would there be a withdrawal of Soviet forces.
Gromyko also commented that large groups of invaders from outside
had been eliminated but that there were still small groups which were
infiltrating into Afghanistan and committing acts of terrorism.
9. Referring to possible UN initiative on Afghanistan, Gromyko
said he saw no need for an international conference. He said that if
Pakistan was willing to enter into direct negotiations with the Babrak
regime, he had the impression—while he could not speak for Afghani-
stan—that the Afghanis might be prepared to move in the disputed
border regions—thus implying a possible Afghanistan willingness to
recognize the Durand Line.
10. The Secretary made the appropriate responses. He pointed out
that, so long as Soviet troops remained in Afghanistan, the situation was
not only dangerous for the stability of the region but also contributed
to international tensions. It also made ratification of SALT II more
difficult.4
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Muskie
3 See Document 275.
4 A memorandum from Brement, September 26, called two items to Brzezinski’s
attention regarding the meeting. Brement was “struck” by Gromyko’s statement that
“large scale gangs no longer cross the border” in Afghanistan, which Brement took as
a sign that the Soviets were “relatively satisfied at the efficacy of the measures they
have taken to seal off the Pakistan border and are pleased at the improving security
situation in Kabul and other population centers.” Characterizing Gromyko’s points as
“predictable propaganda,” Brement also noted the only “modestly new departure” in
Soviet policy with respect to Southwest Asia: Gromyko’s assertion that “Pakistan should
have no apprehensions about Afghanistan territorial claims against them.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West, Brement,

Afghanistan
320.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, September 26, 1980
COUNTRY
Pakistan/Afghanistan/USSR
SUBJECT
1. Views of President Zia as to Reason for Soviet Helicopter Attack Against
Pakistan Border Post
2. Report of Wreckage of Downed Soviet Helicopter Involved in This Attack
[less than 1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[1 line not declassified]
1. Pakistan President Zia ul-Haq believes that the attack of 26
September 1980 by Soviet helicopter gunships against the Pakistan
border post in the Mohmand Agency east of the Konar River is a
deliberate attempt to intimidate Zia just prior to his departure for
the United Nations and his talks with President Carter.2 Pakistan’s
Interservices Intelligence Directorate commented that the attack might
also have been stimulated by Zia’s recent interview with a New York
Times correspondent, in which he predicted the Soviets would take
advantage of the Iraq-Iran fighting.3
2. The Directorate also commented that the Afghan insurgents had
achieved a major success a few days ago in an attack on Khandahar
airfield, when a dozen Soviet aircraft were destroyed on the ground
and many Soviets killed. ([less than 1 line not declassified] comment: This
incident may have influenced the Soviet decision to hit at Pakistan.)
(Headquarters comment: There is no independent evidence that this
insurgent attack took place.)
3. The wreckage of a helicopter downed during the attack is located
only a few hundred yards from the Ghakhai border post (3450N 7117E).
It appears that the Soviet helicopters tried to remain on the Afghan
side of the border while firing on the border post on the Pakistan side
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 1, Cross-Border Oper-
ations—Pakistan. Secret; Immediate; [handling restriction not declassified].
2 The memorandum of conversation of Carter’s meeting with Zia is printed as
Document 326.
3 See Michael T. Kaufman, “Pakistan Predicts Gains By Soviets in a Long War,”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
of the border. (See [less than 1 line not declassified] for a previous report
on the Soviet attack.)4
4. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
4 Not found. An article in the National Intelligence Daily, September 27, character-
ized the incident as the “most serious” on the Pakistan-Afghanistan border since the
Soviet intervention. The article also included information from [text not declassified] who
claimed the attack was undertaken by six Soviet-built MI–24 helicopters, which inflicted
“several casualties.” Anti-aircraft fire downed one of the helicopters, which landed in
Afghan territory. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
gence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI
Islamabad, September 28, the Embassy relayed comments from a senior official in Paki-
stan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs casting doubt on the possibility that Afghanistan had
a sufficient number of pilots to carry out the attack and indicating that, whether the
pilots were Soviet or Afghan, the official had “no doubt” the attack was intentional.
(Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 1, Cross-Border Operations—
Pakistan) A report, September 29, noted that evidence based on sensitive communications
intelligence “strongly suggested” that the attack was undertaken by Soviet pilots. (Ibid.)
A CIA intelligence information cable, September 27, was attached to a memorandum
from Thornton to Brzezinski, September 30, which responded to a tasking order to
determine the Pakistani reaction to the helicopter attack. Thornton noted that Pakistan
was taking the incident “in stride” and was “pleased that they shot down a Soviet
gunship.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meetings

Afghanistan
321.
Night Note for Secretary of State Muskie1
Washington, September 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Aid to Afghan Rebels
After the regular meeting with Agha Shahi this morning, I took
him aside to raise the question [less than 1 line not declassified] interest
in providing help to the Afghan rebels.2 Shahi replied that Pakistan
was not in a position to be a channel for any further aid to the Afghan
rebels. Then, with some bitterness, he said that if the European nations
wanted to help they should maintain the political and economic meas-
ures against the Soviet Union. In his words “they have broken the
political front”. He mentioned particularly Schmidt’s visit to the Soviet
Union, the Giscard-Brezhnev meeting, and the continued extension of
credits.3 He said President Zia would probably discuss this frankly
with you during the meeting Friday.4 I encouraged him to have Zia
also speak frankly to the Europeans.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Records of Under Secretary of State for Political
At the top of the note is the typed note: “Mr. Secretary: The following has been phoned
in to Washington. DDN.”
ber 29 meeting with Shahi in New York. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
declassified] to assist the Afghan insurgent effort. Turner “really questioned” this because,
in his view, it increased the problem of leaks as more people would gain knowledge of
the covert program. (Memorandum for the Record, October 8; Central Intelligence
Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00112R: Subject Files, Box
15, DCI/DDCI, Memrecs/Memos/Agendas & Brzezinski/Aaron Meetings, January–
December 1980)
Embassy reported portions of Schmidt’s June 30 dinner speech in telegram 10494 from
Moscow, July 1. Regarding Afghanistan, Schmidt called for withdrawal of Soviet forces,
“but said nothing about cessation of all forms of aggression against Afghanistan.” The
telegram noted that said aggression was the basis for Soviet military intervention, at
the request of the Afghan Government. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800317–0303) The meeting between Giscard and Brezhnev took place in
Warsaw, May 19. Giscard’s personal account of the meeting was reported in telegram
16199 from Paris, May 20. According to Giscard, the Afghanistan issue dominated the
meeting, and he impressed upon Brezhnev that the West accepted neither the legitimacy
of the Afghan Government nor Soviet actions there. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P870111–1706)
4 See Document 326.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
322.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to
President Carter1
Washington, September 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Relations with Pakistan: The Covert Dimension
We have an unusual two-tiered relationship with Pakistan—overt
and covert. On the overt level, we have a number of differences and
Pakistan seeks to keep some distance between us in order to sustain
its non-aligned and Islamic credentials. As you know, however, we
cooperate closely in a number of covert activities, [1 line not declassified]
and the program to assist the Afghan insurgents. Pakistan is absolutely
key to our ability to keep pressure on the Soviets through the insurgents
since it would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to channel arms
and supplies through any other route. Without Pakistan’s support, the
insurgents probably could not continue for long.
President Zia has been very supportive and personally keeps a
close eye on the covert programs through direct supervision of the
responsible agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate (ISID).
He has also carefully kept the covert program quite separate from
most other aspects of our relations, never linking continued covert
cooperation to military sales, economic aid, etc. However, some months
ago he did choose to use the ISID chief as a channel to express his
uncertainty about the nature of the American security commitment
to Pakistan.2
In discussions in late August with CIA’s Deputy Director for Opera-
tions and Ambassador Hummel, Zia reaffirmed his intention to con-
tinue cooperation in assisting the insurgents, despite fairly heavy Soviet
pressures.3 He indicated that he thought the current level of support
to the insurgents was about right, implying that substantial increases
could provoke serious Soviet reaction.
Zia has rigorously limited knowledge in his own government of
our covert programs. He has made clear, for example, that the subject
should not be raised with Foreign Minister Agha Shahi. Zia is extremely
sensitive to leaks in Washington and has threatened to cease coopera-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit
No drafting information appears on the memorandum.
3 No record of these meetings was found.

Afghanistan
tion if these recur. In public comment, the Pakistan Government offi-
cially denies that it is arming or assisting insurgents in Afghanistan,
although it acknowledges that it cannot effectively control movement
across the border by Afghan tribals.
Zia has asked our Station Chief in Islamabad to inform Washington
that he does not intend to raise “sensitive intelligence cooperation
projects” during his visit. We suggest that during your private meeting
with Zia, you simply indicate your admiration for his willingness to
support the Afghan insurgents and our intention to continue coopera-
tion in ways and at a level agreeable to him and that you not go into
details.4 Stan Turner’s people will be standing by in the event that any
detailed discussions are necessary.
4 See Document 326.
323.
Interagency Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency1
[memorandum number not declassified]
Washington, October 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, cover page, table of contents, preface,
and a photograph.]
KEY JUDGMENTS
The USSR’s invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 provided
a rare opportunity to test the efficacy of the US warning system in
situations involving substantial movements of the Soviets’ armed forces
outside their borders. Moreover, it afforded a chance to examine the
behavior of the Soviet military in preparing for such an undertaking
and to determine what implications this might have for the Intelligence
Community’s capacity to provide warning in other situations, espe-
cially one involving a Warsaw Pact move against NATO. [classification
marking not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, History Staff Files. Top Secret; [codeword
and handling restriction not declassified]. The preface to the memorandum notes: “This
Interagency Intelligence Memorandum was commissioned by the Director of Central
Intelligence in response to a request by the National Security Council for an assessment
of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan to determine if there were any general implications
for the US warning system or any particular implications for the system’s ability to warn
of a Warsaw Pact move against NATO.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
From the outset, it was recognized that the conclusions of this study
could not be pressed too far. Both the performance of the Intelligence
Community in providing warning of the invasion of Afghanistan and
the applicability to other theaters of the lessons learned in that situation
are very much affected by the particular circumstances involved. In
contrast to a Soviet move against NATO, the situation for which the
US warning system is largely designed, the invasion of Afghanistan
required only a fraction of the USSR’s military assets, was not opposed
at the outset, did not involve a certainty of confrontation with US
forces, and occurred in a region where US intelligence collection capa-
bilities were limited. ([classification marking not declassified])
These limitations notwithstanding, the examination of the Soviet
approach to invading Afghanistan and the Intelligence Community’s
success in giving prior notice of this event have yielded some valu-
able lessons:
—Despite the unique circumstances surrounding this operation,
the Soviets’ behavior was essentially in keeping with US estimates of
their doctrine for mobilization and the initiation of hostilities. This
finding is important because the success of any warning system is
dependent on the extent to which an adversary’s behavior conforms
to expectations. ([classification marking not declassified])
—The system of warning indicators that is set up to detect poten-
tially important changes in the Soviet/Warsaw Pact military posture
provided a structured approach to and a sound evidentiary base for
the Intelligence Community’s conclusion that the USSR was preparing
to introduce substantial forces into Afghanistan. The fact that the sys-
tem worked in this unique situation provides increased assurance of
its usefulness in other theaters, particularly in the NATO area. ([classifi-
cation marking not declassified])
—The US intelligence collection system proved equal to the task
of providing analysts with sufficiently detailed, accurate, and timely
data to allow them to reach essentially correct conclusions about the
military activities in the Soviet Union with respect to Afghanistan. Of
particular note was the synergy of [less than 1 line not declassified] in
this collection effort and the quality of the data collected, despite limita-
tions on the resources available. ([classification marking and codeword not
declassified])
—The Intelligence Community’s analysts met their basic responsi-
bility in a situation of this sort by providing sufficient prior reporting
to assure that no key policymaker should have been surprised by the
invasion. The analysts were unable to forecast precisely the timing or
the size of the Soviets’ move, but gave warning at least 10 days before-
hand that the USSR was prepared to invade. ([classification marking not
declassified])
In conclusion, the examination of the early phases of the Soviet
military intervention in Afghanistan provides a basis for greater confi-
dence in US intelligence estimates of Soviet doctrine with respect to
initiating hostilities and in the capacity of the US Intelligence Commu-

Afghanistan
nity to provide warning of such hostilities. ([classification marking not
declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]
324.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, October 1, 1980
SUMMARY OF AFGHANISTAN COVERT ACTION PROGRAM
Since ordnance deliveries started on 4 January 1980, approximately
[amount not declassified] worth of weapons have been delivered, or are
en route, to the Afghan freedom fighters. (NOTE: The Paks prefer the
term “freedom fighter” or “mujahidin” to insurgents.) Deliveries are
limited principally to small arms and emphasize anti-armor and anti-
air weapons. Examples of quantities:
—15 thousand land mines
—158 Soviet surface-to-air missiles. Initial effort to use weapons
in Afghanistan was unsuccessful, probably due to gunner error.
Retraining is underway.
—200 heavy machine guns and 800,000 rounds of ammunition
Most of the equipment is of Soviet origin. There will be no dramatic
change in the mix of ordnance in future deliveries, except that consistent
with the Pak view of Afghanistan as a people’s war (“Give an Afghan
a weapon and you have a soldier”), deliveries of .303 Enfield rifles will
be increased.
Reliable intelligence indicates the freedom fighters effective use of
the weapons. Soviet helicopters continue to be lost to machine gun
ground fire. Armored losses to mine and rocket attacks continue despite
Soviet countermeasures. Independent photographic evidence confirms
weapon distribution throughout the country. We share Zia’s satisfac-
tion with the level of the insurgency; it is widespread but of sufficient
low intensity not to provoke rash Soviet overreaction.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Zia prefers to be ignorant of Egyptian involvement. This should
not be discussed. He is aware of and pleased with Saudi participation.
We have never discussed specific finances with the Paks.
The Paks have been providing ordnance to the insurgents from
their own stocks in addition to those we provide. This Pak action pre-
dates our involvement. We are certain their volume does not exceed
ours.
325.
Information Cable Prepared in the Department of Defense1
[cable number not declassified]
1. (U) Country: USSR (UR), Afghanistan (AF), Pakistan (PK)
2. (U) Title: Political and Military Aspects of the Situation in
Afghanistan.
3. (U) Date of Info: 800729
321, and SD IAG-1002
6. [5 lines not declassified]
7. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Summary: This report discusses political and military aspects of the
Afghan situation as perceived by the Afghan guerrillas. It is divided
into six general areas: (A) Soviet pacification/rapproachment efforts,
(B) preparations for a protracted conflict, (C) counter-insurgency tactics,
(D) feelings toward the Karmal government, (E) tacit support provided
by the Government of Pakistan, and (F) relationships between guerrilla
tribes and leaders.
8A. (U) Details:
(1) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Soviet pacification/rapproachment efforts. The guerrillas all expressed
a strong hatred for Russians/Soviets. They spoke frequently of Soviet
pacification/rapproachment efforts. These efforts have consisted of
determined attempts to gain the support of majority sects/tribes while
PT 11. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Sent for information to multiple military
addressees, CIA, and the Department of State.
2 None of the referenced cables was found.

Afghanistan
completely annihilating the smaller minority sects. The guerrillas claim
that the Soviets have begun giving aid to the Baluchis who want to
achieve independence from Pakistan. As a consequence, the guerrillas
have begun to encounter hostility from Baluchi tribes in Afghanistan.
The guerrillas believe that the Baluchis are preparing to fight against
the guerrillas and feel that the fighting will spread to Baluchistan. The
guerrillas point out that with the Baluchis as allies, the Soviets would
be able to attain their long sought access to the Indian Ocean through the
Arabian Sea. There are also three sects along the Pakistan-Afghanistan
border that support the current Afghan Government, i.e., Soviet control
(NFI). The Soviets are trying to avoid at all costs a united opposition
from the entire Afghan population and are using their own ethnic
Asian and Arabic minorities as occupation troops in Afghanistan as a
means of appeasing the Afghan populace. In spite of Soviet efforts, the
guerrillas believe that they can counter pacification/rapproachment
activities through high morale and strong anti-Soviet feelings.
(2) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Preparations for a protracted conflict: The Soviets are preparing for a
protracted war by occupying the cities and concentrating their troops
there. They have allowed unrestricted movement of people between
cities and throughout the rural areas. Neither the Soviets nor the guerril-
las attack lines of communication and neither side is seriously disrupt-
ing the supply routes of the other. Both sides are currently engaged
in harassment tactics while trying to win the support of the populace,
particularly the city dwellers. The Soviets do not attack the guerrillas
unless the guerrillas engage Soviet forces first. According to the guerril-
las, the Soviets are not currently undertaking any large scale offensive
actions due to international public opinion. The guerrillas are growing
impatient with the lack of Soviet activity, but are resigned to a war of
at least ten years duration.
(3) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Counter-insurgency tactics: The guerrillas claim the Soviets are using
napalm, but have little actual knowledge of napalm. They also claim
the Soviets are changing troops frequently, replacing “inappropriate”
(NFI) units with other units. The guerrillas deny that the Soviets have
ever used paratroopers in Afghanistan. Although there have not been
any major Soviet efforts to search out and destroy the guerrillas, they
did attempt to surround the guerrillas in the mountains near Kabul
during June of 1980. During this offensive, the Soviet helicopters
dropped bombs, booby traps and mines along the guerrillas’ rear sup-
ply routes near the Pakistan/Afghanistan border. According to the
guerrillas, the approximately 100,000 Soviet troops and less than 30,000
Afghan Government troops are not enough to control all of Afghani-
stan, and for this reason, the Soviets have seized only the cities and
will not attack unless attacked.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
(4) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Feelings toward Karmal government: The guerrillas claim they no
longer hate Karmal and in fact have begun to think favorably of him
and sympathize with him. They feel that after he attempted suicide he
came to his senses and will no longer execute Afghan citizens as Amin
and Taraki did.3 The guerrillas predict that the two possible successors
to Karmal are Asadora Sakuwari (phonetic) of the Haruku (phonetic)
sect (correct spelling believed to be “Assadullah Sawari” of the “Khalq”
group) or Maamaddo Haan (phonetic) (possibly “Mohamad Han”) of
the Uzbeki sect. Either of these two men would be acceptable. The
guerrillas feel that the current Afghan administration has adopted the
same political policies as the prior administration and that agricultural
reform will not be achieved. They feel that the Karmal administration
would resist a U.N. peacekeeping force, attempting to delay it until
after guerrilla resistance had collapsed.
(5) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Tacit support provided by the Government of Pakistan: The refugee/
guerrillas are neither encouraged nor seriously discouraged from enter-
ing Pakistan by the Pakistani Government. Although Pakistani border
patrols have been heavily increased, the refugee/guerrillas cross the
border easily. The border near Tor Khan is only lightly guarded by
the Pakistani Government and on the Afghan side is guarded by only
two soldiers, one of whom is unarmed. Further, the border area in the
vicinity of Tor Khan is only delineated by two strands of barbed wire
and no fortifications or border patrols are observable. Thus, movement
across the border is unimpeded and people and trade goods pass freely.
According to the guerrillas, all Afghans become refugees upon entry
into Pakistan. They become guerrillas when they return to Afghanistan.
When Afghans reach receiving areas in Pakistan, they are processed
and then bused to refugee camps. At the refugee camps, they are given
four Pakistani rupees and an identification card with their photo on
it. The refugees/guerrillas are permitted to move freely in and out of
the refugee camps. Some refugee camps are also known as “guerrilla
bases”. The term is used interchangeably for at least two “refugee
camps” in Pakistan, one at Peshawar and one at Bajaur. Weapons are
3 The question of Karmal’s attempted suicide arose during a Department of State
press conference, June 20, and again during a press background briefing conducted on
Air Force One, June 25. During both exchanges, a reporter asked if rumors of Karmal’s
attempted suicide were valid; in both cases the official response was that the United
States could not verify the rumor. The Department summarized the first exchange in
Policy File, D800300–0515) The Embassy summarized the second exchange in telegram

Afghanistan
not supposed to be carried inside the camps, but instead are supposed
to be left at refugee camp headquarters. Nevertheless, arms are carried
openly in the camps. Only a few Pakistani officials and no guards are
available to staff the camps. The guerrillas are even negotiating to
establish a refugee government in Pakistan (NFI). There was no evi-
dence of either any other support given to the refugees/guerrillas by
the Pakistani Government or of any friction between the Pakistani
Government and the refugee/guerrillas.
(6) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Relationship between guerrilla tribes and leaders: The traditional fight-
ing between the various Afghan tribes still continues. The guerrillas
state that even if the Soviets were to pull out of Afghanistan and
another government were established, the fighting would continue
between sects/tribes. The guerrillas want to establish their own govern-
ment. According to the source, the guerrillas do not presently have a
leader who can unite the country as the intellectuals are all seeking
asylum in Western countries. The guerrillas would only accept a leader
who came from a royal family and who has been, and is now, a devout
Muslim. People who might meet these requirements are Professor
Rabani (phonetic), who is a leader of the Jemiato (phonetic) Islami sect,
and Herumacharu (phonetic) (probably Hektyamar), who is a leader
of the Hezb-i Islami sect. Both of these men are currently vying for
overall leadership.
[9 paragraphs (14 lines) not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
326.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, President of Pakistan
General K. M. Afir (Notetaker)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
[President Carter:] We share a common concern over the Soviets in
Afghanistan. And it is important for the UN to maintain its condemna-
tion. The foregoing, together with the fall of the Shah, has caused us
to increase our presence in the region. We now have two carriers in
the area. We have pre-positioned military cargo. We are developing
the Rapid Deployment Force. We are conducting exercises with some
of the countries in the region. We have acquired facilities in Oman and
Kenya, and we are determined to keep the Strait of Hormuz open.
Moreover, we have recently deployed AWACS to Saudi Arabia. We
want to contain the conflict, and we have discouraged the Saudis and
Omanis from becoming involved.
In my State of the Union message, I stated the region was vital to
our national security and that we would act to protect that security. I
wanted Brezhnev to know we would feel our vital interests are engaged
if there was a Soviet intrusion. They might have moved into Poland
if not for the world reaction to their invasion of Afghanistan.2 I see no
possibility of business as usual while the Soviets are in Afghanistan.
Again, let me say how much we admire your courage as well as your
support for the refugees.
I am disappointed and regretful that we did not have an adequate
communication in the past on an economic/military package.3 The
public/press exchanges were mutually embarrassing. I understand that
you do not want military assistance, but we will continue to be helpful
in modest ways with regard to the refugees. We also understand your
aversion to U.S. military aid, which in any case is forbidden by Con-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
In the top right corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “OK” and initialed “J.” Zia
was in the United States to attend the UN General Assembly session.
2 The mention of Poland is a reference to the crisis caused by workers’ strikes and
the Solidarity trade union movement in September.

Afghanistan
gress, but we are willing to discuss purchases, if you want, of military
equipment. If you need the assurance from us that you could purchase
F–16s, we would be forthcoming. I know you have access to French
planes, but we are willing to sell if you so desire it. If you want it, let’s
work it out between us directly.
We are deeply committed to the security of your country. We will
be forthcoming if you want to purchase military equipment. We both
have military backgrounds, so we can deal, if you want, directly.
President Zia: We admire you personally and we are grateful. We
are a developing country and our dream is to have what is best for
our military. We have only China, France, or the USA from whom to
get aircraft; and only China or the USA for our tanks. We understand
your sensitivity about India and we also understand that the U.S. must
have an interest in Pakistan before it does anything for us. We do not
ask you to sever your relations with India, but we are sensitive about
any India veto over your relations with us. (Clifford apparently told
Mrs. Gandhi that the Brzezinski visit was only an eyewash.)4 We should
get your aid on our own merits, not because of an Indian veto or wishes.
We do not have any money for purchases. We will not get it from
Saudi Arabia unless the Saudis feel a genuine interest in Pakistan. Our
problem is that the Soviet Union is now our neighbor. I have told the
Soviets that we will resist to the end and in the meantime, with your
help, we will continue fighting the battle of Pakistan in Afghanistan.
President Carter: It is our fight too.
President Zia: I am 100 percent certain the Afghanistanis will not
surrender. The Soviets will feel the pinch.
President Carter: What is your assessment of the effectiveness of
resistance?
President Zia: Excellent. And they could do more.
President Carter: Do you think more is needed?
President Zia: Yes. Not enough has been given so far. I feel that
Pakistan should continue to fight in Afghanistan, but Pakistan must
be safe. It is in the interest of both Pakistan and the U.S. to support
the freedom fighters. But Pakistan will be punished by the Soviet Union,
and we are prepared for that. If they escalate, and they will do so in
the next few months in order to humiliate us, we will stand up and
we will need your assistance.
I could greatly improve the spirit of my Air Force if I had six more
planes, but if I am able to feed more effectively 650,000 people, I can
4 For Clifford’s trip to India, see Document 190. For Brzezinski’s trip to Pakistan,
see Document 193.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
tell the military the country is getting stronger. I do not need direct
military assistance. Our real need is in debt rescheduling. That would
be the greatest favor to us.
President Carter: The three year part is the most difficult.
President Zia: One year to start and then the others will follow.
President Carter: We will do the one year and the food supply
will be sustained by us. And if you want to buy military equipment,
including F–16s, we will be forthcoming.
President Zia: I need your support with the Europeans. They are
too scared.
President Carter: Giscard and Thatcher said we should do more to
help the freedom fighters. What should I tell them?
President Zia: Tell them to contact me.5 The freedom fighters need
more anti-tank and anti-helicopter weapons (discussion of some defec-
tive SA–7s). France has good weapons and the Europeans should be
more helpful.
On another issue, I just want to say that Mrs. Gandhi is no friend
of Pakistan or the U.S.
President Carter: Do not hesitate to approach me directly. You can
also use a personal emissary to keep in touch with me.
There was an exchange of pleasantries and then the meeting
concluded.
5 In a memorandum assessing U.S.-Pakistani relations following the Zia visit, Octo-
ber 9, Thornton asserted to Brzezinski that Zia’s request that Carter instruct European
leaders to contact him directly was a sign that Pakistan wanted to keep an “arms-length
relationship” with the United States regarding the covert program to provide arms to
the Afghan rebels. In Thornton’s view, Zia did not want the United States “to get involved
in organizing other countries’ support of the insurgents.” Thornton’s memorandum was
attached to a memorandum from Odom to Brzezinski, October 11. Odom described
Thornton’s memorandum as “excellent.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff

Afghanistan
327.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Defense for
Policy (Komer) to the Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence (Carlucci)1
Washington, October 8, 1980
SUBJECT
Afghan Insurgency (U)
(S) While our support for the Afghan insurgency has been far from
miniscule, there is reason for concern that the weight of proximate
Soviet resources and military strength will gradually weaken the
Afghan resistance to the point we will no longer be able to justify our
contribution.2 Can we figure out ways to keep the Soviets involved
and suffering for a longer time? Can we somehow develop the kind
of guerrilla capability which could keep the pot boiling at a lower level
of intensity? If the USSR starts to press Pakistan harder, such a force
also could be most useful.
(S) To this end, why don’t we begin now to plan for a smaller
more professional and better organized cadre of guerrilla forces for
long-term operations, as well as for qualitative improvements in the
tactics and effectiveness of the present loose-knit insurrection? I suggest
we look into the formation of a small trained guerrilla cadre additive
to the current guerrilla bands. The latter are probably too ingrained in
their tactics and motivated by tribal and personal goals to be easily
molded into a more organized force—even if we wanted to. What I
have in mind is drawing upon the available manpower to provide the
basis for a far more professional guerrilla cadre which could supply
small, well trained hit-and-run teams to sustain resistance even if the
present loose-knit rebellion gets overwhelmed. Obviously this would
have to be done in close cooperation with Pakistan.
(S) I recognize there may be serious risks in the proposals above—
particularly for a more professional guerrilla force, among other things,
the GOP might not play. But I believe we should develop a proposal
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–031, Sep–Dec 1980. Secret; Sensitive. A copy was sent to Aaron.
2 In response to a query on the strength of the Afghan insurgency, Charles Cogan
wrote Carlucci, October 14, that the rebels were continuing their activities at a “normal
pace.” Cogan surmised that the perception of a “faltering insurgency” might be attribut-
able to the fact that “Afghanistan has been pushed off the front pages, primarily by the
Iran-Iraq war.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Iran-Iraq war broke out on September 22 when Iraq attacked across Iran’s western border.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
along these lines with some urgency. I am prepared to task my staff
and the JCS to support this planning effort if you agree.3
R.W. Komer4
3 In a memorandum to Komer, November 4, Carlucci replied that, in the view of
the intelligence community, Soviet efforts had not weakened the insurgency; on the
contrary, the rebels’ efforts were “alive and well.” Carlucci agreed with Komer’s sugges-
tion on the advisability of developing contingencies should the insurgency take a turn
for the worse. To that end, Carlucci reported, the CIA was involved in its “first experiment
in providing special training to independent Afghan units” involving “the SA–7.” Car-
lucci further noted that he wanted to assess this experiment before considering a broad-
ened effort as Komer suggested. (Ibid.)
4 Komer initialed “RWK” above his typed signature.
328.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Possible European Assistance to the Afghan Resistance
1. At the outset of our program of covert assistance to the Afghan
freedom fighters, we judged it best that, to maintain secrecy, we should
not involve other Western powers. We were constantly warned by both
the Pakistanis and the Saudis that leaks about this assistance were very
harmful and could prove fatal to the program. The Pakistan intelligence
chief, Gen. Akhtar, said he wanted no other parties involved.
2. During the course of discussions with [1 line not declassified] in
the first half of 1980, we discussed our Afghan assistance program
with them, and they offered to be of help. They assisted in the matter
of sending journalists to Pakistan and Afghanistan and, using press
outlets, were able significantly to augment, in articles and photographs,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For
restriction not declassified]. In the top right corner, Carter wrote: “Zbig” and initialed “C.”
Although the memorandum is undated, attached but not printed is a memorandum from
Brzezinski to Turner, October 15, in which Brzezinski reported that Carter “approved
a positive response to Zia’s request for U.S. help in arranging European assistance to
the Afghan freedom fighters.”

Afghanistan
our own efforts to publicize the Afghan resistance. In the matter of
arms, we decided to accept their offer of help, provided it was chan-
neled through our own pipeline. These weapons would appear to the
Pakistanis to come from us, and we would be adhering to their dictum
of not bringing any more parties into the program. In September 1980,
tion which was sent in through our supply channels. They are in the
process of contributing 3,000 Enfield .303 rifles—a weapon with which
the Afghan tribesmen are very familiar and which is very popular with
them. [less than 1 line not declassified] say they expect to provide at least
another 5,000 Enfields in the near future. (NOTE: The bulk of our
weapons supply has been of Soviet or Bloc manufacture.)
3. Also in recent months we have been discussing in general terms
with [1½ lines not declassified] our program of assistance to the Afghan
resistance. [less than 1 line not declassified] has shown a willingness to
help; but because of the Pakistani restrictions, we have limited our
response [less than 1 line not declassified]. We have told them we would
like them to explore means of supplying arms covertly to the Afghan
freedom fighters through Iran. In making this recommendation we had
two things in mind: a) Pakistani territory would not be used; and
b) eventually some of the heat would be taken off the Pakistanis, as
the Soviets would realize that arms were coming in not only through
Pakistan but also through Iran. [less than 1 line not declassified] promised
to help and said they would send an officer to survey possible clandes-
tine supply routes and assess the freedom fighters’ needs. We are
awaiting the results of this survey.
4. All this changed during the visit of President Zia to Washington,
when he told the President he would welcome assistance to the freedom
fighters from the West Europeans, and he told the President that he
would like U.S. help in arranging such assistance.2 While this takes
the wraps off the Pakistani restrictions under which we have been
operating to date, this Agency must continue to be concerned about
the overall security of the weapons supply program to the Afghan
insurgents. The Saudis are particularly sensitive about any potential
security breaches, and because they are instrumental in providing
financing and logistics support, we must continue our efforts to main-
tain the strict security of the program. Therefore, if there is to be an
approach at the policy level [less than 1 line not declassified] about assist-
ance to the Afghan freedom fighters, it would be useful to make a
parallel approach [less than 1 line not declassified] so the background to
this change during President Zia’s visit to Washington can be explained
2 See Document 326.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to them.3 (Our previous discussions of this program [less than 1 line
not declassified] have been limited [1 line not declassified].) Additionally,
we would suggest that in the policy-level approach, the sensitivity of
this arms supply program be stressed and [less than 1 line not declassified]
be urged to coordinate any covert arms support through us.4
Stansfield Turner5
3 Carter drew a vertical line in the left margin beside this sentence.
4 At the bottom of the page, Carter wrote: “Let us move to carry out Zia’s request,
maintaining requisite secrecy” and initialed “J.” In his attached October 15 memorandum
to Turner, Brzezinski noted that messages from Carter requesting this assistance on
behalf of Zia had been sent to Giscard and Thatcher; [text and 1 line not declassified]. Also
attached but not printed is a draft message to Giscard and Thatcher; Carter made two
minor corrections and crossed out a sentence that read: “I think we agree that it is
important for the Soviets not to conclude that the Afghans can be easily crushed, and
it is also important for the Pakistanis not to feel isolated.” In the upper right corner of
the draft, Carter wrote: “Zbig, ok” and initialed “J.”
5 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above his typed signature.
329.
Editorial Note
Two telegrams reported on Afghan President Babrak Karmal’s first
official visit to the Soviet Union and the broader issue of the ongoing
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. On the eve of Karmal’s arrival, in
“the Soviets are not particularly optimistic about their Afghan adven-
ture. They profess to be looking for a political settlement that could
lead to a Soviet troop withdrawal and an improvement of relations
with the United States. The initiation of talks between Pakistan and
the Babrak Karmal government is seen as the first priority in moving
toward this political settlement, with the aim of such talks being to
halt passage of aid to the insurgents. They are not, however, willing
to sacrifice Babrak Karmal at this point and there is no hint of excessive
concern or dismay in the Soviet presentations.” (National Archives,
Karmal was in Moscow October 16–17. A dinner speech by Brezh-
nev and a joint Soviet-Afghan statement signed on October 16 reiterated
the Soviet position that it would not withdraw its forces until the
insurgency ended. (Kevin Klose, “Brezhnev Renews Backing Of Afghan
Government, Says Time on Its Side,” Washington Post, October 17, 1980,

Afghanistan
p. A23) In telegram 281700 to all diplomatic and consular posts, October
22, the Department commented on Karmal’s visit: “Declaring the
Afghan revolution ‘irreversible,’ the Soviets took the occasion of Babrak
Karmal’s mid-October visit to Moscow to reaffirm their support for
him and for the Afghan peace plan of May 14. Moscow apparently still
hopes to see Karmal’s hold on power strengthened—and the Parcham-
Khalq rift in the ruling PDPA repaired. While the Soviets pledged
continuing military support, no change in the Soviet involvement was
foreshadowed.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
330.
Memorandum for the Record by Director of Central
Intelligence Turner1
Washington, October 30, 1980
SUBJECT
Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 29 October 1980 ([classification marking not
declassified])
1. I showed him the Afghan bi-weekly report.2 He stressed over
and over again that he doesn’t think we are providing enough arms
to the insurgents and wants us to increase it. As you know, I sympathize
with this point of view. I am not sure an increase from [amount not
declassified] to 60 million is all that significant. I want to be able to
reassure Brzezinski next time that we are pushing everything through
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
ski/Aaron Meetings, January–December 1980. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
2 The report noted malfunction issues with SA–7s in Afghanistan; a Time magazine
story that included a photograph of insurgents carrying land mines (that the report
noted were supplied through the covert program); and a campaign in which the Agency
manufactured and distributed around the world some 5,000 t-shirts bearing messages
of support for the Afghan insurgency. The report described this campaign as having a
“remarkable impact.” Also included was a list containing the most recent data on weapons
delivered or awaiting shipment to the insurgents, totaling over [text not declassified]. The
weapons awaiting shipment represented approximately one-third of the total cost. The
bi-weekly report is in the Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central
Afghanistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
the pipeline that Ahktar is willing to receive.3 ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
2. He wanted an assessment of the impact on the Arab countries
of the release of hostages and U.S. provision of spare parts to Iran. I
told him we had it in the PDB a couple of days ago. He recalled that,
though he didn’t think it was incisive enough to make a real impact
on him. In short, he felt that it was obvious the Arabs would be upset
and he wondered if we had anything more to say. ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Stansfield Turner4
Director
3 For the decision to increase funding for the Afghan covert program, see Docu-
ment 336.
4 Gates signed for Turner.
331.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, October 30, 1980
SPECIAL ANALYSIS
USSR-AFGHANISTAN: Prospects for the Insurgency
Ten months after the Soviet invasion there is insurgent activity in every
province of Afghanistan, urban security is worse, and much of the countryside
is under insurgent control. The Soviets have been adapting their force structure
and tactics to this situation, however, and gradually are becoming more
effective. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
The Soviets have prevented the insurgents from seizing a provincial
capital or any other symbolic target and may believe they are making
a start on a long process of establishing a durable Communist Afghan
regime. They probably believe that the diplomatic costs will continue
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
restriction not declassified]. Drafted by [text not declassified].

Afghanistan
to decrease as the world loses interest and comes to accept their occupa-
tion of Afghanistan. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
insurgents are in the field at any one time, in groups ranging from 25
to 2,000. This force is drawn from possibly as many as 1 million Afghans
involved intermittently in the fighting. ([classification marking and han-
dling restriction not declassified])
[less than 1 line not declassified] the insurgents are in “full control”
of about half the districts in the country and control another quarter
at night. [less than 1 line not declassified] seem to support this. Until
recently, insurgents had been in virtual control of parts of the city of
Herat, and assassinations and sabotage occur frequently in Kabul and
other cities. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
Attacks on roads and government installations are common even
in districts supposedly under full government control. Insurgent raids
on convoys have almost completely disrupted the country’s transport
system; many civilian truck drivers refuse to travel in the countryside
even with a military escort. The Soviets recently forbade military con-
voys to move after dark and adopted new procedures in an attempt
to improve their air support for the convoys. ([classification marking,
codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
Mixed Results for Moscow
The Soviet presence and firepower have forced the insurgents to
forgo large-scale operations. Before the invasion, the insurgents moved
at will in sizable groups, but now they retreat quickly to avoid Soviet
forces. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
The insurgents, moreover, no longer attempt to sustain siege opera-
tions against important government garrisons and towns, to block
roads permanently, or to hold any area Soviet troops make a serious
effort to clear. As recent operations in the northeast and Konar Valley
indicate, however, the Soviets do not have nearly enough troops to
garrison the country and still cannot depend on the Afghan Army to
do the job for them. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
The insurgents are still able to move men and material across the
border with Pakistan and Iran despite Soviet efforts to reduce the flow.
Soviet patrols, sweep operations, and extensive mining so far have been
directed at only part of the border. The Soviets have only succeeded
in turning open borders into borders that must be crossed with more
caution. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
There has been only slight success in winning over insurgents, but
there have been some defections to the government; a few important
arms caches have been seized, presumably on information from defec-
tors and prisoners. Such inroads are insignificant and seem to have

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
had no impact on the level of resistance in any part of the countryside.
([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
Fear of Soviet reprisals has made some Afghans reluctant to shelter
insurgents, but this has been a problem only for the few bands that
operate outside their home areas, particularly some based in Pakistan.
Most Afghan villagers still support the locally based insurgents who
make up the bulk of the resistance. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Prospects
The Soviets have helped give the Babrak government time to try
to consolidate politically. The insurgents cannot bring down the gov-
ernment by military means, and they recognize that it will be a long
war. Although some exile groups seeking outside support have claimed
that insurgent morale is declining, there are no signs that this is the
case. ([classification marking not declassified])
Over the next year or so, some tribesmen probably will begin
to lose confidence that they can overthrow the Babrak government.
Although many others will continue fighting, the level of insurgency
nevertheless may gradually begin to decrease. ([classification marking
not declassified])
The erosion of tribal determination would be abetted if Kabul were
to appear to be avoiding radical social changes and were seen as trying
to exercise only nominal authority in the countryside, in the manner
of traditional Afghan governments. The government’s identification
with the Soviets, however, makes its prospects for winning the accept-
ance of the Afghan peoples extremely remote. ([classification marking
not declassified])
If Pakistan continues to provide aid and a safehaven, the insurgency
will continue at a level that will require the Soviets to keep a large
military force in Afghanistan for the foreseeable future. The survival
of the Babrak government could depend on the presence of at least some
Soviet combat forces for years. ([classification marking not declassified])
[Omitted here is a map of Afghanistan.]

Afghanistan
332.
Current Analysis Report Prepared in the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research1
Report 21–CA
Washington, November 6, 1980
SOVIET STRATEGY AND TACTICS IN AFGHANISTAN:
LARGER IMPLICATIONS
Despite indications that the wisdom of the Soviet involvement in
Afghanistan may still be under debate in Moscow, there are no signs
that Soviet resolve is weakening or that major changes are being consid-
ered. The size of the Soviet armed forces and of their weapons stockpile
has allowed the USSR to field an 85,000-man force in Afghanistan
without disrupting military deployments elsewhere or interrupting
military aid programs. All evidence points to a long-term Soviet mili-
tary presence in Afghanistan, with continued military improvements
and some force increases opposite China, NATO, and Iran.
USSR: New Military Priorities
Soviet defense planning has been complicated over the past two
years by the addition of new priorities to the traditional concerns with
NATO and China.
—The Chinese attack on Vietnam in February 1979 led to significant
improvements along the Sino-Soviet border and contingency planning
for a second Chinese attack.
—The occupation of Afghanistan has required continuous supply,
construction of permanent facilities, and troop turnover.
—Developments in Iran and the Persian Gulf have led to new force
priorities in the southern USSR, heretofore a relatively neglected area.
—The Polish situation has imposed a new requirement on the
Soviet General Staff to be ready to take military action.
Military developments throughout the USSR indicate that the Sovi-
ets are attempting to deal with all these contingencies, which continue
to stretch both military and civilian resources.
We see no decrease in military aid to the Warsaw Pact and the
Third World. Indeed, the Soviets apparently promised the Syrians more
military aid during Assad’s visit in early October.
Afghanistan: The Military Situation
After 10 months of fighting, the Soviets still face significant opposi-
tion and serious military problems.
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 6, Soviet Strategy
and Tactics in Afghan—Larger Implications. Secret. Drafted by Crocker (INR/PMT) and
Limberg (INR/EEA), and approved by Baraz (INR/DDR/RNA).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—The Kabul government does not control the provinces.
—The Afghan
Army
continues to
deteriorate.
Conscription
schemes and local defense plans have failed.
—Soviet equipment and personnel losses have been relatively
heavy, considering the poorly equipped and unorganized state of
the resistance.
—Roads and cities are still vulnerable to attack, and logistical sup-
ply is still a major problem.
The Soviets, however, have chosen not to increase the size of their
force. Rather, they are adopting new tactics built around more mobile
ground forces and the heavy use of helicopter and aircraft strikes. The
country has been divided into eight zones of responsibility, each with
a senior commander and a combination of airborne, infantry, artillery,
and air support.
In addition, the Soviets are building housing, stronger defense
positions, and permanent logistic and support bases. During Babrak
Karmal’s recent visit to Moscow, the Soviets pledged continued military
support.2 The joint statement issued at the end of the visit reaffirmed
that Moscow would not discuss the question of Soviet withdrawals
until 1) hostilities had ceased and 2) guarantees that they would not
resume were in place.
We conclude, therefore, that the Soviet military intends to support
the Marxist regime and pursue the suppression of the resistance for
an extended period of time. Recent Soviet emphasis on the time when
the situation in Afghanistan returns to “normal” suggests that, for the
moment at least, Moscow is not planning any major increase in its
force in Afghanistan. At some point, however, perhaps next year, they
may decide to increase the size of their force or mount a more aggressive
campaign to seal the borders with Iran and Pakistan. We also do not
rule out another cosmetic withdrawal for propaganda purposes.
The Domestic Scene
Since the coup in April 1978 that toppled Daoud, the Soviets have
advised Kabul to build up its political base and infrastructure. Taraki’s
and Amin’s failures or inability to implement this advice were largely
responsible for the increase in the Soviet military presence and, ulti-
mately, for the invasion last December. Over the last eight months,
numerous CPSU, Komsomol, and government delegations have visited
Afghanistan to help train their Afghan counterparts at the provisional
and national level in party and government work. During the Karmal
visit, the Soviets again emphasized the need to broaden the Afghan
communist party’s base.
2 See Document 320.

Afghanistan
The effectiveness of the Soviet effort has been hampered by the
continued insurgency and by the Khalq-Parcham feud. Nevertheless,
the Soviets have expressed satisfaction with their progress. Whether
they can or cannot eventually shift the struggle from the military to
the political level, they seem reconciled to a protracted presence in
Afghanistan. In time, Afghan institutions will be forced into a Soviet
mold.
Soviet Diplomacy
Moscow’s refusal to enter into a dialogue on a political settlement
and its continued adherence to the Afghan peace plan of May 14
probably reflect its assessment that its diplomatic approach is gradually
succeeding. Poland and the Iraq-Iran conflict have pushed Afghanistan
off the front pages, and the Islamic Conference’s initiative has faltered
with Ghotbzadeh’s removal and Tehran’s preoccupations with the war
with Iraq.3
As Brezhnev noted in his speech welcoming Karmal to Moscow,
Pakistan remains the key to Soviet efforts in Afghanistan. The Soviets,
therefore, will keep the pressure on Islamabad to stop supporting the
resistance. The recent Soviet attacks on Pakistani border garrisons, as
well as reports of Soviet contacts with Baluchs and members of the
Pakistani opposition, probably are meant as warnings to the Zia regime
that Soviet tolerance is limited. Thus, we do not rule out selected
Soviet or Afghan military attacks against bases in Pakistan. The Soviets,
however, probably would be reluctant at this point to see the conflict
expand beyond Afghanistan’s borders for fear of regalvanizing Islamic
reaction and alienating India.
3 Iranian Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh was removed in August.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
333.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Pakistan1
297580. For the Ambassador. Subject: Military Sales to Pakistan.
1. (Secret—Entire text)
2. COS [less than 1 line not declassified] is being instructed in a parallel
message to ask General Akhtar to inform Zia that we are prepared to
make available from U.S. Army stocks 200 Redeye missiles for purchase
through regular Foreign Military Sales channels.2 We are making this
offer in the context of ever increasing Soviet pressure on Pakistan. We
prefer Akhtar as a channel in order to get the message directly to Zia
without the information becoming more widely known in the Pak
Government.
Muskie
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Intelligence
Drafted by Coon and approved by Kux (INR/DDC).
2 Neither the parallel message nor Zia’s response to the offer was found.

Afghanistan
334.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
1. (C—Entire text.)
2. Summary: The skies above Kabul have again been filled with
helicopters and other aircraft for the past few days as Soviet and Afghan
forces launched offensives against Mujaheddin in several parts of the
country. Some of this activity within 80 kilometers of Kabul has been
billed by the DRA as Afghan military maneuvers, but travelers report
that it is no exercise. The Shia day of deep mourning passed in Kabul
without major incident but the week witnessed several violent incidents
in and around the city, including the killing of an Afghan family by
marauding Soviet troops. Bus drivers on the route north of Mazar-i-
Sharif went on strike to protest the shooting of one of their number
by Soviet troops last week, and there have been attacks on convoys
along other major highways. Fragmentary reports from Herat and
Kandahar indicate that a Soviet offensive is also underway in those
large cities, where some knowledgeable diplomats claim Cuban troops
are stationed. The regime has dispatched party volunteers to mine coal
and collect firewood for delivery to Kabul for the approaching winter.
The party held its fourth plenum on November 11, followed by a series
of rather hysterical meetings urging support for the regime. The DRA
propaganda mill has stepped up its activities, especially against the
US, China and Pakistan, often using slanted or false material. Low-
level harassment of Mission personnel continues, and we still find it
difficult to obtain visas for new arrivals. End summary.
New Soviet offensive
3. The Soviets may have shifted their tactics in trying to crush the
ubiquitous but elusive Mujaheddin. On November 15 the DRA Ministry
of National Defense announced joint ground and air maneuvers in
Kabul, Parwan, Ghazni and Nangrahar Provinces beginning the next
day. Dozens of Soviet helicopters took to the air heading in those
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Islamabad, Moscow, and
New Delhi (also for RSS). Also sent for information to Ankara, Beijing, Bonn, Canberra,
Dacca, London, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, USUN, USNATO, CINCEUR, CINCPAC, and
CINCUSAREUR (military addressees also for POLADs). A copy of this cable was also
found in the Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 2, Afghan Sitreps 1980.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
directions on November 16. That activity continues as this is being
drafted and a few high-flying jet fighters and bombers have also been
sighted over Kabul. Soviet air transport flights also seem to have
increased markedly during this period, but large road convoys have
not been observed as often as about a week ago.3
4. The DRA announcement noted that the forces slated for the
maneuvers had already left for the listed areas, and our sources con-
firmed that large military contingents had arrived in several locations
by November 15. Two of them said that one contingent had also moved
into Wardak Province, though that was not one of the sites specified
for the maneuvers. All of these sources reported that the military forces
were conducting searches of villages for Mujaheddin and potential
conscripts. In at least one case (in Wardak) Soviet forces were shelling a
suspected Mujaheddin encampment. Another generally reliable source
informed us November 18 that Soviet forces trying for the fourth time
to invade the Panjshir Valley had met with the usual stiff resistance
for the fourth day in a row.
5. Kabul itself has been slightly more tense since the beginning of
the Shia religious mourning month of Muharram on November 8.
However, the 10th of Muharram (November 17), a day usually marked
by processions of self-flagellating Shias, passed without major incident
in the city. The Shia processions were unusually small and none was
addressed by leading DRA figures, as had been the practice in pre-
leftist days. Justice Minister Aryan was sent to observe one procession.
While he made no speech himself, he ordered attending preachers
to include blessings for the DRA in their prayers, after which many
participants
were
heard
to
grumble
loudly
about
“godless
Communists.”
3 [text not declassified] Soviet military leaders in Afghanistan had recently concluded
that the “situation in Afghanistan is currently a stalemate.” Despite recognizing that
“most” of the country was controlled by insurgents, the Soviets believed the rebels could
be defeated eventually. Among the tactics authorized toward that end, the report noted,
was an increased use of helicopters. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff

Afghanistan
335.
Letter From the Chairman of the Afghan National Liberation
Front (al-Mojaddedi) to President Carter1
Peshawar, November 25, 1980
Dear Mr. President:
I wish to thank you for all your past help to the Afghan people
and Afghan refugees. The people of Afghanistan shall, with due respect,
remember all the contributions which the friendly nations have made
during this trying period in our history.
It is the graveness of the existing situation facing the Afghan people
however, which prompts me to make an urgent appeal for further
humanitarian assistance to merely enable us to provide the basic means
of survival for a people subjected to the most unprecedented genocide
of our time.
While the heroic struggle of Afghan people is not only for their
own survival but also for the sake of humanity and in defence of basic
human principles and human rights, one can not help but to note that
this defenceless Nation is patiently and perseveringly facing the cruel
and indiscriminate shellings and bombardments of their towns, villages
and even large cities and population centers paralleled with lootings,
burnings, executions, tortures and various other unhuman atrocities.
The Russian military units, these byproducts of atheism and commu-
nism, completely devoid of human dignity and even self respect com-
mit all these crimes in cold blood.
All this, in the course of the Russian aggression in Afghanistan,
has left hundreds of thousands who are wounded, millions who are
facing starvation, an equal number lacking shelter in the face of the
cold season and almost the entire population devoid of medical care,
even to a modest standard. Next to these are near a million and half
people who have been forced to cross over the borders, mostly to
Pakistan, among whom are many weak, ill and wounded people.
Therefore, the extent of existing need for food, medicine and shelter
requires a facility which is completely beyond the material and financial
possibilities of our organization, and thus we find it necessary to call
for help.
Any further assistance you can offer at this time will be deeply
appreciated by me and the freedom fighters as well as by all Afghan
people.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Unfiled

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
At last I wish to express my pleasure that the bearer of this letter has
kindly taken it upon himself to provide you with necessary additional
informations on the current situation in Afghanistan as well as the
position of the A.N.L.F.
Wishing your success and the prosperity of the American people
I remain,
Very Sincerely Yours,
Prof. Sibghatullah Al-Mojaddedi
Chairman of the A.N.L.F.
336.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Chairman of the Special Coordination Committee
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 25, 1980
SUBJECT
The Afghanistan Covert Action Program (S)
Subsequent to David Aaron’s October 27, 1980, memorandum
authorizing a total FY 1981 Afghanistan Covert Action Program of $60
million,2 it has been determined, in consultation with our Saudi and
Pakistani allies, that the program justifies a higher level of support.
Per our earlier conversations, I believe we should increase the FY 1981
total to $80 million.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, For
restriction not declassified].
2 Attached but not printed. In the October 27 memorandum to Carlucci, Aaron
noted that the October 17 request for fiscal year 1981 funding for the Afghanistan covert
action program, totaling $60 million, was approved. Aaron further noted that $40 million
of the total was new funding, added to the $20 million previously authorized in July
1980; and that the total of $60 million would be split evenly between the United States
and Saudi Arabia. If other countries elected to contribute funds to aid the Afghan
insurgents, Aaron directed that the current “ceiling will be raised accordingly.” Carlucci’s
October 17 memorandum requesting the funding increase was not found. In a memoran-
dum for the record, November 5, Denend noted that Brzezinski signed a recommendation
to approach OMB to increase total expenditures to $70 million. (Carter Library, National
3 In a November 26 memorandum to Aaron, attached but not printed, Gregg noted
that OMB was “on board” with this expenditure increase of $35 million, representing
the U.S. half of the new total of $70 million.

Afghanistan
During an early November 1980 meeting in Saudi Arabia, John
McMahon was informed by General Akhtar, head of the Pakistani
intelligence service, that the Pakistanis were now in a position to distrib-
ute into Afghanistan as many weapons as we could provide.4 Prince
Turki, head of the Saudi intelligence organization, agreed that the
program should receive increased support. In anticipation of this
increased level, we are planning appropriately larger purchases and
expansion of the existing logistics mechanism.
I therefore request approval of a total FY 1981 program of $80
million which we would share equally with Saudi Arabia. Of this total,
$60 million was previously authorized as a consequence of the 7 July
million). Thus this memo specifically requests $20 million of new
authority.5
Stansfield Turner6
4 This statement likely confirms that Pakistan accepted the U.S. offer of the Redeye
missiles. See Document 333.
5 Brzezinski undoubtedly approved the recommendation. For the July 7 SCC(I)
meeting, see Document 298.
6 Carlucci signed for Turner.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
337.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to
the United Nations1
325039. Subject: Letter From President Carter to Waldheim on
Afghanistan Resolution.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. President Carter has written a letter dated December 8 to Secre-
tary General Waldheim containing U.S. views on implementation of
the November 20 UNGA resolution on Afghanistan.3 Ambassador
McHenry is requested to deliver to Waldheim the following text of
this letter, which we have received from White House.
3. Begin text.
Dear Kurt:
I know from our previous talks that you join with me in welcoming
the action by the General Assembly in adopting by an overwhelming
majority a resolution calling for the withdrawal of foreign troops from
Afghanistan. This strong expression of support for international law
and the United Nations Charter by the General Assembly has made a
very favorable impact on the American people and has reinforced their
faith in the moral authority of the United Nations.
Secret; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Islamabad, Moscow, and London.
Drafted by Pope (IO/UNP); cleared in IO, IO/UNP, S/S, and in substance in NEA/
PAB; and approved by Christopher.
from Afghanistan, supported the right of the Afghan people to choose their own form
of government, urged all parties to reach a political settlement, and asked the Secretary
General to appoint a special representative to assist in finding a solution. For the UNGA
consideration of the resolution and its text, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, pp.
304–309. An intelligence report produced in the Central Intelligence Agency, October
29, noted that the draft resolution, introduced by Pakistan, was similar to the “strong
position” previously adopted by the Islamic Conference with regard to Afghanistan.
(Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R:
stan Crisis—December 1980, NIDs)
3 Christopher sent Carter a draft of the letter on December 5, on which Carter
handwrote corrections and noted: “OK as amended. J.” (Department of State, Executive
Secretariat (ES), Special Caption Documents, 1979–1989 (Not for the System, Evening
a memorandum to Carter, December 10, Christopher reported the letter was delivered
to Waldheim and that the U.S. Mission to the UN would consult with allies “on how
best to maintain the pressure on Waldheim concerning this matter.” In the left margin
of Christopher’s memorandum, Carter wrote: “Continue to push.” (Ibid.)

Afghanistan
In the resolution, as you know, the Assembly expressed its hope
that you would appoint a special representative to seek a political
solution on the basis of the resolution and in accordance with its call
for the withdrawal of foreign troops. Ambassador McHenry has already
expressed our strong views to you in this regard, but I want you to
know that this is a matter of personal concern to me.
In light of the Soviet attitude I recognize that it will not be easy
to move rapidly toward a political solution based on the withdrawal
of Soviet troops. But I trust you will agree that the appointment of
your special representative should be expedited because of the over-
whelming vote by the international community. The 111 member states
who supported the resolution were well aware of the Soviet Union’s
negative attitude. Nevertheless, we expressed support for your
appointment of a special representative to promote a solution based
on the principles of the Charter which the Soviet Union has so flagrantly
violated in Afghanistan.
I have asked Ambassador McHenry to deliver this letter urgently
to you as a private expression of my views.4
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
End text.
Muskie
4 In a memorandum to Carter, December 18, Muskie reported he “had an unexpect-
edly comprehensive discussion” with Waldheim regarding Afghanistan and the appoint-
ment of a special representative. Muskie noted that Waldheim was “receptive.” (Ibid)
An article in the National Intelligence Daily, January 8, reported that [text not declassified]
the DRA was willing to meet with Pakistan and a UN Special Representative despite
Pakistan’s ongoing refusal to recognize the Afghan Government. The report further
noted that the Pakistanis “view the UN talks in the past as a means of reducing Soviet
pressure temporarily.” Even so, the report concluded, such talks would give the DRA
“a lift.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job
8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1980, NIDs)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
338.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
12795. Subject: Afghanistan and Pakistan/U.S. Relations.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. Summary: The end of 1980 and the current transition period
leads us to take another look at some fundamental issues which are
key to U.S./Pakistan relations during the coming years. For simplicity
of presentation we have divided these concerns into (A) Afghanistan-
related issues, (B) U.S./Pakistan bilateral issues and expectations, and
(C) South and Southwest Asia security concerns. This telegram,
addressing the Afghanistan question, is the first of three which we
are submitting and which are intended to stimulate a dialogue with
Washington and other concerned posts aimed at a more precise defini-
tion of options available to us. The Afghanistan situation remains cen-
tral to our relationship with Islamabad and to Islamabad’s relationship
with many of the nations of Southwest, if not South, Asia. Pakistan’s
firm stance on Afghanistan continues to be fundamental to our own
policy. We think it behooves us to take a look ahead—possibly at some
unthinkables—so that our policies will at least attempt to influence the
course of events rather than the other way around. End summary.
3. In the midst of a major transition between administrations and
as we near the first anniversary of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,
we think it opportune to suggest that the Department and other mem-
bers of the foreign affairs community in Washington take a look at the
Afghan situation and the policy options it presents us. Some of those
options bear directly on the future of our relationship with Pakistan
and other countries in this region, and we would like to offer a few
thoughts from this vantage point.
4. We start with a few basic assumptions derived from our reading
of the current situation in Afghanistan and the likely course of events
over the next year; these we regard as “givens”:
—(A) Soviet troops will remain in Afghanistan as long as Moscow
deems it necessary to secure a sympathetic regime in Kabul and to
remold Afghan institutions along Communist lines;
—(B) Soviet pressures, including cross-border attacks on Pakistan,
will continue and probably escalate as Moscow seeks to intimidate
Secret; Immediate; Eyes Only. Sent for information to Karachi, Beijing, Moscow, New
Delhi, London, Kabul, and Jidda. Pouched for information to Peshawar and Lahore.

Afghanistan
the GOP to drop its opposition to Soviet policy and to accept the
“irreversibility” of events in Afghanistan;
—(C) Large numbers of Afghan refugees (which could approach
two million) will remain in Pakistan for the foreseeable future becoming
an increasingly serious domestic political issue in Baluchistan and the
Northwest Frontier particularly, and
—(D) The Afghan resistance will continue to obstruct Soviet efforts
to pacify the Afghan countryside, but at present levels of outside sup-
port it may begin to lose effectiveness as the war of attrition drags on
in Afghanistan.
5. There may be some debate among Americans about the validity
or force of these assumptions, but there is substantial evidence that
they form the current mind-set of most key Pakistanis who will be
responsible for influencing Pakistan’s own policy toward Afghanistan.
For the Pakistanis, therefore, these are very real factors which we
must take into account in determining our own approach to the issues
involved, including the nature of our bilateral relationship with
Islamabad.
6. We would hope that someone in transition Washington is looking
down the road six months or a year trying to ascertain where would
we prefer to be then.
—Are we prepared, for example, to simply let the situation drift,
somehow hoping that the resistance will remain strong and that Paki-
stan will maintain a firm stance against the Soviets?
—Or are we prepared to take some positive initiatives either to
help defuse the tensions boiling in the area or to bolster Pakistani
resolve in standing up in the face of intense pressures?
These are difficult questions to which we do not have the answers.
We suggest only that someone should be giving them serious thought.
7. If we assume that the Soviets will negotiate over Afghanistan
only on their own terms (essentially the May 14 proposals), we do
not see much likelihood of a solution which would meet our stated
requirements including complete Soviet troop withdrawal, restoration
of Afghanistan’s nonaligned and independent status, self-determina-
tion for the Afghan people, and guarantees of keeping up our own
firm opposition to the invasion and recognition of the Karmal regime.
On the other hand, we ourselves may have extended an aspect of
formal recognition to Karmal by granting an A–1 visa to one of his
diplomats.2 Is it not at least conceivable that Pakistan could find a way
authorized the Embassy to issue A–1 visas to two Afghan diplomats. (National Archives,
to foreign government officials traveling to the United States to conduct official business
on behalf of their government.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
of talking to Babrak while obscuring the fact of recognition. If this were
to reduce tensions in the region, would we see such a development as
in our interest or not?
8. If we think it very important to avoid such a development, then
we should be taking concrete steps to bolster Pakistan in ways which
the Pakistanis consider meaningful. With the exception of debt relief,
we have so far been unable to deliver on our rhetoric of support for
Pakistan. We have in fact cheered on from a comfortable distance while
the Pakistanis themselves bear the real costs of standing up to the
Soviets. True, we have provided generous humanitarian assistance to
the Afghan refugees but that is not likely to count for very much among
Pakistani decision-makers who may believe they are faced with their
country’s very survival.
9. We realize that any discussion of support for Pakistan on a scale
which would produce measurable results here automatically raises the
prospect of strong Indian reactions. But we must question how much
good will we have won in India by our recent policies of providing
almost nothing (in relative terms) to Pakistan. We suggest there is a
middle ground between minimal support and maximal support for
Pakistan which would solidify our position and strengthen Pakistan.
Naturally, whatever we do will have an impact on relations with New
Delhi, but thirty years of threading policy course among the irrelevant
(to us) enmities of the region should long ago have accustomed us to
the fact that we cannot satisfy ourselves and everyone else in South
Asia at the same time.
10. Another set of issues revolves around the question of military
assistance to the Afghan resistance groups. The problems in providing
such aid, including the multitude of competing groups and the desir-
ability of maintaining a diplomatic mission in Kabul, have been dis-
cussed before in other forums. We would submit, however, that we
cannot realistically expect the Mujahideen to go on fighting the Rus-
sians forever without increased support and we should be thinking
how we would adjust our policy to deal with such a development.3
Or we should take another hard look at what we can do to sustain
and promote the resistance cause.
11. Finally, we need to do some serious long-range planning on
our role in providing relief to growing numbers of Afghan refugees
in Pakistan. Not only should we be taking steps to ensure adequate
funds are available for a generous contribution of our own over the
3 It is not clear if Hummel was aware of the recently authorized increase in expendi-
tures to support the Afghan insurgency; or if he was, whether he viewed such incremental
steps as sufficient.

Afghanistan
next several years, but we should carefully consider supporting recent
GOP interest in an international pledging conference. Such a conference
could serve two of our stated objectives, namely to stimulate other
potential donors to take on a greater share of the relief burden as well
as to focus additional international attention on the Afghan situation.
Strong and prompt support for this GOP suggestion would be well-
received in Islamabad.
12. We need to look as well at our own immigration policy regard-
ing the flood of Afghans with whom our consular officers are currently
besieged, with a view toward making additional numbers available for
Afghan applicants—perhaps by designating them a separate refugee
category—and expediting application procedures to the extent possible.
We have already suggested, for example, that a voluntary agency rep
be assigned to concerned posts to help with processing (Islamabad
13. In sum, we should look ahead to the likely ramifications of
possible Afghan developments which we would view as adverse to
our regional interests, i.e., Soviet consolidation of its position in Afghan-
istan, collapse of the Afghan resistance, Pakistani acceptance of a fait
accompli across the Durand Line, and possible Pakistani accommoda-
tion to broader Soviet aims in the region. If we conclude that we
can live in such a new environment, then certain policy options offer
themselves as preferable. If otherwise, then other steps would seem
called for.
14. We hope the Department agrees that such a look ahead would
be both timely and useful. We would be happy to contribute to the
discussion in any way deemed desirable.
Hummel
Islamabad is dated December 2. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
339.
Message From the Ambassador to Pakistan (Hummel) to the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs
(Coon)1
[message number not declassified]. For CIA and State NEA–Coon
From Amb Hummel. Subject: Ambassador’s Conversation With PRC
and Egyptian Ambs Re Arms for Mujahideen.
When I saw Egyptian Amb Scharaff Dec 10 for a return courtesy
call, I raised subject of foreign inputs to Afghan Mujahideen, asking
what he knew of the matter. First elliptically, and then more directly,
he acknowledged that he knew of Egypt’s own assistance and also
something of USG and Saudi activities. He did not talk about the
content or magnitude of the inputs.
He said that in his Mission only he and his MilAtt (whom Scharaff
personally chose, the MilAtt having been a lieutenant under Scharaff
in the army) knew of the inputs. The MilAtt deals directly with Gen
Akhtar on these matters. Scharaff had a favorable impression of Gen
Akhtar. I said on my side only a very few of my officers knew of the
program not including my military attachés. I said that the Egyptian
DCM (Scharaff said this officer was also one of his own choosing
“because personal loyalty is very important”) had been discussing with
foreign diplomats the subject of arms to Mujahideen. I said I proposed
that in our Embassy only the Amb and I should have such discussions.
Scharaff agreed, and indicated he would pass the word for those not
witting on his staff (he said that “some of them may have a general
idea”) not to ask questions or discuss the subject. Comment: My pur-
pose in raising the subject was to make Scharaff aware that his DCM
has been making statements about arms input and probing for
information).
He asked how the U.S. Embassy deals with this subject with the
Pakistanis. I said I have an “Intelligence Liaison Officer” (whom I did
not name) who deals only with Gen Akhtar.
We both agreed that the MFA should not be involved in this subject.
I told him that I had had clear instructions from Pres Zia not to discuss
it with the MFA.
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Intelligence
not declassified].

Afghanistan
Scharaff said he hoped soon to have an intelligence officer assigned
to his staff, and that after that officer arrived he hoped he and my
officer could be in touch. I was noncommittal.
In a separate private conversation with PRC Amb Xu Yi-xin I tried
to probe him on PRC inputs to the Mujahideen. Xu acknowledged that
the PRC would like to see more support given to the freedom fighters,
but asserted that PRC support goes to the Pak Govt “in general”, and
none was specifically earmarked for the Mujahideen.2 The unspoken
implication was that the GOP makes its own decisions as to what arms
of PRC origin go to Afghans. (Comment: This does not square with
other reports that some AK–47s from the PRC are earmarked for
Mujahideen).
2 [text and 1 line not declassified] “The PRC routinely provides machine guns, small
arms, hand grenades and ammunition to the Afghan rebels. Shipments are by ship into
Pakistan ports and by air. In some instances shipments have been by Pakistani C–130
aircraft flown direct from China to airfields near the Afghan border. He stated that no
shoulder-fired SAMs had been provided because China had none. He stated that in his
opinion, SA–7s had been provided by Egypt. Source claimed not to know the dates of
the shipments but described them as routine and continuing. He claimed that PRC aid
to Afghan rebels has the full but unannounced support of the Government of Pakistan.”
(Telegram 27726 from Cairo, December 16; Department of Defense, Afghan War Collec-
tion, Box 5, PRC Support for Insurgents)
340.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, December 16, 1980
COUNTRY
Afghanistan/Iran
SUBJECT
Support by the Iranian Government for the Afghan Dissident Organization,
United Islamic Alliance [1 line not declassified]
SOURCE
[3 lines not declassified]
Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
1. According to a former Afghan Army officer who arrived in
Peshawar in early December 1980, and who until late November was
an active member of the Iranian-based Afghan dissident organization,
the United Islamic Alliance (UIA) (Shura-i-Etefaq), during mid-Novem-
ber the Iranian Government supplied a sizeable shipment of U.S. manu-
factured weapons to UIA insurgents in Ghazni Province. The UIA is
an alliance of Afghan Shia groups dominated by Hazaras from central
and southern Afghanistan. The leader of the UIA is Asif Mohsani, a
Shia from Qandahar, who now resides in and leads the UIA from
Qum, Iran. The UIA does not maintain a presence in Pakistan. (Source
comment: The officer said he had been told by other UIA members
that because of Mohsani’s fundamentalist Shia orientation, he has good
relations with and the support of Ayatollah Khomeini. Because of this
close relationship, Mohsani is the only Afghan dissident leader known
to be residing in Qum. In the officer’s opinion, no other Afghan dissi-
dent group is currently receiving weapons support from the Iranians.)
2. The officer stated that during mid-November the UIA headquar-
ters in Ghazni Province, located at Jaghori (approximate coordinates
rifles, a quantity of ammunition, grenade projection adapters for the
M–1s with a quantity of both anti-tank and anti-personnel grenades,
and a quantity of unidentified U.S.-manufactured anti-tank rocket
launchers and anti-tank mines. (Source comment: Other than the num-
ber of M–1s in the shipment, the officer did not specify the quantities
of other weapons and ammunition received by the UIA. The officer
also commented that this was the only shipment of Iranian supplied
weapons and ammunition he is aware of, but he presumed the UIA
had received others.)
3. ACQ: [1½ lines not declassified]

Afghanistan
341.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Muskie1
Washington, December 18, 1980
The President has read an intelligence report reflecting Soviet con-
cern over passage of the anti-Soviet Afghan resolution at the UN.2 The
Soviets are anxious lest they lose non-aligned support over the Afghan
issue. The intelligence community has initiated planning to make
Nations Foreign Ministers’ Conference in New Delhi and suggests that
it is not too early to energize the entire U.S. foreign policy establishment
toward the goal of defeating the Soviets in New Delhi. The President
noted, “I agree.”3 (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Intelligence
2 A likely reference to an article in the National Intelligence Daily that summarized
a report [text not declassified] December 2, which noted that the Soviets sought to “vitiate”
the resolution adopted on Afghanistan in the UN General Assembly. (Central Intelligence
Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of
3 At the bottom of the memorandum, an unknown hand wrote: “CIA/DDO wanted
to do something through the CA infrastructure, but NEA (Coon) was unenthusiastic,
and nothing more was done.” The notation is dated February 9, 1981.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
342.
Intelligence Cable Prepared in the Department of Defense1
1. (U) Ctry: USSR (UR); Afghanistan (AF)
2. (U) Title: Replacement of Afghan Leader (U)
3. (U) Date of info: 801200
4. (U) Orig: Det l, USAOPSGP, INSCOM, Ft Meade, MD
6. (C/Noforn) Source: [2 lines not declassified]
7. (C) Summary: This report provides information on the current
political situation in Afghanistan, to include observations of Afghan
leader ((Babrak)) and information on his possible successors.
8A. (U) Details:
1. (C/Noforn) According to information received from Kabul dur-
ing the first week of December 1980, Soviet imposed Afghan leader
((Babrak)) was showing strong signs of nervousness. Eyewitnesses
reported that he chain smoked, appeared generally ill at ease and upon
slightest provocation broke into cursing, unusual for a man known for
his gentle language.3 Soviet authorities were not satisfied with the
competence of the Afghan Government, which had virtually ground
to a standstill.4 During the day, government police were on the streets
of Kabul, but during the night rebels roamed the city in small groups
distributing leaflets and calling on merchants to dictate price ceilings
on still available goods. Soviet soldiers broke into two of the main
stores in Kabul during the night and completely cleaned out the Afghan
department store and the agency for the National Electronics Company
of Japan.
2. (C/Noforn) There were two serious candidates considered by
the Soviets for the replacement of Babrak. One of them was ((Sarvari)),
former Chief of Intelligence, who after the Soviet invasion became
deputy to Babrak. He was said to have subsequently left for the USSR
for medical treatment and, without returning to Kabul, was appointed
Confidential; Priority; Noforn.
2 Not found.
3 According to an intelligence cable prepared in the Department of Defense, Novem-
ber 17, Karmal’s October visit to Moscow was for unspecified medical reasons. (Depart-
4 According to an intelligence information cable prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency, December 8, Soviet officials appeared to have taken control of Afghan diplomatic
functions in Pakistan. (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 2, 13
Kabul Sitreps)

Afghanistan
Ambassador to the Mongolian Peoples Republic, a post of no impor-
tance to the Afghan regime. Sarvari, a member of the Khalq faction of
the Communist Party, was a suspected KGB agent. The second person
who might replace Babrak or be placed in another high position was
the former Minister of Commerce Mohamad Khan ((Salaler)). Under
the royal regime in Afghanistan, he held an important post in the
Ministry of Planning. He was then named Minister of Commerce after
gaining the confidence of President Daoud, who allowed him to partici-
pate in all secret conferences. When Daoud was overthrown, he was
arrested with all of the President’s5
5 The rest of the cable was cut off in this copy. No other copy was found.
343.
Article in the President’s Daily Brief1
Washington, December 24, 1980
AFGHANISTAN: ONE YEAR LATER
In the year since their Christmas Eve invasion, the Soviets have
achieved their core objective in Afghanistan—they have kept a Commu-
nist regime in place in the country. This has come at considerable
international political cost and military difficulties. Moreover, the Sovi-
ets have so far made only limited progress toward establishing condi-
tions that will permit the Babrak regime to stand on its own.
—**Despite the Soviets’ increased involvement in military operations
and a steady refinement of their anti-insurgent tactics, the insurgency goes
on in every province at as high a level as any time since the Soviet invasion.
—The Afghan Army, which must be rebuilt if a Communist government
is to survive without direct Soviet support, still numbers no more than about
20,000. It continues to be hampered by defections and by frequent clashes
between adherents to the two factions of the Afghan Communist Party.**
—The Afghan Government is weak, lacks popular support, and is
virtually paralyzed by the same factional squabbling that weakens
the Army.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 7, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only.
The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The
article printed here was found in this form.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
[1½ lines not declassified] Soviet military leaders on the scene recognize
the difficulties.
[2 paragraphs (12 lines) not declassified]
Soviet Commitment
**Whatever their inner misgivings on how things have worked out in
Afghanistan so far, the Soviets show no outward sign of compromise. [1 line
not declassified] Soviet leaders have reiterated that any talks on Afghanistan
must be with Babrak’s government and that there can be no consideration of
a Soviet troop withdrawal until so-called foreign assistance to the insurgents
is halted.**
**The Soviets, meanwhile, have built officers quarters and barracks,
improved roads and runways, constructed an oil pipeline, and put permanent
bridges over the river between the USSR and Afghanistan—all signs that
they expect to be engaged militarily for a long while.**2
2 Carter released a statement on December 24, the anniversary of the Soviet invasion,
calling on the Soviet Union to withdraw its forces and cooperate to find a political
solution. He concluded: “The Afghan people and their struggle have not been forgotten
and will not be forgotten by the rest of the world.” See Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81,
Book III, pp. 2835–2836.

Afghanistan
344.
Research Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, January 1981
[Omitted here are a title page and a cover page.]
Sino-Soviet Relations and the Impact of the Invasion
of Afghanistan ([classification marking not declassified])
Overview
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the US response to it pro-
duced a sharp reaction in China that led Beijing to squelch domestic
debate over foreign policy, reduce its meager relations with Moscow,
and expand contacts with Washington. ([classification marking not
declassified])
China’s decision in January 1980 to suspend the resumption of
political negotiations with the USSR originally slated for this spring
ended the latest phase in bilateral relations that began after China’s
denunciation of the 1950 Sino-Soviet Treaty in April 1979. During that
period, political fluidity in China and heightened tensions resulting
from China’s invasion of Vietnam created a situation in which dissonant
voices called for a lessening of China’s hostility toward the USSR and
an increase in bilateral economic exchanges. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Proponents of a less hostile policy toward Moscow may have
included centrist leaders in the Chinese Politburo. Their influence was
strengthened by a temporary alliance with party leftists during the
spring of 1979, when Deng Xiaoping and his allies were beset with
political problems. ([classification marking not declassified])
In subsequent months, Deng gradually isolated his leftist oppo-
nents, and they were finally removed from the Politburo at the party’s
Fifth Plenum last February. Although the centrists remain powerful
figures on the Politburo’s Standing Committee, the growth of Deng’s
influence has reduced their ability to redirect policy. The trend has been
toward a strengthening of Deng’s grip on domestic affairs, languishing
relations with the USSR, and improved ties with the United States.
([classification marking not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
Impact of the Invasion of Afghanistan. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A
statement on the cover page reads: “This paper was prepared by [less than 1 line not
declassified] Office of Political Analysis. It was coordinated with the Offices of Economic
Research and Strategic Research and reviewed by the National Intelligence Officers for
East Asia and the USSR-Eastern Europe.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Deng has been less successful in devising an ideological framework
within which to revise policies to suit his pragmatic approach while
still proclaiming ideological opposition to the Soviet Union. This has
forced Beijing to impose heavyhanded measures to ensure conformity
on discussion of the Soviet brand of socialism. Nonetheless, allegorical
articles debating foreign policy have continued to appear in China’s
media, and some middle level officials are known to be in favor of
new approaches to China’s Soviet policy. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Beijing is sensitive to foreign awareness of the internal Chinese
debate over policy toward the USSR and the United States. Deng seems
to fear that the appearance of less than unanimous support for China’s
foreign policy will undercut the willingness of the United States, Japan,
and the West to cooperate with Beijing. This sensitivity has led to a
succession of extraordinary efforts in the past year to demonstrate that
China will not deal with the Soviets in ways that Moscow might use
to portray a lessening of Sino-Soviet hostility. ([classification marking
not declassified])
US actions are central to the Chinese foreign policy equation. Deng,
having closely identified himself with the US connection over the past
several years, has had to demonstrate to skeptics at home that the
benefits of the deepening US-Chinese relationship outweigh the costs
of continuing hostility toward the USSR. He also has appeared anxious
to prove the value of the US connection at times when Washington
seemed to be improving relations with the USSR or when Taiwan-
related issues have emerged—developments that strengthen critics of
Deng’s foreign policy. Some Chinese, moreover, may calculate that
Washington’s concern about possible improvements in Sino-Soviet
relations can be manipulated to induce the United States to provide
China with technology, equipment, and political support to forestall a
Chinese move toward accommodation with the Soviets. ([classification
marking not declassified])
Sino-Soviet relations since Afghanistan have worsened despite
Soviet efforts to portray progress. Beijing remains eager to rally opposi-
tion to Soviet “hegemonism,” to explore sales of US civilian and military
technology, and to portray the Chinese leadership as unified as it goes
through the transition from older to younger leaders. ([classification
marking not declassified])
Nonetheless, Beijing has maintained minimal, correct diplomatic
dealings with Moscow, and has reserved the option to reopen political
negotiations. The chances that Beijing would exercise that option would
increase from the current low if political turmoil arises in China as it
did in April 1979, or if Deng has to placate elements in the Chinese
leadership who are skeptical of the US relationship. Circumstances that

Afghanistan
might put pressure on Deng to make such a move could include a
return to detente politics in the West or a developing trend toward
“official” ties between Washington and Taipei. ([classification marking
not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]
345.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
321. Subject: Afghanistan: Soviets Appear To Renege on Their “Ini-
tiative.” Ref: State 5253.2
1. (S) Entire text.
2. Summary: In carrying out instructions today on Soviet initiative
on Afghanistan, I was informed by President Zia and Acting Foreign
Minister Shahnawaz that Soviet Ambassador has suddenly pulled the
rug out from under them by informing GOP that regional conference on
Afghanistan would not be possible if linked to UN General Assembly
resolution, that participation of Iran was not acceptable, and that UN
SYG’s Special Representative could participate only as an observer.3
Soviets attributed these sudden changes to Babrak Karmal. Shahnawaz
has already told Soviet Ambassador that GOP is ‘deeply disappointed’
and he will shortly deliver formal reply from President Zia. Zia and
Shahnawaz said that initiative had been stopped dead in its tracks. Zia
said that Pakistan will continue its firm opposition to Soviet occupation
of Afghanistan in absence of some acceptable proposal for compro-
Secret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to Peshawar, The Hague,
New Delhi, Beijing, Kabul, Jidda, Moscow, London, USUN, Paris, USNATO, and Bonn.
2 Telegram 5253 was not found. In early January, with Soviet support, Pakistan and
Afghanistan had tentatively agreed to begin talks. (Michael T. Kaufman, “Afghanistan
and Pakistan Report Progress Toward Beginning Talks,” New York Times, January 7,
Pakistan recognize the Karmal government as a condition for the talks. (“Dispute on
noted that Pakistan informed the Soviets that these preconditions for the talks were
unacceptable. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Box 7, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1981, PDBs)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
mise.4 He hoped Pakistan’s friends would be prepared to back it up
in these circumstances. End summary.
3. I called on President Zia at noon today, accompanied by DCM,
to carry out instructions contained in reftel. Zia, who leaves for Gulf
and Turkey early tomorrow morning, had Acting Foreign Minister
Shahnawaz and Americas Director Rana present.
4. I went through talking points contained in reftel word for word
with President Zia, emphasizing certain points and adding thought
that softening of Islamic Conference resolution would be premature.
I expanded on talking point regarding Jan 7 Radio Moscow commen-
tary and left FBIS transcript of commentary with Zia. I also left text of
Department Press Spokesman’s Jan 7 briefing dealing with Afghanistan
initiative, and in this connection I made point that we were taking
positive position in public while expressing our concerns over this
initiative to GOP in private.
5. Zia responded by briefly rehearsing how GOP had arrived at
present position. Islamic Conference Standing Committee, expanded
to include Guinea and Tunisia, had led to nowhere and Pakistan had
quite deliberately moved situation towards UN General Assembly vote
that had resulted in overwhelming call for Soviet withdrawal. Recent
initiative entirely that of Soviet Union and he could see three possible
motives for new Soviet initiative:
—A. Buying time. Soviet initiative—“if indeed it is an initiative”—
might be nothing more than a “short-sighted” maneuver to get them
past the Islamic Summit and NAM gathering.5 Similar tactics were
employed
by
Soviets
before
two
Islamic
Foreign
Ministers’
Conferences.
—B. Beset with difficulties in Kampuchea, Poland and Afghanistan,
Soviets decided it was to their advantage to show signs of flexibility
in at least one of these places.
—C. Other explanation was the Mujahidin resistance was becoming
so costly that Soviets had decided that it was to their advantage to try
Pakistan’s Embassy in the Soviet Union privately considered the Soviet move as evidence
that its pressure on Pakistan had “borne fruit.” Additionally, the telegram noted “intense
pressure” placed upon Pakistan by the Soviet Union to enter into talks with the DRA
on the latter’s terms; if Pakistan did not, the Soviets “hinted” of “possible Soviet action
ahead,” presumably a veiled threat of a military attack. According to a Pakistani Embassy
official, Zia took this threat seriously in light of what he considered insufficient support
either from Western Europe or the United States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D810014–0358)
the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement in New Delhi
February 9–12.

Afghanistan
and reach an understanding with Pakistan, the only country in a posi-
tion to inhibit activities of freedom fighters.
6. Now, however, said Zia, there had been a new development of
which he had not himself yet been fully briefed, and he would let Acting
Foreign Minister Shahnawaz explain what had happened. Shahnawaz
prefaced his remarks by saying that new Soviet Ambassador Smirnov
and aide who accompanied him both spoke excellent English and there
could be no question of misunderstanding, as had occasionally hap-
pened with previous Soviet Ambassador. Original approach to Shahna-
waz had led to meeting at which Soviet Ambassador made his pitch
to Zia, Shahi and Shahnawaz. In course of outlining his proposal for
a regional conference Ambassador Smirnov had at least three times
made following statements in reply to questions put to him by Pak side.
—A. Soviet-Afghan side would be prepared to open dialogue under
auspices of UN Special Representative.
—B. Participation in talks by Kabul regime as party and not govern-
ment was acceptable.
—C. Discussions would not imply recognition of Babrak Karmal
government.
—D. Soviet and Afghan Ambassadors at UN would be instructed
to follow agreed line.
7. Shahnawaz went on to say that they had told Smirnov that they
would inform Waldheim of proposal and advise him that he could
check directly with Moscow if he wished. Smirnov had inquired about
what reaction there would be from Iran, and Zia had said that was
one question Pakistan could not answer. Zia then put question to
Smirnov on whether Soviet Union prepared to withdraw its forces.
Smirnov replied that Soviets would do so as soon as outside interference
stopped. Paks then challenged this view of situation, but finally agreed
that there was basis for proceeding with initiative. Soviets requested
no publicity, but Paks insisted that some public statement would be
required. Shahi’s carefully worded public remarks constituted that
statement.
8. Then, said Shahnawaz, on January 9 Soviet Ambassador called
seeking urgent meeting with Zia. Shahnawaz replied that Zia was out of
town but if it was a matter of real urgency he could call at Shahnawaz’s
residence. Message that Smirnov brought was that President Zia and his
government had given an interpretation to Pak-Soviet understanding
which was “not quite correct.” Therefore Moscow had not sent instruc-
tions to delegations in New York. In addition Babrak Karmal regime
had informed Soviets it would not accept any initiative that came under
UN resolution. Finally Pakistan had introduced Iran into equation.
Babrak Karmal had reacted to this by saying that only bilateral talks

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
between Afghanistan and Pakistan were acceptable and that UN Special
Representative could only participate in these discussions as an
observer, not as a participant.
9. Shahnawaz said he had told Smirnov that he was “deeply disap-
pointed” by what he had heard. There had been a clear understanding
that Iran and the SYG’s Special Representative would be participants.
He would have to consult his President. Shahnawaz said that he was
quite taken aback to hear Smirnov at this late date say that he did not
see how it would be possible to have a conference under UN auspices
in view of General Assembly resolution “hostile to USSR and Afghan
Government.”
10. Zia took over at this point to say that as a result of these
developments GOP position was firmer than ever that any initiative
must be under General Assembly resolution or “at least under auspices
of Secretary General whose authority in this matter derives from that
resolution.” Obviously any conference must include Iran. Zia’s conclu-
sion: “The Soviets have got cold feet.” I asked Zia for a few clarifications.
Had Smirnov blamed all of this sudden shift on the Afghans? Yes.
Including unwillingness to include Iran in discussions? Yes. In fact,
said Zia, Babrak Karmal was directly quoted as saying, “Relations
between Iran and Afghanistan are none of Pakistan’s business.” Would
the Kabul regime accept participation as a party and not as a govern-
ment? Yes. In fact, that was one thing Smirnov said Afghans were
satisfied with.
11. Shahnawaz added that GOP still felt it had made a wise move.
If initiative had moved in the right direction everybody would have
benefitted. If it didn’t, as it now appeared would be the case, the onus
would be on Soviets. I replied that in view of what I had just been
told it seemed that many of our concerns were quite justified. Shahna-
waz and Zia concurred. Shahnawaz said that obviously next move was
up to Soviets, after he formally conveyed President Zia’s negative
reaction to Ambassador Smirnov. I said that there was still one point
of difference between us which I thought was important: While GOP
would be prepared to see some kind of discussion take place simply
under auspices of SYG Special Representative we felt that link to Gen-
eral Assembly resolution must be quite explicit. Neither Zia nor Shah-
nawaz reacted positively to this thought. As to what happens next,
Zia said I could be assured I would be kept fully informed on each
development and that the details of what had taken place between
Shahnawaz and Smirnov he and I had heard together for the first time.
As to the future we were in complete agreement that the Islamic Summit
must not in any way dilute the Islamic world’s stand on Afghanistan.
He was totally committed to this position until there was some sign
that the Soviets were genuinely ready to compromise.

Afghanistan
12. I observed that it seemed to me the Soviets had for their own
reasons used the reported objections by the puppet Babrak govt as the
excuse for completely revising the position they had first taken. This
sort of Sov behavior lay at the base of the strong concerns the USG
has had about how the Sovs might twist future scenario of any talks
as they unfolded. Zia and Shahnawaz wryly agreed, and said it would
not be the first time in their experiences with the USSR that the Sovs
blandly reneged on their commitments.
13. At this point I tried to close the conversation; but Shahnawaz,
as he often does, wanted to remind me of the collusion that GOP sees
between the Soviets and India. He cited a recent book in which several
GOI officials are quoted as acknowledging that Amin had suggested
that India should move toward the dismemberment of Pakistan on
more than one occasion. I said I was not surprised that Sovs and
Afghans wanted to enlist India in pressures on Pakistan, but by Shahna-
waz’ own account India had rejected these suggestions, so I could not
see any new significance in terms of Indian intentions.
14. Zia closed the conversation by saying that in reporting this
conversation he hoped I would make sure that Washington under-
stands that despite the fact that the Soviets appeared to be backing out
of what they proposed, Pakistani public reaction had been very positive
on hearing there might be a chance for a political compromise. He had
received hundreds of letters in the last few days expressing relief that
a solution was in sight. The fear of Soviet or Soviet-Indian aggression
is very strong. If the confrontation is now to continue Pakistan must
have assurances that its security will be strengthened. The nation badly
needs some boost for its morale from its friends, he emphasized.
Hummel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
346.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary: Stringent security measures were again imposed in
Kabul last week in the wake of an upsurge of violence in the city and
heightened rumors of further trouble. An incident involving the Pol
representative may have been responsible for the sudden initiation of
police checks of diplomatic vehicles during the week. (Several Embas-
sies plan to protest police excesses during those checks, and all Embas-
sies have advised personnel to be home earlier.) Some foreign residents
are accelerating their departures, resulting in heavily booked outbound
flights after the termination of a charter for an Austrian 707 aircraft.
Electrical outages have continued in Kabul, though a Western diplomat
saw no damage to major facilities during a drive up from Peshawar
last week.
3. Further reports of fighting in the countryside have filtered into
Kabul, many maintaining that the Afghan and Soviet forces have suf-
fered fresh drubbings. Sources also claim that Soviet troops killed
another family in Ghazni and that they continue to sell military equip-
ment on the black market. Afghan soldiers are continuing to protest
extensions of military service in a variety of ways, though some of
them may merely be resisting being sent to fight in the provinces. Some
soldiers report that Soviet troops are again grumbling about being
misled—specifically by Brezhnev—about their mission in Afghanistan.
Meanwhile, the Karmal regime announced the release of more political
prisoners and inaugurated an Afghan-Soviet friendship hall. MFA still
can tell us nothing about the reported death of an American “military
advisor” in December.3
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Islamabad and New Delhi
(also for RSS). Also sent for information to Ankara, Beijing, Bonn, Canberra, Colombo,
Dacca, Jidda, London, Moscow, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, USICA, USNATO, USUN,
CINCEUR, CINCPAC, CINCUSAREUR, and CINCUSAFE (military addressees also
for POLADs).
United Press International and United News of India about an “American military
advisor” who was killed near the Iranian border. The Department requested further
information, but the Embassy was unable to verify the information. (National Archives,

Afghanistan
4. On the diplomatic front, the DRA condemned the current Islamic
Conference meeting in Saudi Arabia and repeated its amnesty offer to
Afghan refugees.4 DRA media also carried recent Soviet allegations of
U.S. aggression against Iran. Several Afghans we have spoken with
have ridiculed Pakistani President Zia for perceiving Soviet “flexibility”
on negotiations with Afghanistan, and friendly diplomats have again
noted that the Soviets and Karmal consider his party to be a govern-
ment. End summary.
[Omitted here is the body of the telegram.]
Mills
4 The Islamic Foreign Ministers met in Saudi Arabia on January 17 prior to the
Summit. Telegram 424 from Amman, January 20, relayed the views of the Pakistani
Ambassador to Jordan (who commented on recently concluded meetings between Jorda-
nian leaders and Zia), that Pakistan planned to “press hard” at the Summit both for a
strong condemnation of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and for the appointment
of a UN Special Representative. The telegram further noted that the Pakistani Ambassador
was “not sanguine about chances of success, since the Islamic participants will focus
so heavily on other issues.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
