Yugoslavia 933 no on the Harpoon, while it will not sit well, will probably not repeat not have the adverse impact that a rejection in either of the other two cases would entail particularly in light of ref D. Conversely, an affirmative reply on the Harpoon would be a major statement of our support at a time when such signals will have a substantial and lasting impact on the attitudes and outlook of people of critical importance to us in the years ahead. 5. My earlier experience in the Pentagon leads me to believe that the Navy, for understandable and respectable reasons, will probably question the wisdom of release of either the MK–46 or Harpoon to the Yugoslavs. Unless I miss my guess, they will put forth at least two arguments: A) there can be no guarantee that Yugoslavia will not transfer to the Soviets, or permit them to examine, the weapons systems in question; B) Yugoslavia, as a potential opponent, should not be sold weapons systems that could be used against US forces. 6. These are perfectly legitimate concerns for which there is no completely satisfactory response. As in everything having to do with foreign policy, the balance of pros and cons must be struck in individual cases. The arguments in response to the straw horse I may have created in para 5 are, as I see them, basically three: they are, admittedly, judgmental in character. The first, the political advantage to the US— particularly at a time when Tito is on his deathbed—has been made by me so many times in so many ways that I will not (you will be relieved to learn) burden you with a repetition here. Suffice it to say that on political grounds alone I believe the USG would be well advised to approve release of both the MK–46 and Harpoon to Yugoslavia. 7. As to the question of transfer of the technology, all I can say is that we have no evidence that such has been the case before, nor is there any reason to believe that it would happen now, when Yugoslav- Soviet relations are at a nadir, or in the future. All the evidence we have indicates that the GOY is meticulous in refusing to discuss with any third party its military relationship—much less the intimate details of the weapons involved—with any arms supplier. We have been held at arms length when we have tried to talk about Yugoslav purchases from the USSR or others, and understand that others have encountered a similar attitude. Thus, in my judgment (a judgment fully concurred in by the DATT), an argument that the Yugoslavs might transfer the technology is, at best, a worst case judgment supported by no evidence or experience to date. 8. So far as the question of Yugoslavia as a potential enemy is concerned, I find it hard to envisage a situation in which this would be a likely event. But, again, using a worst case analysis, it would seem to me that any war in which the Yugoslavs would be engaged against us would be one of such magnitude that the Yugoslav contribution
