1126 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II position; and has sparked, renewed interest in, and generally advanced the concept of equality for women. As presented here, the number and quality of examples of success from posts and post proposals for US action should reinforce work underway and stimulate new efforts. We expect and hope that many of these initiatives will become standard practice and a foundation for policy in missions generally. 5. The following proposals and examples for Embassy action can be applied, without additional funding, by most posts, wherever located (section B). Additional proposals for developing countries are detailed separately (section C). B. Embassy examples/proposals for diplomatic ways to encourage host countries to advance the status of women: 1. Put “our own house in order”, specifically, put more women officers in visible, responsible positions at US Embassies. As Embassy Abidjan notes: “We must first demonstrate that we have confidence in our own women officers. When host countries see a higher percentage of women in decision-making positions in our Embassies abroad, not only are they likely to imitate us, but we ourselves will stand on stronger ground in our advocacy of women’s rights.” Posts widely acknowledge the positive effect of US women in senior positions. As a Near Eastern Embassy reports, “We are a public demonstration of the equality of women, having for years past had women as diplomatic officers on our staff in a part of the world where women are unthinkable as diplomats.” 2. Show the US commitment to human rights and equality of opportunity by increasing the number and responsibility of women nationals hired locally. According to Embassy Abu Dhabi: “Assignment of women officers, as well as secretaries, and employment of Arab and non-Arab third-country women nationals in the Embassy are more obvious examples of US use of women power.” 3. Assure that the Embassy is at all times in contact with the host country’s (A) women leaders; (B) government-established bureaus/ directorates of women’s affairs; (C) appropriate women’s organizations. A significant number of Embassies report designation of a special “women’s affairs officer”. From Bonn, the Ambassador writes, “I have specifically asked a member of my professional staff to follow and report on issues of importance to women as they develop here . . . and instructed my staff to express strong US support for the significant steps taken by the German Government in recent years to improve the status of women.” 4. Reassess Embassy’s own attitudes toward women nationals (A) by reviewing Embassy’s contact lists carefully “to make sure our own unconscious biases or an assumption of local biases hasn’t led us to leave out possible useful contacts because they are women” (Em-
