1126
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
position; and has sparked, renewed interest in, and generally advanced
the concept of equality for women. As presented here, the number and
quality of examples of success from posts and post proposals for US ac-
tion should reinforce work underway and stimulate new efforts. We
expect and hope that many of these initiatives will become standard
practice and a foundation for policy in missions generally.
5. The following proposals and examples for Embassy action can
be applied, without additional funding, by most posts, wherever lo-
cated (section B). Additional proposals for developing countries are de-
tailed separately (section C).
B. Embassy examples/proposals for diplomatic ways to encourage
host countries to advance the status of women:
1. Put “our own house in order”, specifically, put more women of-
ficers in visible, responsible positions at US Embassies. As Embassy
Abidjan notes: “We must first demonstrate that we have confidence in
our own women officers. When host countries see a higher percentage
of women in decision-making positions in our Embassies abroad, not
only are they likely to imitate us, but we ourselves will stand on
stronger ground in our advocacy of women’s rights.” Posts widely ac-
knowledge the positive effect of US women in senior positions. As a
Near Eastern Embassy reports, “We are a public demonstration of the
equality of women, having for years past had women as diplomatic of-
ficers on our staff in a part of the world where women are unthinkable
as diplomats.”
2. Show the US commitment to human rights and equality of op-
portunity by increasing the number and responsibility of women na-
tionals hired locally. According to Embassy Abu Dhabi: “Assignment
of women officers, as well as secretaries, and employment of Arab and
non-Arab third-country women nationals in the Embassy are more ob-
vious examples of US use of women power.”
3. Assure that the Embassy is at all times in contact with the host
country’s (A) women leaders; (B) government-established bureaus/
directorates of women’s affairs; (C) appropriate women’s organiza-
tions. A significant number of Embassies report designation of a special
“women’s affairs officer”. From Bonn, the Ambassador writes, “I have
specifically asked a member of my professional staff to follow and re-
port on issues of importance to women as they develop here . . . and in-
structed my staff to express strong US support for the significant steps
taken by the German Government in recent years to improve the status
of women.”
4. Reassess Embassy’s own attitudes toward women nationals
(A) by reviewing Embassy’s contact lists carefully “to make sure our
own unconscious biases or an assumption of local biases hasn’t led us
to leave out possible useful contacts because they are women” (Em-
