854  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
• MX would present the Soviets with a difficult choice between 
allocating a large number of ICBM warheads against MX shelters or 
employing them against other valuable targets. MX would also provide 
a hedge against potential Soviet advances in threats to the submarine 
and bomber legs of the U.S. strategic triad.
Introduction
The assessments made on the following charts are defined as 
follows:
Strategic Balance. For each case, two charts assess the balance 
between U.S. and Soviet strategic forces at two different stages of hypo-
thetical nuclear conflict taking place between 1979 and 1989:
1. The pre-­exchange graph shows the ratio of on-­line U.S. and Soviet 
forces before the attack in terms of warheads; equivalent megatons 
(EMT), which measures the capability to destroy area targets; and hard 
target kill (HTK), which measures the capability to destroy hard point 
targets.
2. The post-­exchange graph shows the ratio of warheads and EMT 
that can be withheld for use after a Soviet-­initiated counterforce 
exchange in which the strategic forces on both sides and the facilities 
associated with the operational control and employment of these forces 
are attacked. (The remaining HTK is not shown because most of the 
hard targets are attacked in the counterforce exchange.) [6 lines not 
declassified]
This assessment does not necessarily reflect the way in which the 
Soviets would use their forces in a nuclear war. We do not adequately 
understand Soviet strategy, tactics, and objectives in an actual conflict. 
These may differ from our own. Neither does this assessment reflect the 
precise manner in which our own forces are targeted today. Moreover, 
it does not test the endurance of our forces or our ability to command 
and control them during a nuclear war.
U.S. Retaliatory Potential. For each case, the third chart measures 
the potential of U.S. forces that remain after the counterforce exchange 
to attack a comprehensive set of economic and military targets in 
the Soviet Union. (Missile silos and other military targets explicitly 
attacked in the previous counterforce exchange are not included.) [2 
lines not declassified]
DAY-TO-DAY ALERT FORCES UNDER SALT II
[chart not declassified]
Description: These charts assess the strategic balance and the retal-
iatory potential of planned U.S. forces under SALT II. (The NIE estimate 
for a Soviet force with a new 10–RV ICBM is used, since it provides
