March 27–December 31, 1979
891
fense industries adapt and maintain, and otherwise keep operating So-
viet equipment now in the Egyptian inventory. A DOD team has al-
ready visited Egypt for this purpose. We expect to have specific
proposals by October 1st.
Nevertheless, some new equipment will be a continuing require-
ment, and we should be prepared to continue our financial and mate-
rial help. In this regard we will be considering further FMS credits at
about the $500 million per year level, beginning with the FY 1982
budget. This is the financial guide we propose to use in our long-term
planning for Egypt. Such an approach would begin a program of reg-
ular military funding aid for Egypt outside the peace package. This aid
would be similar, to but less than, the annual aid to Israel.
We may have a problem with the public and Congress regarding
an enhanced program. If we should propose to provide $500 million a
year in further FMS credits beginning in FY 82, critics may argue that
our one-time package was authorized for the period through FY 82. In
addition, Israel might argue that our total economic and military assist-
ance programs for Egypt would be approaching parity with Israel’s
and, therefore, might seek new increments for itself. We believe these
are manageable problems.
We have also considered the terms on which FMS credits are of-
fered. At present we have agreed to finance military purchases over a
30 year period, with an initial ten year grace period on principal, but we
believe that debt service will be a growing problem, depending on how
quickly, if at all, the economy prospers. It is preferable that military
equipment be given second priority after Egypt’s economic develop-
ment needs.
So far as equipment releases are concerned, Egyptian requests for
modern tanks, antitank helicopters, and advanced fighter aircraft could
run into regional balance or arms control problems on the Hill. While
our sale of such articles to Egypt may not be advisable now, we may
have to consider them in the longer term. The Egyptians would see any
joint planning which omits such equipment as a serious indication that
the U.S. will not support Egyptian force modernization. The consulta-
tions we plan will give us an opportunity to channel Egyptian desires
in directions we can politically manage.
Our longer-term planning will take place within our previously
stated policy that the U.S. is prepared to provide a substantial amount
though such assistance could enable the Egyptians to prolong the useful life of such
equipment beyond previously scheduled retirement dates, such measures will do little to
reduce Egypt’s growing arms imbalance with not only Israel but also with Syria, Iraq,
and Libya.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services, Directorate of Intel-
ligence, Job 81T00031R: Production Case Files, Box 1, Folder 64, Response to State’s Re-
quest for Information on Western Retrofitting of Soviet Military Equipment in Egypt)
