906 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —He wondered about the speeches that had been made during the campaign, about the conditions of our national security in light of the assertions in this paper. If the defense is not adequate, as the paper insists, then we did not advocate a proper policy and we have misled the American people. (S) —The paper says things about our own record for the past four years. It assumes that our Allies in Europe and East Asia must adopt drastic policy changes or the threat won’t be met. If the threat is that serious and the Allies won’t act, do we have to take up the slack? What are the consequences for Japan if the U.S. suggests that Japan take over the security of Korea? If the Japanese won’t be responsive, why raise the issue now? It would be better to do it later and in a slower manner. (S) —The President’s concern with the State of the Union Message is understandable, and there are some valid points in the paper, but the problems relate to a period when we won’t have jurisdiction over policy. The paper needs revisions before it can be adopted by the President and the National Security Council. (S) Harold Brown answered Muskie’s remarks about the “terrifying paper” (Muskie denied that he had used these words), a surprising paper, Brown added, in light of what was said during the election campaign. Brown recalled that our warnings during the campaign about the problems in the 1980s, about the importance of our Allies’ contributions, about our defense programs going ahead on schedule, and the importance of arms control are very consistent with the thrust of the paper. You say the Allies will not accept it. The future will be terrifying if the Allies do not and we do not carry out our defense programs. Brown added that there has not been time to staff this paper with other agencies, but its issues are primarily defense matters. In any case, we have to leave the next Administration some strategic assessment. (S) Muskie asked why we must go public with this. Harold Brown said it will not be a public document. McIntyre added that in so far as it is included in the defense report to the Congress on the Five-Year Defense Plan, it will be public. Dr. Brzezinski added that it could be refined in our discussion here to provide points to the President for his State of the Union Address. (C) Harold Brown and McIntyre entered a short debate on how large a deviation from previous FYDPs is appropriate. McIntyre charged that Defense is “phoneying” the books on the threat and the problems. Brown argued that “real, real growth” to meet inflation may require quite large deviations as compared to “real growth” which has not. Both agreed to defer this debate until the upcoming PRC meeting on the Defense budget. (S)
