International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 business and banking community and foreign investors are not confident that the US is able or willing to deal with the dollar crisis. In their view, we are not acting forcefully to correct fundamental problems. The group saw the following possible consequences if the US could not halt the dollar’s decline: 1. OPEC would increase oil prices. OPEC might either raise them directly or begin to denominate them in non-US currencies. Either action would have an adverse impact on the US and world economy. 2. Domestic inflationary pressures would intensify. A depreciating dollar raises domestic prices. (Depreciation to date in 1978 is projected to raise prices by 0.5% by the end of the year.) The dollar’s decline is partly responsible for the stock market’s malaise. These developments could further erode business confidence and dampen private investment flows. Eventually, depreciation-induced inflation might have a snowballing effect leading to still further adverse consequences. 3. US leadership abroad in economic policy and foreign affairs would suffer. The trade negotiations would probably fail; the North/South dialogue would deteriorate. The international economic system would enter into a decline with a serious impact on Allied solidarity and the probability of adverse social and political consequences in key Allied countries. The group agreed that the Administration must act now to deal with the dollar problem. We cannot afford to wait until self-correcting forces (e.g., a depreciating dollar leading to increased exports) take hold. Immediate action would forestall more drastic measures later. The group agreed on the following steps to deal with the dollar crisis: 1. Energy. The President should next week call in appropriate Congressional leaders and energy conferees and inform them in general terms that because of the deteriorating international economic situation, if they are not able to agree on an energy tax program by late April, he will be compelled to restrict oil imports by other means. The public announcement of such a meeting should be carefully phrased to avoid the appearance that the President has given Congress an ultimatum, and should be linked to the other measures described below. If the Congress does not act in a month or so, we should be prepared to impose a fee on imported oil. The group agreed that there are strong national security grounds for this action. Consequently, if we present our case effectively and give Congress advance warning of our intentions, the risk of Congressional action to withdraw the President’s power in this area should be manageable.2 2 Carter wrote “?” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
