1074  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
We expect to send Ralph Clough to interview all the prisoners as the 
Department’s representative.
You will be interested in a short item in Drew Pearson’s column of 
June 24:
“Amb. Alex Johnson in Geneva has been instructed to keep 
talking to the Chinese Communists for another year if necessary, to 
give the Far East crisis a chance to cool off. Johnson has been talking 
for almost a year already and he’s now a bit impatient, wondering 
how much longer he had to listen to Red insults and demands for 
a meeting with Secretary Dulles. Back came a cable from the State 
Department last week, telling him to keep talking indefinitely, mak­
ing no concessions.”
While this does not fully reflect your instructions of last week, it 
looks to me as if somebody who saw our guidance telegram talked to 
Pearson. In any event there is a basic leak somewhere and this sort of 
thing is highly mischievous. It is certain to come to the attention of the 
Chinese Communists and will probably be given a certain amount of 
credence by them.
The British Embassy informed us on Saturday that Fathers Clifford 
and Phillips have received orders from their superiors to leave. They 
are to take the SS Hamburg from Shanghai to Hong Kong sailing June 
29. We are glad that they are leaving.
We have not been able to get anything from General Erskine’s 
office this morning on Ekvall’s orders. We believe that local interests of 
the Army Attache in Paris are the only stumbling block since he has all 
the necessary authorization and the money for Ekvall. It may have been 
cleared up already. We gave them a copy of your telegram of June 22. 
We shall continue to press the Pentagon on this until it is completely 
resolved.
There is no present disposition here for us to take the initiative 
on tabling any new formulation of the renunciation of force draft. Any 
change which might recommend itself to Wang would necessarily 
involve something of a substantive backdown and would imply even 
more than it literally conveyed. The disposition here is to stand on the 
April 19 draft.
There is nothing new on the Nehru visit. We have done a short 
briefing paper on the Geneva talks for the Nehru visit. Copy will be 
forwarded.
We are pretty hard pressed with Ralph away on two weeks leave. 
He returns on Wednesday. Regards and good wishes.
Sincerely,
Walter P. McConaughy
