922
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
4. Brzezinski said that he believed we must develop a horizontal
escalation capability4 since we did not have a meaningful vertical esca-
lation capability. We could close the Black and Baltic seas, blockade
Murmansk and Vladivostok, challenge their fleet at sea and levy proxy
penalties by involvement in PDRY, Cuba, Ethiopia, Libya and Angola.
The Soviets must be made to realize that Iran would not be a limited
conflict. Secretary Muskie said this all sounded like World War III—
a view not shared by the Europeans. If we assessed the CPX in such
drastic terms we should share these views with the Europeans. If we
did, this would get out and might provoke the Soviets. [portion marking
not declassified]
5. Brzezinski stated that in the past we had a kind of unwritten
understanding with the Soviets—neither side moved directly into the
“other’s” area. The Soviets might have some ambiguity over Iran
because of our acquiescence to events there and the question is how
do we let them know our position without provocation? Should we
send them a secret message that says, “we have no designs on Iran,
but if you move in we’ll counter you?” A statement such as this does
not impose any limits on our actions. The DCI said that perhaps we
should not consider such a message because if the Soviets are not ready
to enter Iran such a message might indicate we have a plan of our own
and cause them to move. If they do have a plan, such a message,
without any teeth in it, could cause them to discount it. We should give
more thought to this idea of a message. [portion marking not declassified]
6. Muskie reiterated that if we are confident that our CPX assess-
ment indicates probable Soviet action, we have to get Europe on board.
Newsom added that Europe still does not accept that the loss of the
Gulf to the Soviets would put them under Soviet control. They must
be made to see that. Brzezinski did not believe we should go to the
Europeans yet. The message should be to the Soviets and it should be
clear: their involvement in the Gulf will set them on a collision course
with us. We must make sure that the Soviets do not miscalculate our
determination—we must minimize Soviet uncertainty. DoD should
have a look at horizontal options given the fact that the Soviets do not
have any exploitable external weaknesses such as the Persian Gulf is
to the West. [portion marking not declassified]
4 In their August 29 conversation, Turner and Brzezinski discussed horizontal escala-
tion in connection with Iran, that is, “what forms of military action could we take against
the Soviets outside of Iran if they invaded Iran—things like a war at sea or closing the
Baltic or closing the Black Sea, blockading Cuba, mining the Soviets in their harbor at
Dalak, mining Aden, knocking out the Soviet air force contingent at Aden, etc.” See
footnote 4, Document 348.
