3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
887
sions. The Soviet Union questioned whether the US could not look seri-
ously at this question and give its good advice to Pakistan so that they
would enter into contact with Afghanistan and develop good relations
with them. Recognizing the state of affairs between the US and Iran, the
USSR would not ask us to use our influence there but Iran would
follow Pakistan’s lead. The Pakistanis should not use the excuse that
they do not like the present Afghan leadership since the Afghans
hardly respect Pakistan’s leaders.
If agreement can be reached, Soviet forces would withdraw and
Pakistan would have nothing to fear. Pakistan should have no appre-
hensions about Afghan territorial claims against them. The Soviets
knew there were no such claims. However, if this remains a question in
Pakistani minds they can raise it when talks begin.
Gromyko said there had been some talk on an international confer-
ence on Afghanistan which the USSR considered totally unnecessary.
There could be no question of such a conference discussing the internal
situation in Afghanistan. As for the situation between Afghanistan and
its neighbors, this must be discussed between them.
Indian Ocean
Gromyko went on to describe the US effort to build bases far from
US shores as an effort to threaten the USSR and encircle it. This poisons
the general atmosphere between our countries and is opposed by coun-
tries of the region. The US has refused to discuss the Indian Ocean
while it is grabbing a new military bridgehead. The US should ap-
proach this question from a broader perspective.
Secretary Muskie said that if the USSR thought it was being treated
badly in the US press, they should pay more attention to President
Carter’s press clippings. Skepticism about one another’s intentions is
easy to generate but based on his long experience in the Senate, the Sec-
retary said he could testify to this Administration’s good faith on SALT
II. It took time to head off amendments and convert them to under-
standings which would not destroy the Treaty. But SALT II was never
pigeonholed and had been ready to be acted on.
Concerning the future, the Secretary said the President had made
SALT ratification an issue in the campaign. This was not an easy deci-
sion since promoting a Treaty while Soviet intentions were in doubt
was unpopular. The President took a courageous decision because he
believed in the issue. The President, the Vice President, Secretary of De-
fense Brown on “Face the Nation” Sunday,3 the Secretary in his many
speeches had begun an effort to build support for SALT II. They hoped
3 September 21.
