1956  1199
4. Wang said September 24 statement of US once again distorted 
facts by slandering their side with charge of holding Americans as 
political hostages. Ten Americans still held were persons lawfully sen­
tenced for breaking China’s laws. Insofar as law-­abiding Americans his 
country concerned, they always free choose whether to return or reside 
China. Subsequent to agreement September 10, Wang’s government 
had taken further measures of leniency in granting release of greater 
part Americans. Could thus be seen it his government which been 
faithfully carrying out agreement. In contrast, my government still 
failed fully carry out agreement. US still failed give them complete list 
Chinese US. Of 55 persons whose names he had given me, 52 still not 
returned, and my side still failed account them. Of 103 persons on list I 
gave him, 26 still not returned and we still failed give accounting them. 
US still held many Chinese in prison. However their side not making 
charge we holding them as political hostages. Their side only requested 
US on own initiative adopt measures similar to what they had done 
to enable these persons exercise right return. Distortions and slander 
freely resorted to by my side on question civilians were no more than 
attempt to cover up procrastination of talks without intent of seeking 
solution of problems. However, facts could not be so easily covered up.
5. Wang continued as result intransigence my side in unreason­
able position, talks had come to prolonged deadlock. So that no possi­
ble means for solution of controversial issues between China-­America 
would slip through fingers, their side had introduced practical feasible 
proposal for removing embargo. As Wang had said, if we could reach 
agreement this problem it would not only resolve that issue but would 
also exert favorable influence on settlement other issues. Thus far, how­
ever, US had not shown willingness give earnest consideration this fair 
and reasonable proposal. Position my side on this was untenable.
6. Wang said my side had on one hand continued persist in demand 
encroaching on sovereignty and interfering internal affairs China, so 
that both sides could not arrive at agreement on renunciation force, yet 
on other hand my side had made agreement on this prerequisite for 
discussion of embargo. Thus my side had once more blocked way to 
progress in talks.
In spite this attitude my side continued hold in these talks, which 
did not in any way contribute to progress, nevertheless, their side still, 
inspired by spirit of desire for progress, made yet another proposal 
to promote human contacts and cultural exchange between two peo­
ples. Far as his country concerned it consistent policy his government 
encourage and promote friendly exchanges between people his coun­
try and other countries of world. That because they believed peaceful 
coexistence and cultural exchanges between people of world would 
contribute to their mutual understanding and remove doubts.
