624  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Shevardnadze: Well, we can approach this everyday. Every meeting, 
we can give new instructions to our delegations. Maybe you and I can 
stay in touch continuously, but we are going to have to work intensively.
Baker: I agree. But the first thing to be done is to see where there 
are areas of disagreement. Why don’t I try to summarize where I think 
the real outstanding issues on ALCMs are. It seems to me that you can 
identify five differences on ALCMs.
First, whether the 40 percent rule should also apply to future 
bombers. Second, whether you are going to 100 or 115 heavy bombers 
outside of the limits. Third, is the range. Fourth, is there going to be a 
sub-­ceiling on ALCMs carrying heavy bombers. And, fifth, are conven-
tional ALCMs and tactical aircraft to be counted as a heavy bomber 
if they have ALCMs with a range of over 600 kilometers. As I read 
through the elements of common ground and I read what was put into 
the record, these are the essential differences now.
Bartholomew: But the Marshal agreed as part of our discussions, we 
went over things element by element, and we agreed with the excep-
tion of two questions.
Akhromeyev: Yes, that’s right. The two questions were one on range 
and the other is on the floating limit or sub-­ceiling on bombers which 
we say should be between 90 and 115. On this question the US proposes 
nothing.
Shevardnadze: The US proposes no limit for the upper end. I mean 
you could float with no end?
Bartholomew: We have a difference on the very concept of floating 
of it or a sub-­ceiling. The fact is that we simply reject that. It’s not really 
a number that we can find.
Baker: Let’s put it simply. We’ve never agreed to a sub-­limit on 
bombers. It’s not a difference in numbers, we just haven’t agreed to 
that concept.
Shevardnadze: Well, what does the floating concept mean—­between 
some limits?
Bartholomew: We say floating because we are free to set the level of 
bombers that we deploy.
Baker: That number will float. It doesn’t need the acceptance of 
either side. You’ve got an overall number of 1,600 strategic delivery 
vehicles. That’s it. Somewhere under that ceiling we’ll determine the 
number of bombers that we want to have.
Akhromeyev: Yes, it is true that you said three times in Moscow that 
there would be no sub-­ceiling. And three times when you said there 
would be no sub-­ceiling on bombers, we didn’t give you an answer. We 
felt we had to study the problem. We’ve done, so and concluded that 
we can’t accept an agreement where there is no limit on bombers.
