44
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
7. This situation, however, soon changed. On the evening of 8
March the Majlis Oil Commission, under pressure from the exultant
ultra-nationalists, unanimously passes a resolution endorsing national-
ization but asking a two-month extension for study of the practical
problems involved. On the following morning the pro-Soviet element
went into action with an anti-US and anti-UK demonstration outside
the US Embassy, while in the afternoon Mulla Kashani held a mass
meeting which, though orderly, was marked by inflammatory speeches
denouncing the British and Razmara. The organization responsible for
the murder, the Friends of Islam, threatened violence against other op-
ponents of nationalization and indicated that reprisals would be forth-
coming if the assassin were not released. Although the provinces ap-
parently continued to be quiet, and the government’s control of the
security forces was apparently unshaken, uneasiness in Tehran, partic-
ularly in political circles, mounted sharply. No one appeared capable of
forming a strong government satisfactory to the Shah, and most of
those who would normally have participated in such a government
were deterred by fear of personal reprisal and by the sheer difficulty of
coping with the question of nationalization. Proclamation of martial
law would require approval of a demoralized Majlis, while dissolution
of the Majlis involved a risk of increasing the tension. Under the cir-
cumstances, the Shah apparently decided to avoid a head-on clash with
the ultra-nationalists, making do with a weak interim government until
tension abated.
8. The situation has clarified somewhat during the last few days.
Upon rejection by the Majlis on 11 March of the Shah’s first choice for
interim Premier, the Shah persuaded his widely respected Minister of
Court, former Ambassador to the US Ala, to assume the premiership.
Ala, who has been approved by both the Senate and the Majlis, is de-
scribed as apparently “cheerful and optimistic” about what he regards
as the task of effecting a reconciliation among the various factions, in-
cluding Kashani’s. Meanwhile, the impending adjournment of Parlia-
ment for the Noruz holidays offers a breathing spell, and it has been re-
ported that the police have been quietly rounding up members of the
reportedly small Friends of Islam group and of the Tudeh Party. At the
same time, however, the unanimous Majlis vote in favor of the resolu-
tion on oil nationalization indicates that the National Front is deter-
mined to exploit its present psychological advantage. The Oil Commis-
sion has been granted a two-month extension to study the practical
aspects of the problem. In addition, the warning note on nationaliza-
tion which the UK has sent Iran may actually provoke rather than dis-
courage further ultra-nationalist outbursts.
9. A major indication of the trend will be provided by Ala’s presen-
tation of his proposed Cabinet to the Majlis on 18 March.
