International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
35
or to grant relief different from that recommended by the USITC, can
be overridden by Congress by concurrent resolution.
Background
This is the largest case of this type in trade history, involving $1.4
billion in imports from 75 countries, shoe firms employing around
170,000 workers in 36 states, and a product accounting for 1.4 percent in
the consumer price index.
The shoe industry has been attempting to get Government action
to stem imports for almost a decade. Five separate investigations have
been conducted, with relief denied as recently as last year. During this
period the number of firms in the industry has declined by about 40
percent (from 600 to 378), and employment by 30 percent (from 233,000
to 164,000). Unemployment in the industry is at 11 percent compared to
a national rate of 8 percent.
During the same period, 1968–1976, while domestic production of
shoes declined by almost one-third (with a slight recovery in 1976), im-
ports doubled, moving from a U.S. market share of one-fifth to almost
one-half. In 1968 most of these imports were leather, primarily from
Italy and Spain, with a substantial volume of vinyl shoes from Japan,
and a lesser amount from Taiwan. Now the market positions have
shifted so that by volume Taiwan is the largest exporter to the United
States (156 million pair), followed by Italy (47 million), Korea (44 mil-
lion), Spain (39 million), and Brazil (27 million). Japan has ceased being
an important supplier. Some developing countries and Eastern Euro-
pean countries are beginning to increase their shipments here.
The trend in the domestic industry is toward concentration, with
the 21 largest firms producing over half of domestic output. The larger
firms are generally profitable and can compete with the imports. Many
of the smaller firms cannot. The greatest difficulty the U.S. industry has
is the differential in wages between developing countries and our own
(from $.59 total compensation per hour in Korea to $4.33 in this
country). Since shoe production is very labor intensive, the import
share of the U.S. market is likely to grow.
Factors Favoring Granting Relief
Trade Act criteria met. The industry has clearly been injured by im-
ports. There have been large declines in production and employment in
the past decade, soaring imports, and numerous firms with losses or
low profits.
Credibility with Congress, import-competing industries and labor. This
appears to be the type of case Congress had in mind for import relief. In
1974, the Administration promised import relief for footwear in order
to obtain support for the Trade Act. Such relief, however, was not
