1956 899 guidance telegram for the next meeting has been dispatched. Since you will not submit the reformulation at the next meeting on April 9 but merely intimate there will be a new draft later, there is still time for us to consider your reaction. Our thought is that the reformulation will provide a further test of Chinese Communist attitudes and will afford another token of our desire to reconcile the opposing positions. We have changed the ref­ erence to the Taiwan area so that it is no longer contiguous to the ref­ erence to the right of individual and collective self defense. We have adhered to the wording of their draft at every place where we could, and we have given them a peg on which they can gracefully hang a modification of their position, if they have any desire to come to an agreement. We doubt that they will accept the new formula but we at least have something to gain tactically by introducing it, and we do not depart from our essential position. The redraft is the work of Judge Phleger. It was approved by the Secretary on the afternoon of April 4 when he reviewed the entire course of recent developments at Geneva. While there may not be much material for new discussions in this revision, it does at least give you a little something to chew on and should take care of the meetings through the 26th of April, which is the earliest date on which Wang could give a Peiping reply to a revised draft introduced on April 19. We told you in the guidance telegram yesterday about our deci­ sion to have I & N. S. actually ascertain if deportation would be possi­ ble in each of the 50 cases of Chinese aliens in the U.S. penitentiaries. This is quite a project, but the preliminary survey seems worth while. Enclosed is a copy of our letter requesting the survey which gives our background thinking. We are aware of your view expressed in a recent letter that deportation of Chinese prisoners would not bring about the release of the American prisoners since the detention of the Americans is linked to political demands. We agree with you that the Chinese Communists are using the American prisoners to try to extort political concessions, including a Foreign Minister’s Conference. But some of the people working on the matter at this end believe that the release of Chinese prisoners would at least give us a better club with which to hammer the Chinese Communists on the prisoner issue and might well put the Chinese Communists in dutch with even their neutralist friends if they fail to release the Americans following release of Chinese prisoners. Although you have commented at length on this matter in a recent letter to me we invited your reaction to this proposal so that we will be sure that we have your latest view on this, and also that we may have it in the official record.
