September 1953–December 1954
883
and the South Pacific. There is very little market in the Western Hemi-
sphere, nor will there be for some years to come in view of the potential
surpluses that exist in that region. In fact, if there should be any appre-
ciable flow of Middle East oil to the United States within the next few
years and especially if it is the result of price cutting in the Persian Gulf
area, there unquestionably would be severe economic and political re-
percussions in the Western Hemisphere.
9. It therefore follows that if appreciable production is to be at-
tempted in Iran it must flow again into Eastern Hemisphere markets,
and that no appreciable market will develop in the Western Hemis-
phere at least for some years.
10. Almost all Middle Eastern crude oil and refined products are
produced and marketed by seven large international oil organizations.
At least 90 percent of the ultimate retail distribution is handled by these
companies, or their subsidiaries and affiliates. There are a few lesser
companies who also distribute a minor amount of oil but they are not of
appreciable size nor do they have large outlets available. It is necessary
for Iran to consummate some form of agreement with an entity which
will include the major marketing companies, if an appreciable amount
of Iranian oil is to flow to market.
11. The possibility of developing fresh distribution channels of im-
portance outside those afforded by the larger companies does not exist
for the following reasons:
a. New private companies entering the international oil distribu-
tion business in the Eastern Hemisphere would be at a hopelessly great
disadvantage in competing in the present world situation with those
companies which are already well established;
b. Those few governments in the world which are endeavoring to
operate their own refining and distribution systems offer an extremely
limited outlet for Iranian oil.
It is estimated that the sum of these channels could not purchase as
much as 100,000 barrels per day of Iranian oil. In many cases, particu-
larly in dealings with foreign governments, income to Iran would have
to be received on a barter basis and this would offer obvious disadvan-
tages. Furthermore, a distribution policy based upon sales to a number
of small private companies or to foreign governments would not be of a
character which would guarantee a steady flow of oil. Under such con-
ditions it would not be possible to operate wells or refineries in an ef-
fective, continuous or economic manner.
12. If distribution can be obtained through the major companies,
however, a volume of from 400,000 to 800,000 barrels per day could be
achieved within approximately a two-or three-year period after re-
suming operations. This output is comparable to the average off-take of
