164  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
O’Neill further comments that he would have no effective means 
giving publicity to arrangement unless he were given right to place a 
notice in the Chinese Communist press.
Dulles
132.	 Letter 5 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 5
Geneva, August 24, 1955
Dear Walter:
I have received your letter of August 19th, and I am writing this to 
go out by tomorrow’s pouch. I would hope that you would be able to 
work out something so that we could have an exchange at least twice 
a week.
As you can see from my messages, the deadlock is now certainly 
very tight. I am sorry that I apparently misled you a little in my first 
flash telegram on the August 18th meeting by not including enough. 
However, I thought that my statements that I had made no progress, 
result was complete deadlock, made it clear that I had not in fact got 
any place.
I believe that I have included in my two telegrams on the subject 
everything of significance that passed at the dinner I gave for Wang, 
although it is hard to condense four and a half hours of conversation. 
As I said in my telegram, he was making a tremendous effort to go as 
far as he could within his obviously very limited instructions to assure 
me that everything was going to be all right. I thought you might be 
interested in exactly what he said, which I had termed as “an involved 
and tortuous explanation” in paragraph two of my 585. Ekvall and I 
reconstructed it immediately upon our return as follows: “There is no 
comparison to be made of the advantages which those who are left will 
have over those who have been released during the past one year. For 
there are three favoring factors which will make it clear quickly and 
easily for them to be released. The three factors are (a) favorable effect 
release of the others will have on people still there; (b) circumstances 
of the case itself; and (c) state of our relations.” I prodded and poked 
at this from every conceivable angle and was just unable to obtain any 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
