857H.01/36
[Document 149]
The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
[Translation19 ]
WASHINGTON, April 7, 1925.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: Article 10 of the treaty of February 9, 1920, relative to Spitzbergen20
makes it a condition for the adherence of Russia that a Russian Government shall be
recognized by the High Contracting Parties: “Until the recognition by the High
Contracting Parties of a Russian Government shall permit Russia to adhere to the
present Treaty, Russian nationals and companies shall enjoy the same rights as
nationals of the High Contracting Parties.”
The Soviet Government having since informed the Norwegian Government that it
acknowledged the sovereignty of Norway in Spitzbergen and made no objection to the
treaty of February 9, 1920, being put into operation, it seemed to the French
Government that it would be advantageous to secure the formal adherence of the Soviet
Government without giving the said Government any ground upon which to claim
recognition by all the signatory powers on the strength of article 10.
To that end under instructions from the French Government my predecessor laid before
the American Secretary of State a draft protocol stating that the powers signatory to the
treaty of February 9, 1920, had agreed that “notwithstanding the stipulation in article
10, Russia be permitted to give its adherence even though all the High Contracting
Parties have not yet recognized the existence of a Russian Government.”
While concurring in the French Government’s suggestion to let Russia adhere to the
treaty concerning Spitzbergen without waiting for the recognition of the Government of
the Union by all the signatory powers, the Honorable Mr. Hughes asked Mr. Jusserand
in behalf of the American Government that instead of the protocol originally
contemplated there be substituted an agreement calling for ratification. He also
expressed a desire that it be clearly specified that the signature of the United States, if
eventually placed on that agreement, could in no wise be regarded as implying its
recognition of the Soviet Government.
I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that my Government, so far as it is
concerned, sees no objection to concurring in the views of the American Government.
