International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
687
235.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, March 11, 1980
SUBJECT
Tony Solomon’s View on Steel TPM (U)
I called Tony Solomon, who is vacationing on the West Coast, to
ask his views on the steel TPM. Here are my notes as to what he said:
—As the guy who put all this together and who negotiated with
them (the steel people) for two years, it makes no sense not to suspend
TPM. (C)
—The combination of TPM and the US Steel suits would have a
significant inflationary impact. He has talked to 30–40 people on the
West Coast, all of whom agree that the only issue on which you are vul-
nerable is inflation. Maintaining TPM in the face of the US Steel suits
would make it look as though the Administration were fueling infla-
tion. This should be the dominant consideration in your decision. You
would receive strong consumer criticism if you did not suspend. (C)
—The US Government would be in a stronger position to negotiate
with the steel firms if we had suspended TPM and thus demonstrated
our toughness. Suspension of TPM would put more pressure on Rod-
erick,2 since the rest of the industry will want to see it restored. If we
don’t suspend, we will look like a paper tiger, and US Steel’s terms will
be that much stiffer as a result. (C)
—The Europeans are anxious to keep TPM, in large part, in order
to firm up prices in the European market. TPM suspension will not pro-
duce a much worse European reaction than the suits themselves. (C)
—Your credibility is at stake and your image would be damaged
by a reversal of our past position. The head of the National Steel Com-
pany had approached Tony two months ago to propose a deal under
which US Steel would only file two suits and we would maintain the
TPM. Tony replied that this didn’t make sense, since Roderick could
still keep the four other country suits dangling over our head, and we
would encounter vigorous criticism from the US public. The head of
National Steel replied: “You are right; we can’t fool you, but maybe we
can fool the White House.” (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 90, Economics/International: 1–5/80. Confidential.
Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “cc Lloyd—info. C.”
2 David Roderick was Chairman of U.S. Steel.
