602 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ES–19. Telegram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi) to the Department of State1  San Salvador, September 10, 1960, noon. 137. Reference: Deptel 86.2 With collapse yesterday’s strike efforts3 and progress in move toward conciliation, situation here decidedly calmer. May have passed crisis. Discussion with Esquivel, President Assembly, and twelve Assembly members last night convinces me military, business, church, wealthy and community leaders on second thought now recognize necessity support Lemus through current crisis. While many were ready assist in seeking solution, major move came from Archbishop when he reluctantly issued message of conciliation under specific instructions of Nunciatura. Once committed, Archbishop immediately received support banking business and social community resulting in a meeting yesterday and atmosphere evidently conducive to conciliation (Embtel 135 September 9).4 Group last night convinced President still firm. Contemplated investigation will cover not only police violence but also actions on other side. Evident, however, that Lemus hold on government definitely shaken and chances finishing presidential term appreciably reduced. Open question whether Lemus hatred of and efforts to smear Osorio by permitting airing of criminal charges against military and other officers for actions taken under Osorio (Torres Valencia and Palomo cases) have so offended military to whom Osorio is darling that a coup will be forthcoming. Conversations with some responsible leaders suggest that perhaps day of reckoning may have been put off until a coup will not be confused with communism. Army as regularly reported holds key to any change now and in the foreseeable future. To date have heard nothing to indicate other than that officers currently control army 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.00/9–1060. Confidential. This telegram was sent in two sections. 2 In telegram 86, September 9, 1960, the Department of State urgently requested an evaluation and recommendations on the crisis in El Salvador and an analysis of the changed attitude of the Salvadoran press. (716.00/9–760) 3 Despatch 66 from San Salvador, September 14, 1960, reported that efforts to set a general strike in motion on September 9 failed after Lemus agreed to the conciliatory measures mentioned in footnote 4. (716.00/9–1460) 4 It reported a radio announcement that in a meeting with cabinet officers including Ortíz Mancía and Parker, and a public committee of businessmen and the Archbishop, Lemus agreed to release students arrested but not charged with crimes; to determine by investigation those responsible for the September 2 violence, and to suspend the state of siege upon restoration of order. (716.00/9–960)
