Human Rights —EB’s primary concern, however, is that new PL 480 human rights reporting requirements will create serious new bilateral problems with recipient governments. If new reports are required of just a few human rights problem countries, we risk creating a “hit list” which would hurt our relations with those nations. Some recipient governments, knowledgeable about the legislation and Section 112, may not accept the additional reporting requirement as a condition for PL 480 assistance. This would place the United States in the awkward position of either having to agree to omit the report or to terminate PL 480. The HA position that agreements should be amended for all countries would be extremely inefficient and unfairly penalize innocent governments. In addition to adding to a reporting burden which already is excessive, it would likely complicate and delay PL 480 programing. This would adversely affect recipient country food distribution programs and lead to widespread criticism domestically and abroad. —To be effective, reports on how food programs benefit the needy would have to be based on careful monitoring of recipient country food distribution and local currency allocation priorities. This would require a significant increase in AID mission activity in this area beyond what exists in most countries today. Such an expansion would represent a major departure from our current policy under which AID seeks to reduce its role in recipient country currency allocation decisions. AID’s experience, particularly during the period of local currency sales programs, has shown that such involvement can hurt our political and developmental objectives and lead to undesirable friction. EB does not believe we should go down that route again. —Finally, EB has a continuing interest in Title I programs used for budgetary and/or balance of payments support purposes. Most programs promote these objectives to some extent; a few are implemented specifically for such purposes. Recent examples include allocations for Jamaica and Portugal to alleviate the difficult financial situation which those countries face. Requiring all, or even a few, governments to document that Title I directly benefits the needy would undermine this key aspect of the program. In sum, EB shares AID’s view that a new requirement for all Title I agreements would be highly undesirable, but believes that new requirements for just a few problem countries would be equally bad. Our conclusion, noted above, is that the special requirement should be applied only when Title I food assistance is provided to a country identified as a gross human rights violator. In that case, the special provision and report are required by Section 112 of the PL 480 Act and we must, of course, comply. AID View AID believes applying the Section 112 requirement, that food or local currencies directly benefit the needy, to all Title I agreements,
