Human Rights
283
—EB’s primary concern, however, is that new PL 480 human rights
reporting requirements will create serious new bilateral problems with
recipient governments. If new reports are required of just a few human
rights problem countries, we risk creating a “hit list” which would hurt
our relations with those nations. Some recipient governments, knowl-
edgeable about the legislation and Section 112, may not accept the addi-
tional reporting requirement as a condition for PL 480 assistance. This
would place the United States in the awkward position of either having
to agree to omit the report or to terminate PL 480. The HA position that
agreements should be amended for all countries would be extremely
inefficient and unfairly penalize innocent governments. In addition to
adding to a reporting burden which already is excessive, it would
likely complicate and delay PL 480 programing. This would adversely
affect recipient country food distribution programs and lead to wide-
spread criticism domestically and abroad.
—To be effective, reports on how food programs benefit the needy
would have to be based on careful monitoring of recipient country food
distribution and local currency allocation priorities. This would require
a significant increase in AID mission activity in this area beyond what
exists in most countries today. Such an expansion would represent a
major departure from our current policy under which AID seeks to re-
duce its role in recipient country currency allocation decisions. AID’s
experience, particularly during the period of local currency sales pro-
grams, has shown that such involvement can hurt our political and de-
velopmental objectives and lead to undesirable friction. EB does not be-
lieve we should go down that route again.
—Finally, EB has a continuing interest in Title I programs used for
budgetary and/or balance of payments support purposes. Most pro-
grams promote these objectives to some extent; a few are implemented
specifically for such purposes. Recent examples include allocations for
Jamaica and Portugal to alleviate the difficult financial situation which
those countries face. Requiring all, or even a few, governments to docu-
ment that Title I directly benefits the needy would undermine this key
aspect of the program.
In sum, EB shares AID’s view that a new requirement for all Title I
agreements would be highly undesirable, but believes that new re-
quirements for just a few problem countries would be equally bad. Our
conclusion, noted above, is that the special requirement should be ap-
plied only when Title I food assistance is provided to a country identi-
fied as a gross human rights violator. In that case, the special provision
and report are required by Section 112 of the PL 480 Act and we must,
of course, comply.
AID View
AID believes applying the Section 112 requirement, that food or
local currencies directly benefit the needy, to all Title I agreements,
