264  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
of the West in economic, technological, and social-­cultural sources of 
influence and attraction. But they are persuaded by Soviet ideology, 
Russian history, and by their own life experiences to see political con-
flict involving the use of force or conducted in its shadow as the motor 
driving development both within states and in the international sys-
tem. Their self-­interest as well as their beliefs lead them in the con-
duct of foreign affairs to press global and regional issues of security, 
in which the weight of their military power can be brought to bear to 
political advantage.
2. To the extent that comprehensive comparisons are possible, it is 
clear that the USSR on balance has overcome its past military inferiority 
in relation to the United States. The Soviets know the USSR still lags 
in many defense-­related technologies. They are envious and appre-
hensive about the latent technological potential of the US as a military 
competitor. But they have learned from their long experience of mili-
tary competition with the United States that powerful domestic polit-
ical pressures, of a kind to which they are largely immune, reinforce 
American criteria of military sufficiency, which are different from their 
own, in inhibiting fuller exploitation by the US of its enormous military 
potential.
3. The Soviets judge themselves to have a robust equality with the 
US in central strategic nuclear forces in which numbers and some char-
acteristics, such as missile throw weight, compensate for technological 
deficiencies in their forces. Most important, the buildup of Soviet forces 
over the past 15 years has created a situation in which the US could 
not plausibly attack the USSR without the virtual certainty of massive 
retaliation.
4. While the Soviets are aware that the converse is also true, they 
are conscious of emergent strategic capabilities that could by the early 
1980s be perceived to give the USSR marginal advantages in a central 
strategic conflict—­for example, active and passive defenses, a surviv-
able command and control system, and superior countersilo capabil-
ities. Beyond that time frame, however, they are concerned that US 
progress in areas such as cruise missiles and advanced ICBMs could 
work against them should the US successfully exploit its present tech-
nological advantages.
5. The regional military balances that most concern the USSR are 
with Europe and China. In both regions the Soviets are relatively con-
fident that they possess clear military superiority, subject to important 
qualifications. In Europe, Soviet superiority presupposes successful 
conduct of a swiftly initiated offensive drive to the west that could, 
however, be thwarted if it triggered large-­scale NATO use of nuclear 
weapons or if it failed to achieve victory before NATO could bring its 
larger economic and population resources to bear on the course of the
