Message of the president of the United States to
Congress, December 7, 1926
MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS: In reporting to the Congress the state of the Union, I find
it impossible to characterize it other than one of general peace and
prosperity. In some quarters our diplomacy is vexed with difficult and as yet
unsolved problems, but nowhere are we met with armed conflict. If some
occupations and areas are not flourishing, in none does there remain any
acute chronic depression. What the country requires is not so much new
policies as a steady continuation of those which are already being crowned
with such abundant success. It can not be too often repeated that in common
with all the world we are engaged in liquidating the war.
In the present short session no great amount of new legislation is possible,
but in order to comprehend what is most desirable some survey of our
general situation is necessary. A large amount of time is consumed in the
passage of appropriation bills. If each Congress in its opening session
would make appropriations to continue for two years, very much time
would be saved which could either be devoted to a consideration of the
general needs of the country or would result in decreasing the work of
legislation.
ECONOMY
Our present state of prosperity has been greatly promoted by three
important causes, one of which is economy, resulting in reduction and
reform in national taxation. Another is the elimination of many kinds of
waste. The third is a general raising of the standards of efficiency. This
combination has brought the perfectly astonishing result of a reduction in
the index price of commodities and an increase in the index rate of wages.
We have secured a lowering of the cost to produce and a raising of the
ability to consume. Prosperity resulting from these causes rests on the
securest of all foundations. It gathers strength from its own progress.
In promoting this progress the chief part which the National Government
plays lies in the field of economy. Whatever doubts may have been
