106 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX cover 80 percent of East Germany—for a better material life. More recently, Honecker has sought other bases of support, particularly in the Evangelical (Lutheran) Church, which has been promised sweeping concessions that include access to media broadcasts. If these are implemented, the Church could emerge as one of the most influential in Eastern Europe. The regime will want to ensure that it confines the Church’s role strictly to clerical—non-political—matters. 33. East German foreign policy is tied to Soviet foreign policy, including an increased presence in Africa. To the extent they diverge, the GDR tends to press Moscow to adopt more rigid policies in the East-West sphere in order to avert increased Western contacts. The East Germans are particularly concerned that their CSCE Basket III human rights commitments could arouse public expectations which, when unfilled, could lead to popular discontent. This foreign policy posture reflects the GDR policy of Abgrenzung, or separation, of the two German states. 34. There have been times when Moscow’s Western policy was seen as contravening East Germany’s fundamental need to assert its sovereign state identity. In the opening phases of detente, it thus tried to slow down or resist what it viewed as Soviet concessions to the FRG without sufficient benefits to the GDR. More recently, there are indications that the GDR is less than enthusiastic—given its growing economic problems—about Soviet proposals for increased military spending by Warsaw Pact members. For the most part, however, these challenges have been and are contained by Moscow which, with 400,000 troops in the GDR, still clearly sets the main directions of East German foreign policy activity. BULGARIA 35. Bulgaria is usually considered the Soviet Union’s most loyal ally, and Bulgarian leader Zhivkov the most reliable associate. We know of no instance in which the Bulgarians have opposed Soviet objectives in foreign policy, even when these objectives may run counter to Bulgarian foreign policy interests. 36. This is particularly evident in the instances of Balkan cooperation and the Soviet exploitation of the Bulgarian-Yugoslav dispute over Macedonia: —The Bulgarians have rejected various initiatives of other Balkan countries to promote multilateral commerce and cooperation, apparently because of Soviet opposition; —There also is little doubt that the intensity of polemics and the state of Yugoslav-Bulgarian relations over Macedonia is influenced, if not dictated, by Moscow’s desire to increase political pressure on Yugoslavia.
