Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 575 Documentation on the President’s visit, including the memoranda of conversation of the meetings referenced above, is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IX, Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980. 115. Address by Secretary of State Vance1 Seattle, Washington, March 30, 1979 America’s Commitment to Third World Development These past weeks have been a time to deal with immediate diplomatic issues of extraordinary importance to our nation. Tonight I want to speak about an issue that may seem less immediate but is no less important: our approach to the economic future of the developing nations. Before turning to our strategy toward the North-South dialogue between the industrial and developing nations, let me first talk for a moment about why the development of Third World countries matters to us. Its human dimension is clear. At least ½-billion people regularly go hungry in a world of plenty. A half-billion is an abstract number, another statistic among many and, therefore, too easily dismissed. But when we pause to picture in our minds how much human suffering lies behind that single statistic, the scope of our moral challenge is evident. The continuation of that suffering is an affront to the conscience of men and women everywhere. Americans have long recognized this challenge: We have generously shared our resources in times of tragedy and need abroad, from the great hunger in Ireland in 1847, to the Marshall plan and point 4 program2 100 years later. We are determined today, despite budgetary stringency, to live up to that historic moral responsibility. 1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, May 1979, pp. 33–37. Vance delivered the address before the Northwest Regional Conference on the Emerging International Order. For the text of the question-and-answer session following Vance’s address, see ibid., pp. 37–38. 2 Reference is to the Truman administration’s program for technical assistance, commonly known as Point Four, as it was the fourth foreign policy objective Truman described in his January 20, 1949, inaugural address. See Public Papers: Truman, 1949, pp. 112–116.
