786 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV A. Soviet Strategic Planning for the 1980s 5. The Soviet leaders view their strategic requirements in the context of persistent long-­term struggle between social systems, continuing rivalry with the United States for global power and influence, and concern for the policies and forces of countries on the Eurasian periphery, especially NATO and China. Within this framework, the Soviets seek strong and growing strategic capabilities to provide: —A powerful deterrent against nuclear attack by any adversary. —Along with other military forces, the prospect of greater freedom of action in the world arena while minimizing the risk of nuclear war. —An improvement in the chances that, if nuclear war should occur, the USSR could survive and emerge in a better position than its adversaries. 6. The Soviets have made substantial progress toward these goals over the past 15 years. Their strategic forces are generally acknowledged to be equal to those of the United States, and are superior to those of all their other adversaries combined. Despite Soviet progress, however, powerful US retaliatory capabilities would survive even successful Soviet initial strikes, and active and passive Soviet defenses could not prevent the devastation of the USSR. From their statements and writings, it is clear that the Soviet leaders perceive the present US-Soviet strategic relationship as one in which each side could inflict massive damage on the other side under any circumstances. The Soviets would prefer a relationship in which deterrence and strategic stability were assured by Soviet possession of superior capabilities to fight and survive a nuclear war with the United States. 7. The Soviets probably view their improved strategic position as providing a more favorable backdrop than before to the conduct of an assertive foreign policy and to the projection of Soviet power abroad. They probably do not see the present situation of approximate strategic nuclear parity as providing them with the latitude to safely confront the United States directly in areas where they perceive US vital interests to be involved. However, in areas that they believe the United States regards as less central to its interests, particularly in regions where the USSR enjoys a preponderance of conventional forces and the advantage of proximity, such as Afghanistan, the current strategic relationship probably enhances Soviet confidence that the risk of a US local or escalatory military response would be negligible. 8. There is an alternative view which holds that the increasing aggressiveness of Soviet foreign policy will expand as the Soviet Union’s advantages in strategic nuclear forces become more pronounced. The Soviets may now perceive that they have nuclear superiority. As they see this superiority increase during the next three to five years, they will probably attempt to secure maximum political advantages from
