712 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII The Vice President greeted his French guests and opened the conversation by noting that the Foreign Minister had just met with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko. Francois-Poncet: Yes, it was one of our regularly scheduled meetings, and we felt it would have been more complicated to try to cancel it. Let me report briefly on the conclusions of the meeting. Gromyko had a general hardness of line, and a harsh tone about US-USSR relations, using vocabulary I have not heard before. We had three long discussions with Afghanistan taking up about two thirds of our time. The Soviet objective in Afghanistan is a diplomatic initiative involving Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan legalizing the Afghan regime and legalizing the Soviet presence. It is clear they want a regional legitimization. When this is done, they then may want to invite outsiders. We told them that we do not see any outside interference, nothing justifying the Soviet invasion, and with this the case, we asked why they did not accept the proposal of having an international body come in. Gromyko said no, how could they, there was fighting going on. It would be too dangerous (laughter). Secondly, we got into a discussion of Giscard d’Estaing’s proposal for a withdrawal of troops and self-determination.2 Gromyko did not say this is of no interest. He said he accepted the proposal, but only in as much as it helped to promote the USSR objective. But the Soviets say first outside interference must stop. Gromyko balks at a date for Soviet withdrawal. They want a regional approach to “crack the Pakistani nut.” They are embarrassed. Vice President: Did he express some heat about the Pakistanis? Francois-Poncet: Yes, he was aggressive and insulting about the Pakistanis. He said who does this Zia think he is; he should remember how he came to power. Vice President: We have just picked up [less than 1 line not declassified] evidence of construction of a new 9,000-foot air field in southwest Afghanistan. It has a rationale entirely unrelated to the Islamic problem they say is at the basis of their invasion. It looks to us as it is a base for projection of Soviet air power. Francois-Poncet: Generally, our reading of the Soviet move into Afghanistan has not been that there was a master plan with the objective of the Persian Gulf. It is not proven at this stage that they have become prone to military adventurism, but this does not mean that once they are there there will not be other military developments. 2 Not further identified. Gromyko visited Paris April 24–25 and met with Giscard and Francois-Ponçet. Presumably the proposal was made at that time.
