78 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 nation and a rest of a day or so before coming back to the U.S. We expect about 10–12 people. We do not know how the transfer will actually take place. The hostages may be released to the PLO or some other intermediary. (C) 2. Demonstrations. The Attorney General believes that the ruling yesterday permitting demonstrations will be upheld by the Circuit Court on appeal. However, in view of the strong belief of the Secretary of State that the danger to the hostages created by any incidents is very great, the ruling will be appealed. (U) 3. Iranian Assets. Transactions involving the FMS trust fund under control of the Department of Defense will be licensed. Operation of the Bank Melli in New York was unilaterally assumed by New York authorities. Secretary Miller believed this was unfortunate, but it is now an accomplished fact. The Iranian Embassy officials state that they need $20 million per month to maintain remittances for students in this country. Treasury is still investigating the actual procedures used, but intends to authorize new Iranian funds (i.e. beyond those blocked by the action earlier this week) to pay for these remittances as well as financial obligations.3 Iran also holds accounts in foreign branches of U.S. banks in currencies other than dollars. These amount to $300–500 million total. Continued blocking of these assets will intensify the conflict of laws problem, e.g. preventing transactions in British pounds in a London bank. The SCC agreed with Treasury that these funds should be unblocked.4 The British have thus far refrained from issuing any counter order and are being generally cooperative. Secretary Miller intends to stop in London for further discussions on his way back from the Middle East. The latest figures on total Iranian assets are as follows: $1.2 billion in the Federal Reserve (hard figure); $5.9 billion in foreign branches of U.S. banks. The $5.9 billion includes the foreign currency accounts of $300–500 million and may include double counting of some oil payment accounts of as much as $1 billion. Iran has claims of about $1.8 billion on U.S. banks, so the net advantage in U.S. favor is about $5 billion. Other claims may also appear, including up to $1 billion of U.S. direct investment in Iran. The Export-Import Bank has a technical default on an Iranian loan for failure to meet a payment of $2,000. Treasury intends to proceed very deliberately in declaring a default since Iran may have been unable to make the payment as a result of our action. Private banks, however, may declare default on Iranian 3 Carter approved this item with a checkmark. 4 Carter initialed in the margin next to this paragraph and approved the item with a checkmark.
