Eastern Europe Region Ceausescu conveyed a message to Khomeini in an effort to bring about a resolution of the hostage problem.12 On Afghanistan, Romania has once again played a maverick role within the Warsaw Pact13 by issuing public statements indirectly but strongly condemning the Soviet action in Afghanistan, by not speaking out in defense of the Soviets in the UN Security Council debate and not participating in the UN General Assembly vote, and by continuing to refrain from recognizing the new Afghan regime. We should increase our efforts to support Romania’s independent actions by strengthening our relations on bilateral and international issues, and encourage our NATO allies to do the same. Romania’s status within the Warsaw Pact and CEMA creates both problems and opportunities. —Reschedule the Secretary’s visit. —Invite Foreign Minister Andrei for an official return visit to Washington within the following six months. —Give special attention to the CSCE bilateral discussions, including the Special Experts’ Group on military security. The U.S. side should be led by a senior Department official since Romanian delegation will be headed by a Deputy Foreign Minister. We should arrange highlevel meetings for the Deputy Minister on non-CSCE issues as well. —Show our interest in and, when possible, give our support to Romanian initiatives in international organizations, especially those that relate to peaceful settlement of disputes and good neighborliness. —If there is any supplemental allocation of CCC credits, high priority should be given to Romania’s outstanding request. —Encourage visits by a group from DOD’s Army War College as well as a visit by White House Fellows (in conjunction with visits to other countries in the area). —Reallocate unused FY 80 fisheries allocation by drawing on fishing quotas previously reserved for the Soviet Union. —Reexamine Romania’s request for commercial access to Hampton Roads. [N.B. While this would be desirable for foreign policy reasons, JCS objects strongly on security grounds. This question should be reviewed by OSD.] —Grant approval for Romanian government trade offices in Atlanta and Houston.
