1957 1313 can be provided, where regime continues hold Americans as political hostages, and where it desires promote cultural exchanges to break down US policy of non-recognition and non-seating in UN. For US to acquiesce in such travel would encourage Communists to redouble efforts to promote QUOTE cultural contacts UNQUOTE while taking no repeat no action to release imprisoned Americans. Following considerations have bearing on Department’s position: 1. Employers of Look correspondents ordered them out of Communist China after policy explained to them. Department believes moral suasion will still effectively keep most correspondents and other Americans from going. 2. Investigation under way to determine if three correspondents who defied ban misused passports preliminary to determining what further action will be taken. 3. Wirin travel to Communist China and North Korea is unique case of individual travelling as officer of Federal court pursuant to court order specifically authorizing such travel for purpose of offering opportunity to prepare defense of persons accused by our Goverment of crime of sedition. If Wirin’s travel prevented, this might seriously prejudice Government’s efforts prosecute case. Wirin’s passport was not validated for Communist China or North Korea. Under present circumstances Department will therefore continue adhere to policy of discouraging to greatest possible extent travel to Communist China by any Americans including correspondents and will refuse to acquiesce in requests for approval such travel either with or without passport. Dulles 781. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy1 Prague, January 28, 1957 Dear Walter: I received a copy of Taipei’s despatch No. 240 of December 10 com­ menting on NIE 43–56 and copy No. 57 of the Department’s instruction A–159 of January 15 on the same subject. Although I was not able to 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; Official–­ Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
