782 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III At Tab A is a Presidential message based on a draft by State and Treasury; OMB has approved those portions relating to the budget.4 The message focuses on the need for international cooperation in dealing not only with the issues of economic development but also with matters of critical concern to the developed nations, such as the evolution of a stable world economy. We have discussed the message at length with the speech writers; they wish to limit such messages to straightforward descriptions of the legislation. Fallows would like to drop the first three paragraphs of foreign policy context—already cut down from two pages—but is willing to put the decision to the President. I believe strongly that we need this language to emphasize to Congress the importance of these programs and the President’s commitment to them. Regarding a scenario for the Congressional meeting with the President, I suggest the following, which I have discussed with the Congressional relations people: —Obtain Presidential approval of the aid message (Tab A) and of a meeting with the Congressmen. The message could be released on Monday, or after the Wednesday meeting.5 —President would discuss the message at the Tuesday leadership meeting,6 summarize his approach to aid, and indicate his desire for a Congressional meeting on Wednesday. —Because Inouye’s Senate Appropriations Subcommittee may mark up the FY–77 supplemental on Tuesday, a Presidential call on Monday (or a call from Frank Moore) would be important both to inform Inouye of the Wednesday meeting with the President and to encourage him to be forthcoming in his workup.7 RECOMMENDATION That you sign the memo to the President at Tab I recommending that he approve the message at Tab A and agree to meet with key Congressmen.8 4 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Presidential Message on Foreign Assistance.” 5 Monday, March 7, and Wednesday, March 9. 6 On Tuesday, March 8, Carter met with Democratic Congressional leaders for a breakfast meeting in the White House first floor private dining room from 8:02 until 9:17 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation of the meeting was found. 7 Carter did not speak to Inouye by telephone on March 7. (Ibid.) 8 Tab I, attached but not printed, is a March 7 memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter entitled “Your Tuesday Leadership Meeting (Foreign Assistance).” On March 17, Carter sent Congress a message on foreign assistance; for the text of the message, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 455–458.
