Afghanistan 247 groups can play is acquiring funds and armaments from outside sources. A major Soviet intervention might bring in more funds, thus increasing the importance of the exiles. Reaction to the Soviet Role The Soviet presence and role in keeping the present government afloat have become one of the major provocations of the insurgency and a unifying factor for all rebel groups. While insurgents may be fighting, in large part, for local goals, they are united by a desire to get rid of both the “godless” communist regime and the Russians. As the Soviet role has increased throughout the civilian and military establishment, it has provoked a nationalist reaction, even from supporters of Taraki and Amin. Recently, an Afghan pilot, probably flying a mission against Badakhshan insurgents, “accidentally” dropped his bombs on the Soviet side of the border, causing several casualties. [less than 1 line not declassified] this incident was a great tonic to the otherwise abysmal morale in the DRA’s Ministry of Defense.2 Amin has recently stated publicly that his government is dependent on Soviet support.3 However, there has been no indication of an attempt by Amin to prepare the public for a large-scale introduction of troops. If the Soviets were to intervene to replace Amin or to fight directly against the rebels, they would be opening a new level of anti-Soviet feelings and actions. That would greatly complicate achieving Soviet goals. Achieving these goals under such circumstances would require a major Soviet effort. 2 The report was not found. 3 Amin’s statement was reported in telegram 8117 from Kabul, November 21. The telegram quoted two portions of an interview Amin gave to the Soviet news agency TASS: “We are convinced that if there were no vast economic and military aid from the Soviet Union, we could not resist the aggression and conspiracies of imperialism, its leftist looking allies and international reaction, and could not move our country towards the construction of a socialist society.” Amin further asserted “there is no limit” to Soviet support of the DRA, and the Soviet assistance level “completely depends on our capacity to absorb and utilize it.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790546– 0399 and D790536–0665)
