800.51 W 89Yugoslavia/66 [Document 130] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to the Secretary of State BELGRADE, May 17, 1925. [Received June 9.] No. 2680 SIR: Referring to the last paragraph of my Despatch No. 2627 of March 26th,90 last in which I stated that as a result of my continuing to press Dr. Stojadinovitch, the Minister of Finance, for the assurances regarding the Yugoslav debt to the Government of the United States, requested by my Note of May 15th, 1924, which embodied your telegram No. 14 of May 13, 6 p.m., 1924, I have the honor to inform you that I finally received a Note from the Foreign Office containing these assurances on the 16th instant. I enclose a copy and translation of this Note herewith. The second sentence of the third paragraph of this Note read when I received it: “Il ne placera, par des arrangements spéciaux les Etats-Unis d’Amérique ni dans une situation moins favorable …” (“It will not by special arrangements place the United States of America in a less favorable situation …”). I availed of a call upon Dr. Stojadinovitch to invite his attention to this sentence and to inquire as to its exact meaning. Dr. Stojadinovitch informed me that the “special arrangements” referred to were intended to mean special arrangements for refunding debts such for example as the arrangement now being negotiated with the British Government for the refunding of its post-war relief and reconstruction advances (Despatch No. 2627 of March 26th last) but that if I preferred some modification of this phrase, he was prepared to make it. I thereupon suggested that some such phrase as “Il ne placera d’aucune maniére” (“It will not in any manner place”) would appear to include all possible acts on the part of the Yugoslav Government and seem to be more satisfactory. Dr. Stojadinovitch agreed to this modification and accordingly struck out the words “par des arrangements spéciaux” and interlined the words “d’aucune maniére”. The copies and translations enclosed are similarly obliterated and interlined so as to correspond with the original Note. I expressed my regret that the Note was not more directly responsive in its form to the Department’s telegram embodied in my Note. Dr. Stojadinovitch replied that he regretted that he had not had it written using the same terms but that I might be assured
