considered at this Conference”, be substituted for the so-called ninety million dollar clause. Mr. Oudendijk considered that this wording was substantially the same as the Japanese wording. Mr. Strawn agreed, on behalf of the American Delegation, to accept the Japanese draft, as did Count de Martel, who also said that he would be willing to accept the Chinese draft if the Chinese Delegation would be willing to omit the figure $90,000,000. Mr. Oudendijk again attempted a compromise wording but Mr. Strawn said that the American Delegation considered it to be entirely out of place to make any mention of the $90,000,000 because it was necessary first to know the purposes to which the money would be put and the rates which would be required; that the foreign Delegations were working to that end intelligently, faithfully and persistently. Once more Mr. Strawn emphasized the desire of the American Delegation to give the 2½ and 5 per cent surtaxes at once and also to negotiate a new treaty giving additional revenues to the amount required to meet the needs of the Chinese Government. Mr. Strawn expressed the fear that a great deal of misapprehension would arise in America, as well as in China, if the Delegates agreed to the raising of the 90 million dollars without the purposes having been defined. He did not wish a false impression to go out and he did not understand why, when they were approaching an agreement on the subject, the Chinese Delegation should insist upon naming in the resolution the sum of 90 million dollars as the amount required, particularly since the resolution dealt with the 2½ and 5 per cent treaty surtaxes and not the larger interim surtaxes. Mr. Strawn stated that he had no objection to an amalgamation of the Chinese and Japanese resolutions except that he would insist, persistently and continually, for the reasons he had already named, that there should be no insertion of a specific amount in the resolution. After a further unsuccessful effort was made to reconcile the differences in the resolution under discussion, Dr. Yen said that he would insist on his reservation regarding the 90 million dollars, whereupon Count de Martel observed that he thought the item was being inserted for the purpose of obtaining credit. Dr. Yen then suggested that the subcommittee make its recommendations to Committee II and let that Committee decide the point, but Mr. Strawn considered that plan futile because at the last meeting of Committee II not a single foreign Delegation had expressed a willingness to accept the item, although, if it chose to do so, the Chinese Delegation could make a minority report and the full Committee could accept either the
