Afghanistan
503
might be induced to withdraw, I have two thoughts to throw into the
hopper. One is that, if the Soviets and DRA continue to disregard the
UN resolutions (as is likely),3 the Department try to persuade UNHQ
to withdraw its aid missions from Afghanistan. The other is that, were
the Soviets ever to appear to realize their presence in Afghanistan
is too costly for them, the Department should consider approaching
Waldheim or Indian PM Gandhi to propose a face-saving exodus by
substitution of UN troops for Soviet forces, conditional on the holding
of new supervised elections. End summary.
3. We at Embassy Kabul have been delighted with the strong
response of Washington to the Soviet occupation of this country. We
applaud the steps Washington has so far taken and share the wide-
spread view that the Soviets underestimated the degree of Western and
world reaction. Suspecting that the Dept is considering what additional
steps might be taken, I offer here two suggestions.
4. As we reported last week, the puppet Babrak regime has
refrained from telling its people about the Security Council and UNGA
votes.4 Instead, it has tried to obfuscate the issue by saturating the
media with allegations of U.S. and “imperialist” treacherousness and
our alleged close ties with “monster” Hafizullah Amin. While supress-
ing what happened in the UN, the DRA has nonetheless not attacked
the institution of the UN itself, and so far as we can tell still holds it
in respect. This is important in the context of my recommendations.
5. First recommendation. As of this time, we are unaware of any
UNHQ emissary coming to Kabul to investigate whether the DRA and
the Soviets are complying with the UN resolutions. But whether any
emissaries come or not, the Western Embassies here are unanimous in
believing that the Soviets are not about to pull out their forces. (Were
they to do so, the Babrak govt would instantaneously collapse.) On
the contrary, there are many signs that the Soviets are digging in to
stay for a long time. Their forces are building military bastions about
Kabul, and their logistic arrangements point to their establishing or
taking over permanent lodging quarters.
6. Assuming that the Soviets have no intention of complying with
the UN resolutions, it seems to me that the least the UN itself can do
is to withdraw its UN economic aid missions here. Were this done,
this would be a severe psychological and discrediting blow to the
DRA—an action much more effective than all the measures the Western
Embassies here in aggregate could do. A withdrawal of UNDP and
3 See Document 136.
4 This information was reported in telegram 291 from Kabul, January 17. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800028–0983)
