Venezuela 1237 VE–17. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, December 24, 19581 Washington, December 24, 1958. SUBJECT Venezuelan Income Tax Revision PARTICIPANTS Dr. Marcos Falcón-Briceño, Ambassador of Venezuela Mr. R. R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs Mr. Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director, East Coast Affairs, ARA Mr. C. E. Bartch, Officer-­in-Charge, Venezuelan Affairs Ambassador Falcón-Briceño called at the Department this afternoon at Mr. Rubottom’s request. Mr. Rubottom expressed the serious concern of the highest levels of the U. S. Government over the action taken by the Venezuelan Government on December 19 to increase the general income tax rates, particularly since Venezuela failed to consult with the United States. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that in view of the substantial U. S. interests in Venezuela, especially in the petroleum industry, we would have expected that the Venezuelan Government would have consulted with us in advance of taking action which so clearly affects those interests. Mr. Rubottom said that there was no question whatsoever of the Venezuelan Government’s right to adjust its income tax rates, as a matter of national sovereignty. He reminded the Ambassador, however, that the United States has scrupulously followed a policy of consulting with other governments before taking any action which might affect their interests. He pointed out that special efforts along these lines had been made to consult regularly with Venezuela, as the Ambassador well knew. Mr. Rubottom alluded to the importance we attach to friendly consultation and cooperation on matters of common interest among the nations of the hemisphere. He said the United States considers this friendly consultation a cornerstone of our Latin American relations. He pointed out that Venezuela’s failure to consult in advance with the United States had been even more astonishing in view of the fact that Assistant Secretary Mann was in Venezuela on the very day the decree was promulgated and made public, having gone there for the second time this year to consult with Venezuelan officials concerning the oil import situation. As a matter of fact, Minister of Mines Julio Diez had
