436
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
said above and in view of the fact that only Mosadeq might possibly be
able to do the trick.
It is not unlikely that the elements becoming more antagonistic to
Mosadeq might even turn to the Tudeh Party for support. Kashani
might do this if he became convinced, as we believe, that his political
importance is declining vis-a`-vis Mosadeq. This would indeed be se-
rious, as the Intelligence Estimate implied, if Mosadeq should disap-
pear from the political arena and if political factions should bid against
each other for Tudeh support. Our hope (because this is speculative)
would be that the Armed Forces would not be too weakened by Mo-
sadeq maneuvers designed to assure political loyalty among the mili-
tary officers, so that a virtual military regime could take over if Mo-
sadeq disappeared from the political scene.
The political factors that are given in the Intelligence Estimate as
potentially operative after 1953 are just as inherent in the situation for
the near future, for it is most difficult to affirm that they would not
show their explosive possibilities at any time before the end of 1953.
Put another way, the Intelligence Estimate does not show convincingly
how these could not erupt in 1953.
We are inclined to believe that with the current nationalist em-
phasis upon an oil-less economy, the present Government’s objectives
may be achieved if “substantial” quantities were sold abroad, since this
would symbolize Mosadeq’s victory over the UK, and be a reaffirma-
tion of Iranian political independence. Similarly on oil, paragraph 5 of
the conclusions conjectures that Iran would make the same efforts to
sell oil to the Soviet bloc as to the West. This idea is developed in para-
graphs 17 and 39 [18]. For Iran to do so to the Soviet bloc, it must reckon
with restrictive provisions of United States legislation, such as the
Battle Act, which would place such economic aid as Iran is now re-
ceiving in serious jeopardy. We doubt at this stage, with the prospect of
continued Point IV assistance on a scale comparable to the present—
not to mention military aid, which Mosadeq might continue to wel-
come since he controls the Armed forces—that the present regime
would actively seek to sell oil to the Soviet bloc.
This week we have received a visit from a pleasant G–2 colonel,
who works on Iran at the Pentagon and who told us that the Embassy’s
two estimate telegrams were considered too alarmist. We asked him on
what basis this impression was acquired and he stated that some like
himself, “perhaps taking the long view”, felt that Iran had existed for
thousands of years, had been getting into scrapes during that time, and
had been getting out of them, with something turning up to save the
situation. Our only reply, of course, to such an argument was that all of
us at times, in order to keep a sense of balance, could not help but hope
that some unknown “X-factor” or deus ex machina would intervene fa-
