Non-Proliferation
875
how do you apply legal safeguards to the US and France who have the
bomb and Germany and Canada who do not but might want to pro-
duce some day.
Callaghan: Our people have to consider whether safeguards can be
contained in a legal framework. There are a lot of technical questions.
We should try to get the agreed facts. The group should consider
whether safeguards should be confined to existing legal frameworks,
with possible physical safeguards in addition.
President Carter: We are willing to let Japan have nuclear fuel, but
we would want to tell Congress about the safeguards if that fuel is re-
processed. There are a number of questions raised about reprocessing. I
would like to tell people that if the fuel is reprocessed there will be con-
ditions. And we will have to have inspections on ourselves. Even
though this will be a difficulty for those building bombs.
Trudeau: Will we apply these safeguards to ourselves? Unless we
answer this question we cannot expect nuclear fuel.
Callaghan: UK has adopted international inspection procedures.
Trudeau: But the UK is not building the bomb.
Schmidt: I would not like to see this type of discussion in the press.
Someone said that there might be the possibility of others keeping their
own nuclear options open. Especially, then, I would not like to see any
suggestion that some countries might not keep their international nu-
clear commitments. This would cause an up-roar in Germany.
But what do we say to our public? I did not know that it was
agreed that the Ministers would see the press, but perhaps it cannot be
avoided. We must be very careful not to provoke public opinion in
other countries. We should be very careful in reporting to our press.
Simply say we had a very valuable, necessary, discussion that we are
not as far apart as has previously appeared in the press. We should not
tell things to the press about what was said.
Schmidt: It is possible after the discussion to describe it with three
sentences which represent the highest common denominator. The first
sentence should say that we have set up a task force. We should limit
ourselves to another long sentence on the terms of reference on the task
force. You and your people could formulate this over dessert. We
should agree on the terms of references and insure that there is not a
great row in the press.
On the confidence issue good words can add confidence. It is also
important that we represent orally and on TV only what we want to
present. We made progress in understanding each other, and the way
that we present this is important.
Giscard: Let me raise quickly a number of points. We must clarify
our differences. One key issue is our supplies to third countries such as
