3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
650
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
e) We give this explanation out of good will to help close out the
issue. This should not be interpreted as a supplement to the 1962
agreement.
f) There should be no misunderstanding of the fact that the with-
drawal of Soviet military personnel from Cuba is out of the question.
2. Dobrynin added that the Soviet Union would not mind if the US
wished to publish this information, which contradicts the US state-
ment. It hopes this will close out the issue.
3. Dobrynin then added another paragraph, reading from a text
which he did not transmit in writing:
“As for the hint in the US note4 regarding the possibility of a re-
sponse by the US by certain measures in areas where it has displayed
restraint until now: for one thing, we do not, speaking frankly, see
much restraint; and secondly, such hints are not the way we can expect
to lead to mutual understanding between our two countries.”
4. In response to questions, Dobrynin was not able to say whether
there was significance in the fact that this note referred to the training
of Cuban servicemen, while the earlier note and he in his conversation
referred to the training of Cuban officers.
5. He was also not able to say whether the unit had been continu-
ously in the same place, nor whether it had engaged in unit training, or
what kind of training had taken place. While still not confirming the ex-
istence of a brigade, he said there had been no change in structure since
1962. Asked whether the Soviet government would be willing to con-
firm publicly that the 1962 and 1970 understandings were still in force,
he said categorically yes with regard to 1962, but said re 1970 that it
would have to be clear about what had been accepted; “what we ac-
cepted then, we still do.” Will ask Moscow about public statement. No
response on question to whom the equipment now belongs.
6. CV said he would supply some questions for further clarifica-
tion. Dobrynin was given geographical locations, to avoid misunder-
standing re unit in question.
4 Not found.
