723.2515/1624: Telegram
[Document 227]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, September 24, 1925—10 a.m.
[Received September 25—3:20 p.m.53 ]
From Pershing: After careful consideration of the conditions disclosed by such
observations and investigations as have been practicable under existing circumstances,
I am convinced that energetic action must be taken to create an atmosphere of freedom
and fairness that is consistent with fulfilment of the award and essential to the
plebiscite contemplated by the arbitration, and I propose to lay before Plebiscitary
Commission at early date following resolution: [Draft not printed; the text of resolution
adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission on November 2, differs only in minor textual
changes, and is printed infra, out of chronological order.]
I and my advisers have given prerequisites embodied in proposed resolution most
careful attention. We agree unanimously that fulfillment of these prerequisites or their
substantial equivalent absolutely essential to progress.
I am convinced that Commission in adopting the resolution will be acting well within
limits of the powers conferred by the award. In this opinion I am supported by Dennis
and Kreger54 who have prepared a written opinion that has my unqualified approval.
Following is synopsis of their opinion: (1) The authority of the Plebiscitary
Commission is derived from and limited by the opinion and award of the Arbitrator. (2)
The Arbitrator when deciding that a plebiscite was in order held that during the
plebiscite the territory should continue in Chile’s possession, subject to Chilean law
and authority, but that consequent control by Chilean Government is subject to the
limitation that Chilean laws and authority shall not be applied so as to prevent the
holding of a fair plebiscite. (3) Principle that during the plebiscite period Chilean
authority may not be so exercised as to prevent a fair plebiscite would follow as an
immediate corollary from the principle that the plebiscite is to be held in territory in
Chile’s possession as well as the fact that Chilean laws and authority even if limiting
principle had not been expressed [disallowed?] by Arbitrator. (4) Chile is not only
under a negative obligation not to exercise her powers in such way as to prevent a fair
plebiscite but is also under positive obligation to exercise her powers so as to render a
fair plebiscite possible. (5) The arbitral provision for the international commission to
have in general complete control over the plebiscite is inconsistent with any theory that
