182  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
d. The reasoning behind this suggested alternative is:
(1) The present guidance (Par. 14 in the revision before you) does 
not envisage the possibility of limited aggression in “developed areas” 
(including the NATO area). For two reasons this guidance seems “unre­
alistic”, in a period when both sides are coming to realize that general 
war is so horrible that it must be avoided.
First, in such a period, limited aggression may occur, and have to be 
dealt with, in any area. For example, the Soviet Union might take steps 
which seemed to risk general war—­even in a place like Berlin—­in the 
belief that the U.S. or its allies would not allow the confrontation, or the 
military conflict which might ensue, to get out of hand.
Second, while it is obvious that the capability for massive nuclear 
retaliation remains the deterrent to general war, is that capability sure 
deterrent to limited military aggression? Both the Free World and the 
Soviet Union are beginning to doubt whether massive retaliation to 
punish limited acts of aggression will actually be invoked, because of 
the devastation which would inevitably result to all concerned.
(2) The present guidance states that the best way to prevent limited 
military aggression from spreading is the prompt and resolute applica­
tion of the degree of military force necessary to defeat it. But, in a time 
of nuclear parity, is this course in every case the best way? Because of the 
unacceptability of a general nuclear conflict, which might result from 
application of such a degree of military force, should a different prin­
ciple be invoked? Whether in limited aggression to crush the enemy, 
or to seek only to restore stability to the situation, may depend on the 
circumstances of each case.
Expending the degree of force necessary promptly to defeat limited 
military aggression may, through resulting action and counteraction, 
bring on general nuclear war. Despite this risk, some cases may be so vital 
to U.S. interests that prompt and massive action to defeat limited aggres­
sion may have to be taken. But may there not be other cases where U.S. 
interests would be better served if we did not try to win too much, and 
thereby provoke hostile counter action and perhaps resultant general 
war,—­if we satisfied ourselves with trying to restore the status quo ante:
(1) MR. McELROY—MR. QUARLES
(2) GENERAL TWINING
(3) General TAYLOR (BURKE & PATE)
(4) GENERAL WHITE
(5) GENERAL TWINING
(6) SECRETARY OF STATE
(7) OTHERS
My suggestion is that the Council might recommend approval 
of the revised policy statement before you (NSC 5810), including as 
Par. 14 the existing basic policy regarding limited aggression, without 
change; pending submission of recommendations by the Department 
of Defense as to any revision of the military strategy paragraphs of this
