154
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
—Significant new media placements have appeared in [3 lines not
declassified].
f. Black Ops. Part of our projected program involves dissemination
of a strictly limited number of black documents designed to support
and enhance the already ongoing gray propaganda program. The SCC
meeting of 6 April, however, directed us to develop plans for interfering
in Afghanistan, and the SCC meeting of 6 March had already endorsed
“internal propaganda.”6 This activity has policy approval under the
General Finding on “Soviet Interference in Other Countries’ Affairs.”
The Department of Justice, however, has ruled that we had to obtain
cleared guidelines on a black program from State, as black operations
had not been covered specifically in the relevant “Perspectives.” Unfor-
tunately, attempts to obtain such cleared guidelines have been rebuffed.
State takes the position that black operations by themselves would
have little impact. This argument fails to take into account our gray
program, which black operations will complement and reinforce, as
well as the propaganda warfare by leaflet and “night letter” already
being waged by the dissidents. (We would expect that our black ops
would be picked up and exploited fully by the dissidents.) State also
argues that since the Soviets might assume the U.S. hand lay behind any
fabricated documents, their dissemination would embarrass Secretary
Vance in view of the “strong assurances the Secretary recently gave
Ambassador Dobrynin, with NSC concurrence, to the effect that we
have no intention of interfering in Afghanistan.”7
Stansfield Turner8
6 See footnote 5, Document 38.
7 See Document 49.
8 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above his typed signature.
52.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, May 24, 1979, 0512Z
[Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7,
USSR in Afghanistan (May 79–Jun 79). Top Secret; [handling restriction
not declassified]. 2 pages not declassified.]
