Chapter 2, January–June 1989 177 One approach is to defer discussion of such a sublimit until the Soviets accept our verification scheme. This approach was endorsed by the previous administration. A second approach is to propose a stand alone mobile ICBM sublimit now. Various values of such a sublimit were considered in the past administration, with 500–700 warheads being accepted by most agencies. A third approach is to propose a mobile ICBM sublimit, but to nest it within the 1540 warhead sublimit for heavy ICBMs. The Soviets would be allowed a total of 1540 warheads on heavy ICBMs and mobile ICBMs, of which no more than 500–800 could be on mobile ICBMs. This approach would force the Soviets to trade heavy ICBMs for mobiles, thus forcing tradeoffs between two systems of greatest concern to the United States. If the Soviets accept this approach either the first strike threat from Soviet heavy ICBMs or the number of relocatable targets the United States must hold at risk would be reduced. On the other hand, some will find such an approach difficult to explain since it appears to equate the SS-18, the most destabilizing Soviet system, and mobile systems which some believe are inherently stabilizing. A variant of this approach would focus strictly on MIRVd mobiles as a tradeoff with heavies. Since non-MIRVd mobiles do not present the same breakout threat as do MIRVd mobiles, they would be handled under different sublimits. The past administration considered mobile ICBM warhead sublimits as low as 500 warheads, which would only allow 50 rail garrison Peacekeepers, consistent with its budget position not to deploy the Small ICBM. If we are to protect the forces implied by the President’s ICBM modernization decision, the U.S. proposed sublimit must be sufficiently above 500 warheads to allow for a reasonable small ICBM deployment. A value of 800 thus appears the minimum the United States could accept and still preserve both programs (assuming we do not seek a ban on MIRVd mobile ICBMs). Since the Soviets have proposed 1600, there is incentive for the U.S. to suggest a low number. Thus some believe 800 warheads is an appropriate initial U.S. proposal if both single and MIRV mobile ICBMs are to be allowed. Others would propose a number as high as 1000; if we propose 800, the Soviets may accept and we could lose flexibility with respect to the Small ICBM. On the other hand, if the United States is to seek a ban on MIRV mobile ICBMs, a lower value, perhaps 200–500 warheads, may be more appropriate. The United States is unlikely for fiscal reasons to be able to deploy more warheads than this under a MIRV mobile ban when only the single-RV variant of the Small ICBM would be allowed. We may also have a separate deterrence reason to limit the number of Soviet relocatable targets. It is thus in our interest not to allow the Soviets a greater number than the U.S. plans.
