476 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 167. Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 [assessment number not declassified] Washington, January 1980 [Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and cover page.] Prospects for Soviet Operations Against the Insurgency in Afghanistan ([classification marking not declassified]) Key Judgments Through a carefully prepared, massively staged military intervention, the Soviets have imposed a new Communist puppet government in Afghanistan and have occupied the key government and population centers and the main communications facilities with Soviet troops. By early January, the Soviets had six divisions and over 75,000 troops inside Afghanistan—with more apparently on the way—and were rapidly consolidating their control. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified]) We have no direct evidence of the Soviets’ expectations for the eventual size, nature, and duration of their military adventure in Afghanistan, but we believe that substantial Soviet forces will remain there for the foreseeable future. The most likely commitment would appear to be a force of some six to 10 divisions and as many as 150,000 men. Such a force could have been made available within a few weeks of the beginning of the invasion, but the deliberate pace of the buildup suggests that it will not be fully deployed until spring, when operations can resume at full intensity. A force of this size could ensure the survival of the Babrak regime, retain control over major population centers and lines of communication, and conduct limited pacification operations. Meanwhile, the Soviets are likely to make efforts to reconstitute the Afghan Army over the next one to three years with the object of making it effective enough to undertake a long-term pacification effort. ([classification marking not declassified]) In the unlikely event that the Afghan insurgency increases beyond the capacity of the force described above to contain it, or if the Soviets 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. According to a statement on the cover page: “This assessment was prepared in the Office of Strategic Research and was coordinated with the Afghan Task Force, the Office of Political Analysis, the Strategic Warning Staff, and the National Intelligence Officers for Warning, General Purposes Forces, and USSR-Eastern Europe.”
