750  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
is the design and procurement of a force of Maritime Prepositioning 
Ships that will carry heavy equipment and supplies for three Marine 
Corps brigades. These aircraft and ships will permit us to move combat 
forces over vast distances quickly enough to deter conflict or, failing 
that, to turn the tide of battle in our favor.
Ground Forces. We have substantially increased our ability to rein-
force NATO. Primarily by prepositioning equipment, we will be able by 
1984 to double our ground forces in Europe, and triple our air forces, 
in less than two weeks. Our ground forces now include more tank and 
infantry battalions, and more artillery tubes—­an augmentation that 
will continue through the next several years.
We have enhanced readiness and combat endurance by improving 
the Reserve Components. Some reserve personnel are now equipped 
with new equipment and all reservists are assigned to units structured 
to complement and provide needed depth to our active forces.
The opening of a new National Training Center by the Army, and 
the introduction of new equipment—XM–1 tanks, armored personnel 
carriers, helicopters, and better artillery and air defense weapons—­
have, together with the contributions of our allies, strengthened our 
ability to meet any threat.
Naval Forces. We are emphasizing U.S. naval forces that are able 
to maintain the sea lanes to Europe, protect other essential sea lines of 
communications, project force ashore, and support allied forces on the 
flanks of Europe, in the Western Pacific, and elsewhere—­in the face of 
Soviet challenge. To accomplish these missions we have procured mod-
ern, guided-­missile equipped surface ships, such as the DDG–47 class; 
we have begun deployment of ship-, air- and submarine-­launched 
HARPOON cruise missiles; and we have continued improvement of 
our anti-­submarine warfare capability with actions such as procure-
ment of new towed array sonar ships and development of a new class 
of attack submarines. Equally important to our strength at sea have 
been our success in reducing the chronic backlog of ship overhauls, 
and our resolution of $2.7 billion in long-­standing shipbuilding claim 
disputes, some dating as far back as the 1960s.
Air Forces. Our program for the FY 80–84 period will field an active 
Air Force of 26 fighter and attack wings and will modernize—­and in 
some cases enlarge—­the active and reserve components of Air Force, 
Navy, and Marine Corps tactical aviation. This constitutes the first full-­
scale modernization of U.S. tactical air forces since the 1960s.
Over the next few years we will procure about 1700 fighter, attack, 
electronic warfare, surveillance and support aircraft. This will include 
the first KC–10s, which will be delivered in 1981, and allow very long 
range deployments of tactical air forces.
