Human Rights
411
situation in the country concerned, who will benefit from the assist-
ance, and how we can effectively assist the cause of human rights and
the lot of the neediest.
We have modified aid allocations on human rights grounds and
we are working to ensure that our bilateral programs meet the basic
human needs of the poor for food, shelter, health care, and education.
We oppose loans in the international development banks to countries
with serious human rights problems, unless the loans are aimed at sat-
isfying basic human needs. We have accepted the fact that our relations
with certain countries may be strained as a result of our attention to
human rights. As human rights conditions improve, these strains
should be eased.
It may be of interest to record some of the actual dilemmas we face,
for example, in linking human rights and foreign assistance. We often
ask ourselves: should we oppose a loan which could promote the eco-
nomic condition of poor people, in hopes of influencing their gov-
ernments to permit a greater exercise of political rights? Would with-
holding security aid in a particular situation stimulate a siege
mentality, leading to an even harsher crackdown on dissident ele-
ments, or would its practical effect be to promote human rights? How
can we best show recognition of the progress a society is making, and
thus reinforce that process, even if the general human rights situation
remains unacceptable?
These and other hard questions require case-by-case analysis.
Some observers will find our choices inconsistent. This is because
tactics should be adaptable, although our goals are not. We will take
those actions we believe will be most effective in each country, and
which are consistent with statutory provisions designed to promote re-
spect for internationally recognized human rights.
We must also keep our human rights concerns in balance with
other national interests. We often must determine how best to respond
to the needs of individuals living under authoritarian regimes, while
still retaining the necessary cooperation of their governments on secu-
rity or economic matters that are vital to us. Even in striking this bal-
ance however, our broad goal remains the same: economic and security
policies, as well as policy on “human rights”, are guided by a concern
with the impact of all we do on the welfare of individuals.
We are embarked on a long term endeavor. Progress must be
measured over the long run. This Administration will probably not see
the full results—successful or not—of our efforts in this field. Nor can
we claim credit for many decisions made by sovereign foreign gov-
ernments. But we have contributed to an international climate in which
tangible progress was made in 1977:
—Thousands of prisoners have been freed.
