September 1953–December 1954
845
forces are not seriously aggravated; and (c) strong public opposition to
the regime does not develop.
4. Tudeh’s capabilities do not constitute a serious present threat to
the Iranian Government, and the Tudeh Party will probably be unable
to gain control of the country during 1954, even if it combines with
other extremist groups. It will retain a capability for acts of sabotage
and terrorism.
5. Iran will attempt to maintain friendly relations with the USSR,
but will almost certainly resist any Soviet efforts to increase its influ-
ence in Iran’s internal affairs.
6. Failure to receive continued financial aid from the US or an ac-
ceptable oil settlement will probably result in a government coming to
power which will be less friendly to the US than the present one.
Discussion
I. Present Situation
Political and Military
7. The overthrow of the Mossadeq government on 19 August 1953
checked the drift in Iran toward Communism and isolation from the
West. The authority of the Shah has been reasserted, and a moderate
government under General Zahedi is in power. This government is
committed to maintaining the constitutional position of the monarchy
and the parliament, suppressing the Communist Tudeh Party, and
launching an economic development program predicated on settle-
ment of the oil dispute. The accession of Zahedi to power has elimi-
nated neither the economic and social problems which have long
plagued Iran, nor the weaknesses and inadequacies of the Iranian polit-
ical system.
8. The armed forces are loyal to the Shah, who has taken prompt
action to re-establish himself as commander-in-chief in fact as well as in
theory. The morale of the security forces has improved, and they can be
expected to respond promptly in support of the government if given
timely political leadership.
9. Increasing friction and uncertainty are developing within the
Imperial General Staff because of the Shah’s tendency to by-pass
Zahedi on military matters and because of mutual efforts of Zahedi and
Chief of Staff Batmangelich to undermine each other and place their
own men in key positions. Although political maneuvering to this de-
gree is unusual, even in the Iranian high command, there is no evidence
that it has as yet impaired the effectiveness of the security forces.
10. The Zahedi government has taken vigorous action against the
Tudeh Party. The party’s organization has been at least temporarily
disrupted, and many of its most active members have been arrested.
