1524  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
apparatus needed for a single station, when manufactured in large 
quantities, might be ten to thirty thousand dollars. Access roads (or 
helicopter pads), installation and related costs may run the total costs 
up considerably higher, depending on local conditions. Periodic main­
tenance and record retrieval would probably be required at 30 to 60 day 
intervals.
The need for this network of auxiliary stations is clearly greatest 
in the areas of the world where earthquakes occur with high frequency. 
It might be acceptable to limit application of the network only to these 
areas, possibly 20% of the land surface of the world. Also one could tai­
lor power and communication arrangements (possibly using wire lines 
in some places) according to the local facilities available.
If this network could be installed and effectively operated, it would 
very greatly increase the capability of the Geneva System for identify­
ing those seismic events which are earthquakes, occurring in interior 
areas and corresponding in intensity to underground one kiloton or 
larger shots. The practical difficulties of installation, maintenance, and 
operation of the system, especially in remote areas, should not, how­
ever, be underestimated, and the possibilities for occasional spoofing 
must be recognized.
III. Larger Arrays of Seismometers at Manned Control Posts.
On the basis of present knowledge, replacing 10 distributed seis­
mometers in a 3 km × 3 km square as recommended for each control 
post in the Geneva System by 100 distributed seismometers in the same 
square would affect the signal to noise ratio at frequencies near 1 cycle 
per second as follows using specifiable techniques:
(1) It is reasonably certain that an improvement at most stations by 
a factor of between 1.5 to 2.5 will be obtained;
(2) There is reason to hope for improvements in the range from 2.0 
to 2.5;
(3) Increases from 10 to 10k stations should provide improvement 
by a factor from k0.2 to k0.4 for k = 10.
(4) Data which can be obtained within one month will provide a 
much firmer estimate of what may be expected. The data to be obtained 
include, most importantly, data on coherence of noise at station separa­
tions of 150 to 1500 feet, and secondarily, data on dependence of typical 
noise levels on wind velocity.
(5) When more is known about noise characteristics, it may well 
be possible to gain further improvement by applying other analytical 
techniques to a 100 seismometer array.
