1980  913
I have the following comments on the eight issues discussed in the 
paper:
Issue #1
I generally agree with Harold’s assessment, and would add that 
nuclear parity could ease Soviet fears regarding the risks of military 
adventures and even of engaging U.S. forces.
We should also consider the question Harold raises as to whether 
readiness should take priority over modernization. I take it from Har-
old’s concerns about increased dangers of war that DOD would favor 
stressing readiness, but I read elsewhere in the paper that the investment 
sector is crucial and that we should make every effort to take advantage 
of our greatest strength: technological innovation and modernization.
Should we be more aggressive in exploring ways of seeking sav-
ings in strategic arms for the sake of building up our conventional 
strength? My sense is that once our new strategic programs begin com-
ing on line in the mid-1980s, including ALCM carriers in the early part 
of the decade, our strategic position will start improving rather signifi-
cantly, with the Soviets increasingly at a disadvantage if they cannot or 
do not do anything about their vulnerable ICBMs.
Issue #2
I agree that we need to continue to strengthen our abilities to react 
swiftly to a Soviet thrust into the PG/IO areas. I’m less inclined than 
Harold, however, to think that the Soviets see the stakes for themselves 
as high in Southwest Asia as in Europe. In the former, they may have 
an interest in denying us our vital interests; in the latter they see their 
own interests as vital—­interests which go first to perserving the status 
quo in Eastern Europe and then to strengthening their position vis-­a-­vis 
NATO. In setting priorities for the next five years, let’s bear in mind 
that our concerns may well shift back to Europe if we experience fur-
ther crises there, as well we may.
Moreover, we should consider more closely whether Soviet doc-
trine and experience would incline them to strike in force against South-
west Asia in order to cut the lifeline of the industrial states. Soviet 
experience in Afghanistan against a weak but determined enemy in a 
hostile environment may have given Moscow pause in considering a 
far larger venture in the same region. Would Soviet diversion of sub-
stantial forces from their strategic reserve into Southwest Asia lead 
them to be concerned about their vulnerability on other fronts—­except 
under general war conditions? The threat may for some time continue 
to be more from weakness and political flux in Iran, and thus Soviet 
opportunity—­at little cost and with no direct aggression—­to funda-
mentally improve its strategic position and influence in the region. This
