Bulgaria
275
these problems is to have face-to-face discussions where we can discuss
the differences and the common interests. We shall pursue these on
the basis of dealing on a case-by-case basis, country by country, on the
various issues and common concerns which we have.”
The distinction in PD–21 has not officially been made public,
although some news accounts have given its gist. Later public state-
ments of American policy toward Eastern Europe have been consistent
with PD–21, but have not disclosed its key elements either with respect
to objectives or to differentiation between two categories of countries,
favored and disfavored by the United States. These public statements
have also been consistent with Secretary Vance’s rather different case-
by-case approach. (The most comprehensive authoritative public state-
ment of policy was the testimony of Deputy Assistant Secretary Luers
on September 8, 1978, before the House International Relations Com-
mittee, distributed also as a State Department pamphlet, “Eastern
Europe: An overview.” Also important was Assistant Secretary Vest’s
statement before the House Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle
East on July 12, 1979, which explicitly reaffirmed that the Luers state-
ment “remains valid as a comprehensive account of U.S. policy and
objectives toward the region.”)
The annual development, both by the posts and through Washing-
ton coordination among interested agencies, of “U.S. Goals and Objec-
tives,” for the Ambassador to each country provides a useful opportu-
nity for some clarifications of policy guidance, but only up to a point.
Differences over the question of active promotion of MFN for Bulgaria,
for example, led to this minimalist implementation guidance statement:
“If Bulgaria requests, explain U.S. legislative requirements for MFN.”
The Foreign Service Inspection Report on The Conduct of Relations
with the Countries of Eastern Europe (May 1979), based on an inspection
of the operations of the EUR/EE Office in the Department and the
diplomatic posts in Eastern Europe, concluded that: “While the strategy
[of PD–21]5 is basically sound, it does appear to preclude U.S. Missions
in Sofia and Prague from exploiting certain opportunities to pursue
U.S. interests, and therefore should be reviewed.” The Department was
advised to “seek amendments to the Directive if it now appears too
restrictive.”
Policy Toward Bulgaria, 1977–1979
PD–21 was issued on the very day I flew from Washington to Sofia
to assume my mission. I was not made aware of drafts while being
briefed in Washington in July to September; I was aware of the general
5 Brackets in the original.
