1494  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
(B) The composition of personnel at any component of the detec­
tion and identification system shall be such as to minimize the possibil­
ity of obstruction to effective operation.
7. The Commission may at any time decide, by a two-­third major­
ity of all members, that a particular event qualifying under the terms 
of this treaty and its annexes for automatic on-­site inspection need not 
be inspected.
8. The Commission shall establish procedures for the despatch 
of special air missions in accordance with the criteria set forth in this 
treaty and its annexes.
9. The Commission shall prepare findings in accordance with Arti­
cle (blank) and shall make recommendations in accordance with that 
article as to measures to be taken.
10. The Commission may conclude agreements with any state or 
authority to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of this treaty and 
its annexes.
11. The Commission shall establish procedures for dissemination 
of data produced by the control system to nations participating in the 
system and to interested scientific organization.
12. The Commission shall prepare an annual report to the confer­
ence on its activities in carrying out its purpose as defined in Article II 
and such special reports as it deems necessary on its activities. It shall 
also prepare for submission to the conference such reports as the Com­
mission may be requested to make to the United Nations. The Com­
mission shall submit these reports, along with the annual reports to the 
parties to this treaty at least one month before the annual session of the 
conference following the period covered by the report.
13. The Commission shall establish procedures in accordance with 
Article (blank) for the surveillance of nuclear devices and observation 
of nuclear detonations for peaceful purposes.
Article VII—Conference
1. The conference consisting of representatives of parties to this 
treaty shall meet in regular annual session and in such special sessions 
as shall be convened by the administrator at the request of the Commis­
sion or of a majority of parties to the treaty. The sessions shall take place 
at the headquarters of the organization unless otherwise determined by 
the conference.
2. At such sessions, each party to the treaty shall be represented by 
not more than three delegates who may be accompanied by alternates 
and advisers. The cost of attendance of any delegation shall be borne 
by the state concerned.
3. The conference shall elect a president and such other officers as 
may be required at the beginning of each session. They shall hold office
