Bolivia  151
BL–2.		
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under 
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1
 
Washington, January 17, 1958.
SUBJECT
Presidential Escort Battalion—Bolivia
Background:
The revolution of 1952 in Bolivia caused far-­reaching economic and 
social dislocations, including the creation of armed workers’ militias. At 
the same time, the country’s regular army was demoralized and virtually 
disbanded. Since 1954, the United States Government has been providing 
economic assistance to Bolivia, initially in order to prevent a serious eco-
nomic and political upheaval there which might have led to the forma-
tion of a pro-communist or communist government, and subsequently to 
try to help Bolivia to remedy the serious economic and social dislocations 
which resulted from the revolution.2 The United States had also used its 
influence in the attempt to strengthen the moderate elements in Bolivia 
and to weaken correspondingly the left wing extremists. These efforts 
showed their most significant results in late 1956, when the newly elected 
Bolivian administration put into effect with U.S. counsel and support an 
economic stabilization program.
Discussion:
At the end of the first year, the stabilization program has achieved 
considerable success and the position of the moderate elements in 
the Bolivian Government has been strengthened at the expense of the 
extreme left wing. Nevertheless, the lack of effective security forces at 
the Government’s disposal exposes it constantly to the latent threat 
of the armed irregular militia, which is subject to influence and in 
some cases control by extremist elements. Both President Siles and 
his Minister of Defense3 have requested United States military assis-
tance to confront this basic weakness. Consequently, the accompanying 
Memorandum to President Eisenhower4 recommends that the President 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 724.5-MSP/1–1758. Secret. Drafted by 
William T. Briggs of the Office of South American Affairs.
2 Documentation relating to the revolution of 1952 and to U.S. relations with the rev-
olutionary government is printed in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. IV, The American 
Republics, Documents 134–173.
3 Julio Prado Montano.
4 Not printed.
