of the United States. Cases of this character have arisen with respect to Palestine, Syria, Fiume, and other territories involved in settlements arising out of the World War. I believe that this situation could be dealt with by adding after Section 11 (b) (2) a new section numbered (3) to read as follows: “in the surrender of territory by one country but the transfer of which to another country has not been recognized by the United States.” Your attention is also invited to the fact that several small countries recognized by the United States in 1890 were not clearly given a separate enumeration in the census of 1890. A similar situation arose under the present Act with respect to the granting of a separate quota to San Marino which had been recognized by the United States prior to 1910. With a view to making it proper for the United States to provide for a separate quota for such countries, I suggest that the following sentence be added after the word “boundary” in line 25, page 15, of the proposed measure: “Such officials jointly are authorized to prepare a separate statement for countries recognized by the United States before 1890, but to which a separate enumeration was not given in the census of 1890.” With respect to Section 15 (b), it is observed that provision is made for the clearance of a vessel involved upon the deposit of an amount sufficient to cover such sums. The present law contains a similar provision, and it was construed that the foreign ship owner was obliged to deposit money and that a bond with sufficient surety could not be accepted. Such a provision, it seems, would work an undue hardship in cases where a serious question of fact was involved and the sum of money required to be deposited was very large. I therefore suggest that it would be desirable to provide that the Secretary of Labor may, in his discretion, accept a bond with sufficient sureties thereon to guarantee the payment of such sums. The same observations apply to Section 19 (f).
