8. Let me turn to article 10 which I mentioned above and let us envisage for
an instant what such regulation might mean. Suppose an American film, the
scene of which was laid in any country of the world, introduced as a
character a Frenchman whose conduct might be obnoxious to the 32
gentlemen sitting on the commission, under this regulation not only could
that film be refused a visa for French territory, but every film produced by
this company, or any film handled by any person who had even handled this
film, might be refused a visa for all time in France. Surely, gentlemen, I
who am a very rare visitor to the films have frequently seen my countrymen
put in a position and represented in a way which is objectionable to me as
an American citizen. France is not alone in suffering from this
misrepresentation. And yet has it occurred to any other nation to endeavor
to take such drastic measures to protect their reputation abroad? Naturally
no one deplores more than I do the bad taste of an American producer who
will caricature or falsify the characteristics of a member of any foreign
nation, and I the more deeply deplore this in that I am persuaded that one of
the best forms of mutual understanding and one of the best lessons in
comprehension between nations is conveyed by means of the motion
picture films. However, this must be produced by mutual satisfaction and
by mutual good understanding on the part of producers and foreign
governments and cannot, it seems to me, be produced by the application of
force. Carry this thought to a possible extreme and you must envisage the
possibility of the exclusion, or at least the restriction, of foreign books,
magazines, plays and in fact any form of artistic or intellectual productions.
9. One of the complaints most frequently heard against the system of import
and export restrictions and prohibitions, a complaint which was brought by
chambers of commerce of all nationalities as was shown by the speeches in
the First Conference, lay in the fact that international trade must have a
definite and accurate basis for a foreseeable period in advance in order to
lay its plans and carry out its business. To eliminate this state of fluidity and
uncertainty was one of the primary purposes for which we were summoned
6 months ago to write a convention. Such action as is authorized by the
French decree which established a commission which from day to day or
from hour to hour may change its rules goes back to that uncertainty and to
those fluid conditions which make it nearly impossible to do business with
success. In the motion picture trade as in others a considerable investment is
