Chapter 5, May–June 1990  671
Produce/Develop
8. We have had a protracted and emotional battle here over this one. 
The issue is how to formulate the bans on a series of mostly obscure and 
unwanted weapons in Article IV. This would be easy except for the tan-
gled history of the ABM treaty and the Soviets’ determination not to get 
burned again. Our current position draws the line at the production of the 
first copy of the prohibited item. The Soviets want to draw the line much 
earlier in the sequence of research, development, testing, production and 
deployment. However, they have been rather incoherent and unable to 
draw the line at some point that makes sense and is verifiable. It appears 
to be when the item first appears outside the laboratory, as in D&S.
9. One AD Ref compromise formulation we put forward was that 
the sides agree not to engage in “activities that result in” the prohibited 
item. After taking the unprecedented step of pulling their military reps 
out of the middle of negotiating sessions in both START and D&S to 
consider this, Nazarkin said he was recommending it to Moscow. It is 
not entirely clear whether the interpretation we attached to these words 
was fully understood, although Rick and our lawyers explained it sev-
eral times. This interpretation is that the point at which the violation 
occurs is the first appearance of the prohibited item—­the same point as 
in our original position. The novel idea is that, at that point, all activi-
ties which preceded this act would retroactively be understood to have 
been illegal also.
10. Some of us are a bit uneasy with this approach, because of 
the rectroactive guilt angle and the impossibility of knowing whether 
today’s activity will be made illegal by some action in the distant future. 
This could lead to some unpleasant compliance debates in the future—­
perhaps more of the internal U.S. variety rather than U.S.–Soviet.
11. Rick, Lint and the ACDA lawyers believe this is a good outcome 
and I defer to them, of course. We have informed David Abramowitz in 
L of the situation. In addition, Paul Lembesis, one of the authors of the 
approach, is back in ACDA and could be consulted.
12. We also offered the Soviets another alternative. This would 
be just to say the sides agree to ‘‘prohibit” the offending item with no 
further elaboration, on the grounds that, like pornography, a violation 
would be apparent if it occurred. After saying he would recommend 
the first option, Nazarkin now says he recommended both to Moscow 
and no response has been received thus far.
13. I can offer only one other possibility, in case this AD Ref deal 
falls through. I believe the U.S. does not, in fact, insist on the right to go 
right up to turning the last bolt on these prohibited systems, nor should 
we want the Soviets doing this. The problem is to find an earlier point 
that makes sense. Perhaps we could draw the line at producing not
