Bolivia  205
and did not believe that he is the only one who can do anything about 
it, if he has the will, this despatch would not be written. Two changes 
have occurred in recent weeks: (1) there is widespread apprehension 
concerning Comibol’s drain on the nation’s economy, and (2) there is 
recognition in high quarters of the Government that something must be 
done about it. There is an added element of great importance: President 
Paz’ recent election gives him and his Government a greater freedom 
of action than Dr. Siles had in the closing stages of his administration.
I believe that the rehabilitation of Comibol is the key to any early 
economic improvement in Bolivia. I regard it as highly unlikely that 
there will be, during the foreseeable future, any serious disposition 
on the part of Government leaders to return Comibol mines and hold-
ings to private enterprise. Indeed, I suspect that the former owners 
of Comibol mines themselves have no serious interest in returning to 
Bolivia. No Bolivian with any political responsibility has even hinted 
to me that Comibol should be liquidated and that its assets be offered 
to private investors. President Paz told me that such a step would be 
“political suicide”. The nationalization of the great mining companies 
was and remains a major tenet of the Bolivian Revolution. Comibol is 
the chief economic symbol of the Revolution.
Given that Comibol is the key to any improvement in the economy 
of Bolivia, it would seem that the United States is confronted by a most 
serious dilemma.
Although no specific position in this regard has been taken at the 
highest levels of our Government, our policy has been not to consider 
United States Government aid or to encourage American private assis-
tance to Comibol until the Government of Bolivia has reached a final 
settlement with the former owners of Comibol’s holdings. A consider-
able percentage of the stock of Patiño Mines is held by American cit-
izens or by persons who are at least resident in the United States. I 
understand that this is not so in the case of Aramayo and Hochschild. 
The Government of Bolivia has been paying “retentions” to the former 
mine owners and, according to the Embassy’s information, the sum of 
retentions already paid has now reached over $17 million. Recent dis-
cussions were held between representatives of the Patiño group and 
the Government of Bolivia in Montreal, with a view toward a final set-
tlement of the amount to be paid to the Patiño group in accordance 
with the Government of Bolivia’s commitment to compensate the for-
mer mine owners. In essence, the Patiño group asked a sum double 
that which the Government of Bolivia was prepared to give. To the 
Embassy’s knowledge the discussions ended without agreement and 
no further discussions have been held. The Government of Bolivia con-
siders that it has already paid to the former mine owners sums in the 
form of retentions approaching the book value of the holdings which 
were nationalized in 1953. (Mine owners dispute this claim on grounds
