Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  277
4. Veterans of the Geneva scene (and readers of Playboy) will be 
reassured to know that security has been tightened a great deal. For 
example, the NTT delegation has decided that no shoes may be worn 
in the bubbles unless they have been X-­rayed. There was talk of ban-
ning pens in the bubbles, but this has not happened yet. The security 
people have said that all classified material taken to U.S.-Soviet meet-
ings should be double-­wrapped. However, they will allow them to be 
carried in briefcases instead. Briefcases large enough to contain the JDT 
have not been issued yet.
5. The Soviets clearly came here hoping (but probably not really 
expecting) that Nazarkin and Burt could get together one-­on-­one and 
reach some sort of understanding on the D and S/linkage issues. They 
now understand this will not happen. The effect will be that they will 
push these topics up to a higher level. This should not cause any prob-
lems here until we are closer to the endgame.
Working Groups
6. The sides had little difficulty agreeing to set up the working 
groups. The agreed groups and co-­chairmen are as follows:
Treaty Text WG	
MEDAS/IFFT – (Soviet  Co-­Chairman 
probably Masterkov, but there is 
some confusion on this—WG meets 
July 5)
Inspection Protocol WG	
Riveles – Zharkov
C or E WG	
Foley – Kryuchkov
MOU WG	
Daniel – Artem’ Yev
Throw-Weight Protocol WG	 Davison – Koltunov
Mobile ICBM Verification WG	 IFFT – Beketov.
7. In addition, there will be the usual conforming group when 
needed to conform English and Russian texts. The Soviets have not yet 
agreed to establish a new working group on our verification/stabil-
ity proposals. Such a group would probably be headed by Brooks and 
Masterkov.
8. Ellie Sutter is working very hard in the thankless job of Acting 
Executive Secretary, so that Jerry Stacy is the only State advisor. Another 
advisor could be put to good use, since we are now forced to run three 
of the six working groups with no State participation.
Verification/Stability Proposals
9. A good portion of the first two weeks has been devoted to our 
V/S proposals, both working on internal papers (some of which were 
sent to Washington) and selling the ideas to the Soviets. The Soviets 
have been skeptical and have no instructions yet. They read the various
