Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 139 whether relations with Cuba can be improved on a measured and a reciprocal basis. I am dedicated to freedom of movement between nations. I have removed restrictions on United States citizens who want to travel abroad.7 Today there are no restrictions imposed by our country. Today I have also removed similar travel restrictions on resident aliens in the United States. We seek to encourage international travel, and we must take greater account of problems that transcend national borders. Drugs and international crime, including terrorism, challenge traditional concepts of diplomacy. For the well-being of our peoples, we must cooperate on these issues. With each passing year they will occupy a more and more central place in our deliberations. I have a longstanding interest in the OAS, and I very much want to see it play an increasingly constructive role. The General Assembly of the OAS has been an important forum for the direct exchange of views among our governments. Such ministerial consultations are extremely useful. They allow us to apply our own collective strength to political and economic problems. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has performed valuable services. It deserves increased support from all our governments. We believe deeply in the preservation and the enhancement of human rights, and the United States will work toward coordinated and multilateral action in this field. The United States will sign, and I will seek Senate approval of, the American Convention on Human Rights negotiated several years ago in Costa Rica.8 And we will support, in cooperation with international agencies, broadened programs for aiding political refugees. I urge this organization and all its member states to take a more active role in the care, protection, and the resettlement of political refugees. The peacekeeping function is firmly embedded in the OAS Charter. I want to encourage the Secretary General of the OAS to continue his active and effective involvement in the search for peaceable solu- 7 See footnote 15, Document 29. 8 In an April 13 memorandum to the President, Brzezinski indicated that Department of State officials, Lipshutz, and the NSC Staff had all recommended that Carter announce in his Pan American Day speech his intention to sign and seek ratification of the American Convention on Human Rights, adopted by the Organization of American States in San Juan, Puerto Rico, on November 22, 1969. The President approved this recommendation. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South Pastor Files, Subject Files, Box 55, Human Rights: 1–5/77) He signed the American Convention on Human Rights at OAS headquarters on June 1. For his remarks, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 1050–1051.
