Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
139
whether relations with Cuba can be improved on a measured and a re-
ciprocal basis.
I am dedicated to freedom of movement between nations. I have
removed restrictions on United States citizens who want to travel
abroad.7 Today there are no restrictions imposed by our country.
Today I have also removed similar travel restrictions on resident aliens
in the United States.
We seek to encourage international travel, and we must take
greater account of problems that transcend national borders. Drugs
and international crime, including terrorism, challenge traditional con-
cepts of diplomacy. For the well-being of our peoples, we must coop-
erate on these issues. With each passing year they will occupy a more
and more central place in our deliberations.
I have a longstanding interest in the OAS, and I very much want to
see it play an increasingly constructive role.
The General Assembly of the OAS has been an important forum
for the direct exchange of views among our governments. Such minis-
terial consultations are extremely useful. They allow us to apply our
own collective strength to political and economic problems.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has performed
valuable services. It deserves increased support from all our gov-
ernments. We believe deeply in the preservation and the enhancement
of human rights, and the United States will work toward coordinated
and multilateral action in this field. The United States will sign, and I
will seek Senate approval of, the American Convention on Human
Rights negotiated several years ago in Costa Rica.8 And we will sup-
port, in cooperation with international agencies, broadened programs
for aiding political refugees. I urge this organization and all its member
states to take a more active role in the care, protection, and the resettle-
ment of political refugees.
The peacekeeping function is firmly embedded in the OAS Char-
ter. I want to encourage the Secretary General of the OAS to continue
his active and effective involvement in the search for peaceable solu-
7 See footnote 15, Document 29.
8 In an April 13 memorandum to the President, Brzezinski indicated that Depart-
ment of State officials, Lipshutz, and the NSC Staff had all recommended that Carter an-
nounce in his Pan American Day speech his intention to sign and seek ratification of the
American Convention on Human Rights, adopted by the Organization of American
States in San Juan, Puerto Rico, on November 22, 1969. The President approved this rec-
ommendation. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South
Pastor Files, Subject Files, Box 55, Human Rights: 1–5/77) He signed the American Con-
vention on Human Rights at OAS headquarters on June 1. For his remarks, see Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 1050–1051.
