260
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
businesslike pace of the deliberations. Amb. Voutov of Bulgaria, the
chairman of the committee of the whole, more than once seemed un-
comfortable under the watchful eyes of the Soviets as he attempted to
reconcile differing points of view during the article by article debate.
Amb. Maina of Kenya, the drafting committee chairman, was effective
in his role, and clearly appreciative of the spade work done by the
“non-group” in developing draft elements of a final declaration.
8. Detailed discussion of major issues follows.
9. Complaint mechanism. Clearly the most controversial and con-
tentious debate during the conference centered on Sweden’s proposed
amendment to Article V to provide for a permanent consultative mech-
anism to investigate complaints of possible violations of the Conven-
tion. The Swedish objective was to ensure that this “fact finding” stage
was clearly distinguished (and thus immune from a possible veto for a
permanent UN security council member) from the subsequent “Polit-
ical Decision” phase, i.e., whether to take a complaint to the security
council for appropriate action. Predictably, the GOS proposal caught
on with the Non-Aligned and the objective, if not the means, attracted
some sympathy from Western Dels who shared Swedish concerns over
the adequacy of existing verification measures in the Convention.
However, increasingly strident Eastern opposition and latent Western
skepticism about the wisdom of formally amending a convention
which had been so carefully negotiated and whose amendment could
create two sets of parties each adhering to a different text enabled the
UK Del to step in as honest broker with a proposal, based on earlier
US–UK discussions, to attempt to meet Swedish concerns through
some other means, such as an interpretative statement in the final dec-
laration. The UK’s efforts were aided to a considerable degree by: a) our
own low-key but strong expressions of support; and b) more impor-
tantly, by the realization that many Non-Aligned Dels were more inter-
ested in removing alleged “discriminatory” language in the Conven-
tion than with the real substance of the GOS amendment. It then
became a matter of getting the Soviets, who were obviously aware of
their isolated stance, to agree to some compromise formulation which
would be at least minimally acceptable to the Swedes, but would reflect
the view that no amendment was necessary. The Soviets undoubtedly
also feared that, if a consultative committee were established, interest
of others in the Sverdlovsk incident could create a test case. These “ne-
gotiations” to a certain extent were prolonged needlessly by Swedish
(read Amb. Lidgard’s) insistence that any interpretative language in-
clude a commitment to revise Article V formally at some future date.
Swedes finally settled on a formulation calling for “further consider-
ation” of this issue at “an appropriate time.”
10. While, as noted in U.S. Rep’s closing statement, the agreed lan-
guage on the right of any party to call for the convening of a consulta-
