January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1369 Nevertheless, Ali was clearly instructed to let himself be guided by his “lawyers.” 5. The Israelis agreed that there was no need (or benefit) to trilateral sessions until after our elections and privately expressed their preference for continuing to work with us outside of the trilateral format provided we do not highlight “bilateral consultations” since this would be seen as a step back in their relations with Egypt. They expressed concern that trilateral consideration of the MOU would be premature and could make progress more difficult. The Egyptians were relieved by this approach and we had no difficulty setting November 17 as the date of the next meeting.4 It will be in the area and will probably not be at the Ministerial level. Meanwhile we will send to both parties a revised MOU5 and will try to have bilateral discussions of this new text. The latest Egyptian draft6 is a bit better than their previous effort and the Israeli draft has promise in that, for the first time, they have given us Cabinet-cleared language on issues, notably land and water, which they have avoided treating in a formal way from the outset and which does not preclude the possibility of compromise. The Egyptians were clearly interested in Ambassador Linowitz’ characterization of the Israeli paper and the areas of agreement between the parties. In this sense the Egyptians may be a bit less negative than they were before the Oct 14–15 sessions. Privately, they asked us to pass them a copy of the Israeli paper which we, of course, refused. Muskie 4 Following Carter’s defeat in the November 4 presidential election, Ali and Boutros Ghali informed Atherton that Egypt did not wish to resume talks on November 17 unless it would lead to a late January 1981 summit and that they received indication from the incoming foreign policy team of President-elect Ronald W. Reagan that it would pursue Camp David “vigorously.” (Memorandum from Hunter to Brzezinski, November 7; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 5, Autonomy Talks: 11–12/80) Ali stated in a November 20 Radio Cairo interview that Egypt “did not expect” a tripartite summit until after Reagan’s inauguration. (Telegram 25585 from Cairo, November 20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800555–0714) 5 For the text of the revised draft of the Memorandum of Understanding, see telegram 294985 to Tel Aviv and Cairo, November 4. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880140–0430) 6 Copies of the Egyptian and Israeli drafts have not been found.
