Covert and Overt Operations 3. On the NFAC paper,4 it seems to me we have real trouble writing a pro and con paper—I think our analysts all belong in the policy end of the business! Perhaps the situation is absolutely as bleak as [name not declassified] paper makes out—that is, there simply is no benefit whatsoever to be had from any of the non-lethal military options. I frankly doubt that. I really would like to see us lay out both sides of the story, or otherwise we surely will be accused of being subtle advocates. For instance, mining of exports as well as imports will surely have some substantial financial impact. In the past, we have judged this to be insignificant because of all the money the Iranians have banked outside of the country. I think that analysis is a little overdone in view of the fact that it would certainly cause some short-term dislocations if their income was cut off. Beyond that, I sense from intelligence reports of late that the Iranians may be having greater financial problems than we thought they would. Another benefit, it seems to me, would be a demonstration of U.S. resolve. In fact, rather than being a sign of political maneuvering if such a move were executed on 5 November, it could be a clear sign of U.S. determination to solve this problem when there was no political gain to be had (all assuming that the President is re-elected, of course). Still another benefit, it would seem to me, would be a clear demonstration to the anti-Khomeini elements that the United States was basically behind them. Isn’t there still a residue of suspicion in Iran that the United States has been behind Khomeini all along? Beyond this, I think we have stretched a little bit in some of the “anti” points just to be sure we make them. Let’s pare the “con” down to those that are most important and realistic. Finally, I don’t think we need our encyclopedia to review what everybody in the world is going to think about this. We’ve got to put our response in as succinct a form as possible if it is going to be useful. I’d appreciate your turning people loose on this quickly as I’d like to take a revised response down to Brzezinski on Wednesday, 30 July. [portion marking not declassified] Stansfield Turner5 4 This July 25 paper, “Iran: US Non-Lethal Military Options,” concluded that none of these options would lead to the release of the hostages. (Central Intelligence Agency,
