692
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
At this time in Iran, 50 Americans are still held captive, innocent
victims of terrorism and anarchy. Also at this moment, massive Soviet
troops are attempting to subjugate the fiercely independent and deeply
religious people of Afghanistan. These two acts—one of international
terrorism and one of military aggression—present a serious challenge
to the United States of America and indeed to all the nations of the
world. Together, we will meet these threats to peace.
I’m determined that the United States will remain the strongest of
all nations, but our power will never be used to initiate a threat to the
security of any nation or to the rights of any human being. We seek to
be and to remain secure—a nation at peace in a stable world. But to be
secure we must face the world as it is.
Three basic developments have helped to shape our challenges:
the steady growth and increased projection of Soviet military power
beyond its own borders; the overwhelming dependence of the Western
democracies on oil supplies from the Middle East; and the press of so-
cial and religious and economic and political change in the many na-
tions of the developing world, exemplified by the revolution in Iran.
Each of these factors is important in its own right. Each interacts
with the others. All must be faced together, squarely and courageously.
We will face these challenges, and we will meet them with the best that
is in us. And we will not fail.
In response to the abhorrent act in Iran, our Nation has never been
aroused and unified so greatly in peacetime. Our position is clear. The
United States will not yield to blackmail.
We continue to pursue these specific goals: first, to protect the
present and long-range interests of the United States; secondly, to pre-
serve the lives of the American hostages and to secure, as quickly as
possible, their safe release, if possible, to avoid bloodshed which might
further endanger the lives of our fellow citizens; to enlist the help of
other nations in condemning this act of violence, which is shocking and
violates the moral and the legal standards of a civilized world; and also
to convince and to persuade the Iranian leaders that the real danger to
their nation lies in the north, in the Soviet Union and from the Soviet
troops now in Afghanistan, and that the unwarranted Iranian quarrel
with the United States hampers their response to this far greater danger
to them.
If the American hostages are harmed, a severe price will be
paid. We will never rest until every one of the American hostages are
released.
But now we face a broader and more fundamental challenge in this
region because of the recent military action of the Soviet Union.
Now, as during the last 3½ decades, the relationship between our
country, the United States of America, and the Soviet Union is the most
