1978  309
Summary on US population fatalities assume a 10 percent spontaneous 
evacuation of urban population in addition to that resulting from any 
planned CD program. Also, however, evacuation is relatively meaning-
less unless evacuees go to host areas which are prepared to house them, 
protect them (against fall-­out), and feed them for up to 30 days. That is 
what the proposed Program 3 is designed to do.
Most importantly, there is interagency agreement on the broad 
difference which civil defense makes in terms of population survival. 
Given current US and Soviet programs, in the mid-1980s, a major 
nuclear exchange would probably leave the US with 35–65 percent 
of its population initially surviving, while 80–90 percent of the Soviet 
population would initially survive. In short, to take the median figures 
in those estimates, 50 percent of the US population would immediately 
survive as against 85 percent of the Soviet population.
2. Review alternative US civil defense policies and make recommendations to 
the President.
Four policy options are set forth in the Summary (pp. 8–10) and 
Report (pp. V–8–12):
(1) The myth of civil defense, i.e., civil defense is useless.
(2) Insurance, which has been the prevailing US approach, and 
which can run from low cost/high risk insurance to high cost/low risk 
insurance.
(3) Equivalent survivability, which says that the proportions of US 
leadership, population, and economy surviving a nuclear war should 
be roughly equivalent to those of the USSR surviving the war.
(4) Equivalent program, which says that the US should essentially 
duplicate the Soviet civil defense program.
ACDA will probably opt for the Myth of Civil Defense; State and 
OMB will probably go for Insurance; virtually everyone else (i.e., JCS, 
DCPA, FPA, CIA, and NSC) opted (at least in the Working Group) 
for Equivalent Survivability. Since the NSC originated the concept of 
equivalent survivability and developed the arguments for it (Report, 
pp. V–10–12), I hope you will be persuaded by its logic!
One option which is likely to come forward in the discussion of 
policy options is simply to make no decision on policy and to proceed 
directly to a decision on program. Policy, after all, it can be said, is sim-
ply rhetoric, it’s program that counts. Policy is also much more conten-
tious than program. A no-­decision outcome on policy could become 
unavoidable, but it is also undesirable because:
(1) It will provide no basis for rationalizing program decisions or 
linking them to broader strategic issues. It will not provide a means for 
either the NSC or DOD to exercise any policy guidance over the new 
Civil Emergency Preparedness Agency and, as a result, that agency will
