150 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II (i) determining before the convening of each new session of the General Assembly and each major UN conference the priority human rights issues for special U.S. attention; (ii) consulting early and often with close allies and, when possible, with non-aligned and third world nations, to identify human rights issues of shared concern and forge appropriate coalitions; (iii) seeking ways to eliminate the racism-zionism issue, and trying to assure even-handed study and statements on country and area human rights situations so that not just a few countries are singled out; (iv) following up on the President’s proposals for strengthening the HRC by more frequent meetings, by returning the Commission to New York, and by increasing its mandate with the appointment of a UN Human Rights Commissioner, and also to take steps to preserve the Commission’s procedures for dealing with private complaints on human rights. Please do not feel constrained to limit your proposals to these five areas. Paragraph 3(f) of the memorandum requesting the PRM seeks an evaluation of substantive and procedural initiatives the U.S. could take in various international forums to improve human rights conditions. The agenda I have requested above will clearly be of major assistance in preparing a response to paragraph 3(f). Since paragraph 3(f) is not limited to the UN, however, I would appreciate it if you would prepare a draft response to paragraph 3(f) setting forth any substantive and procedural initiatives you would recommend that the U.S. take in the UN as well as any other international forums to improve human rights conditions. I think it is important to note, as you prepare your paper, that in his Law Day speech the Secretary (1) specifically defined the human rights which are the subject of our policy, (2) set forth in detail the questions to be considered as we determine whether and how to act with respect to human rights, and (3) stated that once we choose to act, the means available range from quiet diplomacy in its many forms, through public pronouncements, to withholding of assistance. In addition to the above described action agenda, I would like you to prepare, in consultation with AID, and with clearance from D/HA and S/P, a status report on the observance of women’s rights as well as an action plan designed to foster greater observance of such rights. You may wish to consider the following in your paper: cooperation with U.S. women’s organizations; greater emphasis on women’s rights in the implementation of current U.S. legislation on development assistance; ways to follow-up on International Women’s Year. Please have your staff contact Mr. Schneider of D/HA (Room 7802, x21181) for further details on substance, for information on format and
