1977 197 the Defense budget was increased by 4%, followed by 5% real growth in FY 77. The FY 78 budget, recently approved by Congress, contains only 1% real growth, reflecting, in part, the cancellation of the B–1. The broad strategic and political consequences of these unfavorable trends are increasingly obvious. In Europe open concern about Soviet military superiority has led to policies and actions to accommodate the Soviet Union that are evidence that the process of Finlandization may already be underway. In Asia the shock of Vietnam and the US decisions on Korea have led the Chinese as well as the Japanese to believe that we are moving toward a gradual pullback. At home, moderate and conservative opinion is increasingly concerned at the adequacy of our defense efforts and suspicions of the effects of arms control agreements with the Soviet Union. The last point deserves some elaboration. American opinion has always swung back and forth on the issue of dealing with the Soviet Union. We are clearly in a more conservative period despite the public’s underlying support for better relations and nuclear arms control. At the same time, as I have suggested, many of your initiatives are seen as “soft”—­which even most of those supporting detente do not want us to be. In this context your Defense budget level takes on added significance. It could either enhance confidence that our arms control agreements are consistent with our security or further polarize Congressional and public opinion. The NATO 3% Real Growth “Commitment” Our PRM–10 review led to a fundamental judgment: that the trends in the East-West military balance in the last decade have been unfavorable; but that public opinion could support budget levels that would permit us to offset Soviet modernization by the mid-’80s. PD–18 emphasized the need of offset future Soviet modernization by equivalent increases in US and Allied defense spending, and called for 3% real growth.5 At the NATO Summit, you told the Allies that the US would make a major effort to increase the collective strength of the Alliance if the Allies would do the same.6 Since about 1970, Allied defense spending has increased by about 2%–3% per year in real terms, but many European countries are capable of doing more. At the Summit follow-­up meeting, the NATO Defense Ministers agreed to a Ministerial Guidance (a NATO planning document that is renegotiated every two years) that included an aim of an annual increase in real terms “in the region of 3%” for the planning period 1979–1984. 5 See Document 31. 6 The NATO summit took place in Brussels May 17–18.
