1392  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
the Department is prepared to adopt this suggestion if there is substantial 
agreement by the major news media. The provisions of the Trading with 
the Enemy Act and the regulations issued there-­under will be suspended 
to the limited extent required by this experiment. The experiment will be 
carried out on the following assumptions:
(1) That the present validation of passports will be for a period 
expiring December 31, 1957.
(2) That those traveling to mainland China do so knowing that 
they face abnormal personal risks due to the failure of the Chinese 
Communist regime to treat American citizens in accordance with the 
accepted code of civilized nations.
(3) That all of the representatives designated by the major American 
news media on this basis receive Communist permission to enter the 
China mainland, with the understanding that they intend to travel, 
get information, and freely report as to real conditions in China. It is 
hoped that American correspondents in mainland China will be able to 
report on the condition and treatment of the Americans illegally held 
in Chinese prisons, as to whose fate there is deep concern on the part of 
the American nation. It is also to be understood that the United States 
will not accord reciprocal visas to Chinese bearing passports issued by 
the Chinese Communist regime.
(4) The Department emphasizes that the limited exception here 
suggested is upon an experimental basis. If for any reason it cannot 
be carried out substantially in accordance with the conditions stated 
above, or is otherwise found by the Department to have direct or indi­
rect consequences adverse to the foreign policy of the United States, 
then the experiment will be discontinued.
817.	 Letter from Johnson to Clough1
Prague, July 26, 1957
Dear Ralph:
The couriers have just brought in your letter of July 18 and I am 
sending this reply back directly with them. I entirely agree that there is 
nothing to be gained by my making any statement to Wang on a partial 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret. Johnson 
signed the original “Alex.” A copy was sent to Martin.
