Yugoslavia
965
—We are committed to TNF arms control negotiations and are
ready to start talking now. But to date the Soviets have adamantly
refused to negotiate unless the Alliance renounces its December deci-
sion. We can not do this because it would legitimate and perpetuate
Soviet superiority.
—The continued imbalance of long range theater nuclear forces
would have a negative impact not only on the security of the Alliance
but on Yugoslavia’s security as well. (S)
—Non-Aligned and Third World: The Yugoslavs are particularly
proud of their role in the Non-aligned Movement (NAM) which Tito
helped to found. While Belgrade’s influence is likely to diminish some-
what in the wake of Tito’s death, the Yugoslavs can still be quite
useful in countering Soviet and Cuban influence in the NAM. Thus I
recommend you stress the positive role the NAM could play in world
affairs if it is viewed as credible and neutral, and if Yugoslavia continues
to play an important role in it. Cuba will continue to try to aim the
NAM at the U.S. and at our bilateral problems. You may want to offer
a full briefing on U.S.-Cuban relations so that they could be better
prepared to respond to Castro’s charges. (S)
—Iran/Iraq: You may also wish to use any discussion with the
Yugoslav leadership on the NAM to explore ways in which the Yugo-
slavs can use their influence with Iran to obtain the release of the
hostages, and once they are released, to facilitate a normalization of
U.S.-Iranian relations. Similarly, the Yugoslavs have good relations
with Iraq, and it would be useful to get them to use their good offices
to help us improve our relations with Baghdad. (C)
295.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Belgrade, June 24, 1980, 10:45 a.m.–12:45 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Under Secretary David Newsom
Under Secretary Richard Cooper
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 38, Memcons: President: 6/80. Secret. The meeting took place in the Palace of
the Federation.
