1178  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
of the Telemetry Protocol, and such encryption shall be carried out in 
accordance with paragraph 2 of Section III of the Telemetry Protocol. 
Encapsulation and encryption that are carried out on the same flight 
test of an ICBM or SLBM shall count as two flight tests against the quo-
tas specified in this paragraph.
ARTICLE XI
1. For the purpose of ensuring verification of compliance with 
the provisions of this Treaty, each Party shall have the right to con-
duct inspections and continuous monitoring activities and shall con-
duct exhibitions pursuant to this Article and the Inspection Protocol. 
Inspections, continuous monitoring activities, and exhibitions shall 
be conducted in accordance with the procedures provided for in the 
Inspection Protocol and the Conversion or Elimination Protocol.
2. Each Party shall have the right to conduct baseline data inspec-
tions at facilities to confirm the accuracy of data on the numbers and 
types of items specified for such facilities in the initial exchange of data 
provided in accordance with paragraph 1 of Section I of the Notification 
Protocol.
3. Each Party shall have the right to conduct data update inspec-
tions at facilities to confirm the accuracy of data on the numbers and 
types of items specified for such facilities in the notifications and regu-
lar exchanges of updated data provided in accordance with paragraphs 
2 and 3 of Section I of the Notification Protocol.
4. Each Party shall have the right to conduct new facility inspec-
tions to confirm the accuracy of data on the numbers and types of items 
specified in the notifications of new facilities provided in accordance 
with paragraph 3 of Section I of the Notification Protocol.
5. Each Party shall have the right to conduct suspect-site inspec-
tions to confirm that covert assembly of ICBMs for mobile launchers of 
ICBMs or covert assembly of first stages of such ICBMs is not occurring.
6. Each Party shall have the right to conduct reentry vehicle inspec-
tions of deployed ICBMs and SLBMs to confirm that such ballistic mis-
siles contain no more reentry vehicles than the number of warheads 
attributed to them.
7. Each Party shall have the right to conduct post-exercise dis-
persal inspections of deployed mobile launchers of ICBMs and their 
associated missiles to confirm that the number of mobile launchers of 
ICBMs and their associated missiles that are located at the inspected 
ICBM base and those that have not returned to it after completion of 
the dispersal does not exceed the number specified for that ICBM base.
8. Each Party shall conduct or shall have the right to conduct con-
version or elimination inspections to confirm the conversion or elimi-
nation of strategic offensive arms.
