398 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I While we cannot put an end to competition or to Soviet efforts to help insure territorial integrity at the request of African governments, we can and should make clear our opposition to military adventures which exacerbate conflicts, inhibit peacemaking, and go beyond reasonable defensive efforts. In particular, we should expose attempts to gain political advantage through encouraging bloodshed. It is evident that we cannot force a change in Soviet and Cuban policies in Africa. But there are many things we can do to influence their decisions. If we are to preserve our interest in SALT and other central aspects of the US-Soviet relationship, it is crucial that we do all we sensibly can to deter and prevent further Soviet/Cuban adventures in Africa and encourage their gradually scaling down their activities. Such a strategy includes efforts designed to strengthen our friends, limit the areas in which the Soviets and Cubans can find easy entree, build longer-term relationships with the countries of the region. The execution of this strategy is underway: —We have steadily increased our public and private diplomatic pressures directed against the Soviets and Cubans themselves, emphasizing our concern and interest in stability and peace in Africa. —We have intensified our consultations with non-aligned states. A number of these states share our views about Cuban and Soviet actions, and have urged restraint on Moscow and Havana. Our European allies and some African and Arab moderates have made parallel diplomatic approaches; and Iraqi, Syrian, and Algerian pressures against the Soviets and Cubans in Eritrea may in part have flowed from this effort. —We have strengthened our ties with African countries over the last year, particularly through our commitment to help resolve the southern African disputes. This has fundamentally contributed to our credibility throughout the continent and to limiting opportunities for Soviets and Cubans. —Our substantially increased economic assistance, and the military assistance we have offered some of the more vulnerable countries in east Africa, have provided us with strong cards in many countries. —Our long-term plans for further increases in economic aid to the area, greater effort to help Africans increase their trade with us, and offers of appropriate technology in assisting African economic development are tools we can exploit and which the Soviets cannot match. —Above all, African nationalism itself—while not a tool we can use directly—is the most powerful force available against extended Soviet and Cuban influence. The inevitable role this force will play offers us considerable grounds for optimism over the next few years, assuming southern Africa does not explode into a major racial war.
