Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III the industrial world to LDCs, and it is by improving these means the industrial countries can act most effectively to enlarge that flow. On aid, we propose that the Summit call for differing measures to meet the needs of middle-income and poorer developing countries: —The middle-income countries need more private investment, hard loans, and technological collaboration (such as our intended new Foundation for International Technological Cooperation).7 —The poor countries need growing concessional aid, including generous replenishment of IDA—the World Bank’s soft-loan window. We also propose that the Summit call for more assistance to help non-OPEC developing countries produce or conserve energy, with the World Bank being asked to play a financial, advisory, and coordinating role. The Canadians are suggesting that the Summit countries establish a special fund to receive voluntary contributions for grant aid for energy exploration in LDCs. On trade, the heads of government should direct their MTN negotiators to ensure that LDCs share fully in post-Summit MTN negotiations, and that LDC concerns are fully taken into account in these negotiations. Lowering trade barriers would be the most effective means of increasing LDC export earnings. The Summit should also encourage commodity agreements, which will help to stabilize these earnings. These Summit actions on aid and trade will be directly responsive to LDC concerns. If we are able to arrange effective follow-up, which will not be easy in the present mood of the Congress, they can make a large contribution to the welfare of the roughly billion human beings who live in desperate poverty in the Third World. The Common Fund8 poses more difficult problems. The gap between LDC and industrial country attitudes will be difficult to bridge, except over a prolonged period of negotiation. This issue is of more symbolic than economic importance to LDCs, but must be addressed. 5. Conclusion. If the Summit can agree on the package described in paragraph 1 and address the longer-term problems set forth in paragraphs 3 and 4, it will be seen to have contributed significantly to a healthier world economy. 7 See Document 311.
