Arms Control and Disarmament 1401 of those talks. The approach of the United Nations General Assem­ bly, the release of the United Nations Radiation Committee [report] scheduled for early August, and the possibility of the question of tests arising indirectly in connection with the proposed Special Security Council Session are additional factors which demand consideration of this question. 2. On July 30 Chairman McCone handed you a message sent to him by Commissioner Libby and Dr. Edward Teller (TAB B). The mes­ sage suggests that to avoid our being forced by public opinion into a complete test cessation we might propose (1) to limit the offsite fission fallout per year to one megaton equivalent each year released by the U.S. and the same amount by the USSR, or alternately (2) to ban com­ pletely offsite fallout and permit underground testing by everyone. 3. While any measures which notably reduced fallout would lessen public concern about the health hazards of continued testing, we believe the AEC proposal is insufficient from the political standpoint and that it has the following specific disadvantages: (a) It would be viewed as a retreat from previous Western propos­ als which have called for suspension of tests rather than test limita­ tions, and would seem an illogical sequel to the Geneva talks directed toward methods for enforcement of a possible test suspension. (b) It would not be accepted and hence would enable the USSR to continue to exploit the testing issue and its own unilateral suspension in world-­wide propaganda and to avoid the question of a production cut-­off by continuing to hide behind the issue of a test suspension. (c) By the same token, it would be an easy way for the USSR to avoid the inspection to which it has otherwise become largely commit­ ted as a result of the Geneva talks. (d) It would not inhibit the development of nuclear weapons capa­ bilities by fourth countries, a problem which has been of some concern to the U.S. and one which is of apparently increasing concern to the USSR as well. (e) It would not have the effect of a test suspension in freezing weapons development of the U.S. and USSR at a time when we retain some important advantages in weapons technology (according to tech­ nical studies prepared by the Science Advisory Committee). (f) A limitation of fallout to a fixed amount would, according to past technical consideration of similar limitation proposals, be difficult to enforce by inspection. 4. The policy recommendations which you discussed in general terms with the panel of disarmament advisors and approved for dis­ cussion with other agencies in April, we believe, afford the best basis for decisions at this time. In summary, the nuclear test proposal we have discussed with the other agencies and revised in the light of their comments, is the following: The nuclear provisions of our present pro­ posals (test suspension and cut-­off) would be made separable from the
