146
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
the Shah described as servants of the British). If the United States
should continue to side spectacularly with the British (for example,
Harriman’s refusal to pass to the British Mossadeq’s “ultimatum,” and
the postponement of the $25,000,000 Export-Import Bank loan), the
brunt of anti-Western feeling could easily cover the United States as
well as Great Britain.
B. Dictatorship of the streets. The Mossadeq government is the
prisoner of the “streets.” The “streets” are composed of two main
groups: the followers of Mullah Kashani and the Tudeh Party (with sat-
ellite fronts), both of which are exploiting to the fullest a wave of gen-
uine nationalistic feelings of a broad section of the upper middle class.
Although Kashani’s following is possibly more numerous than that of
the Tudeh, the former has neither the organization, discipline, nor rev-
olutionary and conspiratorial training and experience of the latter. Ac-
cordingly, of the two the more powerful is undoubtedly the Tudeh
Party.
C. The traditional Iranian policy is to maintain the balance of
power between the Soviet Union and Great Britain. The Iranian polit-
ical pendulum is now swinging dangerously toward the Soviet Union
but given opportunities the Iranian should react and turn toward the
West for support (providing the West is not represented by Great
Britain alone).
2. Mossadeq’s government has powerful popular support.
A. Majlis opposition to Mossadeq collapsed on 30 September 1951.
Abdul Rahman Faramarzi announced that the opposition would cease
to attack the government as long as the oil dispute was under consider-
ation of the Security Council. Sources believe, however, that the col-
lapse of this opposition is final. The Security Council debate is a
face-saving excuse. The opposition has gotten “out on a limb,” de-
pending upon British power and Royal Court support. Both failed to
come through with their support and the opposition deputies fear for
their very lives.
B. Moslem religious groups, who at one time might have been di-
verted from Kashani and from his pro-Mossadeq stand, have now ral-
lied to the national front banner. In a letter dated September 1951
Navab Safavi, leader of the Fedayan-I-Islam, made peace with Kashani;
a letter from Burujurdi of Qum (the outstanding spiritual leader of
Iran) to the Shah urged him to support Mossadeq.
C. Kashani’s enormous influence in support of the government
was demonstrated on 3 September 1951 by the general closing of the
bazaars throughout the nation at his request and by the orderliness of
the parades he sponsored in favor of the government on the same day.
D. The Shah has taken a stand in favor of Mossadeq and at least
since 17 September has refused to listen to British entreaties to rally op-
