560 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV guidance.10 As you know, the CG addressed that issue directly in the case of tactical air and the case of amphibious assault forces. Since that time, we have seen some preliminary work by the OpNav staff on the affordability of the Navy as a whole, the results of which imply perhaps an even more serious problem than we understood. (Tom Hayward tells me he will be glad to make this analysis available to us, and enthusiastically endorses the idea of having it on the PRC agenda.) PA&E has continued to work on the affordability of USAF tactical air, and should be able to have something worthwhile by way of background material before the PRC. I am less confident in the case of the Army, but it does seem to me that the general problem of affordability—­even with a real 3% annual growth—­is liable to be serious, and that we may be faced with a declining force structure. If the analyses now being worked out substantiate that concern, there is no question in my mind but that the PRC principals should be made aware of it, and that it should be discussed in the context of adequacy.11 The final part of the agenda would deal with alternatives, which seem to be: • If necessary, alter the fiscal guidance to match the policies and objectives, or • If necessary, alter the policies and objectives to match the fiscal guidance, or • Try to influence our Allies’ actions (which would include the issue of our shared commitment to an annual 3% real growth in defense expenditures), or • Some combination of the above, or • Decide that the current situation is satisfactory, and do nothing. While the group agrees that some rough indication of the quantitative aspects of these alternatives is important, there should be no attempt to turn this PRC meeting into a budget-­setting exercise.12 Rather, the emphasis should be on reaching a judgement as to the general adequacy of the forces and capabilities implied by the CG and, 10 In the right margin next to this sentence, Brown wrote: “Should perhaps put another way: 1) are present pgms sufficient 2) can we afford present pgms within fiscal guidance.” 11 In the right margin, Brown drew an arrow pointing to the end of this paragraph and wrote: “I’d like to approach this differently: 1) what can we buy within present FG? 2) how well does that meet needs of national security, 3) with added funding increments, what added forces can be procured/maintained, 4) how do these add to security.” 12 Brown underlined the words “there should be no attempt to turn this PRC meeting into a budget-­setting exercise,” drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this sentence, and wrote “very important.”
