Comprehensive Test Ban
473
While we know little in detail of the Soviet weapons program, what we
do know suggests that the Soviet nuclear stockpile would not suffer to
the same degree nor degrade as rapidly as ours.
We maintain this view strongly and are disappointed that the in-
teragency process thus far has seemed unwilling to accommodate this
position.
2. The adequacy of seismic verification is one of the most difficult
subjects we must face in the CTB area—and one of the most important
for both acceptance of the Treaty and preventing the development of
major asymmetries.
DOE believes that even with the optimal level of Internal Seismic
Installations (ISIs), we will remain unable to both detect and identify
events below the few kiloton level in low coupling media. Without the
optimal level of ISIs, even this capability would be significantly de-
graded. DOE representatives have discussed my concerns with Dr.
Press about the OSTP/CTB Review Panel Report, and he has agreed to
look into this matter.2
3. In addition, I believe it is essential to our deliberations, as well as
being a sound negotiating strategy, that we maintain the linkage be-
tween permitted experiments, verification, and Peaceful Nuclear Ex-
plosives. It would be unwise to attempt to resolve the verification
issues relating to the number and type of ISIs and On-Site Inspections
(OSIs) without first addressing the issue of permitted experiments—
since these two categories of problems are related intimately to the
level that can be adequately verified. Further, to resolve these problems
by decoupling them from PNEs would seem to give away any leverage
we might have with the Soviets for our desired outcome on prohibiting
PNEs. I am aware, of course, that the Soviets have told us privately that
if these other issues are resolved, we can settle the PNE questions
without difficulty; but we must assume that this is a Soviet negotiating
tactic that may not well serve our interests.
Unfortunately, this essential linkage is not considered in the 17
April ACDA paper requested by the National Security Council on the
ISI strategy for the 4 May resumption of negotiations. This paper treats
ISIs independently of other key treaty issues, and recommends the ne-
gotiation of a questionable phased approach based upon resolving the
details of our verification capabilities in a Joint Consultative Commis-
sion after completion of the basic agreement and its entry into force.
4. A CTB agreement must not only meet objective tests of adequate
verifiability but, perhaps most importantly, must lower rather than
2 No record of these discussions were found.
