National Security Policy 1021 revision of 1958 Basic National Security Policy (NSC 5810/1), and to allow publication of NSC 5904/1 (17 March 1959) before completion of the review of the then current Basic National Security Policy. Although the deletion of the footnote to Section B of NSC 5904/1, as proposed by the Planning Board, would not specifically clarify the definition of the type of aggression being addressed in this section, its deletion without replacement is, in the view of the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; the Chief of Naval Operations; and the Commandant of the Marine Corps, an acceptable proposal since it is assumed that users of this document will also have knowledge of NSC 5906/1, which considers the various types of war. It is our recommendation that the Planning Board proposal be accepted. b. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; the Chief of Naval Operations; and the Commandant of the Marine Corps cannot, however, concur in any footnote, to the effect that a war with Russia is a general war, since nowhere in NSC 5906/1 is general war so defined. Furthermore, such a definition is considered to be completely unacceptable by rea­ son of inaccuracy. Paragraph 9 of NSC 5906/1 recognizes that we are now engaged in a war with Russia; the cold war. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; the Chief of Naval Operations; and the Commandant of the Marine Corps do not consider that this war is comparable to the condi­ tions they envisaged would exist in a general war. 3. If clarification of the subject matter of Section B is considered desirable by the National Security Council, it is suggested that either: a. The title of this Section be changed to read: “US POLICY IN THE EVENT OF CONFLICT IN WHICH SIZEABLE FORCES OF THE USSR ARE NOT INVOLVED.” b. or, the following footnote be adopted: NSC 5904/1, Page 2, Footnote: “This section of the policy statement addresses itself to those con­ flicts in which sizeable forces of the United States and USSR are not involved. Present U.S. policy is based upon the concept stated in para­ graph 16, NSC 5906/1, that ‘conflicts occurring in the NATO area or elsewhere involving sizeable forces of the US and USSR should not be construed as local aggression.’”
