discussion developed very divergent views and technical phases of the question arose, it was deemed advisable to refer the matter to a committee of technical advisers. Mr. Hioki proposed an amendment to the last paragraph of the Chinese proposal concerning the impounding of the revenues derived from the surtaxes and the custodian-ship of the funds (see page 27 of the Minutes of February 24, 1926). This amendment was a remodeling of the American proposal. The provision relating to custodian banks provoked considerable adverse criticism and in reply to Mr. Strawn’s inquiry as to the purpose of the last line of his suggestion, “in such manner as shall have been agreed upon at this Conference”, Mr. Hioki stated that that referred to the principle upon which the Customs revenue was to be apportioned to the different banks, whether it was to be according to the credit which each nation had, or to the trade, or to something else. A series of amendments were then submitted designed to simplify the language and to provide a guarantee against the dissipation of the funds. In discussing the amendments Dr. Yen again referred to the 90 million dollar clause and said that the Chinese Delegation would be prepared to go as far as possible to meet the wishes of the foreign Delegates in regard to the security of the funds. He referred to Count de Martel’s statement that the foreign delegates did not want to name the figure because they feared that the Chinese Government might use the money, or that figure, as security for making a loan. Count de Martel replied that his objection was made because he happened to remember an instance in which the Chinese Government pledged the surtaxes contemplated in the Washington Treaty within a few months after the end of the Washington Conference, and that evidence to this effect was in the files of the French Delegation. Dr. Yen said that he had no knowledge of such a transaction but that there were certain instances when foreign creditors had insisted upon the proceeds of the 2½ per cent surtaxes being guaranteed to them. Count de Martel said that the case he had in mind was the Kiangnan Arsenal at Shanghai in connection with which the Minister of Finance offered the surtaxes as security. Count de Martel said that he would favor ruling out such a pledge and Colonel Peel expressed a similar view and said, too, that the surtaxes had also been pledged to secure payment of certain British creditors. The sub-committee returned to a discussion of Mr. Oudendijk’s amendment designed to take the place of paragraphs 3 and 4 of
