September 18–December 16, 1978 509 choose from it whatever they deem to be in their interest while evading as much as possible what they conceive of as being in the interest of the cause of peace. They cite it to support their exaggerated claims, and forget it when they are confronted with a decision they think is painful. You have done your best to moderate their demands and attitude. But I believe that much remains to be done, for I am determined to make the peace we are working for a solid and lasting structure. I want to leave it as a legacy for our grandchildren as well as the history of mankind. In view of this situation, I decided to take the step of addressing a message to Prime Minister Begin to draw his attention to the real nature of what we are doing and ask him and his colleagues in the Israeli Cabinet to view the matter in a different light. I believe that such a step is a necessary and needed supplement to my initiative. In a nut shell, I want them to wake up, look beyond mere words and rise to the level of the great events we are creating. In addition to that, I do not want you to carry all the burden. You have been most understanding and patient. You kept your pledge to be a full and honest partner.9 I trust that you agree with me on the futility of any attempt to conclude a separate agreement between Egypt and Israel. This is both morally wrong and practically not workable. Nevertheless, the Israeli Government seems to be aiming at that. From their tactics and maneuvers throughout the negotiations, it appears that they are determined to bring the treaty as close as possible to a separate agreement. They misrepresented, and even distorted, the linkage issue. Consequently, they approached it from a negative angle.10 But as I told you before, I am determined to prevent this from happening. To me, working for a genuinely comprehensive peace is a conscientious commitment not a matter of political expediency. Our delegation left for Washington with clear instructions to emphasize the comprehensive character of the peace we are making.11 To this end, we demanded, on October 13, the insertion of the following article into the text of the peace treaty: —“Egypt and Israel pledge theirselves to work for the solution of the Palestinian question in all its aspects on the basis of the realization of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.” On the same day, our delegation submitted to you a memorandum on measures to be taken towards improving the political conditions in 9 Vance highlighted this sentence. 10 Vance underlined this sentence and the preceding sentence. 11 Vance underlined this sentence.
