Venezuela 1289 There have been and are private technical groups here on government contract to study various phases of the economy including transportation, public administration, etc., to assist in the more orderly development of governmental processes and policies. IV. Loans The Government of Venezuela continues to reiterate its reluctance to borrow from foreign sources. The proposed extraordinary budget will require about Bs. 1.1 billion if passed in full by the Congress. The Government hopes to raise this amount from local sources. Some capital requirements for specific projects might lead to borrowing from such organizations as the IBRD, the International Finance Corporation, the Export Import Bank, and the Development Loan Fund. V. Coordination of Programs The coordination of technical and economic assistance programs is by government order the responsibility of the Oficina Central de Coordinación y Planificacion in the President’s office. In the past there has been no particular problem for Embassy in field of coordination because of very special nature of USOM and IAGS activities here. There has been no duplication of U.S.-UN aid efforts in the past. VI. Future AID and Loan Programs Although it is easy to comment on future policy when there are existing programs or studied projects in being, we are troubled here with the fact that the needs, probable utilization of aid and loan programs, and the possible desires of the Venezuelan Government cannot be based upon either any historical concept or known present planning. As noted, the demands in the past have been small, with the exception of the UN technical and program; there has been no history of foreign loans from international organizations and only a minor amount of loans from private banking. Thus we must comment upon possibilities which are still in the minds of the Venezuelan Government officials and we will not know how the program can develop until it is revealed to us through requests. We do know that on the technical aid front, in addition to the expected request for more UN technicians, the President himself in an exchange of letters with Assistant Secretary Rubottom expressed deep interest in the present health program and in its expansion. It is expected that further technical assistance in other fields will very probably be the subject of future requests. Also, apart from strict technical aid, we know the Government is interested in acquiring arms at token cost. Another field in which some interest has been shown is that which is covered in other countries by the ICA Labor program. With respect to loans it is felt that it may not be possible to meet the financial needs from private local sources and therefore the facilities of
