Chapter 6, June–December 1990  921
173.	 Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze and Soviet 
Defense Minister Yazov to Secretary of State Baker and 
Secretary of Defense Cheney1
Moscow, December 6, 1990
Dear Gentlemen,
In view of the doubts that you have had regarding the question of 
the construction of new silo launchers for heavy ICBMs (in the context 
of a broader agreement on heavy ICBMs reached last October in New 
York), we thought it would be useful to make the following additional 
clarifications.
First of all, we wish to once again make it absolutely clear that con-
struction of new heavy ICBM silo launchers under the existing agree-
ment would only take place by way of replacing those heavy ICBM silo 
launchers that have been eliminated under the Protocol on Conversion 
or Elimination Procedures to the START Treaty, i.e. their number would 
remain within the Treaty-­permitted limits. We understand that you 
have a question as to which would be the instances where the need for 
such construction may arise. The answer lies in those situations which 
may occur in real life.
We hope you will agree with us that, unfortunately, one cannot com-
pletely rule out such emergency situations – due to, among other things, 
the extended life of silo launchers – which may make their further oper-
ation impossible. Incidentally, this has been taken into account in the 
Protocol on Conversion or Elimination Procedures, which, as has already 
been agreed between the two sides, provides for a special procedure of 
notification and exemption of strategic offensive arms from the Treaty 
count, including ICBM silo launchers, when they become inoperable as a 
result of an accident or an irreparable damage. Naturally, each side would 
have the right in such cases to compensate for the systems excluded from 
the count—within the relevant limits set by the Treaty. This, of course, 
applies to heavy ICBMs as well. For this reason alone one cannot fore-
close the possibility of construction of new silo launchers for them.
Nor can one rule out such situations which could require relocation 
of silo launchers, including those for heavy ICBMs, that is, closing them 
down in one area of the country and constructing new ones in another 
area, for non-­military reasons, in particular due to the internal political 
processes taking place in our country. Silo launcher relocation could be 
required either during the period of reductions under the Treaty, or at 
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Under Secretary for Arms Control, 
International Security Affairs, Lot 05D259, Records of James Timbie, US-Russia START I 
CFE December 1990. No classification marking.
