Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1151
of voluntary reduction of the nuclear arsenals of the U.S.S.R. and the 
United States, a process with unprecedented scope and objectives. It 
is an event of global significance, for we are imparting to the disman-
tling of the infrastructure of fear that has ruled the world, a momentum 
which is so powerful that it will be hard to stop. In both countries we 
face the complex process of the ratification of the new treaty. There will 
be critics. Here in Moscow some will point at our unilateral conces-
sions, while in Washington there will be talk about concessions made 
to the Soviet Union. Some will say the new treaty does not really fulfill 
the promise of a peace dividend since considerable resources will be 
required to destroy missiles. And if the missiles are not destroyed, crit-
ics will say they’re obsolete and must be replaced with new ones, and 
that will be even more expensive. Sharp criticism is to be expected also 
from those who want to see faster and more ambitious steps toward 
abolishing nuclear weapons. In other words, the treaty will have to be 
defended. I’m sure we have achieved the best that is now possible and 
that is required to continue progress. Tremendous work has been done 
and unique experience has been gained of cooperating in this enor-
mously complex area. It is important that there is a growing realiza-
tion of the absurdity of overarmament now that the world has started 
to move toward an era economic interdependence, and that the infor-
mation revolution is making the indivisibility of the world ever more 
evidence. But the policymakers have to bear in mind that as we move 
toward that era we will have to make new, immense efforts to remove 
the dangers inherited from the past and newly emerging dangers, to 
overcome various physical, intellectual, and psychological obstacles. 
Normal human thinking will have to replace the kind of militarized 
political thinking that has taken root in the minds of men. That will 
take time. A new conceptual foundation of security will be a great help. 
Doctrines of war fighting must be abandoned in favor of concepts of 
preventing war. Plans calling for a crushing defeat of the perceived 
enemy must be replaced with joint projects of strategic stability and 
defense sufficiency. The document before us marks a moral achieve-
ment and a major breakthrough in our country’s thinking and behavior. 
Our next goal is to make full use of this breakthrough to make disar-
mament an irreversible process. So, as we give credit to what has been 
achieved, let us express our appreciation to those who have contributed 
to this treaty their talent and their intellectual and numerous resources. 
And let us get down to work again for the sake of our own and global 
security. Mr. President, we can congratulate each other. We can congrat-
ulate the Soviet and American people and the world community on the 
conclusion of this agreement. Thank you.” (Public Papers: Bush, 1991, 
pages 986–987)
Bush responded: “Thank you, Mr. President. To President 
Gorbachev and members of the Soviet Government, and all the honored
