Chemical and Biological Weapons
249
resentatives of the BWC depository, had jointly worked on a report for
submission to the BWC Review Conference and that no such questions
had arisen during the preparation of the report. Now, all of a sudden,
the US side was raising expressions of concern, asking for urgent con-
sultations, and stating that it would inform the Review Conference that
it had done so.
5. Korniyenko then characterized the information I had provided
about the incident itself as vague. He did not know, he said, on what it
was based and added that it was not unheard of for there to be no basis
for such allegations. Even assuming, Korniyenko went on, that some
kind of illness did occur in the Sverdlovsk area, what relationship did
this have to the BWC? He asked me to imagine how we would react if
the Soviets today or tomorrow were to make such a representation to
US, expressing concern about the “Legionnaires’ Disease,” obliging US
to enter into consultations under the BWC, and trying to bring that
matter into the work of the BWC Review Conference.
6. In commenting on Korniyenko’s remarks, I stated that the US
representation was occasioned by an interagency study of all available
evidence of the unexplained incident in Sverdlovsk, some of it received
fairly recently, and that what we were seeking was an explanation of
the incident. As for his reference to the vagueness of the information, I
told him that I thought it was spelled out rather clearly in the non-
paper I had left with him but that if he could characterize what was not
clear to him I would try to elaborate. Noting that the parties to the BWC
are not permitted to have biological warfare stocks, I told him that if
there was a sensible explanation for what had occurred in Sverdlovsk I
hoped it could be provided to US quickly so it could be taken into con-
sideration in the report we were required to make [garble].
7. Answering his question on how we would react if challenged
about the Legionnaires’ disease, I said I thought I had a pretty good
idea of what our procedure would be. We would in all likelihood invite
the Soviets to send scientists to discuss the matter with our scientists
and to visit the communicable disease center in Atlanta to go over the
records of what our investigation had shown thus far.
8. Korniyenko said he had nothing to add and would merely re-
peat that the Soviets would study our statement and provide a re-
sponse. He stressed that he did not know whether anything had hap-
pened in Sverdlovsk or not and that it would require looking into and
checking. But he was still struck by the fact that our experts had
worked together for several months and that no such matter had been
raised. Our raising of the question at this point could only give rise to
feelings of apprehension on the Soviet side as to our good faith in doing
