community in Shanghai and the treaty ports. Japan is as much interested in
advancing her Chinese trade which has suffered both from general causes and
from boycotting. To appeal to both the trading and imperialistic instincts of
the Japanese is a clever play on the part of the British Government. There is
reason to expect cooperation by France because of French policy toward
China. Because of our “hands off” policy, American cooperation is the least
to be expected.
5. The British have another motive. Great Britain has been unpopular with
the Japanese and has been the object of constant criticism from them ever
since the Anglo-Japanese Alliance was abrogated. The policy of the British
regarding the base at Singapore has greatly intensified this feeling. The
sending of the present British note to the Japanese Government is a means of
improving the British position in Japan without disadvantage, unless, indeed,
the United States should offer criticism because the British are not adhering
to the American policy of masterly inactivity in China. Another consideration
is whether the French and Japanese might not use this move to improve their
own relations with the Soviet Union.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7. Ostensibly the purpose of the British proposal is to prevent hostilities
which now threaten. The means to be used is international consultation or the
bringing of diplomatic pressure upon the rival Chinese factions. Japan is to
be the primary agency, the Japanese Government being requested to offer
constructive proposals for united, peaceable action.
8. As the initiating agent, Japan will consider her own interests and almost
certainly will support Chang as she did in last fall’s fighting. If Chang and
Tuan need a modification of the arms embargo for the benefit of the national
government or a new loan to enable them to carry on, the Japanese would
probably give them support.
9. The means proposed for carrying out this suggestion, whether international
consultation, peaceful action, or pressure, would not be effective with any
party except Chang Tso-lin. He would become the protégé of the foreign
governments. All his rivals, especially the Kuomintang, Feng Yu-hsiang, the
Communists, radicals, and students (a most powerful factor in the existing
political situation) would appeal to racial and national feeling against the
foreign imperialists, who, by using the military, would dominate China. I
fully agree with you that antiforeign feeling would be aroused in China by
the suggested program.
