Chile 273 as Chairman of the Sub-­committee on Latin American Affairs and as an influential member of the Senate, would do what he could to press this point of view and to assist in giving leadership to a movement towards a sensible approach to the whole arms question. Senator Morse replied that as he had already indicated in congratulating the President on his remarks to the press, he shared to a very large extent the views expressed by the President and that he knew also that among his colleagues there were many who were seeking ways to lessen the burden of armaments. Senator Morse then said that he would be very happy to have any views that might be helpful to him and to the Committee relating to economic problems or the economic development of Chile. The President replied at some length by retracing the pattern of foreign credits over the past forty years. In doing this he emphasized points that he has frequently made in the past, that up until the depression of the early 1930s Chile, along with other Latin American countries, was able to go into the foreign financial market, first in England, later in the United States, and borrow money on long term for public works and other necessary development projects. He said that it was important to remember that in this earlier period such funds had not only been available to defray the cost of imported equipment but had also been available for conversion into local currency which could be applied against local costs of development projects. With the depression this private foreign financing had largely dried up. In its place various forms of financing had arisen, first through such agencies as the Export Import Bank and later the IMF or IBRD. While such agencies had made many useful loans, those credits did not provide the same flexibility, particularly for public works and the development of the economic infrastructure of an underdeveloped country. In certain cases they were limited to covering the foreign currency costs of a project, making no provision for local currency expenses. In other cases they were directed towards or limited to specific objectives, again leaving the recipient governments without the needed degree of flexibility. The President continued that he admitted frankly that in Chile, as well as in certain other countries, what he regarded as faulty domestic policy had also limited the necessary growth of the fundamental economic infra-­ structure. Specifically he said that the mistaken policy of proceeding governments in going into fields which could better have been left to development of private enterprise and private capital had had a doubly unfortunate effort. First, frequently foreign credits had been obtained for such projects and had been in effect mortgaging an important part of the financial resources of the government. Thus the servicing of these credits had limited the potential foreign credits available for development in other fields; and second, the same policies had forced
