354  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
delivery systems must take into consideration questions of relative 
technical certainty, costs, performance, time phasing and vulnerability 
to countermeasures.
It is within the framework of such considerations as these that the 
individual items listed below need to be evaluated when weighing 
their value to the striking force and in seeking alternative approaches.
B. Strategic Missiles
What is the most economical, fully adequate program for achiev­
ing a dependable strategic missile capability?
The strategic missiles, Atlas and Titan, are possibly redundant. Is this 
redundancy necessary to the reliable attainment of an ICBM capability?
Concerning Atlas, Titan, and Minuteman, the following comments 
are applicable.
1. Atlas
This missile provides the earliest possible ICBM capability.
If the Titan program is continued, should Atlas program be termi­
nated as soon as adequate production of operational Titans is assured?
2. Titan
Do the improved characteristics of this missile justify its continued 
development in parallel with Minuteman?
Should there be a program for converting Titan to storable 
propellants?
Titan has much greater payload capability (or range) than Minuteman 
and promises an earlier availability. It is an improvement over Atlas and 
in the presently-­planned sites is less vulnerable than Atlas.
3. Minuteman
Does this missile have a technical certainty and an expected oper­
ational performance and availability that would warrant exclusive reli­
ance on it for an ICBM capability?
The most important feature of Minuteman is its large solid pro­
pellant booster. This feature may also be the most critical aspect of 
its development. Although there appears to be adequate back-­up for 
the large-­scale development of solid propellant grains required by 
Minuteman, the early stage of the development makes it difficult to 
predict the date of operational availability.
Is the level of development effort for Minuteman adequate to solve 
its problems and meet reasonable IOC dates?
4. Polaris Force
What constitutes an effective force level for this system, seen as an 
integral part of the strategic missile force of USA?
