Czechoslovakia
317
108.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
PA 79–10354
Washington, August 1979
The Czechoslovak Leadership [classification not declassified]
Key Judgments
Gustav Husak has been strengthening his position and will proba-
bly remain the leader of the Czechoslovak Communist Party for at
least the next several years.
Current trends within the party leadership appear to favor those
with a relatively moderate, pragmatic outlook over their more conserv-
ative, ideologically minded counterparts.
These developments suggest that there will be a gradually increas-
ing movement toward economic innovation and a tendency to bargain
harder in economic dealings with the Soviet Union to the extent allowed
by Czechoslovak dependence on Soviet oil.
Strict internal political controls will continue, however, and
Czechoslovak foreign policy will remain closely aligned with Moscow.
[less than 1 line not declassified]
A Stable, Cautious Leadership
The top ranks of the Czechoslovak leadership have changed little
since the years immediately following the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasion,
which ended Alexander Dubcek’s liberal experiment and left Gustav
Husak with the task of reimposing strict Communist control. Husak
has led the Czechoslovak Communist Party (KSC) since April 1969
and has served as President of the Republic since May 1975. The federal,
Czech, and Slovak Premiers and the First Secretary of the Slovak Com-
munist Party (KSS) have held office since January 1970 or earlier. All
but one of the KSC Presidium’s 13 members and candidate members
have served on that body since May 1971 or before. [classification not
declassified]
The paucity of personnel changes has been matched by a dearth
of innovation in policy. The political composition of the leadership
ranges from cautious pragmatists through conservative ideologues.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job
80T01330A, Production Case Files OPA (1979–1980), Box 2, Folder 10, The Czechoslovak
Leadership: An Intelligence Assessment. Confidential. The report was prepared in the
USSR-Eastern Europe Division, Office of Political Analysis, and coordinated within OPA
and with the Offices of Scientific Intelligence, Economic Research, and Central Reference
and the National Intelligence Officer for Soviet and East European Affairs.
