VII Introduction Ambassadorial talks between representatives of the United States and the People’s Republic of China were held in Geneva from August 1955 through December 1957 and in Warsaw from September 1958 through February 1970. The 73 meetings in Geneva constituted more than half the entire series of 136 meetings, which provided a direct channel of communication between the two countries at a time when they did not have diplomatic relations. The participants in the Geneva discussions were U. Alexis Johnson, United States Ambassador to Czechoslovakia, and Wang Bingnan (Wang Ping-­nan), Chinese Ambas­ sador to Poland. Background of the Ambassadorial Talks Ambassadors Johnson and Wang represented their respective gov­ ernments in direct talks held during the Geneva Conference of 1954 concerning U.S. nationals imprisoned in China and U.S. restrictions on certain Chinese nationals in the United States. The 1954 discussions were precursors of the later ambassadorial talks, although they were more limited in scope. These conversations, as well as subsequent meetings on the same subjects between U.S. and Chinese consular rep­ resentatives at Geneva, are documented in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Volume XIV, and 1955–1957, Volume II. U.S. concern with the problem of Americans imprisoned in China increased in November 1954, when a Chinese military tribunal sen­ tenced 13 Americans to prison on charges of espionage. They included 11 Air Force personnel shot down in 1952 while flying a mission for the United Nations Command over North Korea. At the request of the United Nations General Assembly, Secretary-General Dag Ham­ marskjöld visited Beijing in January 1955 in a vain effort to obtain the release of the 11 airmen. They were freed on July 31, 1955, on the eve of the opening of the ambassadorial talks. The Taiwan Strait crisis, which had been simmering since Septem­ ber 1954, intensified in early 1955 when Beijing increased pressure on the Nationalist-­held offshore islands. On January 29, 1955, Congress passed a Joint Resolution (the “Formosa Resolution”) authorizing the President to use U.S. forces to protect Taiwan, the Pescadores, and related positions against armed attack. In February, the Nationalists evacuated the northernmost of the disputed offshore islands with U.S. assistance. Nevertheless, tension remained high. The continuing crisis led to diplomatic efforts to open a channel of communication between Washington and Beijing. Chinese Premier
