Guatemala  717
The Minister of Finance explained that it had been necessary for 
him to call today instead of on August 22, as had been scheduled, due 
to the necessity of his immediate return to Guatemala. He stated that he 
and Mr. Fernandes had just completed negotiation of a $10 million loan 
from the Bank of America in association with the Chase Manhattan 
Bank and other unspecified banks. Terms for repayment were five 
years at 5 percent annual interest. The loan agreement included a pro-
vision for the deposit of certain Bank of Guatemala dollar reserves in 
the loaning banks on a 6-­months call basis. The Minister explained that 
funds from this loan would be used to liquidate outstanding fiscal obli-
gations, i.e. deuda flotante.
The Minister stated that the Guatemala Government had recently 
completed its plan of Economic Development for the period 1960–64.2 
He promised to provide copies of this plan through the United States 
Embassy in Guatemala. Ambassador Turkel observed that if external 
financing would be sought for any part of this plan, then the loan proj-
ects should be divided into three different categories: (1) self-­liquidating 
projects; (2) long term, non-­self-­liquidating (“social”) type loan proj-
ects; and (3) mixed type, which would only be partially self-­liquidating. 
Ambassador Turkel said that we placed particular emphasis on private 
initiative and participation of private investment capital in plans for 
economic development. The Minister replied that his government 
agreed with this emphasis and for this reason President Ydígoras has 
not approved the Petem project since it provided for too much govern-
ment participation and control.
In reply to an inquiry by Ambassador Turkel, the Minister stated 
that service on the public debt now averages about 10 percent of the 
total annual budget. Service on the foreign debt now amounts to only a 
little more than $1 million annually with the major service costs going 
towards the internal debt. He again emphasized that the loan just con-
cluded with the Bank of America would be used toward liquidating 
the floating debt of approximately Q$12 million, which included over-
due salaries and other various unpaid accounts.
Ambassador Turkel inquired if the development plan included 
plans for housing, and observed that while such projects were com-
mendable, all our available loan resources could easily be employed 
in just housing projects. Of course, this was not possible but we did 
look with favor on self-­help housing projects. Ambassador Turkel 
stated that we also look favorably on projects providing agricultural 
credit to small farmers. He cited the examples of Costa Rica and 
Colombia in promoting successful agricultural credit programs. The 
2 Not found in Department of State files.
