718.1915/735: Telegram
[Document 315]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Costa Rica (Davis)34
WASHINGTON, November 10, 1925—3 p.m.
21. The Panaman Minister Saturday and today discussed informally the boundary
situation. It appears that Panama would accept as a compromise over the so-called
Bravo line proposed by Panama in 1924 a line from the vicinity of Cañas Gordas to
Meridian 83 and thence along the Meridian to the sea. This would be in lieu of any
indemnity and would also comprise the return of Costa Rica’s trophies of war.
It is understood that Fabrega will make this proposal to Costa Rica. What in your
opinion would be the attitude of Costa Rica toward such a settlement? The Department
realizes that Costa Rica is in a strong position in insisting upon the line of the Loubet
Award or a modification that would make mutual concessions. The Department
understands however that it is the view of the Panaman Government that the Loubet
line being mentioned in the Panaman Constitution35 as its boundary it could not
constitutionally give up any territory on the Panaman side thereof. The Department
would be glad to see an amicable settlement arrived at which would be satisfactory to
both parties. The Department desires you to be very careful however not to give the
impression that the Department supports the present Panaman proposal or that it
considers the Panaman claim for indemnity a valid one.
The Department informed the Panaman Government last February that it could not
support the Panaman claim for indemnity. On the other hand the Department does not
desire to do anything which would interfere with the Panaman negotiations for a
settlement of this matter and you should therefore be careful not to express any opinion
on this point. Please keep the Department fully informed of developments and should
the Panaman proposal not be acceptable to Costa Rica please advise what solution
would in your opinion be acceptable to the Costa Rican Government.
In view of the position which the Department has taken regarding the validity of the
White Award and the Loubet line it cannot formally suggest any other line but it would
nevertheless be gratified should Costa Rica, in view of the fact that the Loubet line
gives Costa Rica so much more than it was willing to accept under the Guardia-
Pacheco Treaty,36 grant Panama some consideration on the Pacific as an act of comity
in the interest of peace and orderly procedure in Central America. The Department
desires your personal views in the premises before authorizing you to discuss the
matter discreetly with Costa Rican officials.
