348  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the person most responsible for this issue. But Nazarkin thought prob-
ably Amb. Burt would have an even more brilliant idea.
16. Burt said U.S. lawyers had said his previous suggestion of 
reversing the order in the English and Russian texts of the treaty was 
not brilliant. So for now he had run out of brilliant ideas, but fortunately 
Mr. Joseph, the OSD representative who would soon be in Geneva in 
an important job, understood these issues. Burt asked Joseph to explain 
why he believed the U.S. position was more logical.
17. Thanking Burt, Joseph said he thought both sides could make 
arguments based on logic. The U.S. side had taken the position that the 
unit of account should be missiles, because they actually killed peo-
ple. Joseph did not think it would be profitable to debate, based on 
logic, Nazarkin’s reference the previous day to the question of whether 
the bullet or the gun was more dangerous. Joseph thought it would be 
more compelling to explain why it would cause problems for the U.S. 
side if launchers were used as the unit of account. First, launchers were 
more difficult to define than missiles. Second, the phrase “launcher and 
its associated missile” would cause problems in the JDT for the U.S. 
side due to the issue of “non-­deployed launchers” or “non-­deployed 
bombers,” because the U.S. position did not provide for the concept of 
non-­deployed launchers. To be perfectly candid, Joseph said, perhaps 
the greater problem with putting launchers first was a political one for 
the U.S. side. One major criticism of the SALT II approach had been that 
launchers, and not missiles, had been counted. This was a very practi-
cal problem that was independent of logic. This was why the U.S. side 
supported the compromise package it had tabled the previous day and 
asked the Soviet side to accept it.
18. Nazarkin said he would follow Burt’s brilliant idea of allowing 
his military expert to speak, and invited Col. Koltunov to present his 
reasons for preferring the Soviet position.
19. Koltunov thanked Joseph for his clarification of the U.S. posi-
tion, and said the Soviet side would analyze it again. There were some 
elements with which the Soviet side could agree, he said, but there were 
others on which it was difficult to agree. In the Soviet view, the main 
thing was what the sides had established the previous day: for the 1600 
limit in Article VII of the JDT, the unit of account is a system or complex 
consisting of a launcher and a missile (or a missile and a launcher). 
Other areas in the JDT were no problem because they concerned either 
a launcher or a missile. But from a practical point of view the launcher 
should come first because it was not by chance that the SALT treaty had 
used launchers. If one assumed it would be hard to define a launcher 
and that therefore it should be in second place—­then, Koltunov wished 
to note, the same problem would exist no matter which word came 
first. From a practical standpoint, if a launcher was built it was more
