832
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Harry Chapin announced that the Public Participation Subcom-
mittee would hold hearings in the month of February in Dallas, Denver
and Atlanta. He expressed disappointment that no full Commission
meetings would be held in locations other than Washington.
254.
Letter From Secretary of Agriculture Bergland to the
Chairman of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger
(Linowitz)1
Washington, March 26, 1979
Dear Mr. Ambassador:
I wish to pass along some additional concerns and ideas to you
which I hope will enhance and complement the materials that USDA
has been furnishing the Commission up to this time. As I mentioned in
my talk to the Commission,2 our relations with the developing nations
regarding the world food situation are of particular importance. We
must help these countries increase indigenous food production and
also help them economically so that they become viable participants in
world trade. At this time, however, I would like to stress the impor-
tance of the U.S. linkages to all nations with regard to solving the world
hunger problem.
U.S. agricultural and food policy functions increasingly in an inter-
national environment. There is a growing interdependence among
countries in the production, consumption, and trade of food. The U.S.
economy has become more dependent on other countries as commer-
cial markets for our food and agricultural output, and other countries
have become increasingly dependent upon the United States as a
source of supply for food and agricultural products.
Within the interdependent environment, important international
considerations for U.S. agricultural and food policy are emerging. Es-
pecially significant are those interrelated issues that deal with domestic
supply and demand, commercial agricultural trade, international agri-
cultural development, and food security. Three areas of concern that I
1 Source: Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Sub-
ject File, 1978–1980, Box 17, USDA. No classification marking. A stamped notation indi-
cates that the Commission received the letter on March 29. An April 5 letter from Vice
Chairman Muller to Bergland indicating that Muller would share the letter with Linowitz
upon the latter’s return from China is attached but not printed.
2 Not further identified.
