698 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Minister of Finance10 delivered himself of a rather thoughtful, but at the same time very vigorous, attack on all heads of projects, stating that they had failed to provide him with data as required, that he did not have material for the budget, that he had found Guatemala was far in arrears on its contributions, that they should assist the Ministry of Finance, etc., etc., No one escaped this castigation which apparently is well merited. The Minister went so far as to state that in the past when the Ministry of Finance had need for data on the aid program and joint expenditures that he had to take the embarrassing route of asking the Americans for it. The Ambassador then turned to the technical assistance program, stating that this operates on an annual basis rather than as part of any longer term or pipeline fund, such as might be true of special assistance. With respect to the several ministries involved, he thought that the programs could continue along the same general lines as they appeared to be desirable and to meet needs. With respect to agriculture, however, it had become apparent that this program no longer met the purposes of the two governments. He thought it better that all activities be handled unilaterally by the Ministry of Agriculture and, therefore, notice of termination of U.S. participation on SCIDA had been given, to be effective August 31. The Ambassador said that in order not to be too negative concerning these matters on which Guatemala might need technical assistance, that it were possible, if requests were made, that a few technicians might be maintained on the staff of USOM to assist in an advisory capacity. These might include, for example, some rubber technicians to assist the Bank of Guatemala which was the agency receiving a loan for rubber development from the Development Loan Fund. Similarly, a few technicians might be maintained to help complete the work already started in the rural development program, such men as extension advisers. Dr. Miron, of the Bank of Guatemala, indicated his desire for the rubber technicians and also asked if the United States could not also continue to make available the services of a pathologist in connection with the establishment of the production of Kenaf fiber and a bag factory. It was indicated that this might be possible. Colonel Peralta indicated that the Agrarian Department would be interested in some assistance from extension technicians. The Ambassador then again referred to the presence of Mr. Rollin Atwood, Regional Director of ICA for Latin America, who is here to assist in connection with revision of the program. It was pointed out that the 1960 budget would have to be approved soon, that work could proceed rapidly if decisions were made during Mr. Atwood’s visit, but 10 Julio Prado García Sales, Minister of Finance and Public Credit.
