Negotiating Channels
517
201.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting
Washington, March 7, 1980, 3–4:45 p.m.
[Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 10. Secret. 3 pages (extract)
not declassified. A portion of this summary dealing with the Persian
Gulf security framework is printed as Document 62 in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula.]
202.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1
Washington, March 10, 1980
SUBJECT:
Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 7 March 1980 [portion marking not declassified]
1. I discussed my draft paper2 for use in the Presidential briefing
next week on needing to keep covert action, political action, and mili-
tary action pressures available in Iran. He thought it was a reasonable
thing to present to the President, but that if the negotiations were going
exceptionally well it might be a good idea to postpone it. [portion
marking not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 95M01183R: Policy Files 1977–1981, Box 1, Folder 3: DCI Turner—Eyes Only Files—
Memos and Meetings With Various Officials and Subjects. Secret; [handling restriction
not declassified].
2 Not further identified. The reference is possibly to an undated paper prepared in
the Central Intelligence Agency, “Covert Action in Iran,” which argued for two basic
operational approaches: to encourage and lend support to Iranian moderates and anti-
communists in Iran and the exile community; and to mount operations to weaken and
discredit the Iranian left and the Soviet Union. The paper also points to Bakhtiar as
having “the will and charisma” to lead a cohesive opposition movement. The paper
notes his “excellent tribal contacts,” his support within the military, his staff in Baghdad
and Tehran, his strong backing from Iraq, and the potential support from Israel and
Turkey. Acknowledging the weaknesses of his movement, the paper suggests that the
United States maintain contact with Bakhtiar, provide him with funds, and influence
his planning for up to a year, at which time his movement may or may not be viable.
(Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R:
Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator, Box 13)
