858
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
his suspicions that the United States was supporting Mosadeq as
against him, thus reenforcing his innate irresolution. This is an example
of how one of our worthy objectives may help stymie another. There is
also a potential future complication in that Baqai and Maleki may never
believe, if we are not going along with them, that we are not covertly
supporting others.
All this is a preliminary to the points that you make as potential
targets of our activity:
1. Army. With the continued operation of the military advisory and
aid missions, as well as the Gendarme´rie mission, we believe that there
will be created through this very activity an ever-expanding influence
in the armed forces that will be to our advantage without the necessity
of creating a formal cadre organization. Such influence, as you rightly
say, is priority number one, and we think that it can only be maintained
through the activities and presence of these missions.
2. Government. We agree with you that covert sources need not con-
centrate upon high level Government officials, since when they reach
this point they are subject to the influences you describe. It is only
through the overt association with responsible American officials, such
as the Ambassador and his representatives with whom they are in con-
tact at the time, that they can be generally most influenced in our be-
half. By continuing to build upon the essential Persian confidence in the
basic goodwill of the United States toward their country and of Iran’s
material interests in cooperating with the United States we should have
a strong position through which to influence both Persian politicians
and bureaucrats. It would be only sensible that we put in a good word
as the opportunity offers to further the careers of those basically
friendly to us and the democratic point of view. At the same time, the
Persian mentality being what it is, if one expects a man to be signed up
for life as pro-American on the basis of material advantages from both
overt and covert types of operations, you will not secure those who in
the long-run will reflect credit upon us and, instead, they may even be-
come suspected by their own people.
3. Majlis. We think the last thing we should do would be to try to
create a Majlis party drawing political influence from a tie with Amer-
ican officials. The same arguments apply here as given previously. We
believe, for example, that in any elections in this country, if our own
policies stay on course, there will always be a sizeable group of dep-
uties who will be friendly toward us, with whom we can talk and influ-
ence through our counsel, and who would be more willing to take that
counsel without it being given under the handicap of directives from
the American Embassy.
4. Potential Opposition. Penetration of communist and extremist
groups, of course, is extremely important for covert intelligence. At the
