National Security Policy 313 weapons systems, there is very little in the way of defense policy with which the Chairman of the AEC is not concerned. Furthermore, because of the special characteristics of the legislation under which the AEC operates and because of the constant effort of the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, to have a dominant voice in all matters pertaining to atomic energy, the President wishes to make every effort possible to keep the Chairman of the AEC in the family of the Executive Branch of the Government. He therefore is willing in various ways to take what might be considered unusual steps to identify the Chairman of the AEC with the formulation of national policy. Finally, he felt that men such as Mr. McCone came to Washington at a considerable sacri­ fice and with only the motivation of service and to appear to exclude them from the high councils was something the President wished to avoid. With respect to those who attend regular NSC meetings but do not sit at the table, he made the following comments: Now that Arthur Larson has departed, he would not expect Mr. Larson’s successor to attend meetings. He said that he had never understood why Larson had originally been invited. He felt that the Director, ICA, should continue to attend as long as Jimmy Smith occupies that position. He had not fully understood previously that the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs had succeeded to the coordinating functions formerly assigned to ICA. He felt that the Special Assistants for Atoms for Peace Program, Foreign Economic Policy, Science and Technology, and Security Operations Coordination should attend regular meetings and sit at the table when participating. He had no objection to attendance as observers of the Assistant to the President, the Deputy Assistant to the President, the White House Staff Secretary and the President’s Naval Aide. The President felt that the foregoing would be appropriate for gen­ eral NSC meetings. However, he acknowledged the need for special NSC meetings, and gave me the following instruction: When, after talking with the Secretary of State and/or the Secretary of Defense, it was deemed by me that an item was of suf­ ficient sensitivity to justify a separate meeting, he would wish one called with notification only to those who were to attend. The meeting would be simply described as a special meeting with the President. Upon the convening of the meeting the President would be asked whether he considered this a special NSC meeting and upon his affir­ mative reply it would be understood that the results of the meeting would become a part of the official records of the National Security Council. At such meetings he would expect the statutory members, the statutory advisers, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Special Assistant for National Security Affairs and the Executive Secretary of the NSC.
