United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 21 to the recent strengthening of the voluntary control system increased their understanding of our problem. In the case of copper our current information is that the Department may be able successfully to oppose the pending bills to increase the tax on imported copper. Recently the price of copper has been relatively stable and two of the three largest U.S. producers also produce in foreign countries. It should be emphasized, however, that if the markets for these commodities deteriorate further we may have to consider additional measures. We shall watch this situation closely and make further recommendations as circumstances warrant. Since the very cornerstone of our economic relations with Latin America is trade, it is imperative that the U.S. refrain from imposing undue restrictions upon our own imports. The extension of the Trade Agreements Act as requested by the Administration will have very beneficial effects on evidence of our intentions, provided it is not accompanied by increased resort to restrictive measures affecting individual commodities. Financial Assistance: Although the needs for development capitol in Latin America are enormous, their immediate financial problems are closely related to the commodity problems discussed above. Thus, Brazil, Chile and Colombia are pressing so for what amounts to balance of payments assistance to tide them through periods of depressed commodity prices. It is necessary that we respond to those situations, while [illegible in the original] the same time maintaining pressure, through the International Monetary Fund, for needed internal reforms and endeavor to encourage policies which will help stabilize their economies. The United States is prepared, in principle, to extend financial assistance to these three countries and dimensions are, or soon will be, underway with their representatives regarding specific amounts and related matters. It should be emphasized that balance of payments assistance to Latin America and other areas is a temporary expedient which results in no additional economic development, and has little lasting effect except as countries take advantage of it to improve their own economic policies. Neither the Export-Import Bank nor the Development Loan Fund are designed to extend this kind of assistance. The International Monetary Fund is equipped to do so although tin resources would have to be enlarged to enable it to become fully effective. We believe the U.S. should consider a further subscription to the end of something like 41 billion which, on the basis of the original subscriptions, would be matched by 2 billion from other countries of which $500 million would be in gold and dollars. We would like to explore this
