1955 553 a party and the continuation of which is likely to endanger the mainte­ nance of international peace and security; and 4. Recognizing the particular importance of relaxing and eliminat­ ing tension in the Taiwan area, the PRC declares that the foregoing gen­ eral principles are specifically applicable to that area. 5. Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf, etc. 393. Telegram 1235 from Geneva1 Geneva, December 1, 1955, 1 p.m. 1235. From Johnson. 1. At one hour forty-five minute meeting this morning Wang opened with prepared statement which was very mild and conciliatory in tone, in very marked contrast to tone prepared statements past few meetings, and closed with presentation new draft agreed announce­ ment which reads as follows: A) Ambassador Wang Ping-nan, on behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of China, and Ambassador Alexis Johnson on behalf of the Government of the United States of America, agree to announce: B) The People’s Republic of China and the United States of Amer­ ica are determined that they should settle disputes between their two countries through peaceful negotiations without resorting to the threat or use of force; C) The two Ambassadors should continue their talks to seek prac­ tical and feasible means for the realization of this common desire. 2. In reply I welcomed his statement and characterized it as advance in our negotiations. I then spent about an hour probing on applicability statement to Taiwan area. Best answer I obtained from him was that although Taiwan internal matter beyond scope present talks, willing settle that question by peaceful means. He omitted usual qualification “condtions permitting”. During give and take he spoke of “step by step” resolution US–PRC disputes and said if during course our talks here I wanted discuss ways and means relaxing tensions Tai­ wan area or other questions, he willing discuss. There was no renewal 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/12–155. Confidential; Niact; Limited Distribution.
