694 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement This view of rights of US cannot be accepted by Chinese people. These are unequal rights or views. 55. I said I not asking him accept my views. What I asking was that he take same attitude regarding my position. However, he not doing so. What he was doing, and he had again explicitly stated it this morning, was demand that my govt accept his govt’s views and renounce right of self-­defense. 56. I said I believed I had fairly accurately stated my understand­ ing of situation. If I had not stated it correctly, willing to hear in what way I was wrong. 57. Wang said, first, it would be well for me to recognize that pur­ pose present talks was to try settle issues Taiwan area. Present fact was US had occupied Chinese terriory of Taiwan and violated sovereignty of China. Fell upon us two to correct this unreasonable situation. In order to resolve this issue, it not sufficient merely to state that either side need not accept views of other. Some views must be opposed. 58. Wang said today it US which violates Chinese terriory; it not China which violates American terriory. If US would withdraw armed forces from Taiwan area and stop its threats in Taiwan area, no further issues would exist in this area between us. 59. I said I had nothing more on this this morning but had another matter I would like to take up. Made full prepared statement on implementation: A. I had occasion on Jan 12 to call your attention to efforts your govt create false impression that in some way Americans imprisoned your country, only Americans we were discussing at time of our announce­ ment Sept. 10 last year, were not entitled expeditiously return in accord­ ance with commitment your govt made in that announcement. I had continued to hope this did not represent considered views your govt. B. However, I particularly regret to note since our last meeting your government has in communication with UK Charge again attempted to justify this entirely indefensible position. In reply to communication with regard Father McCarthy your government has made such extreme assertions as Father McCarthy has no right even ask for repatriation during period his imprisonment and question of his encountering obstruction in departing does not arise during his imprisonment. Your government has even stated that under our agreed announcement of Sept 10 it was agreed cases of imprisoned Americans are basically dif­ ferent from those not imprisoned. C. It is hard for me to believe your govt seriously thinks such contentions can be supported, and I am surprised that it continues its attempt to do so. D. In first place you know, I know and world knows that was precisely these imprisoned Americans we were discussing at time our
