70  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
in influence seems to us likely to continue, although we expect it to be 
gradual.
54. The greatest difficulties in Asia are not directly associated 
either with Soviet or US policies, but with the multitude and magni­
tude of the problems which confront many countries in attempting 
to establish political stability, carry on economic development, and 
build viable states on the rubble of insurrection, subversion, ethnic 
differences, and political ineptitude. In addition, the unresolved prob­
lems of Korea, Vietnam, and China are a continual irritant to relations 
among states within the area and a constant source of apprehension 
over the future.
55. Africa. Except perhaps in North Africa, nationalist and revo­
lutionary movements are not as advanced as in the Middle and Far 
East. Nevertheless, in Tropical Africa, knowledge of the outside world, 
detribalization, better facilities for transportation, the growth of market 
economies, urbanization and industrialization, are proceeding apace. 
As in Asia, questions of increasing national prestige, obtaining free­
dom of action and implementing sweeping internal reforms are urgent 
issues in the newly independent African states. In the colonial areas 
the drive for self-­government is being spurred by the example of the 
independent states, the moral encouragement of the United Nations 
and world opinion, and support from Egypt and the USSR. Relations 
between African territories and their former or present European 
metropoles will be transformed in varying ways and degrees over the 
next decade. In many areas under British and French control there is 
likely to be a rapid emergence of new native states during the next few 
years. If the European powers implement liberal colonial policies, they 
probably still have sufficient time to exert a moderating influence on 
nationalist movements. However, the determination of European set­
tlers to maintain control in some areas will probably provoke extremist 
African response.
56. As they achieve independence, Tropical African dependencies 
will be confronted with enormously complex problems. The creation 
of political stability is likely to be critically hampered by frustrated 
popular expectations and by internal disputes between rival factions 
reflecting ethnic, tribal, religious, and linguistic differences; the expe­
riences of such independent countries as Liberia and Ghana illustrate 
the difficulty of overcoming factionalism by other than authoritarian 
means. The problems will be particularly difficult in those parts of 
Africa where there are mixed racial societies in which a smaller white 
minority dominates a much larger native population. Virtually all 
Tropical African territories will continue to be highly dependent on 
foreign economic assistance. Whether free of colonial control or not, 
many of them will turn increasingly to the US—­among other possible
