6  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
We would not expect it to perform miracles in stabilizing prices but 
we could hope that over a period of years the Secretariat could intro-
duce at some degree order in the situation. The difficulty is opposition 
within the United States, on doctrinaire grounds, to any commodity 
arrangement, and probable opposition on similar grounds by Canada 
and other industrial countries. Nevertheless, it would be of great value 
in our relations with lead and zinc producing countries to be able to 
offer this as a means of easing the blow which they will feel they have 
sustained when we raise the tariff on lead and zinc.
(2) Avoid by all means the imposition of quotas on the import of lead and 
zinc. This is necessary because the marginal producers of lead and zinc 
in the United States will urge quotas, as probably the only means of sal-
vaging their position. Quotas would be administratively very difficult, 
and from a policy standpoint extremely injurious.
(3) Seek to develop effective legislation to take care of industries and 
communities in the United States which have been seriously affected by 
exhaustion of resources which they were exploiting, or which have oth-
erwise suffered economic depression through circumstances beyond 
their control. Action on this front will demonstrate to other countries 
that we seek to solve our own problems through domestic action, and 
not through transferring the burden of adjustment to countries less able 
to bear it than we. We are making a more detailed study of the possibil-
ities in this field.
(4) Continue to consider stockpile acquisition through direct purchase or 
through barter as a possible means of assisting the lead and zinc indus-
try. We now have a large stockpile, and it may be too large, in public 
security terms. The special stockpile committee3 has just reported to 
Gordon Gray that the stockpile should not be used for domestic price 
support purchases, but we have used it for this purpose rather exten-
sively in the past few years, and we cannot taper it off too quickly. It 
still has some validity in lead and zinc.
As other commodity problems arise, notably copper, a similar 
analysis should be undertaken, and a program should be developed 
which will enable us to avoid the kind of restrictive action which many 
people consider inevitable in lead and zinc. With respect to commod-
ities which we do not produce, such as coffee, we should change our 
attitude and be willing to consider, on their merits, proposals for com-
modity stabilization. This change would be vital in connection with the 
chief Latin American commodity, coffee.
3 Apparent reference to the Special Stockpile Advisory Committee established 
in October 1957 to review U.S. stockpile policies. A joint Department of State-United 
States Information Agency message containing information about the formation of the 
Committee was cabled to the field in circular telegram 412, October 31, 1957, not printed. 
(711.6/10–3157)
