Human Rights 79 journalists, but also our own personnel—do not know what he means by “internationally recognized human rights,” which human rights are to get priority US attention, and what criteria we plan to apply in individual cases. We therefore believe that a clearcut statement of US policy on human rights should stress the following: —“Internationally recognized human rights” are those set forth in the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights. (Tab 1)11 The 30 articles of that document express rights which enjoy international consensus (adopted by the UN General Assembly), encompass concerns specified by the Congress (e.g., the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended), and reflect traditional American values. —There is an important relation between the political/civil liberties12 and the economic/social rights specified in the Declaration. We cannot pursue our commitments to both economic development and political freedom if we give one set of rights priority over the other. —Although our long-range goal is to help raise the standards of national observance of human rights around the world, we may have to set more selective priorities in the short-term. Thus, in addition to continuing pursuit of economic development, social well-being and political liberty, we will take most vigorous action, when constructive for the case at hand, with regard to crimes against the person:13 i.e., officially-sanctioned murder, torture, or detention without fair trial (Articles III, V, VIII, IX, X, and XI of the Universal Declaration). —Our criteria for formulating and implementing this general policy in individual cases will include consideration for the following:14 • Nature and extent of violations—contravention of the Universal Declaration? Recurring regional, class, ethnic, or political patterns to violations? • Direction of movement—situation improving or deteriorating? For example, we need a particularly sophisticated and nuanced approach for countries which, while still serious violators of human rights, are moving to improve their performance in this area. • Tradition or level of development—realistic, for example, for US to promote Anglo-Saxon precepts in tribal or feudal society? • Validity of security justification—is an emergency abrogation of rights needed to meet an internal or external threat that could not be otherwise contained? 11 Attached but not printed. 12 Christopher inserted the word “personal/” before “political/civil liberties.” 13 Christopher underlined the phrase “crimes against the person.” 14 Christopher placed a vertical line in the margin next to the first two bulleted points below and wrote: “These need to be added to my hurried ‘6 questions’ testimony. Perhaps next testimony can be 10 questions—and some answers.”
