January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1177
eastern and northern frontiers. There are 5000 tanks in Syria, including
T–72s. In Jordan, there are 400 Chieftains, among the best on earth.
Saudi Arabia has the F–16, etc. What is its army worth? But the ad-
vanced weapons are there. Iraq has 1000 tank carriers it got from West
Germany. It could move four armored divisions in 48 hours, whereas
before it took them a week, and they were wounded when they got
there (to the Syrian front). Israel is not frightened by all this. This comes
under “defense.” But there is also infiltration—as at Misgav’am. This is
“security.” Camp David always used “security.” “Defense” is not
there. Therefore, we must not change Camp David. Foreign affairs is
not a matter for this document. Of course there will be no foreign min-
ister or ambassadors. This is only a transitional period. After five years,
everyone can claim rights. This is five years long, and we should let it
work. Therefore, we should leave foreign affairs out.
There is his other point (in his 4-point proposal): internal and ex-
ternal security are linked, including anti-terrorism. This is Israel’s. It is
in accord with Camp David. At page 24 (of the booklet), point two says:
“All necessary measures will be taken and provisions made to assure
the security of Israel and its neighbors . . .” That includes “neighbors,”
too—why? With regard to Jordan, the PLO can do things to them, as it
did before Black September.10 He would not want Palestinians to go
from Israel to Jordan, to kill the King. This is the reasoning behind his
proposal. If “External and internal security, including the fight against
terrorism, conspiracy to commit acts of violence and subversion, will
be the responsibility of the Israeli authorities” is not the case, then in Is-
rael there will be permanent bloodshed. Lebanon will be a playground
in comparison. Last year, Israel captured thousands of detonators, and
hundreds of kilograms of explosives, including 1000 half-kilogram
bricks of delay-explosives. Therefore, Israel prevented their use. But it
might not always do so. If Israel does not have responsibilities, and the
police have it, they would not do it. Israel has had experience with po-
lice—as in Hebron where a student was left to bleed to death by the po-
lice until the IDF arrived. Therefore, Israel can’t rely on police. Then we
can assure peace for all time. There is no need for foreign affairs; “de-
fense” should not be substituted for “security”; and internal and ex-
ternal security should be combined.
The President said that he is deeply concerned. At Camp David,
they talked of “specified security locations,” and talked about between
three and twelve locations. If security is seen as anything that could
10 Reference is to the September 1970 clashes between the PLO and the Jordanian
armed forces, culminating in the expulsion of the PLO headquarters from Jordan. For
documentation on this, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXIV, Middle East Region
and Arabian Peninsula, 1969–1972; Jordan, September 1970.
