868 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX military government will retain control of X percent of the public domain lands now under its control. In these areas, Israel can establish security installations and settlements. The remainder of the public lands will pass under the jurisdiction of the self-governing authority. In theory, Israel would not be required to give up the right to establish new settlements, but as a practical matter the scope for new settlement activity would be limited. —Water. A joint water authority will be established with equal Israeli and West Bank/Gaza representation. The situation prevailing at the time of the establishment of the self-governing authority could not be changed unless both parties agreed. In other words, the worst outcome if no agreement could be reached would be a continuation of the status quo for five more years. If new wells are to be dug, joint decisions would be required. (This would establish a measure of equity which does not now exist. If an Israeli settlement needs more water, it would probably be necessary for the Israelis to agree at the same time to allow an Arab village to dig a new well, which is presently not usually permitted.) —Security. The Israelis have undertaken to withdraw some troops and to redeploy those remaining into specified security locations. This implies some limitations on the Israeli military presence. The stages by which limitations will be set, however, are yet to be decided, and it might be possible to define the type of presence that might exist after three years without spelling out the intervening steps with great precision. It might be specified that the implementation of Israeli military redeployment will be discussed with the new self-government, along with the initial division of responsibility between local security forces and the Israelis. This is not an area where we and the Egyptians should try to be too precise. (S) Conclusions I do not honestly believe that the negotiations for a self-governing authority for the West Bank/Gaza are likely to produce positive results within the one-year target date. At some point, it may be necessary to revert to the earlier approach of trying to define the basic 242 tradeoff—peace, recognition and security in exchange for Israeli withdrawal—with a staged process of implementation that might include a transitional regime of some sort. Begin, of course, will reject this approach, but Peres supports it. It has the advantage of dealing frankly with the principle of withdrawal, without which I see little likelihood of an agreement. The main advantage of the Begin Plan is that it makes Peres’ idea of territorial compromise look increasingly attractive to the Arabs. I suspect we will find that “autonomy” will be a non-starter. Either we forget about the West Bank/Gaza for a while, or we will probably have to find a way of anchoring the transitional concept to 242. Unfortunately, we did not quite succeed in doing so in the Camp David accords. (S)
