Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1123
In this light, a prime goal of our approaches will be to ensure
common interpretation of how the Nuclear Supplier Group (NSG)
Guidelines are to be applied to protect against Argentina later building
unsafeguarded facilities with the technology and without violating any
agreement. As you know, the Guidelines entail bilateral requirements
for safeguards as well as controls over retransfer of the technology or
produced heavy water and controls on facilities produced through the
technology. Although not explicit in the Guidelines, we will wish to en-
sure that the suppliers include a presumption that any facility built
within at least 20 years and using the same type of technology will be
considered as built with the transferred technology and subject to the
same conditions.
There may well be differences among the three suppliers and our-
selves over how the NSG Guidelines are to be carried out. However, we
hope to be in a strong position in this regard since we will be working
from the Guidelines to which we can expect suppliers to adhere. We
consider common interpretation on these bilateral requirements very
important. Such requirements provide a safety net against Argentine
construction of an unsafeguarded reactor in the event Argentina were
later to withdraw from a full-scope safeguards agreement. (Such agree-
ments normally contain withdrawal clauses.)
We plan to focus our approaches as well on the importance of re-
quiring a provision that safeguards be applied on Argentine heavy
water plants and heavy water to protect against the scenario of possible
diversion to clandestine reactors. The IAEA is still developing aspects
of such safeguards, and we will need to continue to work with the
IAEA and other concerned countries to develop the most promising
safeguards approach.
In addition, we intend to continue to urge supplier agreement to
seek Argentine adherence to the Treaty of Tlatelolco in connection with
their negotiations for heavy water production technology. Argentina
has declared its intention to ratify the treaty and its ratification would,
of course, add further political and legal inhibitions to possible misuse
later of this or other technology in the nuclear area. Also, Argentine ad-
herence is a necessary step to the treaty’s entering into force for Brazil
and Chile.
This is not part of the NSG Guidelines, and other suppliers may
well question whether this should be required in addition to Argentine
acceptance of NPT-type safeguards. Also, the Argentines have made
clear to us that they are not going to ratify Tlatelolco before they have
concluded arrangements for the supply of heavy water production
technology. We recognize that all the suppliers are not likely to require,
and Argentina is thus unlikely to accept, Tlatelolco adherence as an ab-
solute precondition for agreeing on heavy water production supply.
