Chapter 5, May–June 1990  789
to solve this problem we have demonstrated quite a bit of flexibility. 
We have come off the prohibition on modernization, even though there 
is some hesitancy on our side on accepting the modernization now 
underway. In Moscow I suggested a limit of 2 flight tests per year. Amb. 
Bartholomew has indicated to Mr. Karpov that we would be willing to 
compromise on 7 flight tests over a 3-­year period.
This issue for us is more of a political issue. We have received, and 
will receive, certain criticisms on this issue, and we will see resistance 
to ratification as a consequence. We are asking you for something we 
can point to in the ratification debate to show we are serious about lim-
iting the further development of heavy ICBMs. We recognize there will 
be a reference in the joint statement on future negotiations having to 
do with heavy ICBMs. Of course we will be pointing to that. And we 
recognize the prohibition against development of new types of heavy 
ICBMs. At the same time the line between modernization and devel-
opment of an entirely new missile is somewhat hazy. So having come 
off of our proposal for a ban on production and modernization and 
flight testing, we don’t think we are putting an unreasonable request 
in saying give us something to point to on testing. If 2 per year is too 
restrictive, if 7 over 3 years is too restrictive, what isn’t too restrictive?
Shevardnadze: Ever since the meeting in Reykjavik as we proceed 
to settling a number of issues, including heavy ICBMs, others arise. 
Until now the issue of heavy ICBMs was settled. We agreed to cut the 
number by 50%. Therefore I view as not legitimate a demand to impose 
constraints on testing of heavy ICBMs, to cut tests to a certain level, 
because in the context of the current START agreement we have settled 
the main issues with regard to heavy missiles. As to further constraints, 
this can be a subject for discussion in follow-­on talks. Such constraints 
should equally apply to other types of strategic offensive arms. If you 
recall, during the instructions to ministers3 my president was quite 
frank on follow-­on talks as the place to raise in some way heavy mis-
siles. Therefore my impression is that what is reflected in our document 
on the START joint statement is the final resolution of this issue. Or are 
we talking different languages?
Karpov: This text is the product of a joint effort. There were US 
proposals, and Soviet proposals. All are reflected in the joint statement.
Baker: We are talking about two different things. One thing is the 
joint statement on future negotiations. There we ask that you agree to 
talk about dealing further with heavy ICBMs in the future. That will 
give us something to point to in ratification. In addition, in my view we 
really need to be able to show some testing limits in the current START 
3 See Document 143.
