1978  267
negative for the United States. In seeking to capitalize on these trends, 
however, they are beset by problems of various kinds. In areas where 
they have actively sought to advance their influence they have suffered 
a number of setbacks, some of them very costly. Events of recent years 
in Egypt, Sudan, and Somalia provide examples. Elsewhere, as in Viet-
nam, Angola, and Ethiopia, they have been more successful. Although 
not oblivious to the costs and risks incurred by these enterprises, the 
Soviets see them as the inevitable accompaniment of a forward policy 
in the Third World.
14. While the Soviets have won recognition as the strongest mil-
itary power in Europe and a legitimized role in the management of 
European security, they have not succeeded in winning the full respect 
for Soviet interests and preferences that they have sought. Some domes-
tic developments in Western Europe, particularly the rising fortunes of 
Eurocommunism, give new promise of weakening NATO, but at a pos-
sible cost of further diminishing Soviet influence over European Com-
munist parties and eventually of contaminating Eastern Europe.
15. To Soviet leaders the strategic meaning of US-Soviet detente is 
the management of change in world politics in ways that control costs 
and risks while constraining as little as possible Soviet efforts to exploit 
fresh opportunities for gain. Such processes as the strategic arms lim-
itation talks (SALT) and US-Soviet cooperation in regional security 
negotiations allow the superpower competition to be monitored and 
modulated. On occasion, they offer Soviet leaders opportunities for 
exerting by diplomatic means influence that might not otherwise be 
available or require more costly or risky measures to pursue. These 
processes also oblige Soviet leaders to calibrate their own competitive 
behavior against the risks of disrupting detente, particularly in areas 
where core US interests are perceived to be deeply engaged. This con-
cern does not, however, appear to have reduced the USSR’s willingness 
to pursue competitive advantages vigorously in areas such as Africa, 
where Moscow may perceive US interests to be less deeply engaged or 
US policy more hamstrung by domestic political constraints.
16. The Soviets probably expect to continue the military programs 
they have pursued in the last 10 years, with some marginal shifts in 
emphasis. They probably expect to improve somewhat on their present 
strategic relationship with the United States, at least temporarily in the 
period 1980–85; to keep their overall advantages in relation to China 
and NATO; and to make steady progress in the kinds of forces and 
access necessary for projection of their influence in third areas.
17. Soviet international behavior in the 1980s is likely to include 
a purposeful, cautious exploration of the political implications of the 
USSR’s increased military strength. Soviet policy will continue to be 
competitive and assertive in most areas of engagement with the West.
