276 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense9 Washington, undated DOD FISCAL GUIDANCE If not the most important issue in the Consolidated Guidance (CG), the size of the Defense budget in FY 80 through FY 84 is certainly high on the list. In accord with an earlier agreement with the OMB, the basic Fiscal Guidance for DoD planning is based on the $126 billion submission to the Congress for FY 79. For the five years covered in the CG, it grows at slightly less than 3% annually in terms of real TOA. I think it is clear that the Defense program must grow in real terms, given the obvious and continuing growth on the Soviet side. The particular growth rate allowed in the CG is tied more to the commitment we have jointly undertaken with our NATO allies than it is to any firm conviction that it will assure, in the words of PD–18, that “the United States will maintain an overall balance of military power between the United States and its allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on the other at least as favorable as that that now exists.” That is an important goal, and one to which I firmly subscribe. Unfortunately, it is hard to measure that balance in any precise and unambiguous way. And of course we cannot be sure as to what the Soviet forces of the future will turn out to be. Thus, there is inevitably a lot of judgment involved in deciding whether the Fiscal Guidance in the CG is or is not enough for us to be able to meet that basic objective stated in PD–18. To further complicate the issue, it is not merely a question of whether you, or I, or the Joint Chiefs of Staff feel that the Fiscal Guidance is high enough to assure maintenance of the current balance. The perceptions of that balance—­and particularly of the trend in that balance—­on the part of Soviets, on the part of our allies, on the part of the third world, and even on the part of the United States public, can have a major effect on what actually happens on the world scene. So we have to judge not only how we view the trend in that balance, but also how we think others will view it. Though there is no way to make such a difficult and critically important judgment simple, I do hope to illuminate the issue somewhat better than it has been in the past. This year, instead of asking the Services to submit only programs to match the basic level of the ­Fiscal Guidance, I have asked them also to submit modifications of those 9 Secret.
