January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1157 lative.” This approach is ill-advised. The Egyptians can get the authority (for the SGA) without the words. Mr. el-Baz said that therefore on the 27th of April it can be discussed, accommodating on words. But he does not like many words to be ambiguous, since that would lead to further controversy. If they try accommodating, it is still necessary to know what is important. Can the SGA do these things or not. First there would be the principles (?); second is the right to amend existing statutes; and third, the details can come later. Minister Butros Ghali said that if one accepted the U.S. paragraph four,9 in four weeks Israel will say that it won’t negotiate, that the words don’t require it. If the Egyptian fourth paragraph is accepted, then there can be talks. Ambassador Linowitz said he did not object to the fourth Egyptian paragraph as such. At the negotiations, Egypt can put it forward and get Israel’s reaction. We are trying to tell the Egyptians what the Pavlovian reaction will be. If the words do not raise problems, then all right. (At 10:54, the two Presidents joined the larger meeting in the Cabinet Room). The President joked that he understands that all the technical work was being done in the Cabinet Room, and that the group was trying to undo his and President Sadat’s agreements! He thinks they should go over the paper we had presented and get the Egyptian response. (The Vice President entered at this point). President Sadat said that they had submitted another paper. Secretary Vance said that Ambassador Linowitz sees no problem with the first paragraph. Paragraph two is ok, with a change in the word “tackled.” With paragraph three, there is a fundamental problem, which he will describe later. Paragraph four’s words are all right, but they hide a problem that will come up when the parties meet on the 27th. There is no reference to laws or legislative authority, but, when the parties meet on the 27th, the issue will be raised. Therefore there is a problem. The President asked if this was a substitute paper. Secretary Vance suggested that Ambassador Linowitz discuss that paper. Ambassador Linowitz said that there are differences between us: whether all powers should be transferred, or the document should try 9 The text of paragraph four of the U.S. paper reads: “Within its specified areas of responsibility, the SGA (AC) will have all necessary and proper powers including the power to issue proclamations, decrees, regulations, or orders which may alter existing statutes. The SGA (AC) will not have the power to alter the terms of the Heads of Agreement and its Annexes.” See footnote 7 above.
