to the favorable consideration of the Sixth Conference of the Americas, to
meet in Habana, January 16, 1928, in order that the diplomatic
representatives of the American Republics taking part in that conference
might, through the exercise of political power, invest them, in their original
or modified form, with the force of conventional law. The diplomatic
representatives, acting under instructions from the governments of their
respective Republics would bind their countries to the extent of their
instructions, and the countries would bind themselves and each to each, by
subsequent ratification of the conventions adopted by the Conference.
The Commission was therefore a meeting of the jurists possessing the
confidence of, and appointed by their respective governments for the
preparation of draft-conventions of public international law, and a code of
private international law, to be submitted to the Sixth Conference of the
American Republics, for such consideration as the Governments therein
represented might care to give to them. The Commission of Jurists could
not, therefore, bind the governments which they represented, nor could the
Delegation bind the government appointing it. This was evidently the idea
of the Conference of Santiago de Chile, which planned the Resolution
creating the Commission; it was the conception of the Government of the
United States as expressed in the commissions of its Delegates; it was the
opinion of all of the Delegates themselves expressed in the first plenary
session of the Commission, and at various times in the Sub-Commission.
It is, therefore, manifest that the Governments are not legally bound either
by the views expressed by their respective Delegates in the Commission, or
in the projects of convention of public law, or code of private law. Their
hands are free, but they have before them materials of public and private
international law upon and about which they may instruct their diplomatic
and therefore political Delegates to the forthcoming Conference of the
Americas at Habana.
I. THE SUB-COMMISSION A. FOR THE CODIFICATION OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW
This Sub-Commission, composed at least of one, and in some cases of the
two members of the Republics which were represented by a delegation of
two persons, held its first meeting at 3 o’clock in the afternoon of Tuesday,
the 19th of April. As its members were taking their places at the long table
