1955 315 Communist China prevented from leaving at least in part because of unsettled Communist claims against American company. If Department approves, I believe it might strengthen Harnden’s chances of receiving an exit permit if I mentioned his case to Wang during a meeting in near future when atmosphere is reasonably good. 2. I would point out that cases of a number of American business­ men had been settled recently, permitting their departure; that while he was a British subject and therefore not strictly our responsibility, he represented an American bank and we felt a certain obligation to bring his case to the attention of the PRC; and that it was hoped he might be shown the same consideration in speedy handling of his case as others had received in recent weeks. I would add I did not expect that Wang and I should get into a discussion of details of case, but would hope he could simply convey our interest to his government. 3. I have received a second request to take up Harnden’s case from Carl Hayden, Vice President of the First National City Bank in Lon­ don. Suggest Department consult UK before advising me on action it believes I should take. Gowen 240. Telegram Dulte 3 from USUN1 New York, September 27, 1955, 6 p.m. Dulte 3. Regarding Geneva 790 following is proposed as Niact cable to Johnson: BEGIN TEXT. For Johnson. Text statement sent you 790 about request for accounting US Mil­ itary personnel was drafted by Defense, and has not been cleared by Department. Opening paragraph reciting that Department cleared is in error. Statement will require further consideration and conferences with Defense and draft sent you should not (repeat not) be used. You should propose “accounting for US Military personnel” as one of sub­ jects for listing Agenda item 2 leaving until later meeting more precise formulation regarding which we will further advise you. Request your comments Defense draft. END TEXT. Dulles 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2755. Secret; Niact.
