3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
586
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
mation by both sides much more serious. We needed to explore deep
cuts in nuclear arms, non-use of force, and limitation or termination of
the production of nuclear weapons. He and Brezhnev will be dis-
cussing SALT further this afternoon. It was obvious that peaceful com-
petition was inevitable and will remain, but some elements of that com-
petition are of deep concern to us and are potentially destabilizing.
Those actions of both sides which concerned the other nation should be
discussed fully so as to understand them, alleviate concerns and re-
solve difficulties. Neither nation can hope to dominate the other. Each
is too powerful to be dominated by others. At the same time, there is
enormous waste of natural and human resources, in the arms race, in
nuclear and conventional weapons. There is also waste in the develop-
ment of unnecessary capabilities, and in taking actions to prevent re-
gional hegemony by one nation which might concern the other. As the
President had heard Brezhnev say many times, the cost of miscalcula-
tion or misunderstanding that could result from the explosion of just
one atomic weapon would indeed be catastrophic and must be
avoided. Because of human nature, each country tended to exaggerate
the actions of the other. The natural desire for secrecy is counter-
productive and could lead to harmful consequences because it could
build up suspicions and induce the other country to develop counter-
measures when they may not be necessary.
Brezhnev interrupted and said he wanted to say something off the
record, requesting that no notes be taken. He noted that President
Carter had already approved a military budget for the coming year
which significantly increased by billions of dollars the sums of money
allocated to military use. Brezhnev did not know whether this was to be
believed or not. The basic issue was this: when he and President Carter
sign the SALT Treaty, that will, of course, be a major step, but they still
will not be ridding mankind of the risk of perishing in an all-out war.
Whether they believed it or not, the danger was very great indeed be-
cause just one button could set off a nuclear catastrophe that would
blow the whole world to smithereens. In his view, he and President
Carter had the duty of getting their nations used to the idea of limiting
strategic arms, and this warranted their moving forward to further
steps in SALT III. That was the main reason why he and President
Carter were signing the SALT II Treaty. He added that this was just an
off-the-record remark.
The President said he, too, would like to make an off-the-record re-
mark. He said it was our understanding that year after year in the last
fifteen years the Soviet Union had steadily increased expenditures for
weapons of all kinds, and that it had done so at a much greater rate
than the United States. He said that it was incumbent upon us to exer-
cise greater restraint.
