1978 305 71. Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 1, 1978 SUBJECT PD/NSC–18 Follow-On Study on Nuclear Targeting Policy2 In general the DOD report provides an excellent description and critique of existing targeting policy and appropriately sets forth the major issues deserving of top-­level consideration and decision. I have only a couple of comments on the report and on the Utgoff/Molander review of the report.3 Two basic issues runs through the report. The first is the need for a much higher degree of flexibility in targeting policy than has previously been the case. Options for the limited employment of nuclear weapons should be multiplied; political considerations should play a greater role in the selection of targets; and, since no plan—­particularly in these uncharted waters—­can anticipate what will be needed in a given contingency, a high capability for Presidential flexibility and improvisation in a nuclear confrontation should be built into our command, administrative, and technical institutions. On these points, I think there is general agreement among Utgoff/Molander, the authors of the report, and myself.4 The second basic issue relates to the relative priority we should give to targeting war-­fighting capabilities compared to war-­recovery capabilities. Here for a variety of reasons the report criticizes what it perceives to be our current emphasis on war-­recovery resources and recommends greater emphasis on war-­fighting capabilities. Victor and Roger are dubious about this conclusion; I support it. The question of war-­fighting vs. war-­recovery comes up in two contexts. The report emphasizes the extent to which Soviet doctrine and practice differ from the US. This is, I think, accurate and valuable. The report points out that the intelligence community now agrees that the Soviets believe that “a superior war-­fighting capability, including what 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, Huntington, Box 64, [PRM–32]: 8/78. Secret. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Utgoff and Molander. 2 See Document 32. 3 Not found. 4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to the portion of this paragraph that begins with “particularly” and ends with “and myself.”
