530
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
about making progress in arms control—specifically SALT, mutual
force reductions in Central Europe and a test ban. Moreover, we want
the preparatory conference in Belgrade for the review of the Helsinki
Accords to yield real progress; we would welcome your suggestions
on how these issues could be advanced, in particular, what the situation
will be in Yugoslavia after Tito.
Human Rights
In the last week, the Romanians have found themselves confronted
by the first sign of public dissent by their intellectuals. A well known
Romanian novelist Paul Goma issued an open letter signed by eight
others, not as well known outside Romania. The letter expressed soli-
darity with the Czech Charter 77, and an appeal to the Government
for human rights. Ceausescu responded immediately with a strong
denunciation (without naming names). But the protestors have not
been arrested (as erroneously reported in the Western press). On the
other hand, the Romanians claim they are granting free emigration
(more than 5,000 in January–February), but the real figure for 1976 was
about 3,000.
Almost certainly this subject will not be raised by Pungan, but you
may wish to advert to it.
1. The defense of human rights is a matter of principle with this
country, and we will not hesitate to speak our mind when the situation
warrants it.
2. We are not linking our concerns to specific policies nor embarking
on a moralistic crusade, but it is best that there be no misunderstanding
of our intentions.
Attached is an advance copy of Ceausescu’s letter (Tab B[A?]).2
Additional background and briefing material from the Department
of State is at Tab B.3
2 Dated February 18, attached but not printed. On March 23, Brzezinski hand-
delivered Carter’s signed response to Ambassador Nicolae. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 33, Memcons: Brzezinski: 1–9/
77) The text of the letter was transmitted to the Embassy in Bucharest in telegram
65360, March 24, with instructions that the Ambassador seek an early appointment with
Ceausescu to review the points made in Carter’s letter. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P850052–1846)
3 Attached but not printed is a February 21 memorandum from Christopher to
Carter.
