Human Rights 193 was taken to leave action up to each individual bureau. This cable will therefore set forth the background for this effort, the required format for reporting, and the specific action requested of each post. 3. Background. In his Law Day speech at the University of Georgia April 30 (copies have been forwarded to each post), the Secretary specifically defined the human rights which are the subject of our policy, and set forth in detail the questions to be considered as we determine whether and how to act with respect to human rights. Further, he stated that once we choose to act, the means available range from quiet diplomacy in its many forms, through public pronouncements, to withholding of assistance. Evaluation reports should focus on all of the means of action he indicated. Both bilateral and multilateral approaches and all forms of economic and military assistance should be considered, especially possibilities for carrying out our policy through the U.N. and the international financial institutions. 4. Evaluation reports should, in a concise manner, describe the current condition of human rights, the extent of violations, their intensity and the most recent instances, and give recommendations for both short and long-term strategies to improve the human rights situation. The following format should be used. Outline for evaluation reports: A. Condition of human rights in (appropriate country). 1. Respect for the integrity of the person, including freedom from: a. Torture b. Cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment c. Arbitrary arrest or imprisonment d. Denial of fair public trial e. Invasion of the home. 2. Respect for civil and political liberties a. Freedom of thought, religion, assembly b. Freedom of movement within a country, foreign travel and emigration policies c. Democratic processes assuring the freedom to participate in the political process. 3. Recent trends in governmental policies relating to the fulfillment of basic needs for food, shelter, health care and education. “strong objections” to the proposed cable, Oxman pointed out that Lamb had received several telephone calls “expressing opposition on the grounds that the cable seeks to rate countries’ human rights performance on some kind of a scale.” He added: “I don’t think that is an accurate description of what the original cable does, and I certainly don’t think my redraft seeks such a rating.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 19, Human Rights— Tasking Memos)
