Covert and Overt Operations 775 283. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, May 13, 1980, 1–1:25 p.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Meeting with Hostage Family Representatives of F.L.A.G. (Family Liaison Action Group) PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Katherine Keough, President of F.L.A.G. Pearl Golacinski, Mother of Alan B. Golacinski, Security Officer Louisa Kennedy, Wife of Economic Officer, Moorhead Kennedy Barbara Rosen, Wife of Barry Rosen, USICA Press Attaché Gary Sick, NSC Ray Jenkins, White House Press Office Mrs. Kennedy briefed the President on the recent trip she and several other FLAG members had made to Europe. They asked for Allied unity and solidarity on the question of the taking of diplomatic hostages, and they had the impression that the U.S. has Allied support. However, the Allies must take action in their own way. The President said that he had received private assurances of support from the Allies, but public statements to the contrary were blown out of proportion by the press, and there was an impression in the U.S. that the Allies were not behind us. He thought the FLAG visit was meaningful and helpful. Mrs. Keough summarized their recent contacts with the TV networks. They are seeking support for coverage of five hostage families and five Iranian families who suffered persecution under the Shah. The objective is to show that communication is possible among ordinary people and between governments despite very great differences. The President said the project would be more effective if he was not involved. However, he thought that anything the hostage families did in a human way could be helpful. He wondered about family trips to Iran. He had noted that Mrs. Timm was condemned when she returned, and he regretted this. Mrs. Keough also noted their efforts to get an opportunity to make a brief appearance before the Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference in Islamabad. They had contacted a number of Mid East Ambassadors, and they had sent telexes to Muscat, Jidda and Islamabad. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 119, Meetings File, 5/13/80 Hostage Family Representatives Meeting with President. Confidential. Cleared by Gary Sick. The meeting took place in the Oval Office.
