September 1953–December 1954
873
be kept effectively under control. It is reported that Chief of Staff Bat-
mangelich has lost out with the Shah in his fight for position vis-a`-vis
Prime Minister. The Government seems to have achieved enough soli-
darity and popular support to have confidence in its ability to cope
with a newly-elected Majlis and effect a satisfactory oil agreement. The
Tudeh Party was very little in evidence during this month although a
discouraging note appeared in a press report which stated that the new
military governor of Tehran has released the vast majority of arrestees
who were picked up as suspected Communists following the events of
19 August.
2. The Shah announced the dissolution of the 17th Majlis on the
grounds that the incumbent body was neither workable nor repre-
sentative of the people. This opened the way for election of a new
Majlis which the Government announced would take place in the near
future and it also removed the political immunity of the principal
leaders of more serious elements in opposition to the Zahedi gov-
ernment. It was reported that the Prime Minister is now prepared to ar-
rest such opposition leaders as Kashani and Baqai if they engage in pro-
vocative activity.
[Omitted here are unrelated activities.]
5. The main Qashqai leaders, Nasr Khan and Khosrow Khan, trav-
eled to Tehran for the purpose of settling their differences with the
Shah and the Government. Nasr Khan had a pleasant but non-
committal interview with the Prime Minister and sent a message to the
Shah but received no reply. It was reported that the Shah had in the
meantime received separate pledges of allegiance from Qashqai sub-
chiefs and was prepared to banish Nasr and Khosrow from the coun-
try. [1½ lines not declassified]
B. Station Synopsis
[Omitted here are unrelated activities.]
9. The Shah and the Prime Minister are in agreement on a joint
slate of candidates to be supported for election to the Majlis. The Sta-
tion believes that in most constituencies the government supported
candidate will win and the Station has been very active in influencing
the composition of the government slate. [3 lines not declassified] Head-
quarters has begun a systematic analysis of all election information
with the intent of providing the Station with maximum support and
guidance during the electioneering phase. [2 lines not declassified]
[Omitted here are operational details.]
John H. Waller
