42  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
for the institution, and informed the Council that the Latin American 
participants in the meeting of the Special Committee of the Council of 
the Organization of American States (OAS) were insisting on discuss-
ing the details of the new institution despite United States efforts to 
confine the discussion to general matters. The Latin American dele-
gates felt they did not have significant resources to contribute to the 
institution, and that the main Latin American need was an increase in 
capital availability from outside Latin America. It appeared that Latin 
American hard currency contributions would be insufficient to have 
much effect, and that hard loans by the new institution would tend 
to reduce the possibility of loans from the Export-Import Bank and 
the International Bank. Accordingly the State Department felt that the 
United States must make additional funds available to the new insti-
tution for loans involving repayment in local currencies. State felt that 
the 1/3–2/3 ratio for hard loan contributions was no longer realistic, 
and that the United States should offer to contribute half the hard loan 
currency.2 Mr. Dillon continued that in his view Latin American coun-
tries would be expected to look to the new inter-American institution 
for soft loans, and the Development Loan Fund would not make loans 
to Latin American countries except in special circumstances. The new 
institution would have broad authority to borrow, which would make 
it possible to borrow from the Development Loan Fund should that be 
considered appropriate at the time. On a 50/50 basis the initial capital-
ization might be $500 million, in addition to the borrowing from the 
DLF. The institution should also have more freedom in the technical 
assistance field than the Working Group recommended, particularly 
in assisting Latin American countries in preparing economic develop-
ment programs.
Mr. Mann, commenting on the meeting of the OAS Special 
Committee, said that some Latin American delegates were seeking 
a United States commitment for a “Marshall Plan” for Latin America 
involving some 2½ to 3 billion dollars. It was felt important for the 
United States to present the non-­controversial aspects of the Inter-
American Bank and if time permitted some of the major points, in 
order to avoid a formal request for such an aid program and wide-
spread criticism of the United States.
The Chairman commented that the United States had been 
exporting large sums of dollars in a variety of ways over the preced-
ing 10 years, and that it was necessary to consider the extent to which 
2 The following two sentences replaced a single sentence in the original draft min-
utes, which read as follows: “The institution should have the right to borrow in private 
markets and should also be able to borrow from governments, specifically from the 
Development Loan Fund, which could make a $100 million line of credit available for 
project loans repayable in local currencies.”
