766  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
interpretation and understanding of this just as explicit as possible that 
I want try again explain my position.
19. I said let me put it this way. Wang disputed position of US with 
regard to Taiwan area, and did not recognize merits, nor did he wish to 
say anything that gave appearance we recognizing merits of position of 
US in that regard.
20. I continued from prepared statement that Wang said he did not 
dispute merits of assertion by US of right of individual and collective 
self-­defense at some places but that he did dispute merits of US claims 
this regard with regard Taiwan area. He said US must abandon its claim 
with respect right self-­defense with respect Taiwan area. I believed that 
this was honest summary his position, as I understood it.
21. I said on other hand they had claimed and still claimed for 
themselves right individual and collective self-­defense in areas admit­
tedly beyond borders their country and where US considers they have 
utterly no basis for claiming that right. I did not and would not say 
anything in this declaration that would recognize or give appearance of 
recognizing merits their claims this regard, and I did not believe draft 
we considering did this.
22. I said surely he did not wish issue a declaration in a form that 
would imply that if their forces attacked they would not defend selves. 
Surely if after making declaration US should in violation its commit­
ment initiate hostilities, their forces would exercise what they would 
consider their right individual collective self-­defense and defend selves. 
It was difficult me to understand how then he could attempt to deny to 
forces of my country very same right.
23. I said Wang had said he would not deny our forces that right in 
some places but did deny them that right in Taiwan area. My point was 
that draft we discussing did not in any way and should not attempt 
deny other’s views or embody agreement between us as to merits 
respective claims. Confrontation our respective claims does not belong 
in present stage of discussion.
24. I said all I had suggested was that in making this declaration 
not to employ force to settle our disputes each of us simply state that 
in doing so we were neither of us renouncing what we considered to 
be our inherent right of individual and collective self defense. In agree­
ing join with Wang in making such statement I did not consider I was 
in any way sacrificing or prejudicing my views with respect to merits 
their claims with regard to places at which they asserted that right.
25. I said, similarly, I did not think that it sacrificed their views with 
regard to merits of claims of my government concerning that right.
26. I said I thought this entirely proper and in accordance with 
original purpose of not attempting in this declaration to discredit or
