814
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
(3) Again the Director asked, rhetorically, whether we could have
blown the whole operation because of too much secrecy (he again
commended Holloway that some comment in their report dealing with
this would be useful).
(4) Further on this, the Director noted that we were lucky that NSA
had been tipped off and used for the OTTER operation.
—Thus they already knew which nets, etc. to monitor when they
were told at the last minute to man up.
—The Director noted in passing that, for subsequent phases of the
operation, NSA had not had the benefit of any rehearsal; but since
those phases were not undertaken, we do not know how the absence
of such a rehearsal would have affected NSA’s performance.
(5) On this secrecy matter, however, the Director noted that the
White House was very pleased with the secrecy that was maintained.
[portion marking not declassified]
4. At the completion of the DCI’s remarks, ADM Holloway made
the following points:
a. They were working for the Joint Chiefs.
b. Their ultimate objective was to recommend to the Joint Chiefs
an organization and procedure for dealing with this type of thing in
the future, i.e. whether and how to maintain a permanent joint task
force in the field.
c. Regarding disclosure policy, he noted that the Panel had been
aware of this as a problem for them to address from early on in their
review of the operation.
—He noted that they had found that the people closest to the
problem (Beckwith and Vaught) had a greater appreciation of tight
security.
—They viewed the possibility of a leak with real concern, seeing
that it could perhaps culminate in an ambush situation. [portion marking
not declassified]
5. There then followed a brief period of questions and answers
(summarized below).
Q (Holloway): [4 lines not declassified]
A (DCI): [3 lines not declassified]
—[2½ lines not declassified]
—[4½ lines not declassified]
—[9 lines not declassified]
—[5½ lines not declassified]
—He mentioned his concern that, as the military viewed the “suc-
cess” of team “A” as a “piece of cake,” it could pose problems in this
regard and lead them to be overly optimistic.
—Holloway, and some of the others, expressed sympathy for this
point of view.
