252 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI place before 12 noon, we imagine the Soviets may be planning shortly to release the text of the statement to the press. 3. Following is the embassy’s informal translation of the oral statement, a copy of which was given us as a Non-Paper. Begin text: In connection with the representation of the embassy of the USA in Moscow of 17 March 1980, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the USSR is instructed to state the following: The Soviet side firmly rejects the efforts of the government of the USA to place in doubt the conscientious fulfillment by the Soviet Union of the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition of Bacteriological Weapons; with regard to this Convention, just as with other international agreements in which the Soviet Union participates, the Soviet side strictly fulfills all provisions of the documents under which it has accepted the relevant obligations. In accordance with the legislation and practice of the Soviet Union, the observance of the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction, ratified by order of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR on 11 February 1975, is guaranteed by the appropriate State Institutes of the USSR. In a statement made by the representative of the USSR in the Committee on Disarmament on 24 June 1975, it was pointed out that the Soviet Union does not have any of the bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins, weapons, equipment and means of delivery indicated in Article 1 of the Convention.4 As for the incident referred to by the American side which occurred in April 1979 in the area of Sverdlovsk, there did in fact occur in this area in March–April 1979 an ordinary outbreak, arising from natural causes, of anthrax among animals and cases of illness of people from the intestinal form of this infection, connected with the use as food of the meat of cattle which was sold without observance of the rules established for veterinary supervision. Appropriate warnings in connection with this were given in the press. No quarantine of any kind was established. That it occurred, however, has no relationship to the question of observance by the Soviet Union of the Convention on the Prohibition of Bacteriological Weapons. And therefore there is absolutely no basis for 4 Article 1 of the Biological Weapons Convention outlines the prohibitions detailed in the BWC. While specific substances are not banned, their purposes can be if they would prove to be harmful. Biological weapons that are prophylactic, protective or peaceful are permitted by the BWC. (Draft text of the Biological Weapons Convention, Department of State Bulletin, November 1, 1971, pp. 508–511)
