6
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
3.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, August 17, 1977, 1050Z
5732. Subject: Conversation With President Daoud: Political
Matters.
1. I called on President Daoud the morning of August 17. The
conversation was in every respect cordial. It lasted one hour. President
Daoud appeared to have fully recovered from some of the minor health
problems he had suffered earlier this summer, such as dental surgery.
2. I referred to our pleasure in having Ambassador Karim in Wash-
ington and how much we looked forward to welcoming Foreign Minis-
ter Abdullah to New York and California in the coming weeks.2 Daoud
asked me to convey his thanks to President Carter for the warm recep-
tion accorded Ambassador Karim. He also asked me to transmit his
personal best wishes to President Carter.
3. Following discussion of economic and narcotics matters which
are the subjects of septels, Daoud said he is greatly concerned about
the large quantity of Communist propaganda publications which are
being brought into Afghanistan through the mails and illegally from
Western Europe and the United States. He related this propaganda
barrage to his concern about the inroads he sees the Communists
making in countries like Thailand and Ethiopia. He said he still sub-
scribes to the domino theory. He said Afghanistan is particularly sensi-
tive to developments of this kind in the world because of its long
border with the Soviet Union.
4. Regarding Communist propaganda, I told Daoud if there were
any specific examples he would like me to investigate, I would try to
do so. He agreed with me that most of it is so boring that it doesn’t
have much effect, but said that nevertheless, people read it.
5. I also mentioned that I do not believe everything in the world
is coming up roses for the Soviet Union. In this connection, I mentioned
the recent ASEAN meeting and pledges of Japanese and Australian
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770297–0366.
Confidential; Limdis. Sent for information to Islamabad, Moscow, New Delhi, and
Tehran.
2 Abdullah traveled to New York to participate in the United Nations General
Assembly meeting and to California on a cultural exchange mission. On October 1, he
met with Vance in New York to discuss a range of bilateral issues; the meeting resulted
in mutual affirmations of improved U.S.-Afghan relations. Vance also extended President
Carter’s invitation to Daoud to visit the United States. (Telegram 238361 to Kabul, October
3; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770360–1051)
