Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: I am grateful to you, Mr. President, to Secretary Vance, and to your colleagues for the efforts that you have made to save our people in Tehran.3 This was a great service to Israel and we will not forget. I would like to say something that I said before. I will have to quote myself from the first time that I met you in July 1977.4 At that time I said that the free world was shrinking, that it was becoming an island battered by hostile winds. This was the truth. Since that time, the Soviets have taken over six countries: Angola, Mozambique, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, South Yemen, and now Cambodia. Saudi Arabia is in direct danger from South Yemen. They are a rich people, but they are weak. Libya is pro-Soviet. Iraq and Syria are under Soviet influence, and the Baath parties in those two countries are coming together. There are between two and three thousand Soviet advisers in Syria. There are more Soviet tanks in Syria—2,800—than in Egypt—between 2,200 and 2,400. Jordan has aligned itself with Syria and Iraq. Now we have the upheaval in Iran, and we must ask ourselves about its meaning. We see this as an awakening of Islamic fanaticism, just as in the Middle Ages. It could be contagious. Iraq has a majority of Shiites. Sadat has had to warn his own people about the fanaticism of the Muslim brotherhood. Sadat sees this problem and he knows what happened in Iran. It could happen in Egypt, where the poverty is so much of a problem. When Sadat was in Jerusalem,5 he talked of inviting me to Cairo, but he could not do it. I believe it was because he could not guarantee my security. There are nine million people in Cairo, a city full of slums and poverty. The Nile Valley is very narrow. I told the President that the United States has only one stable ally in the Middle East, and this is Israel, whose stability is inherent because it is a democracy. This is also true of the United States, where change comes by the ballot, not the bullet. In Iran, a mighty Army collapsed in twenty-four hours in the face of fanatical masses. The story has not reached an end in Iran. Khomeini 3 On February 13, in the midst of the Iranian revolution, the Israeli Embassy in Washington requested that the United States provide refuge to remaining Israeli officials in Iran should they find themselves in “physical danger.” (Telegram 37964 to Tehran,
