638
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin: I am grateful to you, Mr. President, to Secre-
tary Vance, and to your colleagues for the efforts that you have made to
save our people in Tehran.3 This was a great service to Israel and we
will not forget. I would like to say something that I said before. I will
have to quote myself from the first time that I met you in July 1977.4 At
that time I said that the free world was shrinking, that it was becoming
an island battered by hostile winds. This was the truth. Since that time,
the Soviets have taken over six countries: Angola, Mozambique, Ethi-
opia, Afghanistan, South Yemen, and now Cambodia.
Saudi Arabia is in direct danger from South Yemen. They are a rich
people, but they are weak. Libya is pro-Soviet. Iraq and Syria are under
Soviet influence, and the Baath parties in those two countries are
coming together. There are between two and three thousand Soviet ad-
visers in Syria. There are more Soviet tanks in Syria—2,800—than in
Egypt—between 2,200 and 2,400. Jordan has aligned itself with Syria
and Iraq. Now we have the upheaval in Iran, and we must ask our-
selves about its meaning. We see this as an awakening of Islamic fanati-
cism, just as in the Middle Ages. It could be contagious. Iraq has a ma-
jority of Shiites. Sadat has had to warn his own people about the
fanaticism of the Muslim brotherhood. Sadat sees this problem and he
knows what happened in Iran. It could happen in Egypt, where the
poverty is so much of a problem. When Sadat was in Jerusalem,5 he
talked of inviting me to Cairo, but he could not do it. I believe it was be-
cause he could not guarantee my security. There are nine million
people in Cairo, a city full of slums and poverty. The Nile Valley is very
narrow.
I told the President that the United States has only one stable ally
in the Middle East, and this is Israel, whose stability is inherent because
it is a democracy. This is also true of the United States, where change
comes by the ballot, not the bullet.
In Iran, a mighty Army collapsed in twenty-four hours in the face
of fanatical masses. The story has not reached an end in Iran. Khomeini
3 On February 13, in the midst of the Iranian revolution, the Israeli Embassy in
Washington requested that the United States provide refuge to remaining Israeli officials
in Iran should they find themselves in “physical danger.” (Telegram 37964 to Tehran,
February 14; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840126–2351) Five
days later, on February 18, Iranian radio announced that all Israeli citizens in Iran had
been ordered to leave the country. (“More Top Officials Arrested in Iran,” The New York
Times, February 19, 1979, p. A6) The same day, the Israeli Ambassador to Iran and his
staff were evacuated from Tehran to Frankfurt, along with hundreds of U.S. official per-
sonnel, aboard two chartered Pan Am aircraft. (Telegram 1419 from Frankfurt, February
19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790077–0611)
4 For the memorandum of conversation produced during Begin’s first meeting with
Carter in July 1977, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, Jan-
uary 1977–August 1978, Document 52.
5 See footnote 3, Document 4.
