834 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Also enclosed for consideration by the Council at this meeting is a draft revision of paragraph 64–­f of NSC 5906/1, prepared by the NSC Planning Board in the light of its review of the Mobilization Base paragraph. James S. Lay, Jr. Executive Secretary cc: The Secretary of the Treasury The Attorney General The Secretary of Commerce The Director, Bureau of the Budget The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Director of Central Intelligence The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers Enclosure Draft Revision Washington, August 29, 1959 BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY 59. Mobilization Base.2 The mobilization base consists of the military logistics base and the civilian readiness base and should emphasize those elements that will increase U.S. D-­Day readiness and capability. a. Military Logistics Base.3 The military logistics base should be designed to provide for the forces and the logistic requirements of: (a) cold war (b) opposition to local aggression, and (c) general war. The general objective of the military logistics base is to achieve a degree of war readiness which will provide for meeting foreseeable military contingencies. The highest priority will be placed upon achieving and 2 “For planning purposes, the mobilization base is defined as the total of all resources available, or which can be made available, to meet foreseeable wartime needs. “Such resources include the manpower and material resources and services required for the support of essential military, civilian, and survival activities, as well as the elements affecting their state of readiness, such as (but not limited to) the following: manning levels; state of training; modernization of equipment; mobilization materiel reserves and facilities; continuity of government; civil defense plans and preparedness measures; psychological preparedness of the people; international agreements; planning with industry; dispersion; and stand-­by legislation and controls.” (This is the definition of the term “Mobilization Base” adopted by NSC Action No. 1756, subsequently approved by the President.) [Footnote is in the original.] 3 The military logistics base is defined as the total of all resources available, or which can be made available, to the military effort in order to meet foreseeable wartime needs. [Footnote is in the original.]
