1980  887
 System (set up by Kennedy after the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962 when 
he found agencies with separate and non-­interoperable communica-
tions systems, a paralyzing condition for his control), has the responsi-
bility to implement, not only in its C3I programs but also with guidance 
to common carriers on interoperability and survivability for crisis and 
war. PD–53 changed fundamentally the objective of telecommunica-
tions heretofore: sufficient to communicate an execution message for 
a retaliatory strike but nothing more for endurance, flexibility, and a 
prolonged conflict.9 (U)
PD–57, mobilization planning guidance, signed in March 1980, 
tasked the first work on mobilization guidance at the national level 
since the 1950s.10 Treated as less than a serious issue, even in the 
Defense Department until lately, mobilization responsibilities in other 
agencies, although critical for wartime, had long been a joke. As the 
Soviet buildup cancelled our superiority, the joke became a dangerous 
one, undercutting our credibility in the eyes of careful foreign observ-
ers. Little concrete result has been achieved to date, but the level of 
serious interest is surprisingly high after PD–57’s emergence. A parallel 
achievement in manpower mobilization has been the draft registration 
law. It is a major step. (C)
PD–58, Continuity of Government/C3I, signed this June, initiates 
a wholly new conceptual approach to making the National Command 
Authority and the Presidency for civil government survivable under 
conditions of repeated nuclear attack.11 The existing system built in the 
1950s, was judged vulnerable already by 1962 in a report to President 
Kennedy. President Nixon received a similar report in 1970 but failed 
to act on it. Neither report offered a solution to the problem of hardsite 
vulnerability. Until the new system is built and tested, it is doubtful that 
the U.S. could ride out a well-­conceived Soviet attack on our national 
C3I, carry through to a third or fourth ranking successor if need be, and 
retaliate in a coordinated manner. Even if we were lucky enough to do 
that, the staff support for the Presidency to mobilize, control the forces, 
and govern the civil sector is lacking. PD–58 requires the development 
of precisely that support. (S)
9 Carter underlined “retaliatory strike,” “endurance,” “flexibility,” and “prolonged 
conflict” in this sentence.
10 Carter underlined “PD–57” and “mobilization planning” in this sentence.
11 Carter underlined “PD–58,” “Continuity of Government/C3I,” “Command 
Authority,” and “survivable” in this sentence.
