110 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV doing about this situation. The Vice President also asked Stan Turner to continue working with the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence to provide them with a better understanding of the actions presently underway, the complex nature of counteractions, and pros and cons of their ultimate effectiveness. The following conclusions were reached: 1. Not enough is known of the threat of Soviet interception to the “national interest-­government” and especially “national interest-­ private” categories of unclassified information. There is also uncertainty about Soviet intentions and objectives. Stan Turner was, therefore, asked to assume responsibility for preparation of a risk-­benefit estimate that assesses more systematically the threat of Soviet telecommunications intercept to all categories of classified and unclassified information, including that solely in the private sector, and the benefit of similar U.S. telecommunications intercepts abroad. This estimate is to be given highest priority, with a preliminary report due before the end of August. 2. The broad outlines of a National Telecommunications Protection Policy were agreed upon as follows: —Government classified information relating to national defense and foreign relations should, as presently required, be transmitted only by secure means. NSA should continue to have responsibility for provision of adequate cryptographic security. —Unclassified information transmitted by and between Government agencies and contractors that would be useful to an adversary (so-­called “national interest: government”) should be protected. Identification of such communications should be a priority task. —Non-­governmental information that would be useful to an adversary (so-­called “national interest: private”) should be identified and the private sector informed of the problem and encouraged to take appropriate protective measures. Government R&D information and protective technology should be made available to the common carriers. The additional provision, however, of government equipment and funds to the private sector would probably require legislation and raises some fundamental issues and concerns about government involvement. —More attention must be given to the threat to strictly private communications of Americans, especially in view of public concern about the need to safeguard civil rights and to protect against blackmail. Specifically: • The FCC should be requested to work with the common carriers to determine system capabilities to protect the privacy of individual private communications. If regulatory directives are needed to ensure
