Afghanistan 305 them because of India. It was agreed, however, that this issue should not arise in the near term. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] 108. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, December 28, 1979, 1353Z 8665. Subj: (LOU) Preliminary Thoughts on Why Moscow Forcibly Imposed a New Government in Afghanistan. 1. (C—Entire text) 2. Summary: Most observers have consistently downplayed the possibility that Moscow would support—much less back militarily— the overthrow of the Khalqi regime in favor of one led by the former Parcham wing of the Afghan leftist movement. This skepticism flowed from a conclusion that Babrak Karmal and his Parchamists were really no different from their Khalqi rivals, that the great mass of the Afghan population considered both groups equally evil Communists and atheists, and that Babrak himself was probably too pro-Soviet in Afghan eyes to be credible as a genuine nationalist. Thus, the general feeling was that a “Babrak alternative” would not be able to solve any of the problems which the Khalqis themselves had been unable to solve, and that Babrak’s apparent pro-Soviet views would result in an even narrower political base for the Parchamists than the Khalqis had in their worst days. 3. Persuasive reasons for Moscow’s decision to overthrow Hafizullah Amin and install Babrak are, therefore, difficult to discern, since we presume that the Soviets are also aware of the handicaps a Parchamist regime would encounter, especially its total lack of legitimacy in view of the Soviet military action installing them in power. The Soviets may have concluded that a policy of risking potential disaster but also potential success was preferable to the disaster they could see looming if they had continued to back Amin. A demonstration of support for 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 12/28/79. Confidential; Niact Immediate; Sensitive. Sent for information Immediate to Moscow. Also sent for information to Beijing, Athens, Islamabad, Jidda, London, New Delhi, Paris, USNATO, CINCPAC (also for POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD). Printed from a copy received in the White House Situation Room.
