260  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Harold’s five-­year plan (which, including cost growth, averages over 
$6B annually for 1980–83). In the FY 79 Defense budget, we believe 
that (a) NATO-­related Army and Air Forces are of first priority, and 
(b) the Navy’s severe shipyard problems (multimillion dollar claims 
and delays of up to two years in many deliveries) warrant at least one 
year of caution as to just how many billions of dollars we can continue 
to channel to the problem shipyards in the midst of such difficulties. 
In sum, I believe the Defense recommendation strikes an appropriate balance 
between long range Navy goals, mid-­term fiscal constraints, and near-­term 
shipyard problems.
60.	
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Science and 
Technology Policy (Press) to President Carter1
Washington, May 1, 1978
SUBJECT
M-X and Minuteman Vulnerability
There is growing acceptance within the Pentagon of the conclu-
sion of our OSTP Vulnerability Panel last fall2 that a commitment to 
full-­scale development of the M–X trench mobile system would have 
been premature since there were major unresolved vulnerabilities in 
this system. A Defense Science Board task force has completed a pre-
liminary analysis of the M–X trench system and has concluded that “it 
has disadvantages compared with other proposed concepts sufficient 
to rule it out in our view.”3 As a result, emphasis in the Pentagon is 
shifting to other multiple aim point systems such as building a large 
number of silos (perhaps twenty) for each ICBM so that the Russians 
would have to expend a very large number of RVs to threaten our land-­
based ICBM force.
Like the M–X trench system, these alternatives may involve verifi-
cation as well as vulnerability problems. For example, the multiple silo 
system would require modification of SALT limitations on numbers 
of launchers and on-­site inspection to verify the numbers of missiles 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski 
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 124, Weapons Systems: 4–9/78. Secret. Carter initialed 
the upper right corner of the memorandum.
2 See Document 43.
3 Carter wrote “I agree” in the right margin next to this sentence.
