Human Rights
229
Adoption of an affirmative human rights policy will carry with it a
variety of risks, choices, tradeoffs and potential costs:
—Our actions and statements regarding human rights objectives
may involve criticism of conditions in another country, which may be
viewed as either offensive or threatening by the government concerned
and, in certain cases, by some segments of the population. The resulting
strain in our relations with that government may have a negative im-
pact on other objectives. The sensitivity of the Soviet Union to our
human rights initiatives represents a manifestation of the possible risks
involved, in this case a strain in crucial East-West relations. Never-
theless, in many countries, positive responses to our human rights ini-
tiatives have occurred, are occurring, or are possible. As they do, rela-
tions will improve.
—Since some Western democracies, while supporting our general
principles have not agreed with us on certain tactics, there is a risk that
certain of our initiatives, if not properly coordinated, could lead to dif-
ferences with our NATO allies. These differences could, of course, be
exploited by the Soviet Union.
—Our criticism of human rights violations may provoke a greater
degree of repression by a government, either because it fears our initia-
tives will encourage dissident groups to act with boldness or because it
wants to demonstrate disdain for our policy. Of course, such a reaction
bears its own internal political cost.
—Our methods may adversely affect multilateral institutions or
ongoing programs, particularly in the economic area, which have their
own U.S.-endorsed objectives. In particular, using our vote in interna-
tional financial institutions to encourage respect for human rights
might lead others to seek to block assistance on other and purely polit-
ical grounds. On the other hand, failure to raise human rights concerns
could jeopardize domestic support for these institutions. More broadly,
we will have to remain alert to possible costs in terms of developing
country cooperation on North-South issues.
—Inevitable inconsistencies in our human rights policy around the
world will expose us to criticism. Allies such as Korea, Iran and the
Philippines, for instance, cannot be immune from some application of
the policy without endangering the integrity of the policy; neither can
powerful adversaries like the Soviet Union. But whatever qualifications
on the application of our policy toward these or other nations we deem
necessary will invite charges that our policy lacks credibility.
—The implementation of our policy is likely to provoke reciprocal
criticism of domestic conditions in this country, not only from commu-
nist nations but also from friends. Our response should be to welcome
constructive criticism, noting that our system provides many remedies
for social and economic ills.
