672 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV to endorse the DOD recommendation. Admiral Turner may raise two points of criticism (noted below). We recommend that you express support of this basing mode and believe the PRC can promptly make this recommendation to the President. (S) This memo highlights certain issues and data you may find useful in the meeting. (U) Survivability The DCI may argue that the proposed baseline deployment of 4600 shelters could be swamped by large numbers of Soviet ICBM RVs in the late 1980s. Tab B displays his tabulation of possible Soviet RV threats as extracted from the latest NIE.3 These threat levels are physically possible. But that possibility does not obviate the viability of the multiple-­ aim-­point basing approach. —Under SALT II limits, assuming they are extended into the late 1980s, the attacker would fall short of weapon numbers required to kill M–X and Minuteman, or have just about enough. In any case, he would have virtually to exhaust his ICBM force in order to swamp our baseline deployment.4 —With or without SALT, if we see a proliferating RV threat, we can expand the number of aim points at from $1.7M to $2.2M each. Additional deployed RVs probably cost the Soviets on the order of $3–5M each if the missile force is expanded. Buying more RVs through fractionation would cost them on the order of $1–2M per RV. —Should SALT II limits break down, SALT III fail, and we see the Soviets trying to swamp our expanding set of aim points, this would signify a kind of competition in which current constraints would surely be relaxed. We would be much more willing to consider: • Hard-­point preferential ABM defenses for M–X. • Launch-­under-­attack options that could be more effective in the late 1980s against a 5000+ RV raid into a small area than such options are today as a response to Minuteman vulnerability. • M–X mobility outside confined areas. The point is that there are no perfect, good-­forever answers to this or any other strategic problem. Insisting on them tends to mean opting out of the competition. (S) Verifiability DOD, State, ACDA and CIA staff believe the DOD basing concept would be verifiable if deployed by the US or the Soviets. Admiral 3 Not found attached. 4 A marginal note at the bottom of the page reads: “sheltered reinforced truck-­ mobile system.” The word “reinforced” was struck through.
