1978  435
reliable C3, and endurance, and complete independence from tactical 
warning.
• Air-Launched Ballistic Missile (ALBM): With this system, large 
aircraft would carry ballistic missiles of intercontinental range. (In a 
feasibility test of such a system, we dropped and fired a modified Min-
uteman from a cargo aircraft some years ago, but no guidance system 
was operative, nor was capable of doing so).
This concept, however, is much more closely related to the ALCM-­
carrying bomber than to an ICBM. It suffers from the bomber’s depen-
dence on tactical warning and lack of endurance. As an alternative to 
the ALCM, it promises only better penetration (though we do not expect 
penetration to be a severe problem for the ALCM) and quicker reaction. 
On the other hand, its accuracy and the number of warheads carried 
per aircraft would be much inferior to the ALCM’s. And, of course, 
instead of hedging against a Soviet ABM breakout (as the ALCM does), 
it would hedge against a breakthrough in Soviet air defenses.
• Air-Mobile ICBM: With this system, ICBMs would be trans-
ported from airbases to dispersed launching sites, where they would 
be unloaded, erected, and fired. Through use of short take-­off and 
landing aircraft, the potential number of launching sites is very large. 
The dispersion process could begin on strategic warning, though some 
continuing movement of ICBMs between sites would be necessary to 
defeat Soviet reconnaissance and targeting.
This system, though similar in many respects to ICBMs as we nor-
mally think of them, would not be completely independent of warning, 
and it could be difficult to provide communications as secure and reli-
able as the ICBM’s. The proper aircraft does not now exist.
• Land-Mobile ICBM: With this system, ICBMs would be carried 
in land vehicles, either in more-­or-­less continuous motion to prevent 
pre-­targeting, or in a “dash on warning” mode (in which vehicles nor-
mally kept at central bases would disperse on tactical warning, possi-
bly to shelters randomly chosen from among a large number prepared 
in advance). There was much interest in the ’60s in mobile versions of 
the Minuteman, but the concept was abandoned in light of the prob-
lems of C3, security, and—­most of all—­the prospect of public reaction to 
the idea of so many nuclear warheads continuously circulating on the 
roads or rails of the country. However, the land required and the speed 
of the vehicles is subject to tradeoffs with the hardness of the vehicle, or 
of its MAP-­like shelter.
In comparison with ICBMs in silos or MAP, this system would suf-
fer in terms of reliance on tactical warning, or in terms of C3 for versions 
relying purely on mobility rather than random shelters.
• Coastal Submersibles: This concept postulates very small (350-­
ton), inexpensive submarines, each armed with a pair of encapsulated 
MX missiles, and manned by a crew of 12. They would operate on the 
coastal shelf, with communications via a redundant grid of fiber-­optics 
cables on the ocean floor. The submarine would be connected to plug-­in 
terminals in the grid through an umbilical.
If feasible, this system would probably be further off in the future 
than any of the other novel basing schemes. Its potential advantage 
would be lower cost; the likely disadvantage, even if feasible, is vul-
nerability. Aside from its vulnerability to Soviet trawlers—­tearing up
