equipped to give prompt information on crop prospects, supply, demand, current
receipts, imports, exports, and prices.
A bill embodying these principles, which has been drafted under the advice and with
the approval of substantially all the leaders and managers in the cooperative movement,
will be presented to the Congress for its enactment. Legislation should also be
considered to provide for leasing the unappropriated public domain for grazing
purposes and adopting a uniform policy relative to grazing on the public lands and in
the national forests.
A more intimate relation should be established between agriculture and the other
business activities of the Nation. They are mutually dependent and can each advance
their own prosperity most by advancing the prosperity of the other. Meantime the
Government will continue those activities which have resulted in an unprecedented
amount of legislation and the pouring out of great sums of money during the last five
years. The work for good roads, better land and water transportation, increased support
for agricultural education, extension of credit facilities through the Farm Loan Boards
and the intermediate credit banks, the encouragement of orderly marketing and a
repression of wasteful speculation, will all be continued.
Following every other depression, after a short period the price of farm produce has
taken and maintained the lead in the advance. This advance had reached a climax
before the war. Everyone will recall the discussion that went on for four or five years
prior to 1914 concerning the high cost of living. This history is apparently beginning to
repeat itself. While wholesale prices of other commodities have been declining, farm
prices have been increasing. There is every reason to suppose that a new era in
agricultural prosperity lies just before us, which will probably be unprecedented.
 
MUSCLE SHOALS
The problem of Muscle Shoals seems to me to have assumed a place all out of
proportion with its real importance. It probably does not represent in market value
much more than a first-class battleship, yet it has been discussed in the Congress over a
period of years and for months at a time. It ought to be developed for the production of
nitrates primarily, and incidentally for power purposes. This would serve defensive,
agricultural, and industrial purposes. I am in favor of disposing of this property to meet
these purposes. The findings of the special commission will be transmitted to the
Congress for their information. I am convinced that the best possible disposition can be
made by direct authorization of the Congress. As a means of negotiation I recommend
the immediate appointment of a small joint special committee chosen from the
appropriate general standing committees of the House and Senate to receive bids,
