Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1071 Like you, I am guided by the need to comply with all the agreements, as they were worked out in Houston by our foreign ministers. The Houston package is a balanced, carefully coordinated solution to the major remaining START Treaty problems. Therefore, our task now is to implement this solution as quickly as possible in the texts of the START Treaty and its accompanying documents. l am ready to regard as a fundamental reference point in our joint effort the principle outlined in your letter—for each side to avoid the pursuit of maximum unilateral advantage, but to try to strengthen the agreement itself: its durability, confidence in its integrity, the stability it provides, and predictability. This applies equally to all components of the strategic forces of our two sides, both ballistic missiles and heavy bombers. Acting on this basis, we must decide the disputed START issues mentioned in your letter, which are essential for both sides and on whose resolution strategic stability and predictability depend. Certainly, it is on precisely these issues—agreeing on the definition of new types of ICBMs and SLBMs, downloading the accountable number of warheads on ballistic missiles, and access to telemetric information—that fundamental difficulties have emerged recently at the negotiations. First of all, I would like to underscore that I share your approach regarding the importance of a just solution to the problem of defining “new types” of ballistic missiles. Our proposal to include throw weight in the criteria determining such a new type is prompted by a desire to avoid a situation whereby a new ballistic missile would not be considered as such only because its size, type of fuel and number of stages would not differ from already existing missiles. In fact, it is possible that a new missile could be developed to be deployed on existing launchers, which would not differ from its predecessor in any of the other criteria which determine a “new type” except for the throw weight. Lately it has been possible through joint efforts to bring our positions significantly closer on this issue. The U.S. side, as shown by your letter, has acknowledged the throw weight of a ballistic missile as a full-fledged criterion and we, in turn, have taken into account the U.S. concern as regards verification by agreeing that in addition to throw weight, a change in the length of the first stage of an ICBM or SLBM of 5 percent or more be required. Thus, it now remains to agree upon the concrete value of the increase in throw weight which would make it possible to regard an ICBM or SLBMs as a new type of missile. Our experts believe that the numeric value of 30 percent which you sited in your letter for increasing throw weight is unjustifiably large exactly for the reasons given in the letter. In this case, there would occur exactly that which you warned against: the criterion would not reinforce the principle and its spirit.
