Options Identified
285
charge were critical to continued momentum and to keeping the initia-
tive in our hands.
(A singular example of what happens when your leadership is not
directly asserted is the U.S.-U.K. communiqué. You might remember
that I tried to get the British to support us tangibly while you were in
the Cabinet Room.5 This was then left to Cy and Carrington to negotiate.
Page 2 of the enclosed U.S.-U.K. communiqué indicates what was
omitted.6
5 See Document 103.
6 Not attached. A December 14 memorandum from James Rentschler of the National
Security Council Staff to Aaron contained a draft paragraph on Iran for use in a jointly
approved press statement to be released after Thatcher’s visit. It stated in part that Carter
and Thatcher “agreed that they would use every means at their disposal” to obtain the
release of the hostages and “agreed on the need to apply economic measures” that would
isolate Iran and would direct their respective financial institutions to take appropriate
action. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 64,
Outside the System File, Iran Non-Meetings Hostage Crisis 11–12/79) For Carter and
Thatcher’s post-meeting comments, see footnote 3, Document 103. For the final press
statement, see footnote 8, Document 104.
106.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to
Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, December 18, 1979
SUBJECT
The Next Approach to the Iranians—Message to Ambassador Lang
Attached is the message to Ambassador Lang revised after our
discussion last night.2 It is designed to reflect an overall effort to shock
the Iranians into movement.
1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Swiss Channel. Secret;
Eyes Only. Copies were sent to Christopher and Newsom. According to Saunders, the
briefing memorandum was prepared for the December 19 SCC meeting, which was
subsequently cancelled. (Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure, November 1979–May
1980,” American Hostages in Iran, p. 108)
2 Attached but not printed. The message more fully explains the mechanism for
implementing option two as described in this memorandum. The message bears no
indication that it was approved.
