896
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
336.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, August 6, 1980
MEETING WITH SARESHTAHDARZADEH MOHSTOFI
(SHAHPAR)
FROM: WILLIAM G. MILLER
Mr. Shahpar called this morning saying that he wanted to see me
as soon as possible because he had word from Shapur Bakhtiar, Mr.
Ebdehaj and others. I met him at lunch. He said that Bakhtiar, Oveissi,
General Jam, Nazih, the Saudi government, and to some extent the Iraqi
government, were looking for United States approval and assistance.
I asked what he meant by approval and assistance. He said that the
situation in Iran was deteriorating daily and that unless action is taken
soon, events will force Iran into the Soviet orbit. He says that one in five
of all the military in Iran are under the influence of the “Communists”.
I said, did he have evidence that the Soviet or Tudeh party were active.
He said that the Tudeh party is bitterly opposed by the Khomeini
government and the Soviet Union is distrusted by almost all Iranians.
He said, however, that the borders are wide open. Infiltration by Persian
speaking Soviets is occurring and although his information is that
there are not large numbers, there could be. His concern about the
“Communists” is that they are better organized than any other group.
By the “Communists” he means the Tudeh cells and the leftist groups
within the Fedayeen. He said that there was no coup; that he knew
personally that none of the Iranian groups had supported a coup; and
that in fact it was a device by the Khomeini government to curb and
crush opposition groups. He said that a number of his own relatives
had been killed.
I asked about the relations between Bakhtiar, Oveissi and the other
major exile groups. He said that they were in communications with
one another but that all agreed that only the military groups who were
in Iran were about to do anything. That politicians like Bakhtiar could
talk on the outside but that the only real action could come from military
groups within Iran. He said that the groups opposed to Khomeini had
the capacity now to take over all of Southern Iran, including Khuzistan.
He said that the Ayatollahs Shariat Madari, Qomi, and Khoei, and one
other, whose name I missed, were in contact with the outside groups,
although they were under house arrest. Khoei is in Iraq. He said that
Boyer-Ahmadi had 20,000 troops armed with guns. The Qashqai had
1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Records, Iran 1980. Top Secret.
