International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1063
separate National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Fi-
nancial Policies will be chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and con-
tinue to advise him on policy toward the IFI’s); food aid; develop-
mental
programs
and
budgets
of
international
organizations
(excluding organizations now backstopped by Treasury); Human
Rights and Foreign Assistance; legislative strategy (to be established);
and a working group to review strategy for implementing a foundation
for International Technological Cooperation.
Lead. State believes the lead should be shared. AID accepts State as
the central point of coordination but believes AID should lead for
LDC’s and HEW for developed countries. HEW believes it should lead,
but underscores the need for a focal point in State and for coordination
between HEW and State. Various agencies (and many nongovernment
parties) want a significant White House role in the lead.
The answer to who should assume the lead for coordinating U.S.
international health policy and programs will depend to a significant
extent on the way in which current reorganization and coordination
proposals and plans in various areas develop. The new DCC/CDPP4
structure will take some time to establish how its concern for develop-
ment programs and policy will relate to international development
assistance in health and to international health activity not primarily
related to development. The proposed Foundation for International
Technology Cooperation is just now into the earliest planning stage
with only very little known of its relation to health. AID responsibilities
are currently being considered for reorganization. HEW, DoD and
others (EPA, VA, Labor, etc.) are considering strengthening their inter-
national health involvements. Congress (Javits and Kennedy) is pro-
posing new roles and structures for the agencies in international health.
OMB is moving toward a consolidated budget review for international
health. The World Bank is currently reviewing its health sector policy
and should be finished doing so early next year. WHO and the U.N.
family in general are undergoing significant policy and programmatic
reorientation. Until these and other developments take shape, there-
fore, it would seem appropriate to retain leadership for coordination of
international health activity in the White House.
IV. Initiative Development and Promotion. Global health programs,
projects and initiatives can and do originate in many ways, in many
places, and for many purposes. They serve goals of global health (in-
cluding health of U.S. citizens), foreign policy, medical diplomacy, de-
4 The name DCC may be changed to Council on Development Policies and Pro-
grams. [Footnote in the original.]
