Dr. Yen then referred to the question of administrative expenses. He reminded the Delegation, in summing up, that a certain amount of discretion should be left to the Chinese Government and that it would be well for the Delegates to endeavor, as much as possible, to avoid any semblance of the Purposes not having been adopted at the initiative of the Chinese Government. He suggested, in conclusion, a discussion of the question of Rates because he felt that it would be useless to spend all the time discussing Purposes without knowing exactly how much fresh revenue would be derived from the new taxes. Mr. Hioki suggested the appointment of two subcommittees, one on Surtaxes and the other on Purposes, saying, at the same time, that it would be rather difficult to discuss the question of surtaxes until the Purposes had been fully determined. A discussion of the approximate revenues and needs ensued and it was finally decided that no real progress could be made until the serious questions under discussion had been considered by subcommittees of Delegates or Technical Advisers. Many of the questions that arose during the discussion were technical in character and involved classifications of commodities, luxury lists, money values, and related questions. Admiral Tsai said that, for the convenience of the Delegates and Technical Advisers, the Chinese Delegates would prepare and circulate an amplified and enlarged list of luxuries for consideration in the subcommittee meetings. Sir Ronald Macleay supported Mr. Hioki’s view that it would be necessary to know how much money was needed before they could approach the question of the surtaxes and the question of luxuries and that they should also know the amount needed to fund the outstanding debts before taking up the question of the amount to be raised. Pursuant to this view, Sir Ronald suggested that there should be two subcommittees; one to deal with likin and to make estimates of what would be required for its abolition, etc., and the other to deal with the consolidation of debts and the other Purposes, and also to form an estimate of the amount needed. A rather lengthy discussion ensued as to the number and functions of the subcommittees and whether they would be composed of Delegates or technical advisers and the method of appointing members and, further, whether the subcommittees would themselves be permitted to have subcommittees. This discussion finally ended in the committee agreeing that there should be two-subcommittees, one on purposes and one
