World Hunger and Food Policy 809 serves, P.L. 480, international trade and foreign investment, nutrition, and private sector involvement. Bourne concluded the draft with the following paragraphs: “World arms expenditures were estimated at $107 billion in 1960; they are now approximately $400 billion. Thirty million people bear arms today, as compared with 24 million only a decade ago. We must begin to give food the sort of attention we have given to weapons; for our strongest weapons will ultimately be compassion and the will to help and to cooperate with those who are now less fortunate, before the problem becomes entirely uncontrollable. We need an increased and sustained debate, both nationally and internationally, on the issue of world hunger. The United States cannot alone solve these problems. But they will not be solved without us. Our leadership is needed, and our assistance is crucial if the hungry nations of the world are to become self-sufficient in food by the end of this century. That goal can be reached. It must be reached. Working together, we shall reach it, by offering other nations our unmatched agricultural skill, by working with them to adapt our science and technology methods, and to help them develop new ones suitable to local conditions. “In the interests of our national security, and in keeping with our moral responsibility to help our fellow man, we must and we shall do our utmost to combat world hunger while there is still time to act. I ask Congress to join with me in this most important undertaking.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1978) National Security Council Staff member Guy Erb sent a copy of Bourne’s draft to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski on April 3. In an attached covering memorandum, Erb noted that the draft message was “rather long and contains numerous weaknesses.” He added that he could handle “detailed drafting suggestions” with Bourne and his staff members but suggested that Brzezinski send a memorandum to Bourne explaining the NSC’s major concerns with the draft. (Ibid.) In an April 4 memorandum to Bourne, Brzezinski explained that the draft message “appears very long for a document intended to have an impact on Congressional attitudes toward the Administration’s hunger policies. I would suggest greatly shortening the message and moving specific requests to the Congress to the front of the paper. I understand that those requests and recommendations for U.S. trade, investment, and nutrition policies will be cleared by the appropriate agencies.” At the conclusion of the memorandum, Brzezinski stressed that Erb would provide additional detailed comments to Bourne and his staff members. (Ibid.) In an April 5 action memorandum to Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Richard Cooper, Assistant Secretary of State for Eco-
