198 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement discrimination in limited war because we realize that excessive amounts of force would unnecessarily destroy people and facilities. We are at war now—not peace. We should not only realize, but act upon the realization, that treaties, negotiations and economic pacts, as well as limited military operations, are the weapons of this war. Therefore, in addition to the performance of their combatant func­ tions, the U.S. must have military forces also capable of performing various other functions which will permit diplomatic maneuvering in support of U.S. cold war offensive. The U.S. must be able to recognize and act quickly on small prob­ lems as they occur in the world and before those problems grow to a big size requiring big action. In order for the U.S. to continue to be an influence in the world, the U.S. must have allies and friendly neutrals. Our allies will require forces under their own control sufficient to enable them to contribute significantly to their own defense, since they are showing increasing reluctance to placing major reliance on the United States’ massive retaliatory strikes on Russia. The U.S. should permit our allies the pride of achievement asso­ ciated with contributing significantly to their own defense. Since their greatest commodity is manpower, the U.S. will probably have to con­ tinue to supply our allies with a great deal of their armaments. In my opinion, these steps would make it clear to the world that communist expansion by whatever means will be dealt with by the U.S. by the most appropriate means. No one, least of all the Russians, should have any doubt of our determination. Probably the only effective way of convincing the world of our resolution is to take firm and timely action of whatever kind is neces­ sary to prevent the communists from gaining further footholds in non-­ communist countries. This should include the willingness to conduct limited war, to assist friendly countries to maintain freedom from com­ munism regardless of the steps that are taken to impose communism. It is my opinion that the adoption of the more specific language proposed by the JCS majority view will more nearly provide the nec­ essary guidance for reorientation of our military strategy to meet the requirements of the situation which now faces us.
