1977  111
such protection, the necessary legislative changes should be made in 
the FCC charter.
• The Attorney General should consider a temporary modification 
in his current operating guidelines to permit NSA to analyze the extent 
to which the Soviets may be collecting and exploiting individual pri-
vate communications.
3. The technology to protect terrestrial microwave circuits is con-
tinuing to evolve. As a result, protection is a complex problem with sig-
nificant technical and legal aspects and relatively little is known about 
the cost-­effectiveness of expensive alternative solutions. Nevertheless, 
subject to continuous review of available technology and reassessment 
of the foreign intercept threat, the following immediate actions should 
be taken:
—An R&D program covering both system and user oriented pro-
tection approaches should be funded at about $15 million per year.
—Phases I and II of the DUCKPINS cable program should be 
completed as soon as possible and no later than in 1978. This program 
should be funded at a level of about $4 million per year.
—DOD should have an option of selectively installing ESVN sys-
tems if a high priority requirements can be validated.
4. A special interagency National Telecommunications Protection 
Board should be established under the NSC Special Coordination Com-
mittee to review, assess and insure implementation of effective protec-
tion techniques for the government and maximum assistance to the 
private sector to enhance its protection from interception. The Director, 
Office of Science and Technology Policy should chair the Board and 
head this program with the assistance of the Secretary of Commerce. 
At the request of DOD, the specific longer term functions of the Board 
will be given further review by the SCC, but its most immediate tasks 
should be the following:
—Develop a possible program for active interference, including 
the technical approach, cost and political and intelligence implications 
for consideration by the SCC.
—Determine the specific questions Stan Turner should address in 
the estimate of the Soviet intercept threat.
—Define subcategories of national interest information and estab-
lish standards for protecting those categories determined to be signifi-
cant (this should go along with decisions in PRM–29).3
3 Reference is to PRM/NSC–29, which Carter signed on June 1. The Presidential 
Review Memorandum called for a new Executive Order to replace Executive Order 
11652 governing the handling and declassification of national security information and 
material.
