78 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI meeting and an NSC meeting on CW in mid-June; at that time we will consider both the results of the defense strategy review on chemical weapons and the various arms control tasks set forth in NSR-14. We will deal with the conventional arms control in a similar fashion; although the paper is decent in this area, there is additional tasking from the Deputies Committee in NSR-14, and the subject, therefore, is not yet ready for senior-­level discussion. We believe that the remaining four questions offer more than ample scope for discussion, even though the paper, in part out of a concern over leaks, poses no specific issues for decision. We recommend you use the Deputies meeting (and we will recommend that Brent and the President use the NSC meeting) for an exceptionally frank, heart-­to-­heart discussion of where we are going in START and Defense and Space. The meeting should not focus on details of our position; there will be dozens of meetings over the next two years to do that. Rather, this meeting must answer the fundamental question: “Is this a trip we want to take?” The Basic START Issues. With regard to the basic START position, the paper concludes: — Present START reductions don’t imperil military sufficiency although deeper reductions might. Likely START reductions probably don’t save money. Our goal should be stability and reduced risk of war, not reductions, per se.2 — Plausible alterations of weapon-­to-­target ratios (by which people usually mean the ratio of hard target kill RVs to U.S. silos) won’t solve the ICBM vulnerability problem. Downloading and deMIRVing may be good ideas on grounds of flexibility, but mobility and strategic defense are better approaches to solving the ICBM vulnerability problem.3 — START allows us to keep an adequate SSBN force.4 — We are right to encourage a shift to air breathing systems and to accept looser constraints on such systems. We shouldn’t include air defenses in START.5 We recommend you structure discussion as follows: — Summarize the above points and ask if there is agreement. — Ask specifically if the Deputies can agree that the basic START levels (6000 warheads, 4900 ballistic missile warheads, and 1600 delivery 2 Gates placed an asterisk beside this point, underlined “Our goal should be stability and reduced risk of war, not reductions,” drew an additional line under “reductions,” placed two vertical lines in the right-­hand margin and wrote “abandon obj. of elim of nuc. weapons” in the left-­hand margin. 3 Gates placed an asterisk beside this point, underlined “mobility” and “strategic defense are,” and wrote “not taking down SS-18s or de-MIRVing/T.Weight/MIRV limits not way to deal w. ICBM survival” in the right-­hand margin. 4 Gates underlined “START allows us to keep an adequate SSBN force.” 5 Gates placed an asterisk beside this point, underlined “to air breathing systems,” and drew a downward diagonal arrow pointing to this paragraph in the left-­hand margin.
