Comprehensive Test Ban
401
study it carefully. The Soviet Delegation at the negotiations which re-
sume in Geneva on October 3 will have the necessary and proper in-
structions. He agreed that conclusion of a treaty would be of great po-
litical importance worldwide, but at this time he would not associate
himself with what the Secretary had said about a treaty without an ex-
ception for peaceful explosions. In any case, he would suggest that we
continue negotiating and seek agreement in this field.
Gromyko thanked the Secretary for the discussions they had held
during this current meeting, and also for the talk with President Carter.
He was not saying good-bye because he and the Secretary had agreed
to meet in New York City at least once next week, perhaps even twice,
but in any case on September 30 at 9:30 a.m.
The Secretary wanted to reciprocate to the Foreign Minister on be-
half of himself and his colleagues. It had been a great pleasure to have
Mr. Gromyko here in Washington.
169.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 1, 1977
SUBJECT
CTB Negotiations
It was reported in paragraph 31 of reporting cable SECTO 10014,
dated September 30,2 that Cy Vance discussed the CTB with Secretary
General Waldheim. My understanding is that Cy indicated US will-
ingness to entertain an exception for Soviet PNEs to the CTB. The cri-
teria had to do with a limited number/purpose of projects, and a lim-
ited number of explosions.
I want to express my grave concerns about such an approach. Such
explosions, even in limited numbers, and particularly if protracted over
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 6, Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB), 3–12/77. Secret; Personal Close Hold.
2 Telegram Secto 10014 from the Secretary’s Delegation in New York, September 30,
reported that Vance told UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim that the United States
was “not totally inflexible” about the Soviet Union’s “demand” that PNEs be excluded
from a CTB. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770357–0177)
