1062
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
volvement of all agencies with related concerns and potentials for con-
tribution. Ad hoc groups, such as the newly formed African Regional
Health Strategy Group, can best serve immediate needs.
Other Coordinating Groups. Three existing coordinating groups
with health related concerns are: (1) the DCC; (2) the NSC Ad Hoc Pop-
ulation Committee; and (3) Agriculture’s Food Policy Group. The foci
and functions of these groups partially involve international health
matters. However, there are significant aspects of international health
which are not fully covered by any one of them alone or even all three
taken together.
Any international health coordinating body will be concerned
with improving health in the developing, as well as the developed
world. The NSC and Agriculture groups do not address international
health concerns broadly. The DCC does not address international
health concerns of the United States and the rest of the developed
world, nor does its mandate include advancing health science. Good
coordination would be made more difficult to achieve, therefore, by
parcelling out international health policy and program responsibility to
these groups. Whereas population, hunger and perhaps other basic
human needs activities might be most appropriately connected to one
of the three groups, in the case of international health, it seems more
appropriate to consider whether coordination should be separate from
these three groups with significant liaison on respectively appropriate
matters.
The most difficult question in this regard concerns the newly es-
tablished role of the AID Administrator as the President’s and the Sec-
retary of State’s principal advisor on development programs and
policy,2 and as the Executive Branch’s principal spokesperson to the
Congress on development assistance. In this role, the Administrator
will chair an expanded Development Coordinating Committee3 (DCC).
The DCC will deal with issues of bilateral aid, multilateral aid, P.L. 480,
aid for certain international organizations, and legislative strategy and
tactics. DCC subcommittees have been established on: bilateral aid
loans and grants; multilateral aid including IFI and IFAD loans (but a
2 Within the Department of State, the Under Secretary for Economic Affairs remains
the Secretary’s principal advisor for all foreign economic policy. [Footnote in the
original.]
3 DCC membership: Agriculture, AID, Commerce, Export-Import Bank, Labor,
NSC, OMB, Overseas Private Investment Council, Special Representative for Trade Ne-
gotiations, State and Treasury. (Note the absence of HEW, ACTION, DoD and EPA.) [Fo-
otnote in the original.]
