432
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
II. Your Overview
1. Basic Message: Your basic commitment is to the shaping of a
more just and equitable international system for a world that has now
become more politically awakened (and you might mention the emo-
tional outpouring of the Panamanians as an example)2 and that thus
cannot be confined to a system dominated exclusively by the devel-
oped countries. The world now includes more than 150 nation-states,
and their aspirations as well as participation require a wider frame-
work. Unlike the years 1945–1950, when America played a creative role
in shaping the post-World War II international system, this calls not for
a predominantly American response but for more subtle inspiration
and cooperative leadership on a broader front.
In effect, we are seeking to shape a cooperative global community,
while attempting to dampen the more traditional East-West conflicts
and to resolve the novel global and North-South issues.
2. Your Ten Key Goals—and Our Performance
Early in 1977 you set yourself ten key goals as a way of achieving a
more equitable international system.3
Your Key Goals
Response
1. To engage Western Europe,
The first Summit was quite
Japan, and other advanced de-
useful; the second is about to be
mocracies in closer political co-
held;4 more frequent and more
operation, thereby also providing
direct personal top-level contacts
wider macroeconomic coordina-
and consultations than ever be-
tion among them.
fore (including phone calls).
2. To weave a worldwide web of
Your two trips were designed to
bilateral, political, and economic
advance that goal;5 the Vice Pres-
cooperation with the new
ident has recently been to In-
emerging regional powers,
donesia; U.S. has better relations
thereby extending our earlier re-
with all of those mentioned than
liance on Atlanticism to include
at any previous point.
such newly influential countries
as Venezuela, Brazil, Nigeria,
Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, In-
donesia in a wider pattern of in-
ternational cooperation.
2 Presumable reference to the reception the President received in Panama. Carter
traveled to Panama June 16–17 in order to sign the protocol confirming the exchange of
documents ratifying the Panama Canal treaties.
3 See Document 36.
4 See Document 92.
5 See Document 60 and footnote 4, Document 74.
