National Security Policy 561 control over most of the machinery formerly under the MTS may also prove of some significance in increasing output by eliminating con­ flict between the collective farm chairman and the MTS director con­ cerning day-­to-­day operations of the collective farm. Proposals have also been advanced recently to introduce more rigorous cost account­ ability on the collective farms. If carried out, these procedures, taken in conjunction with the gradual introduction of a guaranteed cash wage, will increase the efficiency of collective farm operations, and perhaps permit the release of farm workers to industry. Moreover, the improvement in peasant attitudes brought about by the abolition of the MTS and the effect of 1958 reforms in raising the income of the poorer collective farms will probably have a positive effect on peasant work habits. 67. The Seven-Year Plan carries an unrealistic goal of a 70 percent increase in agriculture. We believe that the actual increase will be less than half of this. Dissatisfaction with the progress of agriculture is likely to lead the regime to continue its experimenting in the agricul­ tural field. Trends in Consumption 68. The Soviet consumer will not enjoy as rapid an increase in over-­ all consumption during the next seven years as he did during the last seven, when per capita consumption increased by approximately 40 per­ cent. This will be true despite recently announced programs to provide more meat, milk, housing, furniture, and clothing. But per capita con­ sumption is still likely to be as much as one-­third higher in 1965 than it was in 1957, with some qualitative improvement in consumer goods. However, except probably in milk production, the USSR will not succeed in its announced effort to match US per capita consumption of meat and other selected food products in the time periods set. Even if it is able to do so eventually, other areas of consumption, such as consumer durable goods and housing, will continue to lag far behind US levels. 69. The increase in the level of consumption anticipated in this estimate should be adequate to keep the population reasonably well satisfied with the regime’s efforts to provide higher living standards. The regime will continue to exploit the propaganda value of rising consumption levels. The dollar value of Soviet total consumption is less than one-third that of US consumption, and on a per capita basis only about one-­fourth that of the US. The Soviet consumer occupies only about one-­fifth the housing space enjoyed by the US consumer. Khrushchev’s much publicized housing program will con­ tinue to receive a rising share of investment for the next two years and then may level off at a volume of construction which should
