a consular officer at trials shall be made with all possible regard for the consular dignity and the duties of the office, it would seem that he is adequately safeguarded. This Government considers that the right to demand the attendance of a consular officer as a witness in criminal cases should relate to cases of misdemeanors as well as of felonies. It has no desire to have its consular officers in Austria exempt from attendance as witnesses in cases of misdemeanors when the ends of justice would be advanced by their attendance; and under the treaties concluded by this country with Germany, Hungary, and Estonia consuls do not enjoy such an exemption. This Government, therefore, does not agree to the substitution of the words “In cases of felonies” for “In criminal cases” at the beginning of the second paragraph of Article XV. It would be agreeable to this Government to consider a suggestion as to the German text which would correspond exactly to the expression “In criminal cases”, the latter being understood to include misdemeanors as well as felonies. The provision as contained in the original draft submitted to Austria was adopted in the treaties of the United States with Germany, (Article XVIII), Hungary (Article XV), and Estonia (Article XVII). In view of the foregoing explanation it is hoped that the Austrian Government will find the paragraph in its original form acceptable. Article XVI. Exemptions of consular officers and government property from taxation The first paragraph of this Article provides that consular officers including employees in a consulate nationals of the State by which they are appointed other than those engaged in private occupations for gain within the State where they exercise their functions shall be exempt from taxation with certain exceptions. The provision of the Article establishing exceptions from the exemption, namely the taxation to which a consular officer is subject, reads as follows: “… except taxes levied on account of the possession or ownership of immovable property situated in, or income derived from property of any kind situated or belonging within the territories of the State within which they exercise their functions.”
