102
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Brit may have some understanding with certain other FARS tribes, in-
cluding the Mamassani, the Arabs, and segments of the Boir Ahmadi.
As was pointed out in Embtel 2449, Brit Intelligence, including
AIOC, has always kept in close touch with tribal leaders near oil fields
and at times has subsidized them so as to enlist their assistance in main-
taining security. At present, in view of recent strikes and tense situation
in oil area, friendship of tribal chiefs in area is important.
Altho we have been unable to obtain specific info, possibility that
Brit may be negotiating with southern tribes should not (rpt not) be dis-
missed. It seems only logical that Brit shld take such action in effort to
maintain order in south if (A) for one reason or another auth of Central
Govt breaks down or (B) if Brit lives in oil area are threatened by mob
action and violence and Mosadeq Govt appears unable control situa-
tion. Also there is always possibility that Brit may attempt to use
southern tribal uprisings as counter pressure on govt (as in 1946),
shld Sov attempt seize control Tehran Govt by infiltration or actual
invasion.
Notwithstanding fact certain tribal grps in south may be to degree
controlled by Brit, it is doubtful whether Brit cld muster sufficient tribal
strength without introducing Brit troops to oppose forceful action by
Iran Govt. This assumes, of course, Iranian troops in south wld remain
loyal to Central Govt. As was reported in Embtel 2847, May 18, PriMin
Mosadeq has already changed a number of officials, including military
commanders, on grounds that those transferred were too much under
Brit influence.4
Matter will be followed closely and views of Isfahan will be re-
quested by mail, there being no code facilities between Tehran and Is-
fahan. CAS concurs.
Grady
4 In telegram 2847 from Tehran, May 18, Grady also reported that these “substantial
changes personnel holding govt posts” were “particularly in south Iran.” (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/5–1851)
