144 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI assurance on testing in space and proposed Predictability Protocol notification measures. (S) It is not clear at this time how long and to what extent additional, useful Brilliant Pebbles testing can be carried out after mid-FY92 consistent with the restrictive interpretation, or for that matter the broad interpretation. However, development and testing of Brilliant Pebbles, if they are regarded as “based on other physical principles,” would probably proceed more usefully under the broad interpretation after mid-FY92. If the broad interpretation applies to Brilliant Pebbles, system development and testing could proceed unrestricted to the point where an ABM system is “created,” resulting in a faster rate of growth in confidence in technical feasibility than a program conducted under the restrictive interpretation. (S) If the concept for a Brilliant Pebbles system is not determined to be “based on other physical principles,” it could not be developed and tested under the broad interpretation. We would then have to test under the restrictive interpretation. While this would still permit us to increase confidence in the feasibility of the technology, the rate of increase, and perhaps its absolute value would be less than could be achieved under a broad interpretation program. (S) N.B. No determination has yet been made as to whether an ABM system incorporating the Brilliant Pebbles concept would be an ABM system “based on other physical principles.” This issue includes considerations beyond those associated with the issue of whether kinetic energy ABM weapons are based on OPP. (S) Options. Options for assuring U.S. testing rights during a period of non-­withdrawal from the ABM Treaty are intended to insure U.S. legal rights and political support to conduct testing necessary to establish the feasibility of effective strategic defenses and to avoid the need to withdraw from the ABM Treaty in order to complete such testing. (S) 1. Affirm the current position. This option would entail continuing to use the current U.S. working paper when we return to negotiations in Geneva. (S) Those who favor this option believe that the U.S. unilateral assurance and predictability protocol proposal would gain implicit Soviet acknowledgment of certain ABM Treaty testing rights during the non-­ withdrawal period, reduce treaty interpretation debates during and after ratification, provide a militarily meaningful distinction between permitted testing and prohibited deployment of OPP ABM systems in space, and satisfy stated Soviet concerns regarding that distinction. They argue further that the U.S. completed its Defense & Space position only late in Round X, and that we have not yet even had an opportunity to explain fully the position to the Soviets. (S)
