Negotiating Channels 355 promote. I suggested that he take the Iranian New Year (Now Ruz) on March 21 as a hypothetical starting point for such a movement and work backwards to see what steps would be required operationally to set such a process in motion. I suggested that Now Ruz would not be a bad name for such a political movement. He thought that was a good idea. This man is not an idle dreamer. He is a hardheaded, even ruthless, pragmatist. But what he is developing in a careful and systematic way is nothing less than a new structure of Iranian politics. In its breadth of vision, it is far more attractive than the traditional games being played by Bakhtiar, Oveissi and company. The bottom line, of course, is whether or not he can deliver. He has demonstrated convincingly that he has excellent connections with the various key opposition groups. He has personally provided us with the best contacts we have with Madani and Shariatmadari. I suspect that his list of 200 key individuals will be imaginative and useful. It is increasingly clear that he sees himself as the key element in preparing such a program, selling it to the various opposition groups, and organizing the new movement. In order to do so, he will have to come out of his closet of security and involve himself directly with the various political groups and leaders. He says that he has no ambition for political office and that he intends never to return to Iran. I take that with a large grain of salt. Even if he believes it now, the appeal to someone as dynamic as he is would become almost irresistible if such a movement caught fire. If and when he comes out of the closet and begins serious organizational efforts, he will increasingly come to rely on us for security and direct support. At this point, I see no reason not to encourage him to develop his ideas. The kind of list he proposes would in itself be invaluable for us. But he is a shrewd bargainer, and we must expect to start hearing more explicitly what the price will be for us. That moment may not be far away.
