1158 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement (4) The countervailing duty against Uruguayan wool tops, ever since its application in 1953, appears “in spirit” to have been discriminatory against Uruguay and against Uruguayan and United States companies and persons interested in the [illegible in the original] in Uruguayan wool tops. This discrimination “in spirit” arises from the fact that the U.S. is not applying a countervailing duty on any other product from any other country because of a subsidy resulting from the fixing of an exchange rate [illegible in the original] encourage and assist the exportation of a product. There are many governments and countries that maintain systems of multiple exchange rates which have the effect of encouraging or assisting in the exportation of certain products as commerce with other. In fact, it can be fairly stated that there are dozens or even hundreds of products being imported into the United States today which are [illegible in the original] in this way by officially established exchange rates of foreign countries. The singling out of Uruguayan wool tops for application of a countervailing duty [illegible in the original], in this sense, [illegible in the original] contrary to the spirit of the recognized principle in United States law that no person shall be denied “equal protection of the laws” as stated in the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution. This principle has been interpreted by the Supreme Court of the United States (Case of [illegible in the original] vs. Hoskins, see Enclosure [illegible in the original])6 to include “protection against unequal application of the [illegible in the original] practically to make unjust and illegal, discrimination between persons in similar circumstances.” This is a superfluous consideration if the countervailing duty should be removed for the reason that the “subsidy” which prompted it no longer exists; but this is a factor of significance in considering the understandable if legally illogical mental hazard that has deterred action to remove the countervailing duty. This hazard has [illegible in the original] apprehension we have felt that the Uruguayans may make further unpredictable changes in exchange rates that would again create a situation in which the exchange rate for exports of wool tops could be construed to be a “subsidy”. There is an ever-present possibility that the Uruguayans may make such changes in officially established exchange rates, and the Embassy frequently hears rumors that such changes will be made just as it heard rumors of many other possible economic measures. However, it is equally possible that—in the event of changes in officially established exchange rates—the relative situation of the exchange rate for exports of wool tops will not be sufficiently different from the average of other new rates to make the wool top rates a “subsidy” rate. (7) The United States Government has heretofore given the distinct impression to the Uruguayan Government that the United States 6 The enclosed memorandum, which described the case, is not printed.
