Negotiating Channels nians at the request of General Torrijos was worth while.4 I returned to Washington, was briefed by Henry Precht on the status of our negotiations with the Iranians through the Secretary General and prepared to take off for Panama City to see Torrijos. I called Torrijos to tell him of my plans but was informed that after a night’s sleep and some additional thought, the General was worried that my coming to Panama might be noticed and alarm the Shah as there was a large press contingent covering the country since the Shah’s arrival there. For that reason he said that it would be better for him to meet me halfway or to send a “personal representative” who could convey to me “the very important message” that had prompted his Friday night call to me. He said that he was also worried that his absence from the country might be noticed so that he was generally inclined not to go himself. We agreed to meet at 3 o’clock at Homestead AFB. I got there by three, checked in with Warren to see if there were any new developments, made a few calls to Iowa and spent some time reviewing the materials that the State Department had given me. The Panamanians arrived about 4:30. There were three persons in the group: my old friend Gabriel Lewis, the Panamanian Ambassador to the United Nations5 who hardly spoke during the three hours we spent together and Marcel Saliman (sp?) who was the person who did most of the talking. At the outset Gabriel pulled me aside and said that Marcel was very close to Torrijos and very shrewd. Gabriel said that while he is “too much of a leftist for me” that he had great credibility among the students in Panama and had been instrumental in representing Torrijos with the Sandinistas. I stated at the outset the posture that I was in—that I had conveyed to the President the request of General Torrijos that I fly immediately to Panama to receive some news about the hostages. That because of the President’s friendship and respect for General Torrijos, he was anxious to honor his request that I come to Panama. I also told them that I was involved only on the periphery of our foreign policy process as related to Iran and the hostages and had been even less involved in recent weeks due to the pressures of the campaign. I told them that I was authorized by the President only to listen and report back immediately the information that they had and that I could neither speak for the President nor make decisions. I told them that I intended to listen, ask questions and take very careful notes, and that the essence of what was said would be passed on directly to the three of you. 4 Saturday, January 12. 5 Jorge Illueca.
