788
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
aspects of North-South relations seen in a 4–8 year time frame. The
Group will use the basic analysis of the EPG as a starting point in re-
lating the economic to the political aspects of North-South relations.
The Working Group will be chaired by Roger Hansen of the NSC. I
would appreciate your designation of a representative with whom Mr.
Hansen can consult in constituting the Working Group, bearing in
mind that the task of the group is to examine the essentially political
and overall diplomatic aspects of the North-South relationships, not to
repeat the economic exercise already performed by the EPG.4
Zbigniew Brzezinski
4 Hansen noted that, in an earlier draft of this memorandum, his intention in the
final paragraph was “to find wording which will give us the flexibility to make sure that
we get the people we want on the Group, not simply those assigned by ‘the system’.”
Hansen suggested that “[i]f the NSC retains the right to ‘negotiate’ on the constitution of
the Group it should be much easier (1) to limit its size (some agencies may not even insist
on being represented, and I would hope they don’t), and (2) to assure the presence of the
people most qualified to participate fruitfully in this kind of exercise.” The goal, sug-
gested Hansen, was “to produce a document with some provocative and novel options
which are still ‘sound’ enough to assure the exercise a serious hearing.” (Memorandum
from Hansen to Brzezinski and Aaron, undated; Carter Library, National Security
Council, Institutional Files, Box 26, PRM–08 1 of 3 [2])
262.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
President Carter1
Washington, April 1, 1977
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Reuss Amendment.]
The Reuss Amendment. You raised a question about the implications
of the Reuss Amendment (attached)2 to authorizing legislation for the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 18, Evening Reports (State): 4/77. Secret. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “To Cy,
cc Zbig. J.C.”
2 Not attached. The Reuss Amendment (H.R. 5262), which was to apply to U.S. par-
ticipation in international financial institutions, directed “that the United States, ‘in con-
nection with its voice and vote, shall advance the cause of human rights, including by
seeking to channel assistance toward countries other than those whose governments en-
gage in a consistent pattern of gross violation of internationally recognized human rights,
such as torture, or cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment.’” (Bernard
Gwertzman, “U.S. Backs a Move For a Rights Curb On Overseas Loans,” The New York
Times, March 24, 1977, p. A5)
