6. I call the Department’s attention to the statement by Waterlow in the third sentence of the telegram from Perkins at the London Embassy, 195, July 1, 1 p.m.75 I received this telegram after my conversation with the Japanese Minister. 7. For a long time I have believed, as previously reported, that considering the situation with respect to Japan and the Soviet Union in Manchuria, the menace in Mongolia from the Soviet Union, and the connections which Feng Yu-hsiang76 undoubtedly has with the Soviets and in general with the radical elements in China, the Japanese must sooner or later decide whether to join an Asiatic block with China and the Soviet Union or to remain, so to speak, a Western power. The proposal reported herein may well be evidence of a decision by Japan to remain in the concert of Western powers if she can be assured of a well-defined understanding with America and Great Britain for cooperation in China. Japan must also realize the advantage of such cooperation in view of the agitation against the Japanese which is now rather widespread in China. The Japanese may have concluded that the American Government is about to assume a more decided leadership or a certain independence of action in China showing more willingness than the other interested powers to respond sympathetically to China’s aspirations for readjustments in her foreign relations. Japan may therefore wish to align herself with America both to keep us from winning undue prestige from such an independent position and to benefit by being in some way associated with America in the pursuance of a policy of this kind which would be popular with the Chinese. 8. Aside from the angles mentioned above with respect to such an understanding between the American, British, and Japanese Governments as is contemplated, I will only suggest a fact which may be worthy of serious consideration, which is that by aligning ourselves in such an association we would be taking an important step toward the adjustment of our relations with Japan as regards the recent immigration-law difficulties and, of even more importance, that it would be a move toward detaching Japan, at least for a time, from a pan-Asiatic alliance with the Soviet Union. 9. I am mailing a copy of this telegram to Tokyo. MAYER 74 See telegrams No. 472, Dec. 4, 1924, and No. 478, Dec. 9, from the Chargé in China, and telegram No. 302, Dec. 5, to the Chargé in China, Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 431, 439 , and 434 . 75 Post, p. 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]. 76 Commander in chief of the People’s Army and director general of the Northwest Frontier Defence.
