984 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 385. Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 PA 80–10355 Washington, August 1980 The NPT Review Conference: A Preview (U) Key Judgments The second nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) review conference will open on 11 August in Geneva. The prospects for formal reaffirmation of the value of the treaty are clouded by a number of recent international developments: • The interruption in progress toward major arms control agreements because of the sharp increase in East-West tensions. • The aggravation of the controversy over assured access to nuclear material and technology for peaceful purposes, which has resulted from the efforts of the United States and other major nuclear suppliers to establish more rigorous export criteria. • The success of some nonnuclear weapons states (such as Pakistan and South Africa) in acquiring or developing militarily sensitive nuclear technology free of international controls. (U) These and other related developments, such as renewed concern about India’s nuclear intentions, will be cited by many NPT signatories at Geneva as evidence that the delicate balance that the treaty seeks to establish between the rights and obligations of nuclear and nonnuclear weapons states is deteriorating. Most criticism of the nuclear weapons states will focus on their failure to live up to their obligations under Article VI2 to halt and reverse the nuclear arms race, and under Article IV3 to facilitate, together with other major nuclear suppliers, the fullest possible exchange of nuclear materials and technology for peaceful purposes. (U) All the nuclear weapons states party to the treaty—the United States, the USSR, and Great Britain—are vulnerable to criticism on the first count. The Soviets, however, have sought to maneuver themselves into a position of comparative advantage with respect to each of the major security issues that are likely to be raised: SALT II, the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and the question of negative security assur- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 116, SCC 137, 9/4/80, TNF and NPT. Secret; Noforn; NoContract; Orcon. 2 See footnote 5, Document 211. 3 See Document 318.
