1108 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX safi, McHenry also informed the Israeli Deputy Permanent Representative to the United Nations of his intention to vote for the resolution. (Telegram 803 from USUN, March 1; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800106–0938) The text of the resolution as unanimously passed was conveyed to Washington in telegram 801 from USUN, March 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800107–1249) For the text of McHenry’s statement to the Security Council, see telegram 802 from USUN, March 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800107–1263) The U.S. vote, however, drew sharp criticism from Israel and Jewish groups in the United States. When informed of this by White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan and Vice President Walter Mondale, Carter recorded in his diary, the President “told them that the Jerusalem references had been deleted. They showed me a copy of the resolution as it was passed, with ‘Jerusalem’ being mentioned six times. I couldn’t believe it. I called Cy in Chicago. He said he thought ‘Jerusalem’ had been deleted.” Carter continued, “My understanding with [Israeli Prime Minister Menachem] Begin was that we would let the issue of Jerusalem and the issue of dismantling existing settlements be resolved in the peace negotiations. That’s why the error was serious.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 406) On March 3, Carter issued a public statement clarifying the U.S. vote, stating that it “does not represent a change in our position regarding the Israeli settlements in the occupied areas nor regarding the status of Jerusalem.” Carter explained: “While our opposition to the establishment of the Israeli settlements is longstanding and well-known, we made strenuous efforts to eliminate the language with reference to the dismantling of settlements in the resolution. This call for dismantling was neither proper nor practical. We believe that the future disposition of existing settlements must be determined during the current Autonomy Negotiations. “As to Jerusalem, we strongly believe that Jerusalem should be undivided, with free access to the holy places for all faiths, and that its status should be determined in the negotiations for a comprehensive peace settlement. “The United States vote in the United Nations was approved with the understanding that all references to Jerusalem would be deleted. The failure to communicate this clearly resulted in a vote in favor of the resolution rather than abstention. “I want to reiterate in the most unequivocal terms that in the Autonomy Negotiations and in other fora, the United States will neither support nor accept any position that might jeopardize Israel’s vital security interests. Our commitment to Israel’s security and well-being remains unqualified and unshakable.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81,
