1108
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
safi, McHenry also informed the Israeli Deputy Permanent Representa-
tive to the United Nations of his intention to vote for the resolution.
(Telegram 803 from USUN, March 1; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800106–0938) The text of the resolution as unani-
mously passed was conveyed to Washington in telegram 801 from
USUN, March 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800107–1249) For the text of McHenry’s statement to the Security
Council, see telegram 802 from USUN, March 1. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800107–1263)
The U.S. vote, however, drew sharp criticism from Israel and
Jewish groups in the United States. When informed of this by White
House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan and Vice President Walter Mon-
dale, Carter recorded in his diary, the President “told them that the Je-
rusalem references had been deleted. They showed me a copy of the
resolution as it was passed, with ‘Jerusalem’ being mentioned six times.
I couldn’t believe it. I called Cy in Chicago. He said he thought ‘Jeru-
salem’ had been deleted.” Carter continued, “My understanding with
[Israeli Prime Minister Menachem] Begin was that we would let the
issue of Jerusalem and the issue of dismantling existing settlements be
resolved in the peace negotiations. That’s why the error was serious.”
(Carter, White House Diary, page 406)
On March 3, Carter issued a public statement clarifying the U.S.
vote, stating that it “does not represent a change in our position re-
garding the Israeli settlements in the occupied areas nor regarding the
status of Jerusalem.” Carter explained: “While our opposition to the es-
tablishment of the Israeli settlements is longstanding and well-known,
we made strenuous efforts to eliminate the language with reference to
the dismantling of settlements in the resolution. This call for disman-
tling was neither proper nor practical. We believe that the future dis-
position of existing settlements must be determined during the current
Autonomy Negotiations.
“As to Jerusalem, we strongly believe that Jerusalem should be un-
divided, with free access to the holy places for all faiths, and that its
status should be determined in the negotiations for a comprehensive
peace settlement.
“The United States vote in the United Nations was approved with
the understanding that all references to Jerusalem would be deleted.
The failure to communicate this clearly resulted in a vote in favor of the
resolution rather than abstention.
“I want to reiterate in the most unequivocal terms that in the Au-
tonomy Negotiations and in other fora, the United States will neither
support nor accept any position that might jeopardize Israel’s vital se-
curity interests. Our commitment to Israel’s security and well-being re-
mains unqualified and unshakable.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81,
