Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
735
C. Interim Restraint.
—Both sides agreed that, in advance of final agreement on criteria,
it would be possible to reach interim restraint agreements for specific
regions. What form such agreements might take is not yet determined
and will depend in large part on attitudes of recipient countries.
D. Role of Other Suppliers and Recipients.
—Both sides recognize that successful effort to develop arms re-
straint regimes will require the active participation of not only other
suppliers, but also recipients. They are hopeful that suppliers and re-
cipients will find it in their interests to support arms transfer restraint.
—We have made clear to the Soviets that we believe legitimate de-
fense requirements of recipients must continue to be met.
E. Assessment and Future Prospects.
—There was considerable movement toward reaching a common
understanding of the general criteria (or guidelines) for US-Soviet re-
straint in arms transfers.
—The Soviets appear to take these talks seriously.
—The next round—tentatively planned for December to enable
both sides to undertake thorough preparations—will provide the test
of prospects for near-term success.
4. FYI: Venezuela is currently exploring how and when to convene
foreign ministers meeting referred to in June 22, 1978 restatement of
Ayacucho Declaration. Mexico invited all Latin American govern-
ments, except Chile, to a meeting August 21–24 in Mexico City. Mex-
ican objectives in convening meeting were apparently three-fold:
—To gain support for Mexican position on prohibition of certain
types of weapons in UN Geneva Conference on Laws of War;
—To reach agreement on establishment of Latin American com-
mission to make recommendations on guidelines for regional restraint
to a 1979 foreign ministers meeting;
—To make joint appeal to suppliers to abide by regional desire for
restraint.
US position is to support both initiatives on the basis that they
have a common goal, that the process of reaching that goal will be long-
term, and that developing momentum and sustaining that process will
require the active commitment of many. We know that attitudes among
host governments are wide-ranging and hope your debriefing on Hel-
sinki talks will serve indirectly to elicit comments.
End FYI.
Christopher
