Special Session on Disarmament
1159
ment would appreciate post’s analysis of host country outlook on
SSOD and possible means of dealing with it. End summary.
4. Background: Dissatisfaction with the slow progress on multi-
lateral disarmament issues among many of the states not aligned with
the US or the Soviets has resulted in pressures for giving greater mo-
mentum to disarmament through a meeting in which all states could
participate. In August, 1976, the Conference of Heads of States of Gov-
ernments of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Colombo, discussed the
issue in its political declaration and adopted a resolution calling on the
UN to convene a Special Session of the GA to review the problem of
disarmament and to promote a program of priorities and measures in
the disarmament field.3
5. On December 14, 1976,4 the 31st UNGA adopted by consensus a
resolution calling for a Special Session of the General Assembly de-
voted to disarmament to be held in New York in May–June, 1978. The
resolution established a Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) with the
mandate of examining all relevant questions relating to the Special Ses-
sion. The PrepCom is scheduled to meet at UN Headquarters, New
York, March 7–11, May 9–20, and September 6–9, 1977. March confer-
ence will be organizational in nature and deal with procedural issues;
May conference will develop the SSOD agenda; the September prepa-
ratory conference will prepare the draft of SSOD resolution for presen-
tation to the 32nd General Assembly.
6. Member states have been asked to submit country views on the
SSOD to SYG Waldheim by April 15, 1977.
7. Members of the PrepCom are:
—Western European and others: US, UK, France, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Canada, FRG, Italy, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Turkey;
—Asian: Bangladesh, Cyprus, India, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Malaysia,
Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka;
—African: Algeria, Benin, Burundi, Egypt, Ethiopia, Liberia,
Libya, Mauritius, Morocco, Nigeria, Sudan, Tunisia, Zaire, Zambia;
—East European: (proposed) Bulgaria, GDR, Hungary, Poland,
Romania, USSR, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia;
—Latin: Argentina, Bahamas, Brazil, Colombia, Cuba, Guyana,
Mexico, Panama, Peru, Venezuela.
8. US attitude: In the past we have opposed proposals for an SSOD.
We were skeptical that an SSOD could have any meaningful results, ar-
guing that it would invite rhetorical posturing and unrealistic disarma-
ment proposals, intrude on the activities of the CCD, and inject extra-
3 “Resolution of the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-
Aligned Countries: Disarmament, August 19, 1976,” is ibid., pp. 566–567.
4 The date in the telegram is in error; the Resolution is actually dated December 21.
