878  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Bottom line:	
No give on substance. Offer a written statement 
that complements the Hurd letter to Shev,17 and 
offer a solution on overseas basing as a sweetener.
Tactics:
 Remind him that we have already done a lot.
 Play our move on withdrawal from Holy Loch and ban on over-
seas basing.
 Make a US statement to complement the Hurd statement; if nec-
essary offer to give it to him in writing.
 Press to close, tell him agreement on non-­circumvention could 
open up flexibility on Backfire and heavy ICBM flight testing.
Talking points:
 We need to settle this.18
 You know we cannot do anything that would suggest that we are 
prepared to subordinate to START a long-­standing relationship with a 
major ally.19
 You say you have political concerns, and we have a lot to meet 
your political concerns, more than we have ever done before.20
—Agreed to ban international obligations or undertakings which 
would conflict with the treaty.21
—Agreed to ban transfer of strategic offensive arms limited by the 
treaty, except for existing patterns of cooperation.22
—Stated that we have no pattern of cooperation with allies other 
than the UK involving transfer of strategic offensive arms limited by 
the treaty.23
—Foreign Secretary Hurd has given you a written statement mak-
ing clear that the British force will remain a minimum one, in no way 
comparable to the nuclear forces of the Soviet Union or the US.24
17 In telegram 220056 from London, July 6, the Embassy transmitted a June 29 draft 
of Hurd’s letter to Shevardnadze reiterating the United Kingdom’s legal and sovereign 
right to maintain an independent deterrent, that it supported a START agreement, but 
that “your negotiations with the United States would need to go well beyond the reduc-
tions envisaged as the original objective of the START negotiation process before the 
UK could consider its involvement.” (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, 
Electronic Telegrams, D9000617-0191)
18 Baker drew a short vertical beside this point and numbered it 1.
19 Baker drew a short vertical line beside this point, numbered it 2, and drew an 
asterisk.
20 Baker underlined “political concerns,” “we have done a lot,” and numbered this 
point 3.
21 Baker drew a short vertical line beside this point and numbered it “i.”
22 Baker drew a short vertical line beside this point and numbered it “ii.”
23 Baker drew a short vertical line beside this point and numbered it “iii.”
24 Baker drew a short vertical line beside this point and numbered it “iv.”
