Peru  1083
3. Under these circumstances it is likely that the Prado government 
will serve out its term and that there will be reasonably free elections 
and an orderly transfer of power in 1962. All the presidential candi-
dates in such an election will be likely to be members of the oligarchy, 
but the candidate supported by APRA will almost certainly be elected. 
(Paras. 33–34)
4. If, on the other hand, Beltrán’s program should fail, he would 
probably resign, and another serious effort to curb inflation and to deal 
with long-­range problems would be unlikely prior to the elections. 
Under these circumstances, Prado would have to rely more heavily on 
military support to serve out his term. Should there be severe and per-
sistent economic difficulties, the outcome would probably be a return 
to at least provisional military rule. (Paras. 35–36)
5. Even if the Beltrán program succeeds, it will only provide a basis 
for long run development measures. In the long run the dominant posi-
tion of the politico-­military elite will probably come under increasing 
attack from the lower classes. If basic measures for economic devel-
opment and accommodation to popular pressures are delayed indefi-
nitely, it is probable that violent social revolution will eventually take 
place. (Para. 38)
6. Since 1956 the Communist Party in Peru has grown in mem-
bership and in influence in student and labor organizations, espe-
cially in the south (Cuzco and Arequipa). During the next few years 
the Communists are likely to play an influential but not decisive role. 
However, the Communists are still far weaker than APRA in strength 
and influence, and the latter will remain the more effective competitor 
for mass support. (Paras. 17–18, 37)
DISCUSSION
I. Background
7. Peru is the fourth largest country in Latin America in area and 
the fifth largest in population. Its area is about twice that of Texas and its 
population of about 10.5 million is increasing at a rate of about two and 
one-­half percent a year. Over half of that population is Indian, making 
Peru one of the three states of South America which is predominantly 
Indian. Over half of its people are illiterate—­most of these being Indian.
8. Peru is characterized by sharp geographical, economic, and eth-
nic contrasts. Along the narrow coastal plain, and particularly in the 
Lima-Callao area, a relatively modern, predominantly Hispanic soci-
ety of commercial agriculture, petroleum production, manufacturing 
and trade has developed. With about a quarter of the population, this 
area accounts for slightly over half Peru’s GNP. In contrast, the two 
other major divisions of the country, with their predominantly Indian 
population, are largely outside the modern society. Although the Sierra
