March 27–December 31, 1979
975
seek an Israeli commitment not only to refrain from its own attacks but
also to assure certain actions by the Lebanese militia forces under
Haddad in the southern Lebanese buffer area.
6. Risks and Pitfalls. Achieving the objectives of this plan will be ex-
tremely difficult, and some may be impossible in the end. A particu-
larly difficult handicap is that the PLO does not control certain radical
Palestinian and Lebanese leftist groups and may not agree to do so
through the use of its enforcement apparatus unless it has been given
major incentives (e.g., increased international respectability and con-
tacts). A major terrorist incident in Israel could undo totally at any mo-
ment what we may have accomplished in the meantime. We will have
to monitor very carefully the timing and execution of our various steps
so that we do not damage the autonomy negotiations or undermine Is-
raeli confidence in our intentions. Soviet involvement could stimulate
Israeli opposition to our overall strategy. As mentioned above, any di-
rect U.S. contact with the PLO could be particularly risky and it would
be even more of an issue if our contacts failed to bring about the objec-
tives we would be seeking.
On the other hand, because of inherent dangers in the Lebanese sit-
uation, we would in any event be trying to do many of the same things
contained in this plan of action, even if we stopped short of seeking our
most ambitious objectives. The high risk of a major Israeli-Syrian con-
flict and a possible Israeli long-term occupation of southern Lebanon—
if we did any less—makes a major and sustained effort essential.
7. Financial Implications. At an early point, we would have to ana-
lyze the financial implications for the U.S. and UN of an international
relief program and expanded capacities for UNIFIL.
LAUNCHING THE INITIATIVE
If you approve, we will be pursuing this initiative through the se-
quence of steps shown in Attachment 2.4
4 Attached but not printed.
