1979 643 trench. He noted that he had an exchange of correspondence with President Brezhnev discussing the question of verification of mobile systems, and that he had assured the President that the US would not deploy a system that was not verifiable.6 The President commented that he could not see how a 20-­mile trench that could be opened once per year after 10,000 tons of dirt had been scraped off, could lead to a verifiable system. In his view, a decision in favor of such a system would mean the end of SALT, though perhaps he did not understand everything. Secretary Brown responded that the President didn’t understand the concept. The President continued by noting the problems we had had with canvas covers over the MINUTEMAN silos, and the problems created as a result of darkness and cloud cover, and the possibility of openings for extra missiles along the sides of the trenches. Secretary Vance remarked that he could not recommend the non-­open trench, and then said that the open trench is what he had thought the group was talking about, a concept that he could recommend enthusiastically. (TS) Secretary Brown said that there is an open trench variant that could be put completely on DOD land. The concept would be to build the system and cover it later if expansion of the Soviet threat required it. The President responded that this sounds like a better idea. Secretary Brown then continued by noting that the covered trench is not as difficult to verify as you might think. The trench would be open to view for a long time during its construction process, which would presumably rule out the possibility of hidden chambers for extra missiles. The launchers that would be used are million-­pound vehicles that would only be assembled at the deployment site and the trench would be openable in as little as two hours in that enough of the section can be removed to guarantee that no more than one missile is inside it. He then remarked, however, that given the President’s and Secretary Vance’s perceptions, it looked like we would have to stay with an open trench although it would not be as good. The open trench would require large amounts of land to be fenced off and might have more impact on the environment, and it might not be as good militarily either. (TS) Secretary Vance then remarked that the Soviets might want to do the same thing. Secretary Brown responded that this question had been discussed before and that the real issue was whether we were deploying an unverifiable system. (TS) Frank Press commented that going to the open trench concept will lead to closing off 3–4000 sq. mi. of area that is currently open to public use. Secretary Brown responded that only the area immediately around each trench would have to be fenced off. (TS) 6 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 189.
