1955 217 10. I interjected he said 12 but actually Miner not able leave immediately. 11. Wang replied Miner being assisted every way possible by local authorities and speed settlement was influenced by his own efforts, he said if, as in Miner’s case, it were possible for them to give definite period of time they would do so but they could never give definite time regard­ ing all cases. He said their solution explicit and clear and no question of vagueness in terms they used. But if we insisted on definition of period of time, then it would not possible for talks to make further progress. 12. I asked if my understanding correct that his statement cases of Americans could “easily be solved” applied also to those accused of crimes. 13. Wang said in light of conditions mentioned before their cases also would easily be solved. 14. I said I also understood their cases would be expeditiously han­ dled in conformity with draft agreed announcement. He agreed. 15. I said I understood with respect to period of time it would not bear any relationship to time it had taken in past to solve some of these cases. 16. He answered that if agreement reached and relations between two countries improved and conduct of persons concerned was good then handling of their cases would be easier. 17. I then told him I could not consider his statements satisfactory to my government. Nevertheless in light of information given me this morning and relying on his statements remaining cases could be eas­ ily and expeditiously resolved, I was prepared recommend my gov­ ernment consider authorizing me agree on announcement along lines wording discussed at last meeting. I would do this also on understand­ ing when we reached agreement on wording announcement, which I hoped might be at next meeting, he would immediately inform me results reviews completed cases of persons accused having committed crimes. I then gave him text agreed announcement (Mytel 682) saying it introduced no new changes. 18. After studying text, Wang suggested use full term “USA” instead of US throughout. After my explanation normal practice use abbreviated form after first mention, he agreed. After first objecting to deletion phrase “the Government of” from introductory paragraph each section he finally accepted deletion. 19. Wang objected to inclusion phrase “in any such case” conclu­ sion para 2(A). He said very clear from context which cases referred to therefore unnecessary specify by adding phrase. 20. I asked if he agreed with sense of phrase but not the words. When he agreed, I said we would then like to keep words in order that English text be absolutely clear. He said he would consider.
