Arms Control and DisarmamentŌĆā 1231
fixed military installations, and numbers and locations of their military 
forces and designated armaments, including the means of delivering 
nuclear weapons located within an agreed inspection zone or zones, 
and within such additional area or areas as may be agreed.
I. Any initial system of inspection designed to safeguard against 
the possibility of surprise attack may be extended by agreement of all 
concerned to the end that ultimately the system will deal with the dan┬Ł
ger of surprise attack from anywhere.
VIII. The International Control Organization
A. All the obligations contained in the convention will be condi┬Ł
tional upon the continued operation of an effective international control 
and inspection system to verify compliance with its terms by all parties.
B. All the control and inspection services described in the conven┬Ł
tion and those which may be created in the course of its implementation 
will be within the framework of an International Control Organization 
established under the aegis of the Security Council, which will include, 
as its executive organ, a Board of Control in which the affirmative vote 
of the representatives of the Governments represented on the Sub-┬Ł
Committee and of such other parties as may be agreed will be required 
for important decisions.
C. All parties to the convention undertake to make available infor┬Ł
mation freely and currently to the Board of Control to assist it in verify┬Ł
ing compliance with the obligations of the convention and in categories 
which will be set forth in an annex to it.
D. The functions of the International Control Organization will be 
expanded by agreement between the parties concerned as the measures 
provided for in the convention are progressively applied.
E. Other matters relating to the Organization will be defined in 
annexes to the convention. These matters will include the duties which 
the Organization is to carry out, the method by which it shall function, 
its composition, its relationship to the General Assembly and the Secu┬Ł
rity Council of the United Nations, its voting procedures, its working 
conditions, jurisdiction, immunities, and prerogatives.
IX. Movement of Armaments
In addition to other rights and responsibilities, the Board of Con┬Ł
trol will have authority to study a system for regulating the export and 
import of designated armaments.
X. Suspension of the Convention
A. Each party will have the right to suspend its obligations, par┬Ł
tially or completely, by written notice to the International Control
