560
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
President: We are in close touch with the Soviets. I think that there
are two or three people now, President Assad and President Brezhnev.
We are ready to move rapidly through the UN to call for the Geneva
Conference. We can do this once we have an agreement with the Soviets
on the format, and indications from Assad that he will attend. I would
be reluctant to exclude Syria if they want to cooperate. In a few days,
we will have information from the Israelis and the Egyptians. Then
we can judge our role. I have talked to Prime Minister Begin, but I
have not yet heard from President Sadat. They were both tired after
the visit. President Ceausescu could help with President Assad. After
your emissary has met with Assad, we would like to know anything
you learn about how we might best approach the Syrians. I have been
pleased with the Soviet attitude as expressed in the joint statement.
They could, of course, obstruct a Geneva Conference but we see no
evidence that that is their intention. They have played a constructive
role as compared to the past and are now eager to move to overcome
the problem we have with Syria.
Foreign Minister: Concerning the substance of my trip, my President
was very happy that you would agree to see me. The main point is to
make clear that we need to help President Sadat. If he falls or if he is
isolated, there can be no peace in the Middle East. His trip to Jerusalem
was an important step.
President Carter: What is your relationship to Saudi Arabia?
Foreign Minister: We have had none. We see each other sometimes
and talk, but we have no diplomatic relations. They are not prepared
for them.
President Carter: We have had good cooperation from the Saudis.
They help Egypt, and we don’t want to see that disrupted. Most of the
world admires Sadat for his move and we hope that the meeting he
had will be a success.
Foreign Minister: He sees himself as a strong leader who can afford
to make this kind of move.
President: He is a strong leader and he has proved it. I am glad to
see that you are taking constructive steps and that they are fully in
line with our own. I hope that we will keep exchanging views.
Foreign Minister: This has been our first mission since the Sadat trip.
Dr. Brzezinski: Has Mr. Poungan gone to see Arafat?
Foreign Minister: Yes, he left two days ago.
President Carter: We look forward to hearing the report. We have
good relations with Assad and I like him. I think he is a fine man.
Foreign Minister: Our direct bilateral relationships are good and
President Ceausescu looks forward to his visit here.
President: I look forward to meeting him.
