Yugoslavia 883 but as an active interlocutor in East-West and North-South exchanges. And in the Third World it has established itself not only as a symbolic European ally but as a leading force within the nonaligned movement. B. Institutional and Procedural Flaws in Tito’s Legacy 10. These are all transformations for which Tito can claim substantial personal credit. They are also transformations in which large numbers of Yugoslavs take understandable pride. In consequence, Tito can be reasonably confident that his successors will not follow Soviet and Chinese precedents and launch a process of “de-Titoization.” On the contrary, he can probably rely on his successors both to profess and to feel a strong loyalty to most of the basic tenets of Titoism. However, he has recently introduced new decision-making procedures that will make it extremely difficult for this loyalty to find expression in effective leadership. 11. In particular, the emergence of such leadership will be strongly impeded by the strictly collegial policymaking procedures that Tito has prescribed both for the nine-man collective State Presidency and— since 1978—for the much more important 24-man Presidium of the League of Communists.2 So long as Tito is alive and well, these procedures do not have decisive significance. Once Tito leaves the scene, however, his successors will be left to try to make timely and coherent decisions in large collegiums with short-term rotating chairmen and rules of conduct that require so much consultation and coordination that they almost entail a paralyzing liberum veto. Such an enterprise would be highly problematical under the best of circumstances—let alone the trying circumstances that will confront Tito’s successors. C. Economic Strains 12. Weakened central leadership will make it more difficult for the post-Tito regime to manage what are in any case likely to be increased economic problems. At a minimum, their lack of charismatic authority will deprive Tito’s successors of an asset that has helped to prevent economic crisis during the 1970s, when the effects of high inflation (averaging 17 percent per annum), large deficits in the balance of payments, growing regional economic disparities, and fluctuations in growth of consumption, associated with wide swings in overall growth rates, have threatened to get out of hand. Moreover, the regional pressures behind inflation and external deficits will be intensified by a new 2 For a detailed discussion of party institutional trends and evolving policymaking arrangements and their likely effect on the succession, see volume II, annex A, “The League of Communists.” [Footnote is in the original.]
