December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
705
the elections there. Let’s take up Article 6 first, then the letter, then oil,
then the question of ambassadors.
Secretary Vance: The Egyptians have made slight suggestions for
change in Article 6, paragraph 2. (Secretary Vance passes out a copy4 of
the new proposal).
President Carter: The Egyptians found the word “derogate” diffi-
cult to accept. We have tried to find a synonym that would be accept-
able to you.
Secretary Vance: The Egyptians have suggested using the phrase “is
not inconsistent with” instead of “does not derogate from”. They have
suggested that the same change be made in Article 6, paragraph 5. In
paragraph 2, they also want to have, after the reference to the Camp
David Accords, the phrase “which express the determination of the
parties to reach a just, durable and comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East conflict”.
Prime Minister Begin: May I respond? Let me begin with Article 6,
paragraph 5. We agreed in Washington to the text “does not derogate
from”. If there is no difference, then there is nothing wrong with that
phrase. If there is a difference, then we will stay by what we agreed.
Then the United States and Israel will agree, and Egypt will disagree. If
the United States changes its position, that is okay, but it will be a devi-
ation. The Cabinet would have rejected these proposals if the words
“does not derogate” had not appeared.
Sadat is entitled to make counterproposals. The United States can
change its mind. But we are free men and we can approve or reject. We
will reject. Let me explain why. Why does Sadat play with words? Why
does Sadat pay attention? I would like to hear what is the difference. In
our view, the two phrases are worlds apart. Article 6, paragraphs 2 and
5, are the heart and soul of the peace treaty. Without this article, it
would be a sham. What is the great difference? If we used the phrase
“does not derogate,” it means that Article 6, paragraph 5 stands, the
heart and soul of the treaty. If we replace that phrase, then the first part
of the note prevails. It would mean that the first sentence is the key, and
it would put this treaty after other treaties. It would be the worst ver-
sion, even worse than that offered at Camp David. We would know-
ingly sign a sham document. It would lose its meaning. The assertion is
that other agreements between Iraq and Egypt that call for the libera-
tion of Palestine would prevail over this treaty. It is not a matter of
theory or legal form, but a matter of life. Syria may attack Israel, and
Iraq, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia may join. The Baghdad Conference5
4 A copy of this text has not been found.
5 See footnote 7, Document 91.
