1128 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 3. Support/encourage surveys of women’s contribution to national food production (Embassy Bamako). Estimates indicate that from 70 percent to over 90 percent of rural women in most Third World countries engage in agriculture. However, few objective factual assessments exist of women’s material contribution to the host country’s total food supplies and GNP. Sharper studies would “raise the level of general awareness that many projects and techniques designed to increase agriculture production are based on the false premise that men do most of the agricultural work, and encourage rural development innovations designed to be implemented by women”. (Embassy Brazzaville). 4. In planning development projects, identify felt needs especially of rural women—a “rule too often neglected” (Embassy Djakarta). Embassy Bamako reports that perhaps the greatest needs include better access to wells, pumps, potable water, carts to carry water. Hauling water, often exclusively “woman’s work”, may alone take two to four hours per day. Embassy Accra concurs: “The most important single (US) step could be providing piped water or wells for each community.” 5. Encourage and where feasible plan for arranging women’s access to credit through cooperatives or otherwise, especially women farm workers, market women and artisans in handcrafts. 6. Use more effectively—and expand—Ambassadors’ self-help funds. These discretionary funds, now available to Ambassadors posted in developing countries, have “exceptional potential”, involve “minimal paper work, and (produce) speedy action” of self-help projects. Embassy Dakar urges that these funds be “constructively expanded and supplemented with additional funding especially earmarked for small projects of immediate impact on enhancing the status of women.” 7. Encourage funding of more self-help or projects by local and foreign PVOs, private foundations, UN agencies, especially where host country may be sensitive to US funding. Teaching income-earning skills is repeatedly stressed as a priority for self-help projects for both urban and rural low-income women. 8. Encourage involvement of more Peace Corps volunteers in design of development projects. 9. Use all available assistance programs of US Government. Examples: Use PL 480 funds for self-help projects; channel more Food for Peace to maternity/child care centers. 10. Help call attention to possible negative aspects of some “modernization” development programs, e.g., Embassy Banjul is attempting to help its own and host country officials “understand the social consequences” of a new river development project which will soon open vast, new areas to rice cultivation, which is traditionally women’s
