1128
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
3. Support/encourage surveys of women’s contribution to na-
tional food production (Embassy Bamako). Estimates indicate that
from 70 percent to over 90 percent of rural women in most Third World
countries engage in agriculture. However, few objective factual assess-
ments exist of women’s material contribution to the host country’s total
food supplies and GNP. Sharper studies would “raise the level of gen-
eral awareness that many projects and techniques designed to increase
agriculture production are based on the false premise that men do most
of the agricultural work, and encourage rural development innovations
designed to be implemented by women”. (Embassy Brazzaville).
4. In planning development projects, identify felt needs especially
of rural women—a “rule too often neglected” (Embassy Djakarta). Em-
bassy Bamako reports that perhaps the greatest needs include better
access to wells, pumps, potable water, carts to carry water. Hauling
water, often exclusively “woman’s work”, may alone take two to four
hours per day. Embassy Accra concurs: “The most important single
(US) step could be providing piped water or wells for each
community.”
5. Encourage and where feasible plan for arranging women’s
access to credit through cooperatives or otherwise, especially women
farm workers, market women and artisans in handcrafts.
6. Use more effectively—and expand—Ambassadors’ self-help
funds. These discretionary funds, now available to Ambassadors
posted in developing countries, have “exceptional potential”, involve
“minimal paper work, and (produce) speedy action” of self-help
projects. Embassy Dakar urges that these funds be “constructively ex-
panded and supplemented with additional funding especially ear-
marked for small projects of immediate impact on enhancing the status
of women.”
7. Encourage funding of more self-help or projects by local and for-
eign PVOs, private foundations, UN agencies, especially where host
country may be sensitive to US funding. Teaching income-earning
skills is repeatedly stressed as a priority for self-help projects for both
urban and rural low-income women.
8. Encourage involvement of more Peace Corps volunteers in de-
sign of development projects.
9. Use all available assistance programs of US Government. Ex-
amples: Use PL 480 funds for self-help projects; channel more Food for
Peace to maternity/child care centers.
10. Help call attention to possible negative aspects of some “mod-
ernization” development programs, e.g., Embassy Banjul is attempting
to help its own and host country officials “understand the social conse-
quences” of a new river development project which will soon open
vast, new areas to rice cultivation, which is traditionally women’s
