Options Identified Political-Military Issues: 1. AWACS. For the moment, the AWACS will remain in Europe for several weeks. Talks are continuing with the Egyptians, but it is clear that their idea was for the planes to come only prior to a U.S. action. They may be amenable to some other form of cooperation. Secretary Brown is to write Mubarak. It was considered unwise to send a Defense emissary such as David McGiffert until a decision has been taken on the military cooperation program for Egypt. (S) 2. Huyser Mission. Because of the Shah’s book,8 as well as a political effort by certain individuals, attention is being focused on the Huyser mission as having permitted the collapse of the Shah’s regime. This is not receiving heavy attention at the moment, but it will be quite important in the post-mortem following the hostages’ release.9 For the moment, all agreed that it sufficed to take the position that Huyser’s mission was to hold the military together so it would be intact for whatever moderate government was likely to emerge after the Shah’s departure. His objective was to smooth the transition and keep the army from falling apart. (S) 3. U.S. Strategy. Dr. Brzezinski drew attention to the story in the New York Times this morning10 suggesting that our strategy of exerting pressure on Iran in favor of a more moderate leadership was not working. Instead, the country is being polarized and pushed toward the left. Should we continue on the same path or should we force the issue to a head by a real jolt at some point? The Vice President agreed that we needed to take stock of our position and consider whether our strategy had any real prospect of achieving the release of the hostages. We should consult the most expert views available, not only in our government agencies but also in the academic community and among our allies. Mr. Carlucci observed that most expert opinion was agreed on the fact that Khomeini did not yield to pressure and that it promised to be a long process. All agreed that the question was fundamental and that a high-level review should be conducted as soon as Secretary Vance returns from his consultations in Europe. One of his objectives was to seek their best judgment on the evolution of events. (S) 8 The Shah’s memoir, Answer to History, was published in 1980. Excerpts appeared in London on December 7 and were subsequently reviewed by FBIS. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject
