Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
487
In negotiations there often comes the time to force the issue to a
head by making the other side take stock of the consequences of failure.
One should even be willing to deliberately create such circumstances,
as Sadat has done from time to time. Of course, before one does so one
should carefully marshal one’s resources and calculate timing very
carefully.
SALT
We have been dribbling our concessions, and asserting from time
to time that we would go no further. Yet time after time we would then
make additional concessions.2
The latest example pertains to the ALCMs: as a major concession
we told the Soviets that we would accept the limit of 35 as an average.
The Soviets countered with 25. We immediately offered 30 as a compro-
mise. The Soviets are now talking of a figure of between 25 and 30 as
the outcome, despite our accommodation on the definition issue.3
Indeed, Cy put the new definition to Dobrynin earlier this week on
the assumption that this would solve all the remaining issues—an as-
sumption Dobrynin led us to suspect is true. The opposite has hap-
pened, and the Soviets are even reopening some old issues.
I am convinced the Soviets want a SALT agreement, and I think
there is a good probability that we could have obtained one some
months ago had we been prepared to establish credibly the position
that we are no longer able to make further adjustments and that we can
wait.4
Cuba
We told the Cubans we would not go to Havana without an expec-
tation of concrete positive developments—by which we clearly meant
their troops in Africa. We then proposed to go to Havana if they would
simply let out the four American political prisoners. When they refused
to do even that, we end up sending a delegation anyway, albeit at a
somewhat lower level. This does not help our credibility.5
2 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote: “SU does the
same.”
3 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote: “Only sym-
bolically important.”
4 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote: “B.S. We’ve
waited 2 years.”
5 At the end of this paragraph, the President wrote: “your proposal.” Additional in-
formation about the political prisoners and the U.S. delegation to Havana, which con-
sisted of Tarnoff and Pastor, is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
vol. XXIII, Mexico, Cuba, and the Caribbean.
