110 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement because of the resultant inestimable damage to both and to the world. (5, 6, 66). b. Under these circumstances, (a) potentially disruptive forces within the Western Alliance have been stimulated; (b) some friendly nations fear that the U.S. will no longer be willing to threaten nuclear retaliation in order to deter Soviet actions in matters of vital concern to them; (c) the Soviets will take more bold actions in the fields of economic penetration and subversion, perhaps in the area of limited war; and (d) there will be a weakening in the Free World alliances, less confidence in U.S. leader­ ship and military power, increased respect for Russian achievements in science, technology, rocketry, and nuclear weapons, more susceptibility to Russian propaganda for East-West negotiations—­all in the hope of escape from tension. (9, 30, 34, 42, 72, 73) 3. U.S. Bases Overseas. a. The U.S. will encounter increasing trouble in retaining overseas bases on terms assuring their availability and effectiveness in case of need. (38) b. The dual control provisions of the IRBM agreements will intro­ duce troublesome elements into the operation of the NATO Alliance. The division between people who seek early negotiations with the Russians and people whose principal concern is to maximize the mili­ tary strength of the Alliance before negotiating, will offer opportunities for exploitation by the USSR and for Soviet maneuvers to delay the installation of IRBM’s. (38, 39). 4. Competition for Underdeveloped and Uncommitted Countries. a. Most of these countries believe the world power struggle is of no direct concern to them. They are not greatly concerned with “anti-­ Communism,” but are interested primarily in their own economic development. Their choice will increasingly be, not between East and West, but between neutralism and pro-­Communism. (47, 50, 87). b. Most of these countries lack political and economic organization to achieve desired economic growth. There is a shortage of adminis­ trative and technical skills. Local capital is insufficient, and economic and political uncertainties and (in some cases) hostility, discourage pri­ vate and to some extent Governmental foreign investment. Population growth frequently exceeds the growth of the economies. Many under­ developed countries are increasingly disposed to accept Soviet eco­ nomic offers, and some may come to adopt Communist methods which appear to them to have been successful in the USSR and Communist China. (48, 65).
