1979  645
President stated that he was prepared to make preliminary decisions to 
maintain the Triad and proceed with the large M–X. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski asked if the President was saying that he was decid-
ing against Option B though not among the various ways of realizing 
Option A, and that he was also deciding that there would be no com-
mon missile, at least as tentative decisions. The President said Yes, but 
that the question of the 190,000 lb missile versus the 170,000 lb missile 
isn’t completely closed. (TS)
Jim McIntyre then stated that he saw some technology and cost 
questions associated with the trench concepts. Secretary Brown 
responded that we know a great deal about the trench already and have 
developed some of the machinery required to build it, and have even 
built several segments. Jim McIntyre continued that he was uncomfort-
able about some of the costs being cited for the mix of systems being 
considered. He also saw the schedules that were cited as uncertain, and 
was also concerned that there might be serious environmental prob-
lems. (TS)
The President suggested that the entire basing issue would have 
to be discussed further and asked Zbig to schedule an evening meet-
ing for this purpose. The President then remarked that we needed a 
fallback on the basing question if we are to hedge against the possi-
bility that we run into insurmountable difficulties. However, for the 
moment, the decision to proceed with the M–X should be enough to 
keep us busy. He then remarked that we have serious problems in get-
ting Congressional support for our defense spending and that the scare 
language that might be needed to gain another $5B in defense spending 
might work to reduce our confidence in ourselves by the equivalent of 
$20B in defense spending. (TS)
Secretary Brown commented that one fallback position would be 
to put M–X in silos. He thought however that moving MINUTEMAN 
around would be a real problem. The President responded that if you 
had 50–100 MINUTEMEN on trucks that would be something—­but 
that he was not trying to dodge the issue with suggestions like this. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski, referring back to the question of perceptions, said 
that we must of course say that we are strong, but on the other hand, we 
can’t close our eyes to the possibilities six years from now. (TS)
The President responded that we have done all right in our 
approach to the Congress for defense funding. The Congress used to 
cut the defense budget by $5B automatically but in recent years the rea-
sonably unified position that we have presented to the Hill had done 
all right. He said that he would hope that we can sell our solution to the 
MINUTEMAN vulnerability problem to the Hill without using scare 
tactics. The President remarked again that while the trends are against
