LXIV  Summaries of Compilations
Ecuador
U.S. Relations With Ecuador
Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents 
in the text.
Except for a brief period in 1960, U.S. relations with Ecuador 
during the closing years of the Eisenhower presidency were normal 
and uncomplicated.
In April 1958, President Eisenhower in a letter to President Camillo 
Ponce Enriquez described Ecuador as “a nation enjoying political sta-
bility, freedom and steady economic development.” (EC–3) In the fol-
lowing month, Vice President Richard Nixon’s visit to Ecuador was 
described as an unqualified success, in contrast to his visits in Peru 
and Venezuela where violent anti-American protest broke out. Nixon 
said there were no great problems between the two countries. (EC–5) 
During his conversations with Ponce, the Vice President stressed the 
need to resolve the area’s economic problems as a prerequisite to cur-
ing the political problems. Ponce stated that stabilization of the Latin 
American economies would make all the countries better customers for 
American products. (EC–4, 5, 6, 7)
The United States did involve itself in loans to improve the 
Ecuadorean infrastructure and aid economic development, and was 
also ready to provide military assistance for internal security programs 
to combat communist subversion and disruption within the country. 
(EC–8, 11)
In June 1960, José Maria Velasco Ibarra was elected President by 
what Assistant Secretary of State Roy Rubottom termed a surprisingly 
large margin. (EC–15) Velasco had held the office on three previous occa-
sions and was believed to be basically friendly to the United States; no 
insuperable problems were anticipated in dealing with the new admin-
istration. The President-­elect indicated his willingness to cooperate 
in fighting communism and opposing Fidel Castro, and Ambassador 
Christian Ravndal emphasized that the United States would offer tech-
nical aid and assist the Ecuadorean economy, particularly with housing 
for the poor. (EC–16)
At the time of Velasco’s inauguration at the end of August 1960, 
however, evidence began to surface that Ecuador wished to focus 
attention on its boundary dispute with Peru. The Rio Protocol of 1942, 
which dealt with that question, noted the new administration, was 
unfavorable and unfair to Ecuador. Velasco and his Foreign Minister 
José Ricardo Chiriboga Villagomez said they did not wish to push to a 
solution at once, but only to reiterate strongly the Ecuadorean position.
