Comprehensive Test Ban
565
more time to study the language. (Jones subsequently informed the
NSC that the JCS recommend against this compromise.)
Aaron concluded the meeting by confirming that the “arrange-
ments” approach was acceptable to all though some preferred going
beyond this and others preferred our current position. He stated that
this would be reported to the President along with the compromise for-
mulation, noting that some preferred this approach while others could
either support it as a backup or had reserved their position. At their re-
quest, he also agreed to note that Vance and Seignious preferred the
“extension” formulation.
229.
Editorial Note
The United States, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom
(UK) continued to meet in Geneva over the next 2 months to discuss a
Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB), but they made little progress, in partic-
ular on the issue of on-site inspection of testing sites. Secretary of State
Cyrus Vance sent UK Foreign Secretary David Owen a letter noting
that a “deadlock” had developed because the UK government had ap-
proved the construction of only one National Seismic Station (NSS) on
British soil. Vance acknowledged that the United States sympathized
“with the problems that your government faces on the NSS question.
But it seems quite clear now that this stalemate could go on indefi-
nitely” since the Soviets had agreed to allow ten stations on their soil,
which Vance described as “the most intrusive verification arrangement
in any arms control agreement to date.” Vance also instructed the U.S.
Ambassador to the UK, Kingman Brewster, to tell the UK government
that “we believe it would probably require a British proposal to move
more than halfway toward the Soviet position if we are to have any
hope of getting the Soviets to be more flexible on this issue.” (Telegram
100316 to London, April 21; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790182–1031)
CTB discussions also took a back seat in overall arms control nego-
tiations as Washington and Moscow spent much of the spring final-
izing the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks II treaty. For more on these
discussions, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II,
1972–1980, Documents 235–238.
Meanwhile, the political position of the ruling Labour Govern-
ment in the United Kingdom had become precarious after Prime Min-
ister James Callaghan lost a vote of no confidence on March 28, 1979,
