Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
809
—on commodities, have reached agreement on common fund to
support agreements which stabilize international commodity supplies
and prices. Individual commodity agreements under discussion or in place
for sugar, coffee, tin, cocoa and rubber.
—have strengthened the coordination of our foreign assistance
programs with creation of International Development Cooperation Agency.
7. Building a sounder international economy.
—US provided leadership necessary to revitalize the multilateral
trade negotiations which resulted in new long-term trade agreement.
Agreement will open greater access to international markets; provide
fairer trading rules for the next decade.
—Negotiated a number of orderly marketing agreements to regu-
larize the flow of certain imports which threatened to severely disrupt
American producers; instituted—and now reviewing adequacy of—
“trigger price” mechanism on steel to prevent other nations from en-
gaging in unfair trading practices.
—Reached agreement with Japan for substantially improving
access of goods and services to Japanese markets; substantially improved
our balance of trade with Japan.
—Through successive economic summits and in the International
Energy Agency, have played leadership role in setting reduced oil import
targets by major consuming nations. Groundwork has been laid for
major expansion of US coal exports that will aid US economy and help our
allies cut oil imports. President’s far-reaching domestic energy program al-
ready resulting in lower oil imports—imports down 10% in 1979; down
even more so far in 1980. We are working to augment and diversify the
world’s energy sources by supporting increased World Bank lending for
LDC energy projects and by a number of innovative programs for co-
operating in energy planning, research and development in Third
World countries.
8. Asserting our national commitment to human rights.
—Our pursuit of human rights progress around the world has
given renewed meaning to America’s purpose in the world—to defend our
freedom and to help advance freedom of others. And it serves our
long-term interest in building a more stable world.
—Have infused our national commitment to individual freedom
and dignity into day-to-day conduct of foreign policy. Human rights con-
siderations now taken into account fully in allocation American assist-
ance; President has signed number of important international human
rights covenants.
—While we cannot claim full credit, we believe our practical ef-
forts have contributed to significant human rights improvements in many
countries. Thousands of political prisoners have been released in over a
