908
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—EURhasformedaninteragencygrouptoreviewtheseplans,bring
them fully up-to-date, and prepare necessary decision documents;
—under the aegis of this group PM is preparing a more detailed
analysis of military options for the US and NATO which will be ready
by January 25. (S)
3. The Quad paper on military contingencies in case of Soviet pressure
(Tab C).5 You should ask General Bowman (DOD/ISA) to briefly
review the status of this paper and DOD contingency plans for supply-
ing Yugoslavia in the first weeks of any crisis. (C)
As you know, the Political Directors’ meeting will be on January
24–25. To date the other three Allies have not provided a very useful
list of equipment which they could supply Yugoslavia. Our objective at
the Political Directors’ meeting should be to get agreement on what each ally
would supply in the first week of a crisis and to push the other three to do
more. You should stress that we want to be in a good position to respond
to any Yugoslav request for aid. However, while we need to be able
to respond quickly to any Yugoslav request for aid, we should also be
mindful of strong Yugoslav sensitivities about NATO discussions of contin-
gency plans, which they fear will stimulate Warsaw Pact pressures. (See
in particular the cable at Tab D.)6 (S)
Three final points:
—You should task DOD to look into any changes in legislation that
might be necessary in order to respond to Yugoslavia’s requests quickly
and effectively. Otherwise, we may find that the Yugoslavs turn to us
with a request for a certain type of advanced equipment, i.e., The
Dragon, and we may not be able to supply it in time due to legislative
restrictions.7
—State should be tasked to look at the signaling process. The Yugo-
slavs are very sensitive about external involvement in their affairs and
do not want us to take any action that might provoke the Soviets. At
the same time they want to feel confident that they can rely on us if
they need to. We need to have a better idea of how we can signal our
willingness to help the Yugoslavs without getting too far out in front.
—CIA should be tasked to do a concise analysis of Soviet goals, tactics
and scenarios for intervention. To some extent they have done this in the
latest NIO but we need a separate policy-related study which focuses
solely on the Soviet angle.8 (S)
5 Tab C is not attached. Tarnoff forwarded the final paper, dated March 3, to
Brzezinski on March 6. See Document 284.
6 Tab D is not attached.
7 Aaron circled “Dragon,” and wrote in the margin “what do they want that we
can’t supply?”
8 Aaron underlined “the Soviet angle” and drew a question mark under. He also
wrote after this point: “Soviet reaction to P[resident] visit.”
