1955  161
129.	 Telegram 607 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 24, 1955, 7 p.m.
607. From Johnson.
1. As the situation has developed do not believe that text of agreed 
announcement to explain recess contained my 551 is any longer appli­
cable. Believe text somewhat along the following lines would be more 
appropriate and factually accurate:
2. “For the past . . . . weeks Ambassadors of USA and PRC have 
been seeking settlement of item one of their agenda, return of civilians 
both sides to their respective countries.
3. Ambassador Johnson has informed Ambassador Wang that all 
Chinese in US who desire to travel to PRC are now entitled do so and 
that US has adopted measures so that they may in fact promptly return.
4. Ambassador Johnson has also informed Ambassador Wang 
when the PRC has agreed that all Americans, including those involved 
in unfinished civil and criminal cases, can return to the US within 
specified period of time the US Government is willing authorize Gov­
ernment of India assist return to PRC of any Chinese in US who may 
request such assistance.
5. Ambassador Wang has informed Ambassador Johnson that 
PRC has completed review of some unfinished civil and criminal cases 
involving Americans but that he is willing inform Ambassador Johnson 
of results of such completed reviews and permit the return of Ameri­
cans involved only when US has agreed to implementation of arrange­
ment with respect to the GOI mentioned above.
6. Ambassador Wang has also stated it is not possible for PRC to 
estimate length of time it will take complete review of remaining unfin­
ished civil and criminal cases and to permit Americans involved to 
return to US.
7. Ambassador Wang has informed Ambassador Johnson that 
PRC is willing authorize Government of UK to give same assistance to 
Americans in PRC as GOI would give Chinese in US.”
8. In view of fact foregoing statement would be used only in event 
Wang had proposed recess or recess had been proposed by me to avoid 
break in talks difficult to complete latter portion of statement explaining 
reason for recess which would depend upon Wang’s position at time. It 
is now clear he is certainly never going to propose or accept recess for 
purpose “completing reviews”. In absence my proposing recess prevent 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2455. Confidential.
