National Security Policy  789
b. The second sentence of the redraft covers limited war situations 
in areas where the main Communist power (Sino-­Soviet bloc Power) 
would not be brought to bear: Central and South America, the Carib­
bean and Africa. In these areas the use of nuclear weapons would be 
manifestly neither militarily necessary nor politically appropriate. In 
areas such as the Middle East, South Asia and Southeast Asia, the deci­
sion as to the use of nuclear weapons in limited war would be made 
in the light of the then existing circumstances, including the involve­
ment or non-­involvement of main Communist power. In areas where 
main Communist power would be clearly involved, it is anticipated 
that nuclear weapons would be used. Such areas would include hostili­
ties on the mainland of China and Korea. The possibility of limited war 
on the Continent of Europe involving sizable forces of the U.S. and the 
USSR is ruled out; situations short of limited war such as incursions, 
infiltrations and hostile local actions, involving the U.S. and the USSR, 
are covered by the NATO political directive and strategic concept.
c. The third sentence of the redraft provides that in all contingen­
cies covered in sub-­paragraph b above, deployed U.S. combat units will 
have a nuclear capability and designated major commanders of such 
units will be prepared to use this capability when required in defense 
of their commands.
d. There is no controversy regarding the fourth sentence of the 
redraft.
The above is based upon our understanding of the President’s views 
and those expressed by Mr. McElroy.
4. Secretary McElroy is interested in discussing the foregoing para­
graph with the Joint Chiefs of Staff within the next few days.
/s/ Haydn Williams
Deputy Assistant Secretary
Enclosure
Paragraph Prepared by Gorden Gray
Washington, July 9, 1959
REDRAFT OF PARAGRAPH 12–­a
It is the policy of the United States to place main, but not sole, 
reliance on nuclear weapons; to integrate nuclear weapons with other 
weapons in the Armed Forces of the United States; and to use them 
when required to meet the nation’s war objectives. Planning should 
contemplate situations short of general war where the use of nuclear 
weapons would manifestly not be militarily necessary nor appropri­
ate to the accomplishment of national objectives, particularly in those 
areas where main Communist power will not be brought to bear. All 
deployed organized units will be prepared to use nuclear weapons 
when required in defense of the command. Advance authorization for 
the use of nuclear weapons is as determined by the President.
