Chapter 7, January–May 1991 983 Houston and not withstanding the previous exchanges and undertake not to deplore a nuclear ALCM and the bomber without a flight test with the ALCM on the bomber first. But we’re not quite there. In addition, we’d be prepared to ensure that any non-­nuclear ALCM tested on a B–1, B–2, would have to be distinguished from the nuclear ALCM. On the B–1 we have the Houston solution. The B–1 is not equipped now for nuclear ALCMs, and steps which we’re taking show that it is not so equipped. The Soviet side wanted to make changes in the aircraft to ensure they would be technically incapable of carrying such weapons. We’re not prepared to do that but I did point out that, we’re prepared to provide a statement that explains how long it would take to convert the aircraft to become an aircraft capable of carrying nuclear ALCMs and in fact where such a process would be done. We would read that statement into the negotiating record and we would point out what it would take in terms of adding the pylons, the bulkhead, the changes that would have to be made, and that this could only be done at certain repair facilities. We should point out that this is not the kind of procedure that could be done quickly and easily. It would have to be done in a way that is actually somewhat difficult to do and would take some time to do. The plans will have to be developed and I can tell you to convert 20 aircraft to become a nuclear ALCM carrier would take well over a year. So that’s where we left the issue. On PPCMs, we had a couple of exchanges, and I’ve explained how the Midgetman would fit into the process that we’ve discussed. We don’t have closure based on, at this point unfortunately, on our big move at Houston on PPCM. There are two other issues that have a somewhat different status. One is the new types definition, which is to say when you determine the missile is a new type. We agree on the 10% rule, but we have not agreed on the question on throwweight. We have a difference on throwweight. We’ve also made an effort on downloading and we’ve tried to develop a new position given the problems with the SS–N–18. If we would allow the Soviets to drop their warheads on SS–N–18s from the number of seven to three provided we at the same time would be dropping our warheads on Minuteman from three to one. But I gather this has not been particularly well received. Baker: For the purposes of organizing our work ­let me just ask what will be required to get us back to Houston? This after all is the commitment that was made and then confirmed in writing and I just want to see what are the essence of the problems. What do we need, in other words, Reggie? Bartholomew: Well, on B–2s that there be an agreement that there be no exhibit of the aircraft. On the B–1 and the B–2, we have these outstanding issues that I described above and then we have the PPCM issue.
