1957 1453 845. Letter 77 from Clough to Johnson1 Letter No. 77 Washington, November 26, 1957 Dear Alex: I am enclosing an exchange of correspondence between Mrs. Downey and Mr. Robertson. Mrs. Downey’s renewed request for permission to visit her son caused us to reconsider our policy of denying passports to relatives of prisoners for visits to Communist China. After weighing the various considerations we have decided to recommend to the Secretary that we authorize travel by those relatives of the six remaining prisoners who may wish to make the trip. We recognize, of course, that this action will attract a good deal of publicity and will constitute another breach in our policy opposing travel by Americans to Communist China, particularly coming so soon after our approval of Wirin’s travel. However, we felt that those relatives have a far stronger claim than could be put forward by any others who may wish to visit Communist China and we feel we could defend our policy against further encroachment. On the plus side there is the possi­ bility that one or more of the prisoners might be released on the occasion of his relative’s visit. I am not optimistic that this will happen, but at least we will have taken every possible step to bring about the release of those unfortunate people. It is possible that the Communists may not desire such visits at this time or may seize upon our action to demand reciprocal rights for visits by relatives of Chinese prisoners in this country. I think we would have to oppose any such maneuver on their part and it would give us an opportunity to retell the story of our offer to release Chinese prisoners which leaves the Chinese Communists in a rather weak propaganda position. In order to minimize the possibility of giving the Communists any pretext for accusing us of “inequality”, “one-sidedness”, “espionage”, etc., we thought it would be best for the relatives to apply individually to the Chinese Communist Red Cross rather than for us to take it up at the Geneva talks. In view of Hammarskjold’s interest in this subject we would notify him before our action was made public. I would appreciate receiving by telegram any comments you may have on this proposed course of action. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official– ­Informal. A copy was sent to Martin and to Geneva.
