First Responses
155
and this seems to be catching on. A flood of telegrams to the UN or
Iran was also mentioned. (C)
7. Shah. Iran intends to bring suit against the Shah. One suit will
probably seek the return of his assets to Iran and the other will attempt
in some fashion to bring him to account for crimes. We have always
said they could resort to our courts, and there is no immediate decision
required on our part. However, we may later wish to consider filing
an amicus brief or otherwise intervening if the question arises about
Iranian standing in our courts, especially while they continue to hold
hostages. (S)
Political-Military Issues:
1. International Court of Justice (ICJ). The SCC agreed that we should
be prepared to request the ICJ for a finding on interim measures for
protection and release of U.S. hostages. It is anticipated that the Court
could act within a week to ten days. Going to the ICJ would complete
a record of having exhausted all available remedies under international
law. It does not deprive us of the right of unilateral action while the
case is under consideration, although it may make certain actions more
difficult. Under the terms of our treaties with Iran, they can renounce
jurisdiction by the ICJ by simply sending a telegram; therefore, we
should not reveal that this course of action is under consideration. All
agreed that no approach should be made to the ICJ until 24 hours after
the Security Council resolution, to avoid providing an excuse for Iran
to delay on the grounds that the matter was under consideration by
the Court.6
2. AWACS Deployment. A possible base has been identified at an
isolated location in Egypt in the Eastern Desert. Two AWACS aircraft
can fly non-stop from Oklahoma to Egypt. Refueling aircraft would
be required from the Azores, four KC–135 tanker aircraft would have
to be positioned at the Egyptian field, and support equipment would
have to be brought in via 26 C–141 flights or 10 C–5 flights or a mixture
of the two.7 The Secretary of State believes strongly that such a large
movement would become known and could endanger the hostages in
this period before Ashura. He felt that even approaching the Saudis
concerning overflight rights or to get their reactions could be dangerous
at this moment. Nevertheless, the JCS felt that we should take whatever
steps are possible to expedite deployment of the AWACS in the event
they should be needed. The clearance process and filing of flight plans
6 Carter underlined “prepared” and wrote “ok” in the margin next to the first
sentence of this item, then wrote “Get my approval first” next to his approval of the item.
7 Carter underlined the phrase “via 26 C–141 flights or 10 C–5 flights” and wrote
in the margin: “This seems ridiculous.”
