International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 The study has thus far covered only these five major disincentives. There are about a dozen other laws and policies that discourage or restrict exports, but they are much less significant than these five. We could go on to examine these other disincentives and produce a single report after they have all been examined but, given the duration of the study to date and the business community’s impatience, I believe it would be better to divide the venture into two phases: —The first phase, consisting of (i) a report and recommendations on the five major export disincentives listed above, which are summarized in this memorandum, and (ii) a Presidential decisions announcement similar in form to your export policy announcement in September 1978. A draft text of this statement is attached.4 —The second phase, culminating in the new report on export incentives and disincentives that the Congress has mandated for July, 1980,5 could include any further action that then seemed politically feasible on the major disincentives, as well as recommendations on the secondary disincentives not considered in the first phase. The President’s Export Council6 would be involved in preparing this second phase. We would also inform Reginald Jones7 of the first phase decisions, before they are announced publicly. (U) In Phase I we have looked for recommendations that would reduce the negative effect of the five major export disincentives and demonstrate your appreciation of US business interests, without requiring controversial legislative proposals or abandonment of fundamental policies in other fields. This limits the scope and effectiveness of these recommendations: Strongly supported policies, in some cases recently affirmed by the Congress or the Executive Branch, would be compromised by any major dismantling of export disincentives. (C) My recommendations regarding each of the five main disincentives are set forth below. (U) 4 Attached but not printed is a draft Presidential statement entitled “Reduction of Export Disincentives,” dated January 19. Carter initialed at the top of the draft statement and wrote “ok.” The draft differs from the statement that was ultimately issued on February 27; for the text of the latter, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
