National Security Policy  283
the Treasury; the Attorney General; the Director, Bureau of the Budget; 
the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Deputy Secretary of Defense; 
The Assistant to the President; the Deputy Assistant to the President; 
the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Special Assistants to the 
President for Atomic Energy, for the Atoms for Peace Program, for 
Information Projects, for National Security Affairs, for Science and 
Technology, and for Security Operations Coordination; Assistant 
Secretary of State Smith; the White House Staff Secretary; the Naval 
Aide to the President; Bryce N. Harlow, Administrative Assistant to 
the President; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Director, NSC 
Secretariat.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
[Omitted here are agenda items 1 and 2.]
3. OPERATIONAL CAPABILITY OF RECONNAISSANCE SATELLITES
(NSC Action No. 1946; NSC 5814; NSC Action No. 1941; Memo for 
NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated July 29, 1958)
Mr. Gray briefed the Council on the subject (copy of briefing note 
filed in the minutes of the meeting and attached to this memorandum). 
After Mr. Gray had read paragraph 5 of his briefing note, the Director 
of the Bureau of the Budget confirmed Mr. Gray’s statement that the 
decision as to the specific number of reconnaissance satellite test shots 
to be attempted would be worked out through the normal budgetary 
process. Mr. Gray then called on Secretary Quarles for a brief report on 
the status of the reconnaissance satellite program.
Secretary Quarles said the reconnaissance satellite program ante­
dated the IGY satellite program and was motivated by the desire to 
have a vantage point from which to view what goes on behind the Iron 
Curtain. In order to operate reconnaissance satellites for this purpose, 
however, it would be necessary to establish the doctrine of freedom of 
outer space. In the last two years, technology had advanced to the point 
where we can now proceed actively with the development of recon­
naissance satellite vehicles. The program for the current fiscal year calls 
for the use of intermediate-range rockets to put into orbit reconnais­
sance test vehicles weighing from 20 or 40 pounds up to a few hun­
dred pounds. Later intercontinental-­range rockets will be used, and the 
reconnaissance vehicle will weigh 3000–4000 pounds. The goal of the 
program (but not a firm commitment) is to send up the first operational 
reconnaissance satellite in March, 1960.
Secretary Quarles summarized the objectives of the reconnaissance 
satellite as follows: (1) to photograph the earth through TV cameras and 
on command transmit these pictures to a station in the United States; 
(2) to survey and transmit information on electromagnetic radiations;
