508
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
This has led the Soviets to undertake a number of small-scale sweeps
and to launch tactical airstrikes and helicopter attacks at suspected rebel
concentrations. In the northeastern provinces of Takhar and Badakhshan, the
Soviets have undertaken a more ambitious operation to ensure that the besieged
provincial capitals do not fall to the rebels. This drive, however, has been
hampered by bad weather, poor road conditions, and insurgent harassment.2
We have no evidence that Soviet forces have been able to engage the
rebels on terms that would allow the Soviets to bring to bear their
superior firepower and air support.
We have had several reliable but fragmentary reports of Soviet casualties.
One report from a Soviet town near the border reports the recent arrival of
a large number of coffins bearing remains of Soviets killed in Afghanistan.
We believe the Soviets have sustained as many as 2,000 killed and wounded
since the invasion began. We have no information about the number of insur-
gent casualties.
Prospects
Moscow probably will not find early relief from these problems.
The Babrak regime shows no sign of pulling together, and the situation
in the Afghan military will be extremely difficult to retrieve. Even
under the best of conditions, it could take years to assemble an Afghan
military force capable of controlling the country. Thus Moscow almost
inevitably will have to take a more direct hand in running and pacifying
the country.
An early collapse of the rebellion also seems unlikely. Better
weather in the spring probably will bring an increase in insurgent
activity.
All of this does not mean that Moscow cannot maintain essential
control or keep whatever government it wants in power in Kabul. Nor
is there the slightest sign that the Soviets might seriously contemplate
withdrawal.
Politically, Moscow probably will intensify its effort to establish a
more effective Afghan Government. If Babrak cannot do the job, the
Soviets could engineer yet another coup in Kabul, as embarrassing as
that might be for them. But they are unlikely to come up with a formula
2 A situation report on Afghanistan, January 25, prepared in the Bureau of Intelli-
gence and Research, noted that Afghan and Soviet military forces faced a “serious
dilemma” regarding the insurgency: “They must carry out orders that state ‘the rebels
must be destroyed using all resources’ and, at the same time, adhere to a government
policy of refraining from attacking villages or pursuing rebels who take sanctuary in
villages and homes. That policy is part of a propaganda program to reduce hostility
toward the Soviet and Afghan armies.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director
of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordina-
tor for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, SITREPs)
