1957  1435
going to allow a certain number of American newsmen to go to China 
while it does not even try to conceal its refusal to give reciprocal treat­
ment to Chinese newspapermen going to the U.S. All this shows that lip 
service to reciprocity does not mean reciprocity actually. With regard to 
the question of Chinese going to the U.S., this is entirely a matter for the 
Chinese correspondents to decide on because his government has never 
tried to prohibit or prevent the visits of correspondents as my govern­
ment has done. Thus the Chinese correspondents can make their own 
decision on this matter. The question does not depend on the Chinese 
Government or on the Chinese correspondents but it is up to whether 
the U.S. is willing to observe the principle of reciprocity and equality.
14. I replied. Then apparently there was no problem. Apparently 
no Chinese correspondent desired to go to the United States as no one 
has made application to do so.
15. Wang continued. He had made it clear that it was not a question 
of this or that correspondent but was a question of whether the U.S. is 
going to observe the principles of equality and reciprocity in interna­
tional affairs. They could not in any way accept the position of the U.S. 
which unilaterally refused to accord equality and reciprocity to Chinese 
correspondents. This position violated all standards of international 
behaviour.
16. I replied. We simply made it clear in view of the history of this 
question and in view of the legal framework in which we must operate 
that we could not be bound as a matter of right to permit, or to give 
advance approval, to a number of Chinese correspondents correspond­
ing to a number of American correspondents which they might decide 
to admit to their country. If and when any Chinese correspondent 
makes application to go to the U.S. we are entirely willing to consider 
his application. He himself had said that application for visas to his 
country would also be considered individually.
17. I continued. United States correspondents travel to most of the 
countries of the world including those which have social and economic 
systems similar to his own, and correspondents from those countries 
travel to the U.S. In no case did I know of any agreement on reciprocity 
or equality nor has the U.S., for those countries, insisted on any such 
agreement. If they were to do so, we would have to give them the same 
answer I gave him here.
18. He then indicated he had no more to say.
19. I did likewise and suggested we meet again on November 7. 
Wang said he would prefer November 14. I agreed.
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
