26
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
7.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Cargo Preference Legislation
You asked, Tab A, for a brief on oil cargo preference legislation.2
Congressman Murphy, Chairman of the House Merchant Marine
and Fisheries Committee, is now holding hearings on H.R. 1037, a bill
to “require that a percentage of US oil imports be carried on US-flag
vessels”. Executive Branch agencies have been asked to testify on
March 15. The bill would require that an initial 20%, and by June 20,
1980, 30% of US-imported oil be transported on privately-owned
US-built and registered commercial vessels. Similar legislation was
pocket-vetoed by President Ford on December 30, 1974 because, as he
then noted, of its substantial adverse effect on the US economy and in-
ternational interests.3
This bill would benefit the US maritime industry by increasing the
utilization of US tankers and jobs. However, it has a number of draw-
backs as well. It would, by extending cargo preferences to commercial
cargoes, deviate from the long-standing US policy of fostering competi-
tion in international shipping; violate most-favored nation and “na-
tional treatment” clauses of our Friendship, Commerce and Navigation
Treaties (which require that each treaty partner provide reciprocal
treatment to the flag vessels of the other party with respect to interna-
tional carriage of commercial cargoes); encourage the adoption of sim-
ilar measures by other countries (particularly oil-exporting countries
who are already demonstrating a tendency to get into the oil shipping
business); force the US consumer to eventually absorb the higher oper-
ating cost of using US-registered vessels as opposed to foreign vessels;
and force the US to underwrite the higher construction costs of new
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 14, Congressional: 3/77. Secret. Aaron initialed the memorandum on Brzezinski’s be-
half. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Sounds bad. J.”
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is the second page of what appears to be one of
Vance’s daily evening reports to Carter. In the margin next to the third item in the report,
on “Oil Cargo Preference Legislation,” Carter wrote, “Zbig—give me brief on this.”
3 For Ford’s “Memorandum of Disapproval of United States Tanker Preference Leg-
islation,” issued December 30, 1974, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States:
Gerald R. Ford, 1974, p. 782.
