Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1143
243.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, August 5, 1991, 1503Z
8572. Subject: START: Soviet Unilateral Statement on Submarine 
Tunnels
1. Secret—Entire Text.
2. On the margins of initialling the START treaty on July 29, 
Nazarkin gave Brooks a Soviet unilateral statement on submarine tun-
nels. Nazarkin said that he had been instructed to make this statement 
at the closing plenary earlier in the day, but the statement was not ready 
in time.
3. Comment: The Soviet position up to and through the time of 
the plenary was that its unilateral statement on submarine tunnels had 
already been made. There was no hint that the statement would be 
made again and no copy was provided at the plenary. End comment.
4. Begin text of Soviet unilateral statement:
Unilateral Statement of the Soviet Side Regarding  
Underground Structures Adjacent to Waters in  
Which Ballistic Missile Submarines Operate
Since the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has underground 
structures located in the immediate vicinity of the Ara Inlet (Kola 
Peninsula), the Yagel’Naya Submarine Base (Kola Peninsula), and the 
Pavlovskoye Submarine Base (Primorskiy Kray), in connection with the 
treaty on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms and 
in order to settle the issue of these underground structures once and 
for all, the Soviet side states that these underground structures have 
no adits that make them accessible to waterborne craft of any displace-
ment from adjacent waters and that the Soviet Union has no plans to 
construct and will not construct such adits as long as the treaty remains 
in force. Effective verification of this shall be ensured by national tech-
nical means.
The Soviet side proceeds from the premise that the United States 
of America does not have and will not construct similar underground 
structures as long as the treaty remains in force.
End Text.
Brooks
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D910745–0060. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent Priority for information to Moscow, the 
Mission to NATO, and USNMR SHAPE.
