944  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
PM–36.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary 
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1

Washington, March 21, 1960.
SUBJECT
PANAMA
PARTICIPANTS
The President	 	
	
	
Assistant Secretary Roderick
The Secretary 		
	
	
General Persons
The Secretary of the Army 	
	
General Goodpaster
The Under Secretary for Political Affairs 	
Assistant Secretary Rubottom
Secretary Brucker referred to the President’s memorandum of one 
month ago2 as providing the basis for the meeting and then distrib-
uted copies of a paper “Proposed Action by Panama Canal Company 
and Canal Zone Government,”3 listing a ten-­point summary of a more 
detailed paper which he handed to the President4 which the latter 
began to read. Secretary Brucker retained a copy of the detailed pro-
posal for his own reading but did not have other copies of the basic 
paper to distribute.
The President, after a few minutes, inquired about the apprentice 
plan, recalling that he had heard from an American source regard-
ing their poor treatment in the Canal Zone training school. General 
Goodpaster said that Robert Burroughs had been the source of this 
report.
Mr. Roderick said that Panamanian apprentices received the same 
wages as Americans (except the regular 25 per cent foreign residence 
differential), starting at approximately $1.00 per hour and increasing 
gradually over the four-­year apprenticeship to almost the maximum 
wage paid to skilled Panamanian workers. He averred that the real 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.1913/3–2160. Confidential; Limit 
Distribution.
2 See Document PM–35, footnote 2.
3 The Panama Canal Company and the Canal Zone Government proposed, in this 
paper, to authorize a 10% increase in the wages of Panamanian employees; to expand 
the apprentice program to admit 25 Panamanians annually; to replace 500 substandard 
housing units in the Canal Zone; to construct 500 low cost housing units in Panama; to 
withdraw the Panama Railroad terminal from Panama; to install a new water main 
to increase the water supply to Panama; to reduce the rate charged for water furnished 
to Panama; to support legislation to increase the pensions paid to disabled Panamanian 
employees; to increase the pay of teachers in Latin American schools; and to continue 
the review of security positions to keep the number at a minimum. (Eisenhower Library, 
Staff Secretary Records, “Panama Canal”)
4 Not found.
