730
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ance on fuels other than oil to meet the energy needs of the future—
coal, nuclear, synthetics, and renewable sources—whose potential to
increase supply is estimated at the equivalent of 15–20 million barrels
daily of oil by 1990. By carrying out the agreed strategy, the partici-
pants expect that the share of oil in total energy demand will be re-
duced in the Summit countries from 53 percent now to about 40 percent
by 1990, that collective energy use will increase only 60 percent as fast
as GNP (the ratio used to be one to one), and that collective oil con-
sumption in 1990 will be significantly below present levels. The Decla-
ration notes the mutual dependence of the industrialized democracies,
the oil exporting countries, and the non-oil developing countries for the
realization of their economic aspirations, and adds, as the Western
countries have said many times before, that the participants “would
welcome a constructive dialogue . . . between energy producers and
consumers in order to improve the coherence of their policies.”
6. On his return from the Summit, President Carter said of the en-
ergy talks, “We recognize that we must break the relationship between
economic growth in the future and our dependence on energy; in other
words, to have more growth for less energy . . . Obviously our
over-dependence on foreign oil takes away our own basic security, the
right that we have to make our own decisions . . . Oil politics is literally
changing the interrelationship among nations. We must stand united,
cooperate whenever we can, and meet a common challenge to the secu-
rity and certainty of the future brought about by rapidly increasing un-
controllable prices of oil, and excess dependence by all of us on imports
of oil.”
7. In addition to energy, the agenda covered macroeconomic issues
(inflation and growth), monetary problems, trade, and relations with
developing countries. The Heads of Government agreed that curbing
inflation and breaking inflationary expectations is the immediate top
macroeconomic priority. It requires restrained fiscal and monetary pol-
icies. None of the participants urged the US to abate recession by stimu-
lating the US economy now; they recognized the danger of rekindling
inflationary expectations nor were they persuaded that there was a
trade-off between inflation and unemployment. Rather, the discussion
focused on inflation as a cause of unemployment. In addition to
short-run demand management, the principals agreed that parallel ac-
tion on the supply side is necessary to encourage investment and inno-
vation and increase productivity.
8. The discussion of international monetary questions at Venice
was limited. There was general satisfaction with the current operation
of the foreign exchange market, and the discussions focused primarily
on recycling problems arising from the latest oil price increases. The
Summit recognized that a combination of financing and adjustment
