Human Rights
361
Latin America
Several Latin American governments are at least as unhappy with
our promotion of human rights as the Soviets. With some like Uruguay,
Paraguay, and Nicaragua, our bilateral interests are so modest that our
prime interest is human rights. This could, of course, become a situa-
tion in which the sum is greater than the parts: if enough such gov-
ernments become sufficiently angry over our human rights approach,
there could be a spillover effect which damaged the OAS, and our in-
terests in it. But this is not yet the case: to the contrary, last summer’s
OAS General Assembly was notable for a surge of human rights
enthusiasm.
And in those Latin American countries where we have more at
stake, no concrete damage seems to have been done. Our severe criti-
cism of Argentina’s human rights record did not prevent it from
agreeing to make some nuclear non-proliferation commitments during
the Secretary’s November visit;18 and it is highly unlikely that Brazil
would have agreed to forego its reprocessing agreement with West
Germany even had we had no human rights policy.19 We cannot know
what price we might one day pay for the deterioration in our once close
military relationships with Brazil and Argentina. That obviously de-
pends in part on the political evolution of the countries themselves—an
evolution to which the human rights policy, if successful, could con-
tribute positively.
Middle East
The impact of our human rights policy on US interests in Middle
Eastern countries has been modest. Few of them are recipients of eco-
nomic assistance and, as noted, we have not put primary emphasis on
human rights considerations, in view of our other pressing interests,
when deciding on arms sales or determining our approach to the area
generally. The quiet diplomacy we have undertaken in the region has
been palatable to the governments concerned, and shown some success
(e.g., in increased Jewish emigration from Syria).
Africa
The human rights policy, far from damaging our interests with Af-
rican governments, has served them. This is partly because the chief
targets of our criticism have been South Africa and Rhodesia, and that
greatly enhances our stature in the area as a whole. We have refrained
from criticism of the human rights problems of frontline states whose
18 Vance traveled to Buenos Aires, Argentina, November 20–22, 1977, to meet with
President Videla.
19 See footnote 5, Document 42.
