3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 480 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI was impossible to verify the distinction. The U.S. offer of distinctions by externally observable design features he rejected as no more than word of honor. 5. Noting a positive shift in the U.S. position on timing for reductions, he rejected the requirement of irreversible inoperability by June 30, 1981. He observed that the Soviet reductions would take place throughout the period, but emphasized that this did not mean they would necessarily take place at a steady rate. He repeated Soviet condition that Treaty must enter into force by March 31, 1979 for Soviets to be willing to complete reductions by December 30, 1981. 6. He rejected a fixed date for protocol expiration other than three years from entry into force, but repeated earlier formulation that it was impossible to consider protocol expiration when we do not know when Treaty will be signed, much less when it will enter into force, which may suggest they have in mind three years from date of signature as the result. 7. Backfire. Gromyko rejected the text Warnke had given Dobrynin, saying that since what was involved was a unilateral Soviet statement, they would decide what went in it. He said his discussions with the President had established that the issue would be resolved on the basis of the text previously given, but with omission of the radius information and flight profile. He read the following text, which, although he did not mention it, also admits the “good will gesture” point: Begin text. The Soviet side informs the U.S. side that the Soviet TU–22–M aircraft, called Backfire in the United States is a mediumrange bomber and that the Soviet side does not intend to give this airplane the capability of operating at intercontinental distances. In this connection, the Soviet side states that it will not increase the radius of action of this aircraft in such a way as to enable it to strike targets on the territory of the United States. It does not intend to give it such capability in any other manner, including aerial refueling at the same time, the Soviet side states that it will not increase the production rates of this airplane as compared to the present rates. End text. This statement would, he said, be handed to the U.S. side at the time of signing the Agreement and giving it must completely exhaust the issue. There could be no changes in the text; it was, for example, essential that it state that the Backfire is a medium-range bomber. Nor would the Soviet side agree to confirm in any way any statement by the U.S. side that arbitrarily interprets the Soviet statement and introduces concrete numbers. His only reference to the U.S. intention to send the statement to Congress along with the Agreement as part of the ratification process was to say that the Soviet side had no objection to the U.S. desire to present the matter in the best possible light, but we could not do that at the expense of the USSR.
