1420  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
15. I continued. He said that August 22 statement said that only 
Americans could go to China and no Chinese could go to the US. The 
statement does not say anything of the kind. It simply says that the US 
is not in a position to accord reciprocity which is a legal fact I could 
not change. Only now for the first time so far as I knew has question 
of Chinese going to US even been raised. As far as I knew we never 
received even an application for anyone to go to US. As I had told 
him here this morning, if any individual or number of correspondents 
makes application, their applications would be considered on same 
basis as any other application.
16. I continued that he had spoken of his government as always 
one which had worked to remove obstacles and that the US always 
­created obstacles. I was astounded that in face of record here that he 
could make such a statement. Even before we came here we made it 
entirely clear that major obstacle was that of imprisoned Americans in 
his country. We entered into an agreement that was supposed to resolve 
that problem. Yet in the face of the very exact words of that agreement 
and whole history of our talks here, he had temerity to allege that agree­
ment does not even apply to the Americans that we were talking about. 
And in face of this he proposed even entering into further agreement.
17. I continued he surely could not believe that I or my government 
was that naive. We entered into the first agreement and here two years 
later the six Americans still in his prisons stand as an indictment of 
his government for not honoring its commitments. If his government 
really wanted to remove obstacles instead of talking about it, and really 
would honor the principle of reciprocity, this agreement would long 
since have been carried out and this obstruction removed. Appealing 
to supposed violations by the US which have no basis in fact, in no 
manner relieves his government of obligation to carry out this agree­
ment. Vague and unsupported statements do not constitute facts nor 
take place of facts. Facts are that the very agency which he suggested 
for seeing that agreement carried out has not called our attention to a 
single violation in any way.
18. Wang continued that when we got to question of return of 
civilians, the principle of looking after interests of both parties still 
applied. From time we began talks to present, it can be said that almost 
all American residents in China including criminal offenders have 
returned to U.S. Whereas in US prisons alone, US is still holding some 
30 Chinese there. It would be a distorted interpretation of agreement if 
one of sides always sees his own interest disregarding others interests. 
On question of exchange of visits between peoples of two countries, his 
side always maintained a clear cut position.
