August 8–September 17, 1978 59 civil war continues, there will be little possibility in moving toward that goal which is of concern to all of us. It seems to me crucial that a major effort now be made to halt the fighting once and for all so that attention can turn to that basic objective. —What I believe must now be done—urgently—is to help bring about a real and lasting ceasefire and a breathing spell during which the underlying causes of the various confrontations in Lebanon could be dealt with. We know that during past ceasefires, provocations against Syrian forces have occurred, yet, since Syria’s publicly stated policy, in addition to attempting to preserve law and order on behalf of the Sarkis government, is to respond only to major provocations, it might be possible to go one step further and reduce the chances of new provocations from elements hostile to Syria. This might take place if Syrian forces would stand fast where they are now and end or cut down the movement of Syrian forces through areas where provocations are likely to occur. —If the Syrian forces made a determined effort to remain only in well protected and heavily fortified positions, reasonably safe from provocations—for at least a while—the repeated series of provocations and counteractions could perhaps be interrupted. If, on the other hand, Syrians continue to advance in force into areas where Syrian forces have not been involved previously, and particularly in the Mount Lebanon heartland, I fear that the situation will continue to deteriorate and the risk of escalation will grow rapidly. In our view, it might be preferable for the time being for Syrian forces to remain aloof from fighting that erupts between Lebanese groups and factions. —I appreciate the renewed assurances about Syria’s objectives that have been conveyed in recent days to us by Foreign Minister Khaddam and Deputy Foreign Minister Kaddour, but I believe the gravity of the situation demands a major determined effort by Syria to bring about an immediate ceasefire. I hope that our two governments can work together to bring about the strong and stable Lebanon which we have both wanted and which is important to Syria’s well-being and security. 2. Make clear to the Syrians that we will, if asked, flatly deny that we have conveyed an Israeli warning to the Syrians. We will say merely that we have continued to be in touch with the Syrian authorities on the situation in Lebanon. However, please be certain that SARG understands from this message that the atmosphere in Jerusalem is increasingly tense about the Lebanese situation and that we are convinced a dangerous train of events could quickly develop. Christopher
