paragraph number (2). To me it seems that if we are not to stand by and see the treaties torn up, we must make a determined resistance to the proposed taxes. However, the attempt might be worth while—and politic even if it were unsuccessful—to persuade the Cantonese and other factions to lay their differences aside to the extent that they appoint representatives for the purpose of discussing with representatives of foreign powers at Peking whether it is possible to find a foundation for such an agreement on tariff problems as would meet with the approval of the various political groups in China. A suggestion to this purpose might be made informally and publicly simultaneously with the refusal of the powers to accept the taxes proposed by the Cantonese.” Received September 30, at 6 p.m. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2. Before I received the Minister’s telegram of September 30 I had reached exactly the conclusion at which he arrived. To me this appears as a final test whether we shall stand by while treaties and all obligations and rights due to the American Government and American citizens, if not in fact their personal safety and their commercial interests, are disregarded and jeopardized, according as the case may be, or whether we shall take action preventing this, producing a change in the atmosphere and ceasing to be longer in the defensive position into which the Chinese have cleverly maneuvered us. The Canton situation presents, in my opinion, the best opportunity for this promulgation that we have had or may hope to get. I am completely in agreement with the Minister in believing that the Cantonese are anxious to avoid contending with the foreign powers in a group and that they are not in a military position to do so. Their campaign is now at a stage that is critical. Should it become more successful, there will be an increase in their political aspirations, with the result that probably they will look forward more immediately to the powers’ recognition. On the other hand,
