3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
489
conceivable that he did not understand that the execution of someone
for allegedly spying for the United States would convey a negative
message regarding the state of our relations. Moreover, the Soviet side
itself injected the Filatov case by forwarding to the President a letter
from Filatov which asserted that the President is morally responsible
for whether Filatov lives or dies. Such a letter was obviously trans-
mitted with the cooperation of the Soviet authorities, and hence I do
not understand how now the Soviet side can insist that we can be en-
tirely indifferent to what happens to Filatov.
Finally, I stressed that we, too, have made significant concessions,
the most important of which was to omit Shcharanskiy from the ex-
change, a fact for which we will doubtless take some political heat. As
the discussion unfolded, Dobrynin became increasingly conciliatory
and started asking me questions as to how I would envisage the “en-
tirely separate and independent” resolution of the Filatov case. For ex-
ample, would we be satisfied if the Soviets informed us privately that
Filatov would not be executed; would we take public credit for it;
would we leak it?
In response I assured Dobrynin that we would not link or make
any claims regarding the Filatov case in the event that his life was
spared, and that we would see the exchange as involving purely and
only the other individuals. I could not guarantee that leaks would not
occur, and I added the hope that in some fashion the Soviet side could
make it known more publicly that Filatov was not being executed, since
that doubtless would contribute also to better atmospherics.
Finally, I again asked Dobrynin to convey to the Soviet side not
only the substance of our position but our genuine desire for a con-
structive resolution of these matters, with both sides necessarily
making some concessions. I got the distinct impression toward the end
of the discussion that something along the above lines might be con-
trived, even if the initial Soviet response is negative.
