1978 277 programs to meet both higher and lower spending levels. The spread on either side of the basic level will start out at ±5% in FY80, rising to ±9% by FY84. This should allow us to consider two kinds of possibilities: reallocations within a given budget level; and net changes in the total budget level. For example, if one Service should propose a particularly attractive program at its augmented level, we could consider adopting part or all of it, and selecting in compensation an offsetting amount of the other Services’ programs at the decremented level. On the other hand, we will be able to combine all the incremented programs (or portions of them) to see what larger Defense budgets would buy, or combine all the decremented programs to see what we would have to give up with smaller Defense budgets. I am sure we will be able to do that much—­to describe the effects in terms of force structure. I will also do my best to describe for you what those effects imply in terms of practical capability. Therefore, I think that then, rather than now, will be a better time for you to judge the adequacy of the Fiscal Guidance. For the moment, there are two things in this connection of which you should be aware. First, the Fiscal Guidance represents a cut of roughly 5% from the previous Five Year Defense Plan (submitted by the Ford Administration in January 1977 and revised by us in a rather pro forma manner in February of 1977). It will thus force compensating cuts in previously planned procurement, force structure, operations, R&D, or whatever. While that is hardly a palatable prospect for the Military Departments, I think it is important that the Five Year Defense Plan be kept realistic rather than fanciful. The second point is that the current Fiscal Guidance is particularly tight in the case of the Department of the Navy. The CG notes that there is a real possibility that our current naval force structure cannot be supported for long within the fiscal limits implied by the CG. The basic problem is that the unit costs of Navy hardware as a whole—­ships, aircraft, submarines—­are rising faster than the Defense budget and the Navy’s share of it. Three ships we are considering for the FY80 program (a Trident submarine, a nuclear-­powered cruiser, and a mid-­sized conventional carrier) would alone cost almost $4 billion—­not much less than our entire FY79 program (though that program is somewhat smaller than normal). In recent years the Navy has been able to buy only about half the tactical aircraft it needs to support a properly modernized force on a long-­term basis; in FY79, it will not be able to buy enough aircraft even to offset its expected peacetime losses. The CG directs a 14% cut in our amphibious assult shipping force in an effort to reallocate funds to higher priority needs. This situation faces us with something of a dilemma. On the one hand, we could decide just to do the best we can at the current level of
