Arms Control and Disarmament  1365
Enclosure
Semi-­Annual Progress Report
SEMIANNUAL PROGRESS REPORT BY THE ATOMIC ENERGY 
COMMISSION AND THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE ON THE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF NSC 5725/1—PEACEFUL USES OF 
ATOMIC ENERGY
1. This report summarizes significant events during the period 
December 1957–June 1958 under NSC 5725/1, “Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy,” dated December 13, 1957. Because many of the items relate to 
several sections of the policy paper, the information is not keyed to spe­
cific paragraphs.
SUMMARY EVALUATION
2. U.S. leadership in peaceful uses of nuclear energy was affirmed 
during the reporting period when the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) requested U.S. cooperation in considering 
whether a joint nuclear program might be developed to install within 
the Community by 1963 sufficient U.S.-­type enriched fueled reactors 
of proven design to supply 1,000,000 kilowatts of electric power. The 
EURATOM program ranks with the establishment of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as one of the most important projects 
to be undertaken within the framework of the President’s Atoms-­for-­
Peace program. It is presently in the final stages of negotiation.
3. Other significant developments include new offers of assist­
ance to the International Atomic Energy Agency; steady advances in 
controlled thermonuclear research paralleling those in the United 
Kingdom; development of an equipment grant program similar to the 
research reactor grant program; continuing assistance to other nations 
in the development of national programs; negotiation of a comprehen­
sive power Agreement for Cooperation with Japan, and the increas­
ing scope of U.S. preparations for participation in the Second United 
Nations Conference on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy.
4. Meanwhile, Great Britain has revealed a “stretch-­out” in the 
phasing of its massive nuclear power program, the target date for com­
pletion being moved from 1965 to 1966. There are indications of further 
slippage in the Soviet program. A 40-­stage gaseous diffusion isotope 
separation pilot plant is reported to have begun operation in France in 
December 1957. Interest in nuclear propulsion for commercial vessels 
has increased, particularly in Japan, West Germany, Norway, Sweden, 
and France. U.S. firms maintained their dominant position in the for­
eign market for research reactors, but neither the U.S. nor any other
