616
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
B. You will recall that both in Washington in December3 and earlier
in Tokyo,4 the President asked the Prime Minister—as a means of doing
our part on the Western side to facilitate progress in CTB—to consider
accepting four NSS in the UK and its dependent territories.
—We have looked at various ways together as to how this might
be done. One possibility, for example, was reflected in the idea which
Secretary Vance and Lord Carrington discussed on a contingency basis
in December5 that if you would look into the possibility of locating
three stations in Southern Hemisphere territories, we would examine
whether it might be possible to fund the equipment for those three
stations.
—The President has concluded after examining this idea that it
would not be appropriate for US to finance those stations. We remain
prepared, however, to explore other possibilities of mutual cooperation
with you.
C. We continue to believe that our key objective should be to nail
down Soviet acceptance of 10 NSS on their territory. And we should
avoid giving the Soviets any basis for charging that we are obstructing
the CTB.
—The President therefore hopes you will be able to accept three
stations in the Southern Hemisphere. In our view, such stations would
serve our mutual interests in both CTB and non-proliferation moni-
toring, and give us a much firmer basis for continuing to oppose the un-
justified Soviet demand that the UK accept ten NSS.
—On this basis, and after consulting with you on tactics and
timing, we would make it clear to the Soviets that the Western side had
now done all it can to resolve this question, and we therefore fully ex-
pect them to accept the new position. While it’s highly unlikely that the
Soviets would promptly accept the offer, it would put US in a good po-
sition to demand that the Soviets drop their linkages and negotiate seri-
ously on the many difficult and time-consuming verification and other
issues which would still remain unresolved.
—If the UK agrees in principle to accept four NSS, we would con-
sult closely with you on how and when to play this in Geneva in order
to put the strongest possible pressure on the Soviets. Needless to say,
we would stand solidly with you in advancing such a position to the
Soviets.
D. Let me stress, finally, that we value the close and cooperative
US/UK relationship on CTB policy. We naturally want to continue this,
and look forward to working closely with you in coming months on all
CTB-related issues, including the question of how to handle CTB both
in the CD and at the NPT review conference in August. End text.
3 See Document 242.
4 See footnote 3, Document 240.
5 No record of this meeting has been found.
