February 1951–February 1952
179
16. Although Mossadeq will probably continue to seek US aid to
enable him to meet his budgetary deficit—which would make it easier
for him to stand firm on his own terms for an oil settlement and would
temporarily strengthen his political position—it is increasingly clear
that he opposes the development of closer military and political ties
with the West. He has vacillated on giving formal approval to the con-
tinuance of the US military missions and the military aid program. He
also has strong objections to becoming subject to the US economic ad-
vice. Although he was recently prevailed upon to sign a Point IV agree-
ment, he has thus far refused to provide the assurances that would en-
able Iran to obtain military assistance under the Mutual Security
Program. If he fails to receive US aid to relieve his growing budgetary
difficulties, he may terminate the contracts of the US military missions
and eventually curtail US technical and economic assistance activities
in Iran. However, it is also possible that internal pressures may force
him to go further in giving commitments to the US than he would per-
sonally favor. Meanwhile, he will almost certainly make greater efforts
to expand Iran’s economic relations with other countries including the
Soviet bloc, providing they do not appear to involve foreign interfer-
ence in Iran’s domestic affairs.
17. As an alternative to US aid, Mossadeq almost certainly would
press forward with negotiations now under way with Poland, Czecho-
slovakia and Hungary for the sale of some two million tons of Iranian
oil, and will probably also seek oil deals with other members of the So-
viet bloc or with the USSR itself. However, it is unlikely that the Soviet
bloc could provide enough tankers to move financially significant
quantities of oil from Iran, and thus the sale of oil to the Soviet bloc
would probably not provide Mossadeq with a lasting solution of his fi-
nancial problems.
18. The USSR might attempt to gain political advantages in Iran by
providing Mossadeq with limited advances against future oil deliveries
or by satisfying Iran’s dollar and gold claims against the USSR. Such
measures would have only a temporary effect on the financial position
of the Mossadeq government. We do not believe that the USSR would
be willing to give Mossadeq sufficient assistance to solve Iran’s finan-
cial problems except on terms which he would be unable to accept. The
Soviets probably estimate that their best chance of gaining control of all
or parts of Iran is by allowing the situation to continue to deteriorate
rather than by bolstering any Iranian Government.
19. The loss of foreign exchange as a consequence of the closing of
the oil industry will force the Iranian Government in the coming
months to reduce imports largely to the level which can be financed
from the proceeds of non-oil exports. Because of the high level of ex-
ports which has characterized Iranian foreign trade in the Korean war
