522
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
187.
Memorandum Prepared in the Embassy in the United
Kingdom1
London, April 7, 1953.
Minister of Court Ala called on Ambassador Henderson on the
morning of April 4. He said that he had just returned from spending
two days with the Shah at a Caspian Sea resort. During the two days
Ala said that he had done everything he could to persuade the Shah
that Mossadeq would probably obtain all the reins of power unless the
Shah took some definite step in opposition. He pointed out that the
Shah’s position might become practically hopeless. The Prime Minister
was set on forcing the Majlis to approve the report of the 8-man com-
mittee. He would interpret the committee’s approval as authorization
for his becoming the actual Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces
and also for his controlling revenues which were currently accruing di-
rectly to the Crown. Ala also told the Shah that the only candidate who
had the necessary energy and backing to succeed Mossadeq was Gen-
eral Zahedi. The latter had agreed to present his undated resignation to
the Shah in advance so that should the Shah be displeased with him he
could dismiss him at any time. Among the General’s support was
Kashani, Haerizadeh and other dissident members of the national
movement, influential political leaders not connected with that move-
ment and many mullahs, merchants, army officers, etc.
The Shah seemed impressed and said he would give the matter
further consideration on his return to Tehran (on the afternoon of the
4th). Ala emphasized the necessity of acting quickly. He pointed out
that the Prime Minister was preparing a demonstration on April 5 or 6
to intimidate members of the Majlis. These demonstrations would
probably be supported by certain disguised Tudeh groups as well as
other groups imported from outlying districts and provinces.
In reply to a question by Ambassador Henderson, Ala said that
Kashani supported Zahedi but, as with Maki, he hesitated to go all out.
While giving lip service, both appeared to prefer to maintain a position
which would allow them to plead non-involvement should the attempt
to overthrow Mossadeq by peaceful or other means fail. Ala said he in-
tended to see Kashani later in the day in an effort to persuade him to
take a more forthright position.
1 Source: British National Archives, General Correspondence of the Foreign Office,
FO 371/4564. Top Secret. According to a covering memorandum by A.K. Rothnie of the
British Foreign Office, this memorandum is a paraphrase of a telegram from Henderson,
which was handed to the British by Houghton of the U.S. Embassy in London.
