1955  349
it considered necessary to enable the third countries to assume their 
functions. It would not be necessary to debate, either in the meetings or 
publicly, who was inviting whom.
The first indication that Wang was going to make an issue of the 
interpretation of Paragraph 2 came in the 15th meeting on September 
14, the first one following the issuance of the Agreed Announcement. 
At that meeting I informed Wang that the United States had invited the 
Government of India to undertake the functions set forth in the Agreed 
Announcement and asked him what action his government had taken 
with respect to the United Kingdom. He was apparently caught unpre­
pared by our prompt action with respect to India, as he did not say that 
the PRC had extended an invitation to India. The best he could do was 
to propose that the U.S. and the PRC deliver to the U.K. and the GOI, 
respectively, official texts of the Agreed Announcement, which would 
“complete the official procedures regarding invitation of third pow­
ers”. He also complained that some press accounts were distorting the 
meaning of the Announcement by alleging that the U.S. was to invite 
the GOI and the PRC the U.K.
Before the next meeting (the 16th on September 20) it became obvi­
ous that the PRC was prepared to argue vigorously for its interpretation 
of Paragraph 2. A commentary, entitled “Forbid the Misinterpretation 
of an Agreement” appeared in the Jen Min Jih Pao on September 16, 
which alleged that the USIS was distorting the Agreed Announcement 
by stating that it was the U.S. which should invite India and the PRC 
which should invite the U.K. The commentary rejected this interpre­
tation, declaring that the “attempt” by the USIS to “juggle the facts to 
hoodwink world opinion” was “not a very smart trick”.
On the same day, September 16, Wang, acting under instructions 
from his government, sent me a letter (my despatch No. 5, September 
21, 1955) in which he referred to my statement on September 14 that 
the U.S. had formally invited India and declared that this statement 
would be interpreted and understood by the PRC as meaning that the 
U.S. agreed to India’s assuming the functions entrusted to it by the PRC. 
At the same time he asked me to inform him whether the U.S. had for­
mally “entrusted the United Kingdom”, adding that when this had been 
done, the PRC would notify the U.K. of its agreement.
At the 16th meeting, on September 20, Wang sought persistently, 
but unsuccessfully, to get me to agree to his interpretation. Finally, he 
accepted my statement that the U.S. had requested the U.K. to assume 
the functions set forth in the Agreed Announcement choosing to inter­
pret it as a formal invitation and said that the PRC would notify the U.K. 
of its agreement. He also stated at this meeting, for the first time, that the 
PRC had formally invited the GOI. Although it must have been clear to 
Wang after this meeting that the difference of interpretation of Paragraph
