Human Rights 565 hardship, but suggested that perhaps we could obtain from MDB staffs preliminary or working documents which would provide enough information for our purposes.5 (6) They also want to know when we are seeking their support because of the depth of our concern as opposed to simple notification.6 (7) Most other governments do not examine documents on MDB projects as carefully as we do; nor do they have coordinated procedures for consideration of human rights issues. Consequently, in order for our solicitations of support to be effective, they must include more complete information on our analysis of projects and human rights conditions.7 Given the reluctance of other governments to oppose projects except in the most serious cases, we must select very carefully the instances on which we will solicit their support. Of course, we should continue to advise them when we decide to oppose a project even if we do not explicitly seek their support for our position. Once others become accustomed to opposing projects, we may wish to solicit their opposition on a broader range of projects. As our embassies approach governments on specific projects, we also should advise relevant executive directors at the MDBs and perhaps their embassies here and even in the prospective recipient countries. At Tab 28 is a list of forthcoming MDB projects in countries with serious human rights problems. We could select a few of these now and begin to collect information and prepare our analysis for presentation to other governments. Since we have already decided to oppose the IBRD Railways II loan to Argentina and its consideration by the Board has been postponed until January 30, EB, HA, S/P and Treasury believe that it might be a good first case. This is particularly so, since even our simple notification drew preliminary positive responses from the UK9 and the Scandinavian countries. ARA, however, believes that this case is not an appropriate one on which to solicit support by other countries as the U.S. is only abstaining rather than voting no. 5 An unknown hand placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to the portion of this paragraph that begins with the word “brought” and ends with the word “purposes.” 6 An unknown hand underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with the word “because” and ending with the word “notification.” 7 An unknown hand underlined the last sentence of this paragraph and placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence. 8 The undated list, entitled “Upcoming Multilateral Development Bank Assistance to Selected Countries with Human Rights Concerns,” is attached but not printed. Christopher bracketed the word “Concerns” and wrote “Problem” next to it in the margin. 9 An unknown hand corrected “UN” to read “UK” and placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to the portion of the paragraph that begins with the word “governments” and ends with the word “no” in the following paragraph.
