September 1953–December 1954
761
months, some of the brothers, in my opinion, will come to Tehran (indi-
cated by Khosrow) at which time a full reconciliation can be achieved.
I picked up one thing which I am not totally able to evaluate, but
which I feel should be passed on. Habib is liked by the Ghashghaies,
but does not stand in too high regard with a number of them, the
reason is that he does not represent any tribal people since his tribe is
dissolved. And secondly, some feel that he would put personal interest
over that of serving the tribes.
E.C. Bryant
316.
Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
No. 154
Tehran, September 11, 1953.
SUBJECT
Attitude of Qashqai Tribes Toward the Zahedi Government
There are transmitted herewith several items reflecting upon the
attitude of the Qashqai tribes toward the Zahedi Government (see list
on page 3).2
As was to be expected, the Qashqai tribes were greatly alarmed by
the change in administration occurring on August 19, fearing that it
portended activity against them by the Central Government and by the
Shah in particular. Principally through the leadership of Khosro Qash-
qai, a member of the National Movement Faction in the 17th Majlis, the
tribes thoroughly allied themselves with the Mosadeq Government
and on repeated occasions indicated to American officials in Iran that
they would resist with force any change in administration unless they
were assured in advance of a benevolent attitude on the part of the suc-
cessor government.
In keeping with previous events, on August 19 tribesmen dis-
armed the Gendarme´rie garrison of some 20 men at Semiron, summer
seat of the tribes, but restored them to their former duties several days
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/9–1153. Secret;
Security Information. Drafted by Gannett. Received September 18. Sent by pouch to Is-
fahan and London.
2 The list of enclosures on page 3 is not printed. None of the enclosures is printed.
