Options Identified 283 measures would follow certain actions on their part. That warning appeared to be credible, but now it seems to have worn off and they are convinced that we are unwilling to pursue non-peaceful options. Secretary Brown noted that if the UN does not support us on sanctions, we will be worse off since there will be a question of whether our cause is just and stronger measures are justified. Mr. Aaron and Jody Powell, on the contrary, felt that going to the UN established a record of exhausting all peaceful remedies. Dr. Brzezinski said that our statement should make clear that sanctions are the last peaceful remedy but that other remedies are not excluded if that fails. That will pressure others to support us. General Jones added that there are a number of minor military steps, e.g. SR–71 overflights, which would underline our ability and willingness to turn to other options. Mr. Newsom argued that Ambassador McHenry should be given 48 hours to sound out attitudes in the SC. Secretary Brown warned that one outcome of the SC debate might be to get a resolution opposing the use of non-peaceful means.11 Mr. Christopher observed that we could get a message back to the Iranians through the Swiss channel that our patience is running out. Mr. Donovan pointed out that we might succeed in getting Chapter VII sanctions then find that it produced no results while tying our hands from taking more vigorous action. (TS) 4. Covert Action. Dr. Brzezinski introduced the two papers (Plan A and Plan B) previously prepared by Stan Turner. Plan B was more modest. [3 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown said that Plan B was a logical first step toward Plan A. If we were not willing to go that far, we were abdicating our ability to influence events. [7½ lines not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski interpreted it to mean that we were opposed to a Khomeini-controlled regime, without specifying what type of government would emerge. We want a government we can work with, that is all. Mr. Christopher said he was prepared to support Plan B, but he found Turner’s description somewhat difficult. The SCC reviewed the wording of the specific proposed finding and agreed that it should be rewritten to be more in conformance with Plan B. A meeting would be held later with the Attorney General and OMB present to examine the finding officially. (TS) 11 Carter underlined the words “opposing the use of non-peaceful means” and wrote in the margin: “We would veto.”
