452 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Schmidt: I suggest that the EC language which Jenkins read be included in the declaration before we come to the FRG, because we are acting under the EC declaration. Then we can have the German commitment. Then we can quote Callaghan’s contribution saying he will carry on the fight against inflation. It will help me in the FRG. Callaghan: It will help me, if we commit ourselves here, to resist inflation back home. Giscard: Much work has been done in the OECD group under Charles Schultze. We said we agree to the goals set for us in that group. We are the leaders of Europe in growth. We agreed with Schultze that we should have a stimulus of .5% of GDP. Our contribution will go hand-in-hand with the fight against inflation—a decrease in our budget deficit of 10 billion francs. We are prepared to put this in the final communique. Carter: Our part of the statement concentrates on reducing inflation, our trade deficit and our energy imports. I have a feeling that Schmidt’s verbal statement was more forthcoming and specific than his written statement. The US portion of this is too lengthy and we look to your advice as to how we can extract the pertinent sentences. If the FRG and Japan are reluctant to indicate specific expressions of their goals it will make it more difficult for me to project more specific goals on energy. I would like to agree on specific goals if others are willing to do so. Percentage increases indicated in the declaration are more convincing to the general public. We can give specific figures on the dates and goals to be achieved. If others do the same, it will help me. We should clarify this today. We know what we can do if others do the equivalent amount. Criticize us if you believe our statement is not sufficiently forthcoming. Let our aides negotiate specific language. Andreotti: We can say we are moving in the right direction. In 1977 we had a $1.7 billion current account surplus. In 1978 there will be a $3.5 billion surplus. But we still have a very large budget deficit. I will introduce very large cuts in public expenditure in new legislation. The task is difficult because inflation is still very high. And because of unemployment, an austerity program is not regarded with much enthusiasm. Our weak side is the employment problem. Schmidt: Could you indicate something about Italy’s fight against inflation as the Italian contribution? We can leave it to the experts to determine the wording. Trudeau: I agree that it is desirable for the participants to put something in the communique. We will put a phrase in it. Our situation is not very good or very bad. We have the fastest growing labor force in the OECD. We are creating jobs at a rate exceeded only by the US. But unemployment will remain high. We could refer to our rate of growth and to measures we are taking to fight inflation. We are now entering a
