744
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
it cannot help but affect morale in our embassies, particularly when
there is disagreement about basic policies. (C)
The President. What kinds of policies? (C)
Ambassador Watson. Well, China would be one thing—the policy of
evenhandedness, especially the question of MFN and of supplying
strategic products to the Chinese. We seem to be sending out mixed
signals. (C)
The President. This is a misconception. There have been no high
level differences on China policy. You can ask both Ed Muskie and Cy
Vance and they will tell you that all our decisions about China were
reached with complete compatibility at the top level. There are, of
course, differences within the State Department, with each area and
head of area thinking his area should be preeminent and that his area is
the most important for our foreign policy. Dick Holbrooke’s attitude
toward China is different from that of the man in charge of European
affairs.3 I think that is the real origin of any confusion regarding our
policies. The State Department is an unwieldly, compartmentalized bu-
reaucracy. That is its nature and it is not going to change. On MFN, we
wanted to move together with both the Soviets and the Chinese, but
events made that impossible. I can assure you that on the question of
normalization with China and on the sale of military related equipment
to China there have been no major differences at the top levels of this
Administration. Isn’t that so, Zbig? (C)
Dr. Brzezinski. There’s been only one difference that I am aware
of. And that is that Fritz pushed for MFN for China even before we
did. (C)
Ambassador Watson. Still, I think we should keep in mind the basic
nature of the Chinese and what they believe in. What are the real differ-
ences between the Chinese takeover of Tibet and what has happened in
Afghanistan? (C)
Dr. Brzezinski. One main difference is that the Chinese invasion of
Tibet took place many years ago and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
took place last December. We cannot as policy-makers deal with events
which took place in the distant past, or continually place in the fore-
front such occurrences as the Soviet takeover of the Baltic States. In fact,
the President’s policy on the USSR was quite clearly articulated in his
speech in Philadelphia.4 (C)
Ambassador Watson. I did not in any way mean to suggest that we
should condone what the Soviets did in Afghanistan. If you look back
at the original telegram sent out by Garrison and me on December 25,
3 Presumable reference to Vest.
4 See Document 147.
