604  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Dr. Perry then presented five possible modernization programs for 
our ICBM force: (1) a baseline option with minimal modernization; (2) 
an option adding MPS/M–X to the baseline for $32B in procurement 
and operating costs thru FY 2000; (3) an option adding small missiles 
on trucks to the baseline for $26B; (4) an option adding 100 M–X in 
STOL aircraft plus 100 M–X in silos for $35B, and finally (5) an option 
putting Trident II missiles in submarines and 400 silos, and increasing 
the baseline cruise missile carrier purchase by 100 at a total cost of $37B. 
Dr. Perry then showed that Option 5 is the most cost effective in terms 
of surviving EMT or RVs per dollar, Option 2 comes in second, Option 4 
comes in third, and Option 3 is tied with Option 1 for last place because 
its trucks can be destroyed on their bases in a day-­to-­day alert situation. 
In discussing the options, the following points were made. (S)
Option 2 is the JCS strong and unanimous choice, though they sug-
gest adding a Trident II deployment program to it once MPS/M–X has 
been developed. They argue that MPS can be expanded to deal with 
increased threats, or defended by BMD, and can be verified with the 
sort of cooperative measures that will be required if deep cuts are to be 
achieved in SALT III. The JCS noted that the fractionation limits it con-
tains are the most valuable element of SALT II and that with unlimited 
throw weight fractionation, MPS would have problems. (S)
OSD noted that Option 2 has a big SALT plus in that by making 
the percentage survival of our missiles independent of the number we 
own, it could make reductions easier; that the governors and legisla-
tures of the two states where it would be deployed support it—­though 
outside opposition might build a case on environmental concerns any-
way; that losing its security would make MPS a disaster; that MPS has 
good endurance though perhaps not against bombers; and that while 
the breakout problem is not unique to MPS, this system draws attention 
to the problem. (S)
State questioned whether MPS could survive in the absence of 
SALT and was told we could expand MPS more cheaply than the Sovi-
ets could raise their RV numbers. OSTP argued that a race where the 
Soviets build RVs and we build holes would be ludicrous, and that the 
panel they have looking at the basing issue is concerned about the pos-
sibility of catastrophic breakdowns in deception. ACDA asked whether 
the large number of aim points presented by MPS would reduce Soviet 
incentives to agree to fractionation limits in SALT III. CIA suggested 
that a variant of MPS using the Trident II missile should be examined—­
this change would allow us to go to a different mobile option if neces-
sary. Further, proceeding with Trident II would allow us to move our 
hard-­target capability to sea. (S)
Mr. Aaron commented that we should test the MPS system against 
larger threats than those possible under SALT II since it will expire
