March 27–December 31, 1979 1009 oil in relation to the future—e.g. the exchange of Israeli and Egyptian Ambassadors in February. —Sanctions against Egypt: New steps are unlikely to be taken; however, there is a good chance of a declaration listing a series of punitive steps following the exchange of Ambassadors. —Eastern Front: It will probably be raised by Syria and/or Iraq and the PLO, but is unlikely to be established. At most, there will be a declaration of intention. If it does get serious consideration, it will sink the whole Lebanon initiative. —Hussein initiative: It is essentially dead at the moment; in particular, Arafat has cancelled his trip to Amman this weekend (presumably because of Iran), and Hussein can’t move without coordination with the PLO. Failure of this effort leaves the moderates without an issue around which to coalesce. —Hostages: Iran will no doubt be discussed privately. If the hostage issue is still unresolved, it is possible that the Summit could take a position (most likely privately conveyed); we should consider asking Waldheim to send a message to the Arab League Secretary-General if the situation is not resolved this week. —Iraq: It will work hard to dominate the Summit and drive it in a hardline direction, but might be disposed to be more moderate if we were to have a preliminary discussion about common problems with Iran. This should not even be considered until the hostages have been released, and then balanced against the risks of our later being associated with any Iraqi action against Iran. —Sadat: We should suggest to him gently that he say nothing publicly to inflame the Summit.10 (S/S) In general, Arab Summits are not helpful to our interests. We are helped, however, by the number of items on the agenda (also including the Euro-Arab dialogue and aid to Jordan, PLO, etc.), and a lot of disarray among the rejectionists. (S) We also discussed the potential impact on the Gulf Arabs of the Iranian situation. The consensus was that we will be better placed for low-key discussions with countries like Saudi Arabia on security, and that the Iran situation would continue the Saudis’ drift back to us (as 10 On November 14, the Egyptian media reported an interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation in which Sadat asserted that Egypt had “overcome” the effects of cuts in aid from Arab states as a result of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty. Moreover, Sadat predicted that the autonomy talks would be completed in 2–3 months, Hussein would join the negotiations and “assume responsibilities for the West Bank,” and that a “hysterical” Arab reaction would accompany the scheduled exchange of ambassadors between Egypt and Israel. (Telegram 23421 from Cairo, November 14; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790524–0802)
