National Security Policy 109 Paper Distributed at the 359th NSC Meeting1 Washington, March 20, 1958 IMPORTANT POINTS IN THE “ESTIMATE OF THE WORLD SITUATION” (NIE 100–58) (Figures in parenthesis refer to “Estimate” paragraphs) 1. Soviet Strength and Intentions. a. The Soviet world position vis-­a-­vis the West has improved in 1957 over 1956, in part due to its demonstrated scientific capabilities, its reasserted control over Bloc countries, and the effective psycholog­ ical impact of its propaganda effort to depict Russia as the advocate of “peace” and “disarmament.” This Soviet trend is not necessarily irre­ versible. (1, 19). b. The Soviet determination to achieve world leadership is unabated. (6, 40). c. It is unlikely that at least in the next five years the Soviet Union, even with an ICBM capability, will embark on general nuclear war or deliberately take actions involving serious risk of such war. The Soviet Union has still a healthy regard for U.S. retaliatory capability and of damage attending nuclear exchanges. (10, 66). d. Changes in top Kremlin personnel do not indicate a deteriora­ tion or disintegration in the Soviet regime’s policy or determination to gain world leadership for Communism. However, there are evolu­ tionary changes in Soviet society which might in the long run (but not in nearby times) turn Russia into a nation with which the Free World could live more at peace. e. During the foreseeable future there will be a dangerous jockey­ ing for position between the U.S. and the USSR, involving the most dif­ ficult calculations of risk of actions or inactions in particular situations. (67, 70). Failure to calculate accurately could lead to local war or even to a general conflict. Despite efforts to keep wars limited, the chances of doing so whenever major areas or causes are involved are at best not too promising. (67). 2. The State of Mutual Deterrence and Deterioration in the Western Position. a. The U.S. and the USSR will soon achieve a state of mutual deter­ rence, under which each will try to avoid a general nuclear conflict
