Afghanistan
783
294.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, July 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and a
cover page.]
The Intervention in Afghanistan:
Ramifications for Soviet Interests Abroad
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
Soviet interests abroad have suffered because of the intervention in
Afghanistan—and especially the USSR’s failure to consolidate control.
Although things now look better to Moscow than they did a few months
ago, the negative reaction to the invasion was greater than the Kremlin
anticipated and, though now diminished, remains of considerable con-
cern. ([classification marking not declassified])
The desire to consolidate control in Afghanistan at any cost may
prove overriding, but Moscow has been given important incentives to
try to achieve this objective with a minimum of forces. A major escala-
tion that did not produce victory in the field or obtain accommodations
to strategic Soviet goals in Southwest Asia would result in further harm
to Soviet external interests. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
The Soviets have made several gains and avoided some poten-
tial losses:
• Moscow has derived comfort from West European desires to
maintain a dialogue with the USSR and to avoid heightened tensions
in Europe; the significance attributed by US allies to normal trade with
the Soviet Union; and the uneven Western support of US policies
toward the USSR in the wake of the invasion.
• In Southwest Asia, Soviet ability to bring pressure on Pakistan
and Iran has been enhanced, although neither country has reacted by
accommodating Soviet objectives thus far.
• India, although distressed by the intervention, shows no present
inclination to alter its security ties with the USSR; Iraq’s dependence
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Soviet Moves/Options (May 1980). Top Secret; [codeword
and handling restriction not declassified]. A statement on the cover page reads: “This assess-
ment was prepared by Stephen S. Kaplan USSR/EE Division, Office of Political Analysis.
This paper has been coordinated with the Offices of Strategic Research and Economic
Research.”
