104
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
bilateral way, it does not look like something is happening of the nature
of special action. Your doubling of aid by 1982 though is clearly
tangible.
Vance: We can do this easily bilaterally. We can put our share into
the fund. We can do it in a bilateral way so that it will be counted in the
total.
Schmidt: I must ask the gentlemen around this table not to lose
sight of one overriding principle. We should not have a bad conscience
vis-a-vis the LDCs. It is not good that some Westerners go around ex-
tolling their bad consciences. We have done well, much better than the
Communists. We will do more. We want it to be recognized that we
have a moral obligation. And I think we can do better than we are. Al-
though we must ensure that any additional commitments not jeop-
ardize the world economy as a whole.
We have been talking about structural crisis. The oil countries’
price increase has had a major impact on the terms of trade, which is
part of the structural crisis. What we do should not undermine the
world economy. I hold this view as a social democrat, but my liberal
friend Genscher also shares it. A smooth world economy is as impor-
tant to them as it is to us. With respect to aid, $17 billion worth is pro-
vided; 80% comes from OECD countries, 15% from the OPEC coun-
tries, and 5% from the COMECON. They provide a lot of military aid.
But their economic aid all together is only 50% of that of Germany.
They sponsor wars in Africa and we let them get away with it. We
should invite them today to participate in the aid effort—to take up
their part of the responsibility. The Soviet Union and the East Germans
are comparable to some industrialized countries.
In other fields I have the impression, as I said before, that we are
going to meetings with bad consciences. We have been willing to give,
but we are not asking all others to give as well. I am willing to go to my
nation to ask them to give more—to make additional sacrifices. But we
also want to get something. I want to get more stability and foresee-
ability in the system. I want guarantees for foreign investment in their
countries. If we do not have this, private investment will diminish and
aid requests will increase. This should be in the final act.
OPEC should also give certain pledges in the final act. They have
contributed to the structural mess of the world economy. Saudi Arabia
needs and deserves praise. It has been especially helpful. But there
ought to be a pledge on the quantity of oil to ensure adequate supplies.
We should not talk about a price mechanism. I don’t believe in a price
mechanism very much, but we should at least ask this of them. It is out-
rageous that they embargo us.
Thus the Declaration should refer to the Soviet Union, LDC invest-
ment guarantees, and OPEC assurances on supply. Returning to my
point about sacrifices, we should indicate that we will make some.
