356 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —We have reduced the PL 480 allocation to Guinea,11 and increased it to Peru, on human rights grounds; —We appear to have indefinitely delayed one CCC credit to Chile, and the Interagency Group on Foreign Assistance and Human Rights is also available for advice to ExIm when the latter requests (as it has done on Uruguay and Argentina). But most of our bilateral effort has focused not on determining who is a deserving recipient of aid, but rather on ensuring that it does in fact promote human rights: —$750,000 was earmarked in AID’s FY 78 budget for projects which promote civil and political rights (e.g., legal aid for the poor). —We are beginning to implement the new legislative requirement that human rights violators which receive PL 480 Title I assistance report on how food or the proceeds from its sale is used to “directly benefit needy people.” Reporting requirements have been signed with Indonesia and Guinea and negotiations are underway with Bangladesh, South Korea, Zaire and Somalia. They may begin with a few others. Human rights concerns may cut more deeply into AID programs—including country allocations—in the future, beginning with the 1979 budget. This is a difficult and controversial business since, even though AID money can be reprogrammed to other countries, we would be reducing aid specifically designed to benefit needy people in a particular country in order to express disapproval of their government and try to influence its performance on civil or political human rights. The International Financial Institutions The human rights policy has had greater—and more visible—impact on our role in International Financial Institutions, especially on loans for industrial development which seldom meet the “basic human needs” criteria. Since the Carter Administration took office we have abstained from voting on eleven loans on human rights grounds (to 11 At its October 14, 1977, meeting, the Interagency Group reduced the proposed P.L. 480 agreement with Guinea from $7 million to $5 million. (“A Summary of the Decisions Taken by the Inter-Agency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Economic Assistance, May–October 1977,” October 21; ibid.) According to the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s January 16, 1978, evening report: “The human rights situation in Guinea appears to have improved significantly largely in response to American and other Western pressure. Sekou Toure ordered the release of at least 62 political prisoners during December—the largest single political amnesty in Guinea’s history. Toure apparently intends to release all political prisoners by the end of 1978.” Brzezinski wrote in the margin next to this statement, “shouldn’t we react?” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 1–3/78)
