3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
85
then the two of them could discuss this issue during their special
meeting on the Middle East in May. There were evidently differences
on this procedural question between the various Arab leaders. But it
would be up to the Soviet Union and the United States to steer a true
course, and not allow questions of substance to flounder in procedural
matters.
The Secretary agreed that our two countries would have to exercise
leadership in order not to get bogged down.
Gromyko said that the Soviets were not afraid of these matters. He
was sure we would survive these procedural difficulties. He would
point out that it sometimes happened in the United States that people
preferred to look at very major issues through very small ones, with the
result that minor issues were assigned a significance one million times
more than they were worth. He believed that procedural difficulties
would not be hard to overcome.
The Secretary hoped Gromyko was correct. He had seen too many
conferences spend months and months on procedure, when they
should have been discussing substance.
Gromyko said he was afraid that in that respect he had set a record
at one conference, but the real reason for that only appeared to be pro-
cedural, while in fact it had been a matter of policy.
Secretary Vance recalled that it was only with Gromyko’s good help
that we had managed to settle the question of the shape of the table in
Paris.
Gromyko demonstrated how he had done this, using pencils. The
Secretary was right; such situations did arise. Translating this into se-
rious language, if our two countries pursued a policy aimed at peace, a
really bold policy, then this kind of thorn, the Middle East problem,
impeding the development of our bilateral relations, simply could not
exist. The situation there was not of Soviet creation, and it seemed to be
disturbing not only the Soviet policy, but also US policy as well. How-
ever, the Secretary would be the better judge of US policy.
The Secretary thought that this concluded the Middle East discus-
sion. He and Gromyko would pick it up again in the not too distant
future.
Gromyko agreed, and hoped this could be done with a view to set-
tling the issues on the basis of a general settlement. Perhaps he was an-
ticipating events, but he thought he could say that the United States
would also be interested in a general settlement. After such settlement,
it should also be possible to resolve the question of arms deliveries,
arms sales to the Middle East. Without a general settlement, it was not
possible to do so. If another war broke out, how could our countries
possibly resolve this question? That would be fantasy. But if there was
