Afghanistan
83
ship, especially as it formulates its policies toward Pakistan and Iran.
There is a trade-off here, however, as the Afghans conceivably could
find themselves not completely free agents should Moscow, for its own
purposes, decide to exercise a restraining hand over possible irredentist
Afghan tendencies vis-à-vis the Pushtun and Baluch regions of Paki-
stan, or any Afghan inclination to reheat the Helmand waters dispute
with Iran. Nevertheless, the Afghans could well use a commitment
from Moscow that the USSR would extricate Afghan chestnuts in the
event Taraki might overplay his hand and provoke a strong Pakistani
reaction of some sort. Many observers here believe that such a commit-
ment has already been given, even if only tacitly. From the Soviet
viewpoint, the Afghan potential for making trouble for Iran and Paki-
stan in Baluchistan remains an important card in Moscow’s hand.
Moscow might, therefore, consider some statement of support for
Afghan concern for its “Pushtun and Baluch brethren.”
8. Economic needs: Also of immediate concern to the Afghan lead-
ership is the extent to which Moscow would be willing to underwrite
Afghanistan’s economic development should Kabul’s stand on interna-
tional issues and its approach to bilateral programs provoke a reduction
of Western or Arab-Iranian assistance. The presence of several “eco-
nomic” ministers in the Taraki party signals a long Afghan shopping
list. Although no non-Communist country has as yet significantly cut
its operations here, radical or rigid Afghan policies could create a
situation in which Moscow and its Socialist colleagues would be the
only donor countries willing to invest economic resources in Afghani-
stan, a possibility which could well have provoked the Afghan leader-
ship’s recent pro-Soviet displays. A Soviet diplomat in Kabul recently
told an Indian diplomat that the Socialist Bloc is prepared and able to
shoulder the entire development burden in Afghanistan should the
West elect to quit the field (Kabul 8970).5 Taraki’s delegation might
also ask the Soviets to support Afghanistan’s food needs during the
current testing period when oppositionists are successfully withholding
key commodities, such as flour, from the market. Although Moscow
may be unwilling to satisfy each Afghan request to the letter, Taraki
and his colleagues will probably not come away empty-handed. It is
possible that the Soviets might utilize this occasion to announce another
large credit for Afghan development. We presume that the Soviets are
fully cognizant of the crucial supporting role they play here, and that
they will want to reassure, to an extent consistent with their own
assessment of the relationship, the Afghan leadership that Taraki and
his colleagues can count on Moscow’s backing on several fronts.
5 Telegram 8970 from Kabul is dated November 8. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780461–0225)
