1034  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Ministers are subjected could be eliminated if decissions were made 
by a high-­level inter-­agency group rather than by individual Ministers.
Ambassador Berckemeyer said that Peru has legislation providing 
for a coordinating body but that it has not been implemented.
Mr. Waugh said that he had found during his trip that countries in 
Latin America are having trouble at the present because of low prices 
for export products, an effort to carry forward economic development 
programs at a faster rate than is actually possible and payment of social 
benefits in excess of economic capacity. Peru is better off than most 
countries in Latin America, and its long run prospects appear good. 
However, good development planning is needed, especially at the pres-
ent time.
Mr. Thorndike said that he is sure that Peru will be in a good posi-
tion in five or six years but in the meantime does need to obtain large 
loans from abroad. He gave Mr. Waugh a copy of the attached memo-
randum outlining Peru’s problems.3 (This memorandum, except for the 
attachment dealing with minerals, is Thorndike’s rewrite of a memo-
randum prepared for him by Pedro BELTRAN, publisher of La Prensa.)4
As we were leaving the meeting I told Mr. Thorndike that we are 
very much troubled by the new tax bill which has just been passed 
involving discrimination against foreign companies. The bill includes, 
among other things, a 196 tax on foreign loans in Peru which would 
be unjust and would discourage foreign investment. He professed not 
to know about this aspect of the bill. He said that it has not yet been 
promulgated and that either on Saturday or Monday he would ask me 
to come over and go over the provisions of the law in detail before he 
takes any action regarding promulgation. I said we should be delighted 
to have an opportunity to do this.
(The next morning at the airport he said he would wish to include 
the problem of reconciling Peru’s tariff increases with its GAM obli-
gations in our proposed discussion. He said he would call Monday to 
arrange a time for such a meeting.)5
3 Not printed; in an appendix to its memorandum, the Peruvian Ministry of Finance 
and Commerce stated that Peru had relied on loans from private U.S. commercial banks 
but that it no longer could do so. To meet general needs and service the external debt, 
Peru needed about $40 million a year for the next 5 years.
4 The memorandum by Pedro Beltrán was not further identified.
5 Under cover of despatch 845 from Lima, May 14, the Embassy transmitted a mem-
orandum of conversation between Thorndike and Linville, May 12, on Peru’s new dis-
ciminatory tax law, approved May 11. (823.11/5–1458) In despatch 970 from Lima, June 
11, the Embassy reported that at the Intersessional Committee meeting of the contracting 
parties in Geneva, June 3-4, Peru received a temporary de facto waiver of its obligations 
under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, permitting increases of 50 percent 
and 100 percent in a majority of its import duties. (823.00/6–1158)
