Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 523 high-profile pressure which would be likely to upset efforts to put the Commission back on track. (C) Approve proceeding with oral arguments as scheduled.8 Postpone oral arguments for two weeks or more. 3. Break Diplomatic Relations with Iran. State is preparing a paper which examines the pros and cons of a formal break in diplomatic relations. This paper will also consider intermediate steps which we could take to restrict the presence and/or activities of Iranian diplomats in the U.S. The paper will be considered at the SCC meeting on Thursday morning.9 (C) 4. Impose Formal Economic Sanctions on Iran. Mr. Cutler had prepared and circulated a draft of the sanctions which the President could impose.10 Secretary Vance felt that immediate imposition of sanctions could interfere with the contacts which are under way, and he recommended that it be withheld until after we had been in touch with the intermediaries on Wednesday. The Attorney General and Treasury noted that the formal imposition of sanctions was essentially a symbolic gesture, since the regulations already in effect have shut off all economic relations with Iran. Dr. Brzezinski said that he would prefer taking a number of steps at once, rather than dribbling it out over time, so he would prefer holding the announcement of sanctions until we were prepared to take steps on diplomatic relations, resort to the SC, and other possible steps. The SCC recommended holding off on any action at this time. (C) Approve holding off announcement for now.11 Proceed with announcement of formal sanctions. 5. Message to Allies. State was in the process of revising the Presidential message which had been prepared the night before, based on the announcements which the U.S.12 and the UN had issued last night. The message will be available later today and will inform the allies that we are considering the imposition of sanctions and other steps 8 Carter approved this option with a checkmark. 9 The paper, “Possible Options for Changes in Diplomatic Relations with Iran,” was attached to a March 13 memorandum from Dodson to Mondale, Vance, Miller, Brown, Civiletti, Cutler, Jones, and Turner. For the discussion of the paper at the March 18 SCC meeting, see Document 210. 10 Not found. 11 Carter approved this option with a checkmark. 12 On March 10, the White House issued a statement announcing that the Commission of Inquiry had suspended its activities for several days and would return to New York for consultations with Waldheim. The statement also noted that the Commission was prepared to return to Tehran “when the situation requires.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, p. 455)
