808  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
503.	 Telegram 1693 to Geneva1
Washington, February 28, 1956, 7:39 p.m.
1693. For Johnson.
Guidance for March 1 Meeting.
1. Implementation Agreed Announcement.
Lay particular stress on long time lapse since last ­American, 
Dr. Bradshaw, released Dec. 20. Contrast this record of complete non-­
performance for over two months with steady flow of voluntary depar­
tures Chinese from this country to Mainland China. At least 114 such 
Chinese arrived Communist China since August 1, 1955, 35 of these 
since December 20. You should again draw attention to these sizeable 
figures. Note that current Chinese Communist record on fulfillment 
of its obligations under Agreed Announcement, far from improving, 
is even worse than unsatisfactory standard established Autumn 1955. 
Record can only be construed as evidence of Chinese Communists 
contempt for their publicly pledged word and that they do not expect 
achieve anything constructive on other topics. Wang must be aware 
constructive achievement unlikely in atmosphere engendered by open 
flouting of Chinese Communist undertaking.
2. FYI We are requesting on confidential basis solely for our own 
guidance a survey by Attorney General of identity, status and eligibility 
for voluntary deportation all alien Chinese prisoners in Federal and 
State penitentiaries. Would like your own views as to whether Wang 
has gotten or can be gotten into position where if we were to deport 
such prisoners PRC would feel bound to release and deport US prison­
ers in China.
3. FYI We are telegraphing separately summary of conversation 
with Indian Embassy officer in which he requested our assistance in 
ascertaining current addresses of Chinese whose name submitted to you 
by Wang. Indian Embassy wishes to mail copies Agreed ­Announcement 
to all these individuals. END FYI
4. Renunciation of Force.
Adhere to and restate as necessary principles already fully enunci­
ated. You should again take no repeat no initiative to reposition either 
of controversial clauses.
Dulles
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/2–2856. Secret; Priority; Limit 
Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger in draft.
