954  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
rights. Nazarkin said their language was intended to put a “positive 
spin” on the provision.
7. I expressed dismay at the Soviet actions. Nazarkin reciprocated 
with claims of similar dismay with respect to PPCM. He claimed 
that both Shevardnadze and Obukhov made it clear in Houston was 
that the central deal was swapping the Soviet PPCM position for the 
U.S. ALCM position. He also emphasized that Shevardnadze’s let-
ter of November 244 made it clear that the Soviet PPCM position 
included the small ICBM. He stressed that the Soviet view of PPCM 
reciprocity means an equal number of missiles on each side as well 
as an equal number of facilities. Finally he noted that we had never 
told them the small ICBM would not be included. (To the best of my 
recollection this last point is true, although our language was care-
fully crafted to allow us to exclude the small if it was not deployed 
in a mobile mode.) The end result was that while I accused the 
Soviets of a walk-­back on bombers, Nazarkin accused us of bad faith 
on PPCM.
The Throw-Weight Package
8. With the exception of the new types definition, Nazarkin con-
firmed that all other elements of the October ad ref throw-­weight pack-
age were agreed, including:
— Throw-­weight includes all mass except for burned fuel and 
the shroud which separates after the point where final stage velocity 
is 1000 meters per second less than the final stage velocity at thrust 
termination.
— Potential throw-­weight using range standards of 11,000 kilome-
ters for ICBMs and 9,500 kilometers for SLBMs.
— Calculations based on a spherical, non-­rotating Earth.
— Calculations assume residual fuel in each stage of no more than 
one percent for solid-­propellant and two percent for liquid-­propellant 
ICBMs and SLBMs.
— Exclusion of the first seven flight tests, provided that for such 
tests demonstrated throw-­weight does not exceed the maximum 
throw-­weight capability to the range standard by more than 20 percent 
or 250 kilograms, whichever is less.
— Use of the forty percent rule for warhead attribution for future 
types. (Note that the Soviet text refers to “MRVs”; Nazarkin confirms 
that this is an error and that the text should refer to missiles with multiple 
warheads, i.e. both MRVs and MIRVs.)
— No destruction of reentry vehicles.
9. On new types, the Soviet paper accepts ten percent change in 
launch weight, but calls for five percent change in length and adds a 
throw-­weight criterion. Privately Nazarkin told me they could accept 
4 See Document 168.
