Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America 1149 The Argentines said in any event they could not act on the latest U.S. suggestion since it had not been formally communicated to them. Mr. Locke explained that the reason the U.S. requested the 90-day notification was to cover the period the NRC and other U.S. agencies were making their reviews. In any event, it was agreed that some solution could be found. This problem could be discussed further to determine what arrangement could be worked out agreeable to both parties. Amb. Smith said we understand what the problem was, and hoped a solution can be found. At this point the meeting was ended. After the meeting, Mr. Placer, CNEA Safeguards Chief, mentioned to the Science Counselor that the problem of exchange of notes and 90-day notification on pending uranium exports was really not the major problem, but that the deletion of the wording in the note referring to deuterium not supplied by the U.S. is more important and would have to be resolved before an agreement could be reached.4 4 Telegram 2604 from Buenos Aires, March 26, reported Smith’s impression of his visit. “Conditions for our visit,” the Ambassador said, “were not auspicious” given that Castro Madero was in Moscow “at the Soviets’ invitation” while a “high-level German Delegation” was in Buenos Aires “to complete negotiations for the Atucha II reactor.” Smith noted that in his talks with Videla and other Argentine officials, “we stressed the seriousness with which we view the international situation, that there will be no ‘lurch towards de´tente,’ and our aim to strengthen relations with Argentina.” Nevertheless, Smith said “There was no encouragement during my talks that Argentina will ratify Tlatelolco any time soon; on full-scope safeguards we agreed to disagree. Argentina’s nuclear program is well advanced and will move ahead under able leadership. Our central objective must be to prevent the emergence of a nuclear arms race in the hemisphere.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Country File, Box 1, Argentina: 1–4/80)
