January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1123 1. We believe the Arabs (possibly stimulated by the PLO) will request a Security Council meeting4 on Palestinian rights at the end of March or the beginning of April. Very simply, the issue for us is: —We could write a good resolution that would be intellectually responsible in taking into account both sides of the issue, but it seems unlikely that we want to take that issue on now, given our experience on this subject last August, the recent reaction to the latest Security Council resolution, and the other larger efforts in which we will be engaged. We do not need charges on top of the recent ones that we are now trying to “change 242.” —If we do not introduce a resolution of our own, one will be produced which will face us with another difficult choice. —I am already recommending separately that we try to get such a Security Council meeting postponed but to do so we may have to have some indication that we are prepared to handle this issue in some alternative way at a later time. Our credibility in seeking such postponements is worn. 2. The “European initiative” is gaining momentum. Key Europeans believe they have a signal from us that, after May 25, some noise from them might be useful. —At worst the Europeans will seek to curry Arab favor by supporting objectives that we cannot support without any prospect of improving the situation on the ground. The Europeans may marginally help themselves while putting us on the spot without helping us to move any negotiation forward. —At best, a party like the British might try to use the exercise to gain PLO acceptance of Resolutions 242 and 338 and Israel’s right to exist in order to fulfill our Sinai II commitment.5 At some other times this might be helpful, but it seems unlikely to me that we really want to open a dialogue with the PLO in 1980. —One approach worth considering is whether we might propose to the British that they try to engage the Palestinians in a serious dialogue about how they could see themselves being woven gradually into the negotiating process. If the Palestinians knew we were behind the British initiative, they would view this as a significant step. 3. We have received and will probably receive further suggestions on strategy from Arab leaders that they will accept a hiatus in the peace process in the latter half of 1980 if we can tell them what we will do in 1981. We will have to deal with this question first with Begin and Sadat, but we should keep high on our agenda consultations with the other 4 The Security Council met seven times between March 31 and April 30 to consider the issue of Palestinian rights. For a summary of those meetings, see the Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, pp. 377–380. On April 28, Tunisia submitted a draft resolution on Palestinian rights to the Security Council. For the Security Council’s consideration of that resolution and the April 30 vote which followed, see Document 365. 5 See footnote 5, Document 97.
