914
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
underway and being coordinated through Bill Odom of the NSC Staff.
[classification not declassified]
7. Attached at Tab A is a preliminary checklist of activities which
the SCC has charged the IWG with conducting in connection with the
prospect of succession in Yugoslavia.6 [classification not declassified]
Arnold L. Horelick
6 Attached but not printed is a January 18 preliminary checklist of activities following
Tito’s death.
279.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Tito’s Health
It now appears that Tito is dying.2 You will have to decide who
will attend the funeral. In ordinary circumstances it would be a good
gesture for you to do so rather than send the Vice President. In the
current circumstances, however, the issue is more difficult.
If you go, Brezhnev may well be there. Whether you meet with
him or not will be a major issue. If you do not meet him, you will be
severely criticized for refusing to deal with the Soviets at a dangerous
time and you will bear the onus for any further deterioration in our
relationship. If you do meet with him, the meeting is likely to contribute
to a further aggravation of our relationship because of the positions
you will have to take. To have a different outcome will require that
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 86, Yugoslavia: 2/80. Secret.
2 Earlier on February 12, Brzezinski sent a memorandum to Carter informing him
that “CIA reports this morning that Marshal Tito’s health is rapidly failing. He will not
accept any food and takes very little fluid. The fluid intake and his heart medicine are
both adversely affecting his kidneys. The prognosis is poor. We will be reviewing our
contingency plans for the event of his death.” Carter initialed the memorandum indicating
he saw it. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 1–2/80)
