Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I ment of disputes seems to be on the increase. Subversion, terrorism, and organized national force are on almost constant display. And their lethality is being heightened by the expanding trade in nonnuclear weapons and technologies. We live in a tough neighborhood. Current Issues and the U.S. Role It is a neighborhood where, as the result of earlier and often neglected developments, a number of current and potentially explosive issues beg for a solution one way or another. The differences in the Middle East may have been narrowed; they have not disappeared. Racial tensions and clashes in Africa are mounting. The Sino-Soviet dispute is quiescent but by no means extinct. The rising price of oil continues to send periodic shocks through the international economy. We still lack an agreed international law of the seas. The list could be made even longer and more forbidding. But the main point about it is this: While many of the issues may be specialized or regional in nature—and may not even involve the Soviet Union to begin with—they can escalate rapidly to the superpower level unless they are contained, defused, and eventually resolved. We should be concerned about them for many reasons. We must, in any event, be concerned about them on national security grounds. The analogy of the two scorpions in a bottle may not precisely capture the current situation. (It undoubtedly oversimplified the real situation of the past as well. Now, as then, there are lots of other bugs, ants, crickets, butterflies, and also a few vipers in the bottle.) Nonetheless, we should be wary of letting the two scorpions and their bottle be put on top of a powder magazine built over a match factory. The scorpions may be cautious, but someone else could strike a match. It would be tempting to turn our backs altogether on this turbulent and dangerous world. But that choice is no longer open to us. The United States is bound to have a substantial but finite influence on the rest of the world. If other nations do not catch colds when the United States sneezes, they will certainly feel the draft. Our highest hopes for a world of peace and order have not been realized. But our worst fears have not materialized. Utopia is not just around the corner, but Armageddon is not inevitable either. Despite constraints and mistakes, our record of accomplishments has been, on the whole, a good one. Now is not the time to turn away from it. As a nation, we are less inclined than in the 1960’s to see a threat in every alien event—and that is a part of wisdom. But wisdom and inertia are not the same thing. It is true that we could adopt a passive strategy, reacting to events only in the hope of staying out of trouble rather than acting to shape them. But that is not the President’s style.
