Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX On balance the GDR has a very restrictive record on movement of people, symbolized by the Berlin Wall. This is attributable to the attraction of FRG society, which creates emigration pressure and strain on the state’s stability unmatched in Eastern Europe. The GDR has had, however, a relatively good record on movement of ideas. The country is open to Western broadcasts, and there have been many and widely used channels for GDR intellectuals to play their views back into East German society by means of contact with Western media and publishing houses. This is also a factor, of course, of the unique geographical and political situation of divided Germany. It would be extremely difficult at the present stage to engage the GDR directly on the former type of issues since these could be seen as affecting its very existence. I would hope, however, that we could over time encourage the GDR to build on its relatively good record on access to the spoken word and to foster a more liberal domestic climate by relaxing its attitude toward internal circulation of the printed word and the Western contacts of its intellectuals. The recent series of events outlined above demonstrates graphically how sensitive these subjects are. Consistency and credibility for our human rights concerns, however, would appear to make it important to respond to the GDR measures. I would be modest in our assessment of what we might achieve in the short run though I doubt that our intervention would injure people like Heym and Havemann who count for their protection in part at least on their standing in the West. Over the longer run, however, I would hope that it would assist us in establishing more firmly some of the guide lines for our relations and in identifying areas in which we can have realistic hopes that the GDR will be able to liberalize its internal controls. Tactics I realize that discussion of any of these issues with the GDR at the present time must be considered in connection with the serious Berlin status issue created by the simultaneous decision June 28 to permit direct election of East Berlin representatives to the Volkskammer. Because of that violation of the Four Power status of the city, I understand that we will be holding back on a number of aspects of our bilateral relations such as the signing of the Consular Convention. We can not make this the subject of a direct demarche to the GDR because quadripartite matters are discussed only with the Soviet Union, not the GDR. It would be anomalous and perhaps would offer the GDR indirectly an opportunity to seek discussion of Berlin issues with us were we now to make a formal demarche on human rights. It might also provide a confusing signal as to what were our immediate reasons for holding back on the bilateral relationship. On the other hand, because we will not be going forward for the time being with bilateral
