International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 121 indication of the fact you are looking into this area might send out some chilling signals to the steel industry. 2) Quotas on specialty steel also have little impact on U.S. steel imports since such quotas cover only 2 percent of the total. In order to further reduce these quotas, you must ask for advice from the International Trade Commission. The EPG will recommend to you in a memorandum you will shortly receive, that you ask the ITC to formally review the import quotas.5 This will send a clear signal (one, I might add, which both labor and industry will vigorously oppose), but the impact on the major steel companies who have recently raised their prices will be minimal since specialty steel accounts for such a small percentage of total industry shipments and revenues and is produced by such a relatively small and specialized group of firms. This would, therefore, have little impact on the larger steel companies such as U.S. Steel and Republic Steel Company, which recently raised their prices. It might have an impact on the specialty steel producers who have announced price increases of 8 percent on their production since May 2.6 3) You could indicate that you are considering reducing the “Buy America” preference which U.S. steel producers have in light of their price increases. However, government purchases of steel mill products are not a large portion of the U.S. steel market and, as Ambassador Strauss points out, such reductions might reduce our negotiating leverage in the multilateral trade negotiations as well as with Congress. 4) One other potential action not mentioned in either memorandum is with respect to the 301 Case that the steel industry is presently arguing before the Special Trade Representative.7 Their argument is that the steel agreement between Japan and the European community is hurting the U.S. industry by directing Japanese steel exports from the European community to the United States and that the U.S. should therefore retaliate. There is some question as to whether the domestic industry has proven its case. You might consider an indication that the STR does not at this time look favorably on the industry’s petition and that recent inflationary price rises indicate that the industry apparently is not really feeling the impact of increased Japanese competition. I would recommend that before you consider any of the potential steps outlined herein and in the memoranda, that you have a meeting with Secretary Blumenthal, Ambassador Strauss, Chairman Schultze 5 See Document 29. 6 Carter highlighted the final three lines of this paragraph, beginning with “raised their prices” to the end of the paragraph. He also wrote “Sounds best” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. 7 Reference is to Section 301 of the 1974 Trade Act; see footnote 3, Document 4.
