March 1952–February 1953
223
have an important influence on the actions and attitudes of the leading
figures on the Iranian political scene.5
John H. Leavitt
5 In Staff Memorandum No. 214 (Revised), April 14, Leavitt suggested that Iran in-
telligence specialists agreed that developments did not warrant revision of this estimate.
While they conceded Mosadeq’s popularity had declined during the past 2 months and
that there was a revival of anti-Mosadeq agitation by more conservative elements, they
“continue to believe that Mossadeq will once again be able to rally sufficient support to
remain in power. In particular, they still believe that Mossadeq will probably succeed in
assembling a Majlis quorum and in obtaining legislative authority for the issuance of new
money ‘which would avert a fiscal breakdown through the summer of 1952.’ They con-
tinue to consider that the Shah is unlikely to take any initiative in overthrowing Mos-
sadeq, even though they agree that during the past two months he has seemed more
self-confident and has indicated a determination to retain control of the armed forces.”
(Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79T00937A, Box 1, Folder 3, Staff Memo-
randa—1952 (Substantive))
68.
Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of
State1
Paris, March 28, 1952, 8 p.m.
5970. At request of former Prime Minister Qavam of Iran, Embassy
Officer called at his hotel. Invitation was extended by Parvis Khan Kha-
lili, Afghan subject of Georgian origin, and Khazrai, both in Qavam’s
entourage.
Extremely oriental manner of Qavam made it difficult to fathom
real purpose of conversation. Some light was thrown by Khazrai who
subsequently endeavored to interpret obtuse and vague words of
ex-Prime Minister Qavam. Qavam expressed his admiration, sympathy
and confidence in US and referred to abortive attempt to get in contact
with President in 49 to warn him of dangerous course which Iran was
following. He stressed his unwavering pro-American attitude, and his
attempts to bring American technicians to aid his country during his
Premiership. Deterioration of political and economic situation in Iran
and mounting threat of Communism were described. Only solution to
combat these evils was strong man at head of government.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 25. Secret; Security Information. Repeated to Tehran for the Ambas-
sador only. Received March 29 at 3 p.m.
