Yugoslavia
877
our effort to develop a relationship with the Yugoslav military but to
our broader bilateral interests as well. Either we take steps now to get
our act together or we should withdraw from the effort before further
damage is done.
3. What has upset me most is our consistent failure to handle
the potential Dragon purchase with even a modicum of competence.
Paragraph 9, et. seq., details this sad story. Suffice it to say here that
we have quoted wildly different prices to the Yugoslavs at least twice,
offered Dragons that we then found were faulty, emphasized that we
needed a GOY decision soon so that we would not have to reopen the
production line (and thereby charge a substantially higher price), and
then told them we would have to restart production (at a substantially
higher price). The tragedy is that the Dragon buy was the first major
opportunity for us to put our money where our mouth was and so far
we have messed it up to a fare-thee-well.
4. The Dragon case is not the only mess we have made of things.
In addition we have now lost, after more than two years of screwing
around, a sale of dollars 1.7 million worth of 155 mm illuminating
rounds. And—at least so it appears from here—we and the Yugoslavs
seem to be well on the way to substantial misunderstanding about an
air defense radar system that has been under discussion for some
months. Just who—we or the Yugoslavs—has been most responsible
for the confusion is not clear.
5. I do not contend that we know all the facts on any of these cases.
There may well be extenuating circumstances that will explain why
we have performed so miserably. But that is really beside the point:
What is important to the GOY is that we are unable or unprepared to
respond to Yugoslav requests in a timely and effective manner. We
are flunking the reliability test, and for the Yugoslavs—in terms of
their concerns about the future—a passing grade is a sine qua non.
6. Nor will I argue that the Yugoslavs have been without blame
for the sad state in which we now find ourselves. They too have been
less than efficient, as the air defense radar system case shows but it
takes substantial ingenuity for a nation of 220 million people that prides
itself on its tradition of efficiency to match the ineptitude of a Balkan
nation of 22 million. We, alas, have succeeded.
7. The next meeting of the joint military working group is now
tentatively scheduled for mid-October in Washington. So it is time to
face up to some hard choices. Unless I can be assured that steps have
been taken to get a firm grip on the management of our military
program with Yugoslavia it is time to call off the noble but so far
unsuccessful experiment. Either we tell the Yugoslavs at the October
meeting that we are distressed at the way things have been going, that
we know much of the fault lies on our side, that we will not permit
