1216 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 17. I am enclosing for comment a draft break statement which I would plan to issue immediately following any meeting at which a break would occur. It might, of course, be necessary somewhat to mod­ ify it to meet the exact situation but I would plan to stick fairly close to its general line. As this would ostensibly be an extemporaneous state­ ment as I left the meeting room it must be short and simple. 18. In the quite likely event he does not break at our next meeting but very shortly thereafter and issues a statement along the lines of his prepared statement today I would propose to promptly comment along the lines of para 2, 3, and 4 of the enclosed break statement with such changes as the circumstances require. Regards to all, Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador P.S. Just an afterthought. If they are planning something timed to our elections I might throw them off step and somewhat spike their guns by asking for a postponement of the next meeting to Monday November 5. I am in a good position to ask for it as I have never cashed in on the times I have agreed to his requests for postponement. I would, of course, do it at the last minute, that is on Wednesday or Thursday before the meeting and all I would have to do is send him word that it was “impossible” for me to meet until Nov. 5. UAJ Enclosure2 DRAFT STATEMENT I regret to announce that at today’s meeting Ambassador Wang refused to agree to any date for our next meeting. (or refused to meet further with me). In effect, he refuses to meet further unless the U.S. capitulates to their demand for a Foreign Ministers conference under the continued threat that the Chinese Communists will resort to force if they cannot otherwise achieve their ambitions in the Taiwan area. Ambassador Wang has also demanded that the U.S. remove its existing controls over trade and travel between the U.S. and China. I have told Ambassador Wang that I hope he will reconsider this peremptory attitude and for my part I stand ready again to meet at any time to resume with him in a genuine negotiating spirit search 2 No classification marking.
