January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1301
387.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, July 2, 1980, 4:22–4:35 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Egyptian Foreign Minister Kamal
Hassan Ali and Israeli Interior Minister Joseph Burg
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Edmund Muskie
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Personal Representative of the President for the West
Bank, Gaza and the Autonomy Negotiations
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Robert Hunter, National Security Council Staff Member (notetaker)
Egyptian Foreign Minister Kamal Hassan Ali
Israeli Interior Minister Joseph Burg
(The President met briefly with Minister Ali and Dr. Brzezinski in
the Oval Office from 4:15–4:21;2 after the Cabinet Room meeting with
Minister Burg in the Oval Office from 4:35 to about 4:40).3
The President began by noting that West German Foreign Minister
Genscher had just been here, following Chancellor Schmidt’s talks in
Moscow. Genscher is going back to Bonn tonight, for a cabinet meeting
tomorrow. This is a difficult travel schedule, and Genscher is not well.
Deputy Secretary Christopher said that Genscher has a heart
problem.
Minister Burg said that Genscher has had to cut down on his food
and his weight.
The President said that Genscher had spent three months recuper-
ating last year.
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 37, Serial
Xs—(5/80–6/80). Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room.
2 In their meeting, Ali passed along to Carter a message from Sadat that the Egyp-
tian President would “stand by” the message delivered by Mubarak, but “the unfortu-
nate move by the Knesset on Jerusalem means that we have to concentrate on the meas-
ures that impede the peace process.” In response, Carter asked Ali to tell Sadat that the
situation “would be worse” if the talks did not “start now.” Carter continued: “Israel is
less likely to do something negative if the talks are going on than if they have been halted.
My [Carter’s] preference is to start the talks right away without any delay and without any
preconditions.” A copy of the memorandum of conversation of this meeting is in the
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 38,
Memcons: President, 7/80.
3 A memorandum of conversation of this meeting has not been found.
