824
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
begin by explaining that the Commission could not fulfill the second
part of its mandate because it was unable to see the hostages because
of the position the students had taken. He would report that the Presi-
dent and Foreign Minister thought the situation would have improved
if the Commission could have stayed longer.
—He would explain that the Commission had observed evidence
presented to it on the activities of SAVAK, violations of human rights
and other excesses during the reign of the ex-Shah. He would also say
that the Commission was informed of grievances held by the Govern-
ment of Iran about U.S. involvement in Iran.
—He would state that the Commission had, therefore, completed
the first part of its mandate but not the second. He would report
Ghotbzadeh’s present view that the second half of the mandate had,
in effect, been completed by the Red Cross visit to the hostages.
—He would report the Iranian leadership’s repetition to him of its
grievances in two areas—the excesses of the Shah’s regime and the
involvement of the U.S. in Iran.
—He would report expressions of intent by Iranian leaders to
resolve the crisis by peaceful means despite USG efforts to release
the hostages by force and economic sanctions. He would report their
determination, as described to him, to continue the course of the revolu-
tion. He would report emphasis by the Iranians on the importance of
avoiding pressure on Iran and the use of force and their hope that the
Secretary General would encourage a peaceful solution.
—He would state that the Iranian leaders expect parliament to take
up the issue and believe submission of the Commission’s report would
be valuable when that takes place. He would report Iranian views that
the Commission could resume its work in New York.
—He would conclude by reiterating that Iran’s leadership wishes
to reach a solution which will not compromise the basic course of the
revolution.
Waldheim’s view is that some such report would serve a useful
purpose. He felt that if the UN does nothing it would undermine the
UN’s opportunity to play a further role. When I asked Daoudi what
purpose such a report could play in the political dynamics of Tehran,
he said that the main members of the “team in power” in Iran have
to be backed. Involvement of the UN was their idea and should not
be seen to be a failure. The Daoudi report would not contain any
findings on behalf of the Commission but would simply report what
he and the Commission before him had been told.
When we asked whether this would not in some way provide the
legitimization of Iranian complaints that the Iranians had been seeking,
Waldheim thought not because the report would simply contain what
