508 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II progress on political rights and the legal and institutional instruments of repression remain. Discussion We believe there should be a strong policy bias against opposing IFI loans except in response to gross violations of rights of the person and that in general we should limit programs which are designed primarily to help American exporters and investors (ExIm, CCC, OPIC) only to the extent required by law. The latter would mean no limits on CCC credits (since there is no applicable law), and might mean using the language of the ExIm legislation (to “take into account” human rights situations “and the effects such exports may have on human rights”) to deny credits only if the particular export in question might be used in human rights violations or if chances were high that denial might actually produce improvements in rights of the person. This would be consistent with laws which specifically cite violations of the person as those which require denial of US assistance. It reflects various policy statements, beginning with the Secretary’s April 1977 Law Day Speech in which he said we can justifiably seek a rapid end to violations of the person but that promotion of other human rights may be slower to show results. And it reflects both laws and policy directives (and common sense) which call on us to consider human rights trends rather than demand sudden transformations in authoritarian societies. We can imagine exceptions which we might advocate to this guideline. We might not, for instance, want to vote in one of the Banks for a major non-bhn loan to a country when its military had just overturned an elected government, even if that move did not include arrests of opposition leaders. Exceptions, however, should be used to express concern about a human rights deterioration or the reversal of a trend— not to maintain maximum pressure until all serious problems are solved. Chile could be the hardest test of the policy we are advocating. Violations of the person have virtually ended, in part as a result of our pressure. There is a good chance that continued pressure from us could contribute to further progress toward restoration of political freedoms. The latter would, inter alia, be the best long-range guarantee of rights of the person. Chile’s democratic traditions, moreover, make it hard for that regime to argue that our pressure for a restoration of democracy reflects cultural arrogance. And our own role in its recent history makes it impossible for us to be neutral: to begin now to support IFI loans to it, or to open up ExIm credits, would be seen (in Chile and abroad) as prematurely rewarding Chile. Finally, those Congressmen who care about Chile are urging that we intensify pressure until and unless democracy is restored.
