Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX State Department has informed the Yugoslav Ambassador about it.11 You will recall that we were falsely accused of overflights last fall, but dealt successfully with the incident by sending a senior Admiral to Yugoslavia to compare technical data, and by showing our deep concern. There is now an “informal” procedure—to avoid setting a precedent that could cause problems during a succession crisis—by which we let the Yugoslavs know when there will be naval air activity in the Adriatic. Economic Cooperation. In his Reston interview (not in the part carried in the Times), Tito emphasized economic cooperation with us. In the last week, we have agreed with the Yugoslavs to set up two working groups, at the Deputy Assistant Secretary/Ambassador level, on economic cooperation—one group in Belgrade and one here. This will be announced in the joint statement at the end of the visit. Kardelj. You may want to recall the visit of Mr. Kardelj last fall. At the moment, he is very seriously ill (cancer, reportedly), and you may want to inquire after him. Detente. The Yugoslavs repeatedly say that detente between the U.S. and Soviet Union has possibilities of condominium, unless broadened to include “smaller powers”—i.e., Yugoslavia. You might go into Yugoslavia’s role (and that of other smaller powers) in CSCE, areas like diplomacy on the Horn, Tito’s role in dealing with both East and West, and his leadership of the non-aligned movement. Horn of Africa. We would welcome more Yugoslav initiative on the Horn of Africa. We hope the Yugoslavs can capitalize on the relationships they have in Addis Ababa, a) to influence Mengistu’s government to pursue a more balanced and more truly non-aligned policy; and b) to cooperate in a settlement with the Somalis which will preserve Ethiopia’s territorial integrity—but at the same time avoid needless humiliation of the Somalis. If an Ethiopian-Somali settlement is to last, some arrangement for a broader ceasefire policing operation appears to us to be needed. It would be best to have this set up under OAU auspices; but if the OAU finds it difficult to work out arrangements, we would like to see more experienced countries—such as Yugoslavia and India—offering their help and serving as catalysts. China. You may wish to explore with President Tito the possibility of his acting as a channel to Peking, much as the Romanians were used at an earlier stage:
