Afghanistan
57
remain modest compared with that of the USSR will preclude a closer
relationship.
[Omitted here are the Discussion section and an Annex.]
25.
Editorial Note
By the summer of 1978, U.S. officials began to assess the viability
of various Afghan opponents of the Taraki government and whether
or not the United States should assist their attempts to overthrow the
current regime. The issue arose as a result of telegram 5047 from Kabul,
June 22, in which J. Bruce Amstutz, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim after
the departure of Ambassador Eliot until the arrival at post of Ambassa-
dor Adolph Dubs, sought guidance in responding to a “highly sensitive
matter.” Amstutz reported, “I have been approached by a major anti-
Communist group, led by no less than the number 2 in the Afghan
military, to seek our advice on how best to proceed against the present
pro-Soviet, pro-Communist government. This group is considering a
military counter-coup and believes they can secure power in a matter
of six hours—if it were not for the Soviet presence. They fear the Soviets
will intervene à la Czechoslovakia unless the U.S. (and perhaps Iran
and Pakistan as well) are willing to stand up to the Soviets.” Amstutz
went on to discuss in detail his meeting with Dr. Mir Ali Akbar, Chief
of Jamhuriat Hospital, who claimed to speak for the Chief of Staff of
the Afghan military, an Afghan military officer, and a senior retired
officer, who together directed an unnamed anti-Communist organiza-
tion with significant popular support as well as military manpower and
clandestine “penetration” of the ruling Khalq Party. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File, Country
Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1978)
Amstutz surmised that Akbar, in taking the dangerous step of
approaching the U.S. Embassy, was primarily seeking advice on how
to proceed with a coup clandestinely, so as not to trigger a massive and
rapid Soviet response. The group for which Akbar spoke, in Amstutz’s
estimation, was genuine and “not a Taraki-regime frame-up” and “rep-
resents the only significant non-Communist opposition and alternative
to the Taraki regime.” On the question of the extent to which the United
States should advise and encourage this group, Amstutz offered an
historical lesson: in the early 1960s, Washington rejected Prime Minister
Daoud’s request that the United States become Afghanistan’s major
arms supplier; subsequently, Daoud turned to the Soviets. “I am con-
