International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 957 In addition, the following were present: Mr. Clifford R. Nelson, Department of State, OES/ENP/PO Mr. Samuel Baum, Department of Commerce, Census Mr. Elliot Schwartz, Department of the Treasury, OASIA Mr. William Falkner, Department of State, IO 1. As this was the first meeting of the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy, introductions were made. The Chairman pointed out that the First Annual Report of the Interagency Task Force on Population Policy (now renamed the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy) was accepted by the White House,2 and the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs had recently reaffirmed basic population policy as set forth in NSDM–314.3 II. Procedural Items 2. The Chairman suggested that, given their related interests, the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the International Health Office at the White House under Dr. Bourne might be included on the Task Force. There was no objection to the inclusion of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, but it was suggested that we wait on the International Health Office pending the reorganization of the White House Staff, now in progress. 3. The Chairman reminded the Ad Hoc Group that it had two basic requirements contained in the policy papers.4 One called for the development of performance criteria and the other for the presentation of an annual report on population matters. Given the lapse in meetings of the Group and its predecessor Task Force, he suggested that the Group set the end of the year as a deadline for the submission of the second Annual Report.5 The representative of the NSC Staff pointed out that there were a number of ongoing studies related to foreign assistance as well as North/South issues which would be due by the middle of September anticipating probable development-related initiatives in the early fall. At the same time, also on the basis of these studies, OMB would be making some key decisions in the Budget Cycle, and the annual report should be a vehicle for making sure population issues were adequately covered in all these efforts. 4. In describing the content of the Annual Report and his feeling that our embassies in the field should be consulted, the Chairman pointed out that it would be difficult to telescope the process too much 2 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume E–14, Part 1, Documents on the United Nations, 1973–1976, Document 125. 3 See footnote 3, Document 280. 4 Not further identified. 5 See Document 308.
