December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 637 William Quandt, NSC Staff Member Ed Sanders, Senior Advisor to the President and the Secretary of State Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President Prime Minister Menachem Begin Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to the U.S. Meir Rosenne, Legal Adviser, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Yehuda Blum, Ambassador to United Nations Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister Hanan Bar-On, Minister, Israeli Embassy to the U.S. Dr. Marum Gottesman, Prime Minister’s Physician Dan Pattir, Press Spokesman Yehial Kadishai, Director of the Prime Minister’s Bureau Yehuda Avner, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister The President: I want to welcome you, Mr. Prime Minister. We had a productive meeting last night where we discussed strategic relations in the Middle East,2 threats to our joint security, and the importance of Israel in the Middle East, and the benefits to the United States of a strong, independent, and democratic Israel. Our strategic interests are obvious. Camp David opened a vista of peace and provided for Israeli security in ways that have not been possible for thirty years. This prospect of peace is important to our country. Since the Camp David agreements, we have been unsuccessful in getting a treaty. I told the Prime Minister last night that the United States has no position on the substantive issues. There is no paragraph or sentence in the text that we want to impose on either Israel or Egypt. Anything that they agree on we could accept. When there is a deadlock, we put forward suggestions and we will keep on trying. But we have no desire to enforce an American position on either nation. I pointed out to the Prime Minister the value that we derive from our partnership, as well as our strategic interests in the entire region. We have strong and valued relations with others in the region as well, especially Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan, and these must be maintained. We touched on some of the textual difficulties last night, but it might be worth reviewing them here. Our contribution to Israel in the context of peace would be important to us and to Israel, and we will have time to get into bilateral issues this weekend. My suggestion is that you outline your views, Mr. Prime Minister, and then we will discuss them. Secretary Vance has been more involved in the texts than I have. Again, I want to welcome you here. 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Begin in the Oval Office from 6:32 p.m. to 8:25 p.m. on March 1. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No memorandum of conversation for the meeting has been found.
