1979  743
169.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, December 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Readiness, Mobilization and NIFTY NUGGET
At our meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the FY 1981 budget,2 
we discussed readiness, mobilization and Exercise NIFTY NUGGET. I 
am not sure that we were precise enough in distinguishing between the 
readiness of our forces and our ability to mobilize. This memorandum 
summarizes what we learned about the nation’s mobilization capabil-
ity in NIFTY NUGGET. That exercise did not improve our insights into 
readiness of our units, nor was it designed to do so.
Readiness is a term the Department of Defense uses to describe a 
military unit’s ability to carry out its mission in military operations. The 
readiness of each military unit is estimated by comparing the number 
of people assigned to a unit, the extent of their training, and the amount 
of their equipment with the people, training and equipment required 
for that unit in wartime. The term readiness is sometimes used more 
broadly to include as well our ability to deploy units and to sustain 
them once in combat. In this latter usage readiness overlaps somewhat 
with mobilization but, in general, the mobilization process comple-
ments readiness.
In mobilization we would make it possible for active and reserve 
units to be deployed rapidly to an area of conflict, and to be sustained 
with trained replacements, ammunition, equipment and other sup-
plies. During mobilization, the private sector must augment Defense 
resources. Commercial airlines, the shipping and trucking industries, 
and current Defense suppliers would be the first to be called upon. If 
the emergency continues, the entire nation would become involved in 
the mobilization effort.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Ermarth, Box 113, Mobilization Scenarios, 8/79–4/80. No classification marking. ­Carter 
wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “cc Harold—(a) I should have 
been more thoroughly informed earlier (b) when would it be feasible to have another 
similar exercise? J.” Brzezinski returned the memorandum to Brown under cover of a 
­December  10 memorandum in which he noted: “The President notes that he should 
have been more thoroughly informed earlier and asks when it would be feasible to have 
another similar exercise.” (Ibid.)
2 Carter met with Brown, Brzezinski, Claytor, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff at Camp 
David the morning of November 24. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s 
Daily Diary) No record of the discussion was found.
