154 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 43. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, April 9, 1958 The President said he had an excellent talk with Secretary Gates and Admiral Burke at the White House last evening. They said the Marines are particularly emotional over the proposed reorganization. As to themselves, they said that they completely accept the basic propositions of unified strategic planning and direction, and placing all activities under the control of the Secretary of Defense. They are rather afraid of what their staffs might do, however, since there is a great deal more emotionalism and apprehension at lower levels than they them­ selves feel. Also, they said that they had prepared a plan a few months ago, which was very thoroughly worked out and coordinated within the Navy Department, and they don’t see how they can change their posi­ tion so quickly. They added that they knew a lot of people were calling them recal­ citrants. They do not feel that they are that at all, since they support the basic concept the President has put forward. They told the President they were worried about the situation they would face when they were called to testify. The President said it is simply a matter of not getting rattled. He felt that they can answer questions quite satisfactorily, given that they have the conviction favoring unified strategic planning and command direction which they had earlier indicated. The President said that several times in the conversation they mentioned their “apprehensions” over what might be done under some future President or some future Secretary of Defense. The appre­ hensions do not apply in the present circumstances. The ­President said he talked these apprehensions out with them. The primary one repre­ sented concern over a single service of supply. The President told them he had never believed in it and does not now. There should, however, be the capability for single management of various “common use” items. The President thought they accepted this line of thinking very well. They also said they were afraid that the services might become “mere shells” with consequent loss of morale. The President said he stressed to them the tremendous responsibilities and tasks that would still remain, and felt that their minds were much put at ease by this explanation. Again they came back to the need for the provision “separately administered.” Here he made clear that he expects the Secretaries 1 Source: Conversation among Eisenhower, Gates, and Burke on Defense reorgani­ zation. Confidential. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
