1955  423
be usefully discussed under present conditions in which one party is 
threatening use of force if its views do not fully prevail.
F. I have sought to determine aspects of this principle on which 
we agree and hope that whatever common ground we do have may 
be extended and provide a sufficient base for making declarations 
which I have suggested. Solemn duty which both of us have toward 
our respective governments and peoples is to attempt to widen area of 
whatever agreement exists between us and to narrow and eventually 
eliminate areas of disagreement. You have stated that your government 
is in agreement with my government regarding principles of United 
Nations Charter with respect to use of force. However, if I understand 
your remarks correctly, your government is not willing to apply those 
principles to situation in Taiwan area. As I pointed out in my statement 
at our 20th meeting, there are many countries in world today which 
are abnormally divided. In each of these cases resort to force by one 
side or other cannot but result in war. A determination that such sit­
uations should not be permitted to bring about war has been voiced 
by responsible governments. In such an atmosphere there can be hope 
that equitable, just and peaceful solutions can, with patience, be found. 
Such solutions are impossible in atmosphere of overwhelming threat 
of one side to resort to force if its views do not prevail. Only when 
threat of force is removed can there be hope of coming to constructive 
conclusions.
G. I fail to see why or upon what moral or legal basis your govern­
ment considers that situation in Taiwan area differs from these other 
situations. I fail to see why your government considers that it should be 
entitled to disregard accepted standards of international conduct with 
regard to this particular situation.
H. I again most earnestly express hope that your government will 
be able to agree with mine upon this simple but fundamental principle 
so that other matters can be discussed with a better hope of reaching 
constructive conclusions.
20. Wang replied with prepared statement. He said that he had pre­
viously pointed out that principle of non-­recourse to force must not 
be abused with respect to China’s exercise of its sovereign rights to its 
own territory of Taiwan. He said that Chinese Government has already 
stated that “circumstances permitting it will strive to liberate Taiwan by 
peaceful means”. However, this Chinese domestic affair is not within 
scope of our present talks.
21. He said that second agenda item covered only practical mat­
ters at issue between China and US and that I had repeatedly indicated 
that discussion could involve only China and US. Hence he considered 
domestic affairs of China or US could not be made subjects of talks.
