630  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
The President observed that it was frightening how a few Communist 
elements could get in and take over a government while the others in the 
government behaved like jellyfish. It was also alarming that we could not 
get the OAS to be really concerned about such a situation because of the 
political problems that these governments have at home. He observed 
that we might have to go back to greater reliance on power politics.
Mr. Mann stated that a decision on recognition had to be made on 
the basis of an estimate of whether the existing El Salvador Government 
would be around long enough to make support worthwhile or whether 
we should work for a counter-­revolution. The President suggested 
that we ought to find out whether the Rightists in El Salvador believe 
that it would be useful for us to recognize the regime or whether they 
consider that withholding recognition would be helpful in stimulat-
ing a counter-­coup. Secretary Merchant observed that U.S. recogni-
tion could dishearten the opposition. The President asked whether we 
were talking to the opposition. Mr. Mann said that we were and that 
a majority of our friends in the governments were urging prompt rec-
ognition. However, he also acknowledged that friendly army officers 
took the opposite view. Secretary Anderson said that he did not see 
how could run a government with the second and third echelons in 
the control of the Communists and the top of the government split; he 
did not see how any government could long exist on this basis on our 
side. Secretary Gates expressed the view that we should drag our feet 
on recognition because recognition would create a UN problem; that is, 
it would provide a basis for possible later UN intervention. He felt we 
were entitled to a period of time for foot dragging. The President stated 
that we did not want to let the situation sit and simmer; we needed 
to decide the best way to achieve our objectives. Secretary Merchant 
concluded this portion of the discussion by observing that there was no 
doubt that Osorio was friendly to us; the only question was whether he 
could control the situation.
The National Security Council:
3. Noted and discussed an oral briefing by the Acting Director 
of Central Intelligence on the subject, with specific reference to Sino-
Soviet relations; the situation with respect to Algeria; and the situations 
in Laos and El Salvador.2
[Here follow the NSC Action on Algeria and discussion and Action 
on agenda item 5, Scandinavia.]
2 This paragraph constitutes NSC Action 2330, approved by the President on 
November 10, 1960. (S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files, Lot 66 D 95, NSC Records of Action)
