Mr. Hioki, chairman of the Japanese delegation, stated that his delegation have come
here with the curious [serious] conviction that some definite results [in] the direction of
a common purpose and a common understanding between China and other powers may
well be attained at the present conference. He pledged that delegation’s wholehearted
cooperation to this end and predicted that [deliberations of] the conference will be
marked on all sides by fairness and moderation in spirit and simplicity and directness in
method. He stated that Japan has always watched with keen interest every effort made
by the Chinese people for the realization of their legitimate national aspirations. He
stated also that Japan had at one time been subjected to unilateral restrictions upon her
freedom of action in matters of fiscal and judicial administration and referred
particularly to the fact that the present tariff restrictions in China had their counterpart
in Japanese history of tariff restrictions in Japan and their relinquishment finally in
1911. Concluding this historical résumé he said:
“China is still following the same paths that we once pursued. The
difficulties, the embarrassment[s], and the perplexities that confront China
today have once been ours. The Japanese delegation will approach the
problems before this conference with sympathy and understanding and with
intimate apprehension of the Chinese position.
I am happy to state at the outset that the Japanese delegation are fully
prepared to consider in the friendliest way the question of tariff autonomy
which appears in the agenda presented by the Chinese delegation.”
Mr. Hioki then referred to certain provisions of the customs treaty particularly articles
II and III concerning respectively likin and the 2½ [percent] surtax which he stated
could provide additional revenue of approximately 99 [29] million dollars in silver. He
made reference also to a general readjustment of Chinese finances and stated that the
Japanese delegation would on another occasion make concrete suggestions on this
subject. He stated also that the Japanese delegation would not be disinclined to take up
any proposals which might be put forward with a view to the levying of a reasonable
surtax, higher than 2½ [percent], pointing out that such a proposal might be considered
as falling within the terms of article II of the treaty. He remarked, however, that since
this would constitute an intermediate step prior to the total abolition of likin, it would
be requisite for China to effectuate at least a partial abolition of likin as well as to fulfill
certain conditions provided for in the treaties between China and other powers. Mr.
Hioki here returned to the question of tariff autonomy and reiterated the statement that
the Japanese delegation will consider sympathetically and helpfully any reasonable
plan of the Chinese Government in this regard but stated that the goal could be reached
only by successive stages and that immediate and unconditional surrender by the
powers of their existing treaty rights is not within the contemplation of China herself.
Mr. Hioki then proposed the following alternative plan:
