Chapter 6, June–December 1990  909
170.	 Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear 
and Space Talks (Burt) to Secretary of State Baker1
Undated
SUBJECT
December Ministerial: Make or Break for START
Mr. Secretary:
(S) 1. I know there are many other things on your plate right now, 
but as I think about your December meeting with Shevardnadze I am a 
very worried man. I have three important concerns:
— If we don’t sign START in January there is a good chance we 
may never sign it.
— If we don’t resolve—­or at least reduce—­the outstanding issues 
in December, we won’t be able to finish in January.
— To resolve the outstanding issues in December will require diffi-
cult, high-­level decisions, but we don’t have a process in place to make 
those decisions.
(S) 2. As you and I discussed recently in Geneva, a war in the Gulf 
or internal developments in the Soviet Union could make it impossible 
to complete START if it isn’t done soon. January may thus be our last 
chance.
(S) 3. If we are to have any chance of completion in January, your 
upcoming meeting is a make-­or-­break one. This is especially true 
because my counterpart tells me that Shevardnadze is the only candi-
date for the new post of Vice President of the Soviet Union. Obviously, a 
new Foreign Minister would result in a temporary slowdown in Soviet 
decision-­making.
(S) 4. While the Soviets claim to want to resolve all remaining issues 
in connection with your December meeting, that is probably not pos-
sible: as of this morning there are over thirty issues remaining whose 
resolution will require action at higher levels in Washington. Most can 
be settled either between Reg Bartholomew and Obukhov or here in 
Geneva—­assuming we are prepared to streamline the Washington 
approval process, which currently has taken over ten weeks to pass 
judgement on a straightforward ad ref agreement on the definition of 
a heavy bomber.
(S) 5. However, there are three sets of issues which have little 
chance of being solved below your level: data denial, perimeter and 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01033–009, Backchannel 
[Cables]—November 1990. Secret; Eyes Only.
