August 8–September 17, 1978
177
He said that in this situation he believed strongly that it was a
tragedy not to conclude at least an agreement on how to organize the
West Bank and Gaza for the transition period and “to get on with estab-
lishing the self-rule regime.” This, he said, was now well within reach;
the other two major subjects under discussion, a broad set of principles
applicable to everything and the Sinai problem, did not seem to be
within reach, blocked by the inadmissibility language, settlements re-
moval, and Sadat’s insistence on removal of all airfields within three
years. He had, therefore, suggested to Vance that we find a way to sep-
arate out the agreement on the West Bank and Gaza so as at least to
leave Camp David with that as an achievement. He was sorry that
Vance had replied that this was, in his view, impossible.
There then ensued a lengthy discussion about all of these subjects
in which Dayan revealed, among other things, that he had, with great
difficulty, finally persuaded Begin to accept language on the Pales-
tinian question and on 242, including “in all its aspects” and “in all of
its parts,” which Begin had resisted for months. He said it was totally
impossible to move him on settlements at this juncture, and Begin had
now decided to take the whole issue back to the Knesset where he (and
Dayan) were quite certain an overwhelming majority of members
would refuse to sanction removal. He said that Begin and he were both
now planning to leave Camp David no later than Wednesday night,
September 13, as was Barak—who in any event had to be back in Israel
Thursday night in order to be sworn-in as a justice of the Supreme
Court. Dayan seemed convinced that there was little left now to do but
close out the conference.
I urged Dayan not to jump to conclusions and, above all, not to
plan to leave or to permit Barak to leave before Friday, at the earliest. I
reviewed the anticipated schedule for the next 48 hours with him and
said that they should wait to see the next draft of our paper, which
would be based on their reactions, as well as the Egyptian reactions, to
our first draft. I also urged him to think long and hard about some way
that the “inadmissibility” language could be incorporated into the Pre-
amble in a form which Begin might accept. I said that all of us under-
stood the depth of feeling about the settlements question, and that we
should both continue to seek formulas by which it could be handled in
this framework, since it would be tragic to be able to agree on most
other issues but find no way of dealing with this question.
After lengthy debate, in which Dayan’s mood gradually im-
proved, he finally agreed to seek ways in which the “inadmissibility”
language might be utilized, while asking me to do everything possible
(a) to look for a way to deal with the Sinai settlements issue in this
paper which put off to the period of detailed negotiation its eventual
resolution, and (b) to persuade the Secretary to reconsider his response
