February 1951–February 1952
187
characteristics quite peculiar to themselves. Mohammad Mosadeq is an
aristocratic Moslem Persian, born to wealth, bound by tradition,
steeped in classic Persian culture. He is proud to be a Persian and he
understands and loves his people. The vices and the virtues he demon-
strates are not unusual characteristics in Iran, although he emphasizes
those aspects of his character which are most useful to his politics.
Patriotism First among these characteristics is love of country. It is
astounding how eagerly Iranians will tell foreign acquaintances about
Iranian immorality and undependability; but, in a perverse way, this
attitude reflects the deep pride in country which all Iranians have. Mo-
sadeq shares this patriotism. Examples of a willingness to join in patri-
otic movements are numerous in Mosadeq’s career, most prominent
among them being his participation in the constitutional reform of 1906
and his determination, while in the Majlis, to prevent the Russians from
controlling northern Persia.
A politician who wants to claim Iranian popular support will have
to emulate Mohammad Mosadeq and build at least a reputation as a
patriot, even leaving other attributes aside. For instance, Hosein Maki
now holds a place in many Persian hearts solely because he demon-
strated battling patriotism in his supervision of expropriation of the
British oil industry in Khuzistan.3
Incorruptibility Another characteristic which has won for Mosadeq
a good public reputation is his disregard for the material benefits which
usually accrue to Persian government officials. Many Persians consider
that corruption is the natural state of the human race and refuse to be-
lieve that the tremendously wealthy oil company could not buy Mo-
sadeq to its point of view or at least persuade him to pervert the nation-
alization law to some long-term, devious British advantage.
By his refusal to be bought, Dr. Mosadeq broke the ancient pattern
of bribery which had been used to move most previous politics in Iran.
The old gang of intriguing greedy politicians could not overthrow with
their traditional tactics a Premier who was not interested in cash
profits. Mosadeq’s colleagues, however, do not fail to profit from their
positions under the cloak of the Prime Minister’s peculiar probity.
Infirmities As an aged man, Mohammad Mosadeq naturally finds
the burdens of the premiership extremely wearing. There is no faking
in his need to rest as much as possible. However, as the following story4
shows, he sometimes used his weariness to serve political purposes.
3 It may be appropriate here to note Dr. Johnson’s definition of patriotism: “The last
refuge of a scoundrel.” [Footnote is in the original. At the end of the footnote, there is a
handwritten comment that reads: “Who is the scoundrel, AIOC or Mosadeq?”]
4 Related by a reliable source who was present during the incident. [Footnote is in
the original.]
