500.A 4 e/412: Telegram [Document 707] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray) [Paraphrase] WASHINGTON, October 23, 1925—7 p.m. 303. Your telegram 449 of October 17, 7 p.m., fifth paragraph. 1. It seems to me most important that as far as possible the principles governing future tariff relations between China and other countries be worked out before detailed rates that might be applied under tariff autonomy are considered. So many points of controversy are involved in the question of detailed rate schedules that the possibility of agreement on anything would be endangered should such discussions be entered upon, even informally, in connection with the conference. You may take such action as you think advisable to impress this view upon the interested parties. 2. Unconditional most-favored-nation treatment is a vital underlying principle, as indicated in our telegram 282, October 5, 1 p.m., paragraph 4 (b). Refer in this connection to the seventh article of the treaty with Germany which became effective this month71 (see Congressional Record for February 10, 1925, page 348272 ). Express assurance should be given that there will be no discrimination and that when any benefit is granted to any one country the other countries shall receive it unconditionally without request. 3. The possibility of disadvantageous treatment of American trade will remain, as you suggest, even with provisions accepted for most-favorednation treatment. This might result either from restrictions upon imports and exports, rate schedules, or classification of goods. The following comments are offered regarding these points: (a) Obviously it will be very difficult to devise any tariff system that will affect equally the Chinese trade of the several foreign countries. The Department feels that if China in good faith applies reasonable principles in tariff-making, no country can with reason object. It is reasonable, for example, that necessities should not bear as high a tax as luxuries. Our Government would not object in principle if higher rates were placed on American luxuries,
