846 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 255. Summary of Conclusions of a Presidential Review Committee Meeting1 Washington, May 17, 1979, 9:30–10:20 a.m. Subject West Bank/Gaza Negotiations Participants State DCI Secretary Cyrus Vance Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director Harold Saunders, Assistant John Helgerson, Assistant NIO for Secretary, Bureau of Near Near East and South Asia Eastern and South Asian White House Affairs Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski Michael Sterner, Deputy Assistant David Aaron Secretary, Bureau of Near NSC Eastern and South Asian Robert Hunter Affairs William Quandt Defense STR Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan Ambassador Robert Strauss, Robert Murray, Deputy Assistant Special Representative for Secretary, Near Eastern, Trade Negotiations African and South Asian Ambassador James Leonard Affairs JCS Lt. General William Smith 1. Objectives. Secretary Vance stated that the West Bank/Gaza negotiations would have critical importance for the stability of the Egypt- Israel treaty and for the trends in the Arab world. Early progress will be essential, despite the difficulty and unfamiliarity of the issues. (S) 2. Trends. Ambassador Strauss noted that nearly all the trends in the Middle East are negative. Arab opposition to Sadat is deeper than expected. Israeli settlement activity is likely to increase. We must do something to reverse these trends. (S) 3. Settlements. It was generally agreed that the best issue on which to take a stand is Israeli settlement activity. Secretary Vance said that he would talk to both Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat about settlements. Sadat might then raise the issue directly with Begin. Ambas- 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 25, (Meetings—PRC 107: 5/17/79). Secret. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. The minutes of this meeting are ibid. Quandt sent the summary to Brzezinski for approval under a May 17 memorandum in which Quandt noted that he did not feel it was “essential” for Carter to see the summary and that he would instead prepare a short note for him. A notation in an unknown hand in the margin indicates that this was done on May 18. Aaron initialed approval of the summary, presumably on Brzezinski’s behalf. (Ibid.)
