718
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
high ground. In fact we are there already, although nobody seems to
notice it very much for we are sharing it with some noisy types. (S)
Specifically, we should double track our current strategy (make
the Soviets pay heavily) with a strategy that portrays us as the party
urging a peaceful settlement on reasonable terms. We should be the
moving spirit of a “peace offensive”—and define its terms. At present,
we are in the apparent position of grudgingly accepting the idea of a
peaceful settlement while harping on things that people don’t like
to hear. And, given our evident lack of interest in a peaceful negoti-
ated outcome, when we do say something positive it tends to be
discounted. (S)
What is needed is a change in emphasis. We should be talking
long and loud about the need for a peaceful settlement in Afghanistan.
We should be pointing out at every opportunity that the Soviets are
frustrating this outcome not only by their actions on the ground but
also because of their unreasonable and unjust refusal to commit them-
selves to prompt and total withdrawal. (S)
Clearly we would keep up (and if possible intensify) our drumfire
of propaganda along the present lines. And we would not yield an
inch on our conditions. But we would try to become identified with
the goal of peace rather than the goal of punishing the Soviets (largely, it
might be noted, at the price of dead Afghans and unhappy athletes.) (S)
This theme should also be featured in our talks with the Soviets.
From what I have seen of the reporting, we have been growlingly
negative. We should be challengingly positive. Put Moscow more and
more on the defensive. Sure, it won’t make much difference in bilateral
negotiations (and none of this will likely budge the Soviets out of
Afghanistan), but the fact of our emphasis on peaceful settlement will
leak out, and play back into our public strategy. (S)
The public strategy should be founded on statements by the Presi-
dent, Muskie and you. The Philadelphia speech, for example, should
have had an impassioned plea for peace and a truly non-aligned
Afghanistan “if only the Soviets would see reason and meet conditions
that are universally supported.” It should have stressed that we have no
preferred outcome in Afghanistan as long as the Afghans are content.2
Incidentally, a strong push by us in this way could generate increased
public support in such countries as India. (S)
2 Carter addressed the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia on May 9. Concerning
Afghanistan, he said: “Our goal is the withdrawal of Soviet occupying troops, the neutral-
ity or non-alignment of Afghanistan as a nation, and the encouragement of the formation
there of a government acceptable to the Afghan people.” For the text of his speech, see
Public Papers: Carter 1980–81, Book I, pp. 873–880. It is also printed in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. I, Foundations of Foreign Policy, Document 147.
