Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II how to handle loan proposals for governments that do not respect human rights and will be pursuing the subject with them bilaterally. II. CSCE Human Rights Since there will probably be a NATO Summit meeting right after this session, that would be a more appropriate forum for discussion of CSCE human rights questions.3 III. Anticipated Reaction All participants in the Summit are likely to accept more or less willingly an exchange of views on human rights and may be willing to accept some general communique´ language on the importance of the subject. However, most will oppose efforts to reach agreed policies on human rights. UK and to a lesser degree Canada will welcome discussion of human rights at the Summit. France will probably oppose such discussions as serving no useful purpose and possibly embarrassing the French Government. Germany and Italy will be cautious about human rights discussions because they consider other issues more deserving of attention in this forum. The Germans have expressed concern over the impact of human rights activities on their Ostpolitik efforts. Both countries will listen carefully, but will be unenthusiastic at best. Japan looks forward to the Summit primarily as an opportunity to discuss economic and trade issues, but will be willing to discuss human rights in a general context without reference to specific countries or cases. If the European Community (EC) Commission participates, it will remain in the background. 3 After the Summit, the President traveled to Geneva and Berlin, then returned to London to attend the May 10 North Atlantic Council meeting. He delivered prepared remarks to the NAC meeting on May 10 and referenced the upcoming CSCE Review Conference, noting that the United States intended to support a review of progress made by all countries in implementing each provision of the Helsinki Final Act. Carter added that the U.S. human rights policy “does not reflect a desire to impose our particular political or social arrangements on any other country. It is, rather, an expression of the most deeply felt values of the American people. We want the world to know where we stand. (We entertain no illusion that the concerns we express and the actions we take will bring rapid changes in the policies of other governments. But neither do we believe that world opinion is without effect.) We will continue to express our beliefs—not only because we must remain true to ourselves but also because we are convinced that the building of a better world rests on each nation’s clear expression of the values that have given meaning
