that its meaning was intended to be exactly responsive to my Note. I then said that I would communicate it to my Government.

The paragraphs in the Note enclosed regarding the financial operations and foreign loans of the Yugoslav Government will be observed and are evidently intended as a further reply to the phrase in the Department’s telegram requesting confirmation to the effect that “no action will be taken by the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes prior to the refunding or discharge of the latter’s indebtedness to the United States with respect to any other indebtedness heretofore or hereafter contracted which would result in placing the United States in a less favorable position as a creditor than that which it occupies at the present time.” In connection with such loans, I may refer to the Department’s Instruction No. 507 of July 22nd, 1924, in reply to my Despatch No. 2348 of May 27th, 1924,91 requesting a statement setting forth the Department’s point of view regarding the relations between the assurances asked by the World War Debt Commission and further financial obligations which the Yugoslav Government might desire to incur. I have [etc.] H. PERCIVAL DODGE [Enclosure—Translation92 ] The Yugoslav Minister for Foreign Affairs (Nintchitch) to the American Minister (Dodge) MR. MINISTER: By your letter No. 755 dated May 5th last you were good enough to ask me to confirm the assurances made by the delegates of the Royal Government especially appointed to discuss its debt to the United States of America before the Committee on Foreign Debts of the World War. In confirmation of the assurances of the Delegates of the Royal Government I have the honour to make the following statement to you: The Royal Government considers its debt to the United States of America as a financial obligation which has to be fully respected and it has the intention and the desire to pay it when the economic and financial recovery of the country will permit of it. It will not in any manner place the United States of America either in a less favorable position than another creditor of the Kingdom for the period from 1914 to 1920 or in a less favourable position than their present position as creditor. By its financial operations and by its foreign loans since the conclusion of peace up to the present the Government of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes has had
