3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
161
predates the change in US administrations. The initial impulse for it
was probably the desire to silence the dissidents before the Belgrade re-
view conference.5 The new US administration’s public defense of So-
viet dissidents apparently did reinforce and intensify Soviet anxieties.
The net effect was to impel the leadership increasingly to conclude that
harsher measures against dissidents were required.
The current campaign against dissidents is in part related to irrita-
tion over the lack of progress in other areas of US-Soviet relations, as
well as to the Soviets’ desire to keep dissent closely controlled during
the Belgrade conference. At the same time, the more defensive and
pugnacious tone of Soviet policy, both externally and internally, may
also reflect aggravated tensions within the Soviet leadership. Recent
policy difficulties may have strengthened the arguments of those
leaders somewhat less inclined to conciliate the regime’s opponents,
both at home and abroad.
The Evolution of Soviet Reaction to Dissent
When the Soviets signed the CSCE accords in August 1975, they
took a calculated risk that their acceptance of the human rights provi-
sions of Basket III would not create serious internal difficulties for
them. After Helsinki and especially during the last year, however, sev-
eral developments heightened the concern of Soviet authorities about
dissent in their society. This increased anxiety has been gradually
translated into increasingly tough stands on issues of ideology and
social control, and has produced the current crackdown on internal
dissent.
[Omitted here is a chronology of interactions between the Soviet
Government and dissidents, August 1975–July 1977.]
I. The Dissident Problem
A. CSCE: A Rallying Point for Soviet Dissidents
The human rights provisions of Basket III provided a common
ground for Soviet dissidents with a wide range of views and concerns,
thus raising the specter for the first time in many years of a unified “op-
position.” The CSCE monitoring group, the most important dissident
group to emerge in the Soviet Union since Helsinki, was organized by
physicist Yury Orlov in Moscow in May 1976, and soon sprouted re-
gional branches in the Ukraine, Lithuania, Armenia, Georgia, and Len-
ingrad. These branches were tiny and the degree of actual coordination
that existed between them is not known, but the emergence of a dissi-
dent organization with links throughout the country was unique in re-
5 See footnote 7, Document 2.
