Romania 657 the purpose of justifying the arms race, the so-called need to allocate high investments, to change the armaments in all of the sectors [of the economy] as soon as possible, and to involve the economic potential of all [Warsaw Pact] countries taking part in this arms race.” (Minutes of the Political Executive Committee of the Romanian Communist Party, November 24, 1978; Romanian National Archives, CC RCP Chancellery Files, 89/1978. Published by the Cold War International History Project) While agreeing to continue living by its commitments under the 1955 Charter, the Politburo decided to continue to oppose what it saw as Soviet attempts to interfere in its internal affairs through demands for increased control, and to publicize its positions on military matters and increase of military expenditures, an unprecedented airing of Warsaw Pact internal disagreements. Ceausescu “orchestrated public explanation and support from RCP Political Executive Committee and delegations from all social categories beginningwithworkers,”theEmbassyinBucharestreportedintelegram 8461,November27.“Amidcheeringreminiscentof1968post-Czechoslovak invasion atmosphere,” Ceausescu’s performance, the Embassy wrote, “will do [him] no harm with Romanian population.” (National Archives,RG59,CentralForeignPolicyFile,D780488–0150)Ceausescu’s December 1 speech, reported by the Embassy in telegram 8603, December 1, “placed Romania’s differences with Warsaw Pact allies on formal public record in a context designed to demonstrate maximum national unity behind him.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780496–0373) In telegram 8758 from Bucharest, December 7, the Embassy described Ceausescu’s actions as the result of “serious policy differences with Romania’s formal allies.” Ceausescu, the Embassy continued, was likely “under considerable pressure in the weeks leading up to the Warsaw Pact summit.” Ceausescu’s decision to go public, the Embassy reported, was a calculated gamble to elicit: “a) sympathy and support from the West, China, and others; b) genuine Romanian national unity around Ceausescu; and c) a chance to expand substantially Romania’s maneuvering room on foreign policy at one blow rather than by the usual small incremental steps.” The Embassy concluded that Ceausescu “may see an old and sick leadership in Moscow and the start of a succession struggle there, a Soviet Union deeply absorbed in SALT negotiations with the United States and profoundly concerned by a revitalized and outward-looking China, and a collection of East European states, who, to a greater or lesser extent, are reluctant allies of the Soviets and which may not-so-secretly share some of Romania’s points of view. In such a situation, small states can move decisively and successfully against big ones, and Ceausescu has moved.” “Any statement or other clear indication of U.S. support for Romanian inde-
