518
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
tain what they regard as tight and responsible monetary policy in the
period ahead. Any indications otherwise will likely have a negative im-
pact on the dollar.
In summary, the world’s official financial leaders (unlike the pri-
vate people who are moving money around in huge quantities) are be-
ginning to appreciate and even applaud our economic initiatives. They
are anxiously awaiting your anti-inflation proposal and will judge its
success by the discipline it imposes on the government itself. And they
are hopeful that the Federal Reserve will refrain from prematurely
easing monetary policy.
W. Michael Blumenthal7
7 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
168.
Letter From President Carter to French President Giscard
d’Estaing1
Washington, October 6, 1978
Dear Valery:
Thank you for your letter informing me of the policies that France
has adopted in fulfillment of its Summit pledges.2 I am glad to learn of
your contribution to the common effort—in stimulating growth,
fighting inflation, and freeing up the French economy.
Meanwhile, I am moving actively on the other fronts that we dis-
cussed at Bonn: The Congress will soon pass our energy bill; I will
shortly announce a new anti-inflation program; and we have tried re-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 6, France: President Valery Giscard
d’Estaing, 2/77–11/78. No classification marking. Owen sent the letter to Carter for his
signature under cover of an October 4 memorandum, in which he noted that the letter
“tactfully” encouraged Giscard to meet his Bonn G–7 Summit commitments on trade.
Owen commented: “While the Germans and Japanese have adopted measures to stimu-
late growth, and the U.S. will soon be acting on inflation and energy, the British and
French are not fulfilling their part of the Bonn agreement. Bob Strauss (who cleared this
letter, along with State, Treasury, and Jim Fallows) tells me that their trade negotiating
positions haven’t changed since the Summit.” (Ibid.)
2 Owen forwarded Giscard’s undated letter to Carter under cover of his October 4
memorandum (see footnote 1 above).
