Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1047
4. Brooks referred to an informal suggestion Nazarkin had made 
the previous day on the time to transport inspectors for reentry vehi-
cle inspections. Nazarkin had suggested three hours for submarine 
bases and rail garrisons, eight hours for ICBM silos, and five hours for 
restricted areas, with an agreed list of specific restricted areas requir-
ing more time. Stressing that he was speaking personally, Brooks said, 
he thought this approach had promise. Once Nazarkin was ready to 
propose it formally, Brooks said, the U.S. side would be ready to react 
promptly and constructively. Nazarkin said he was still seeking author-
ity to make the proposal.
5. Brooks noted that Nazarkin had indicated that the Soviet side 
was working on a package proposal involving inspection quotas, size 
of inspection teams, mobile ICBM call back provisions, and the fre-
quency of changes to the list of inspectors and monitors. Brooks asked 
if Nazarkin could preview Soviet thinking. Nazarkin said he could not, 
and in turn asked for Brooks’ views. Brooks urged that the Soviet side 
not reopen the issue of inspection quotas. On the other three issues, 
Brooks continued, U.S. flexibility might be possible.
6. Nazarkin asked why the U.S. side needed the ability to update 
lists of inspectors every 15 days. (Comment: The U.S. position is 15 
days; the Soviet position 30 days. End comment.) Brooks said he did 
not know and suggested that the sides look at the INF treaty to see 
what provisions were included. Nazarkin said that the standard time 
for issuing visas in the Soviet Union was three weeks, implying that a 
compromise of three weeks might be possible.
7. Brooks asked why the Soviet side remained so obdurate about 
use of the global positioning system (GPS). Nazarkin said he was not 
completely sure, but the Soviet military appeared to believe that GPS 
receivers could collect data, not just simply record locations.
8. Brooks asked Nazarkin when the Soviet side would have infor-
mation on production units. Nazarkin said he did not know.
9. Brooks noted that the current work on using throw-­weight in the 
new types definition had led some in Washington to examine new types 
agreed criteria. In particular, Brooks said, some were concerned that a 
relatively small change in launch weight would be difficult to verify. 
The fact that the U.S. side was reconsidering requiring verification of 
stage and missile weights was, in part, due to the question of launch 
weight. Stressing, once again, that this was a personal inquiry, Brooks 
asked if the launch weight criterion was important to the Soviet side. 
Perhaps, Brooks speculated, it would make sense to drop that criterion. 
Nazarkin said he would check with his technical experts. Speaking 
politically, however, he was reluctant to reopen agreed language with 
respect to new types.
