1979 651 on our ALCM carrier—­first, because we will be depending more upon that force, and second because the Soviets will be able to better concentrate their efforts against it. He said that we would probably need a hardened cruise missile carrier that will have many of the characteristics of the B–1, but that our need for this aircraft will be somewhat less under the Triad options than under the dyad. He also remarked that he wouldn’t recommend the airmobile approach because of the C3I problems it would pose, and the reduced accuracy that would result with an airborne missile system. Finally, he remarked that he did not like the fact that the dyad option would require us to use a smaller missile. (TS) Secretary Brown noted that the survivable Triad options did not require us to make a decision on ultimate force size until 1985. Secretary Vance asked why, and Secretary Brown responded by noting that IOCs of the systems we would be pursuing under this option came slightly after 1985. He went on to note that with this option, the survivability of our land-­based missile force could be made independent of the number of missiles deployed in it. (C) The President asked if it was true that we were deploying three additional RVs every day. He was told that we were deploying more like one a day (this was later corrected to approximately one a week). The President noted that some of the anti-­war literature he had seen had made the statement about three. It was also noted that the Soviets are currently deploying approximately 5 RVs each day. (S) Secretary Vance asked if warhead proliferation wasn’t mostly a matter of ALCM deployments. Secretary Brown reviewed some of the numbers involved, and drew the conclusion that the options that were being discussed involved deployments of comparable numbers of ALCM and missile warheads. (C) The President asked what the maximum allowable range of the ALCM was, and was told that it was intercontinental. He remarked that this suggested that additional cruise missile deployments might provide a good response to a Soviet breakout, but he wondered where we would find targets for all of the additional warheads. (S) Frank Press remarked that if we can find a way to build a survivable Triad that is secure, verifiable, and feasible, it would be the best idea. The President remarked that the question was whether or not there existed a land-­based deployment scheme with these three characteristics. He added that it is obvious that the point of the small missile is that it really keeps the dyad option open. (C) Secretary Brown noted that we should look at ways to get the 190,000 lb. missile to sea. Bill Perry commented that we have put $40M for Trident II into the ’81 budget. Secretary Brown remarked that perhaps the best policy would be to push both Trident II and the large MX for a year. (C)
