1978 239 years from now and, by implication, on our foreign policy of a change up or down in average annual level of defense expenditures by 5% either way. To find out how you would like now to proceed, I attach a ten-­page summary of what seem to me to be the major issues and the major features of the guidance.3 I also attach for your information the table of contents and two sample sections of the guidance document; the first is on strategic nuclear forces and the second on forces for NATO.4 I would appreciate it if you could go through the ten-­page summary and indicate any issues you would like to have discussed in more depth. I will then prepare more detailed briefing documents for a meeting during which you and I can discuss them thoroughly with Charles Duncan, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, and a few of your other staff. We could (and I would recommend it) do this during the week of March 20th, before you leave on your overseas trip.5 Alternatively, you may wish to wait until May when, according to the OMB staff, you will be in a position to look at the Government-­wide guidance for the FY 1980 budget. There is one matter, however, which will not wait beyond the end of March. This is the need to submit to the Congress a five-­year ship-­ building program. It is important that this be a program that we are prepared to stick with over a period of at least a few years, subject of course to changes that we are forced to make to account for Congressional changes while still assuring program balance. I will be ready to go over this subject with you any time after March 13th. Probably Zbig, Jim McIntyre, and I should discuss it first. Unsurprisingly, there are a number of matters within the Consolidated Guidance that are not unanimously agreed within the Defense Department. There are therefore likely to be additional changes in it as the arguments (and the realities of Congressional action) sway me one way or the other. It begins to look as if the Congress, while making a number of changes up and down (adding a CVN and deferring a Trident submarine, for example) is at least as likely to approve a higher Defense budget for Fiscal 79 than we submitted as a lower one. This will probably reinforce the view among my subordinates (one of their few unanimous views) that a 5% increase above what is now contained in the five-­year fiscal guidance, could easily be passed if the Administration would propose it. They see this course of action as solving their most severe problems and as making the difference 3 Attached but not printed is the 10-­page summary; see the attachment to Document 63. 4 Attached but not printed. 5 Carter traveled to Venezuela, Brazil, Nigeria, and Liberia March 28–April 3.
