934 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI our own bill, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act, which was passed in March 1978 with overwhelming majorities in both houses. The Act set the criteria for licensing the export of nuclear material, and prohibited U.S. export to any country not accepting international safeguards on all of its plans.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp. 132–133) In his memoirs, the Ambassador-at-Large and Special Representative for Non-Proliferation Matters, Gerard Smith, recalled that while the Act “gave the United States veto rights over reprocessing of spent fuel it provided to foreign countries, called for renegotiation of existing contracts and agreements, tightened export license criteria, and prohibited U.S. export of fuel to any nation not accepting so-called ‘fullscope’ safeguards,” the Act could not prevent other nations from finding “other sources of supply for their fuel.” He recalled “When the President signed the bill into law and photos were taken in the White House, I stood to one side despite Brzezinski’s protest that I should be in the middle of the picture. I was determined not to be associated with this legislation, although as Carter’s Special Assistant, I was bound to uphold it.” Ultimately, Smith said “as things developed, I took it as my principal mission to roam the globe trying to cut down on the bitterness about our new policies and to mend fences with both allies and ‘threshold,’ or potential nuclear, states.” (Smith, Disarming Diplomat, pp. 192–193) 367. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, March 15, 1978 SUBJECT EURATOM–IAEA Safeguards PARTICIPANTS US USSR Philip J. Farley, S/AS Alexander Bessmertnykh, William R. Salisbury, EUR/RPE Counselor of Soviet Embassy (notetaker) in Washington 1 Source: Department of State, Chronological Files, Speeches, and Papers of Lucy W. Benson, Lot 81D321, Box 8, EURATOM 1978. Confidential. Drafted by William Salisbury (EUR/RPE). The meeting took place at the Department of State.
