1082 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 324. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs (Pickering) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the Under Secretary of State for Management (Read)1 Washington, January 19, 1979 SUBJECT Women’s and Children’s Rights—New Position We believe that the Department is vulnerable in not having a full-time, high-level position devoted to international issues pertaining to rights of women and children.2 In much of the world, the plight of women and children comprises one of the most serious denials of basic human rights, as well as being a major impediment to social and economic development. Concern for these issues by Congress (especially in light of the Percy Amendment)3 and others, including humanitarian organizations, is certain to increase because of the International Year of the Child (1979) and the 1980 mid-term Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women. Further, the Department is in process of organizing an interagency task force on women and children, in which HA should obviously play a central role. An OES officer, Dr. Luke T. Lee, FSR–2, possesses unique credentials in these fields. He has considerable academic and legal experience and is an international authority on rights of women and children. He has been involved in several United Nations projects and has published 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 5, TL 4/16–4/30 1979. No classification marking. Drafted by Green; concurred in in substance by Blaney. 2 In an April 25 memorandum to Lake, Lee indicated that M had taken the position that HA did not require an officer for women’s issues as the Department had an Office for International Women’s Programs in IO. Lee continued, “This position is in error for a number of reasons. In the first place, socio-economic rights involve more than the rights of women; they include also the rights of the child and the elderly, as well as the rights to education, health (including family planning), employment, food and nutrition, etc., which are dealt with by IO at best on the multilateral basis. Second, even assuming the rights of women embrace the entire scope of socio-economic rights, IO’s involvement in the status of women at the multilateral level should not preclude HA’s involvement at the bilateral and other substantive levels, just as IO’s roles in multilateral population matters has not precluded OES’s role in bilateral and other substantive population issues. Third, by not linking HA to socio-economic rights, the Department’s role in human rights as a whole is apt to suffer.” (Ibid.) 3 The Percy amendment added Section 113, “Integrating Women into National Economies,” to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1973 (P.L. 93–189).
