3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 799 “normal and traditional” levels. (2) Seek agreement to a more restrictive program. We would hold sales to 8MMT and ask other exporters to reduce shipments below 1979/80 levels. (3) Relax all restrictions and reestablish a competitive export posture. (C) The group agreed that the grain suspension had been effective this year. The Soviets would obtain only about 7 MMT of the 17 MMT we had denied them. Except for Argentina, the other exporting countries had been fairly cooperative in limiting shipments. But the overall commitment was imprecise, and some countries (e.g. Canada) are pushing the upper limit of “traditional” sales. Continuation of the present policy into 1980/81 (option 1) was undesirable because the American farmer would continue to bear most of the economic burden while other countries increased their share of the Soviet market. Option 3 would require the US to retreat from the decisions announced in January and was undesirable from a foreign policy standpoint. Option 2 seemed the preferable course if: (a) it would have a significant impact on the Soviet economy; and (b) other exporters would cooperate. (C) On the first point, assuming a Soviet crop of 215 MMT (trend estimate), option 2 would impose further pressures on the Soviet livestock sector and prevent the rebuilding of stocks. If their crop is much higher than 215 MMT, there is little we could do unilaterally or jointly to punish the Soviets. They could rebuild stocks and increase livestock herds. (C) There was detailed discussion about the prospects for gaining exporter cooperation. It was agreed that Argentina is the key. If Argentina continues massive grain shipments to the USSR, it would be difficult to convince others to hold the line, much less cut back exports. Argentina has just concluded a long term agreement with the Soviets, calling for minimum grain shipments of 5MMT annually. We might be able to convince Argentina to hold to that level. It was noted that we have little bargaining leverage with Argentina to go below this level unless we are willing to back away from our policies on human rights, nuclear nonproliferation, etc. If we don’t go below this level, other exporters would object, since 5MMT is 180% of average Argentine exports to the USSR in recent years. Canada and Australia both have large unsold stocks from this year’s crop. Canada wants our approval for the export of 1979/80 grain to the USSR. Canadian farmers claim they have borne the main burden of the embargo—just as ours do. Conceivably, Canada might conclude a long term agreement with the USSR. (C) The group agreed that the degree of cooperation we receive will depend in large part on the size of the Soviet harvest. If their crop is good, there will be a competitive scramble for a limited market, and any agreement will fail. We will not have a good estimate of the crop until July. (C)
