First Responses Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 27, 1979 SUBJECT The U.S. and the Islamic World (U) It disturbs me that the net result of our response to critical events in Iran and elsewhere in the Muslim world contributes exactly to what our enemies most want to see: we isolate ourselves from Muslims, mutual suspicions grow and permanent alienation sets in. Thus we will find it harder and harder to communicate with Muslims—because we reduce our opportunities for communicating. If we do not stem this process, the Carter Administration will have left its successors a legacy that will require many years to eliminate. (U) Steps to protect Americans in Muslim countries from imminent attack by evacuating dependents and reducing staffs are probably unavoidable in the circumstances in which we now find ourselves, but I sense that we may be on the edge of a form of bureaucratic panic. The more we reduce presence in such countries, the less opportunity we have for communication with their governments and peoples on any level and the more opportunities there will be for suspicions and misunderstandings to grow. Rather than demonstrating to the world that we break and run when under pressure, we would serve our own interests better if we displayed a stubborn insistence on staying in place, asserting ourselves and being ready to fight (let the Marines shoot!) to defend our installations and our principles when challenged. (C) Eleven hundred Marines to protect more than 150 diplomatic installations around the world is too few. We need to double that number. We still possess the most advanced technology in the world—we should announce a new program to apply it to defense of our diplomatic establishments abroad. Our information efforts are already too weak in most of these countries; our exchange efforts are oriented too much toward listening to others and too little toward telling our own story. The naive idealistic thrust of these programs which has become enshrined as a set of sacred principles in recent years should be reversed. (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General
