per second from Lake Michigan through the channels of said Sanitary District; AND
WHEREAS, In the judgment of the Secretary of War, an annual average diversion of more
than 8,500 cubic feet per second should not now be permitted; NOW THEREFORE, this is to
certify that, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Engineers, the Secretary of War,
under the provisions of the aforesaid statute, hereby authorizes the said Sanitary
District of Chicago to divert from Lake Michigan, through its main drainage canal and
auxiliary channels, an amount of water not to exceed an annual average of 8,500 cubic
feet per second, the instantaneous maximum not to exceed 11,000 cubic feet per
second, upon the following conditions:
1. That there shall be no unreasonable interference with navigation by the
work herein authorized.
2. That if inspections or any other operations by the United States are
necessary in the interests of navigation, all expenses connected therewith
shall be borne by the permittee.
3. That no attempt shall be made by the permittee or the owner to forbid the
full and free use by the public of any navigable waters of the United States.
4. That the Sanitary District of Chicago shall carry out a program of sewage
treatment by artificial processes which will provide the equivalent of the
complete (100%) treatment of the sewage of a human population of at least
1,200,000 before the expiration of the permit.
5. That the Sanitary District shall pay its share of the cost of regulating or
compensating works to restore the levels or compensate for the lowering of
the Great Lakes system, if and when constructed, and post a guarantee in the
way of a bond or certified check in the amount of $1,000,000 as an evidence
of its good faith in this matter.
6. That the Sanitary District shall submit for the approval of the Chief of
Engineers and the Secretary of War plans for controlling works to prevent the
discharge of the Chicago River into Lake Michigan in times of heavy storms.
These works shall be constructed, in accordance with the approved plans and
shall be completed and ready for operation by July 1, 1929.
7. That the execution of the sewage treatment program and the diversion of
water from Lake Michigan shall be under the supervision of the U. S. District
Engineer at Chicago, and the diversion of water from Lake Michigan shall be
under his direct control in times of flood on the Illinois and Des Plaines
Rivers.
