Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 from all sources in aid. Thus steps such as these by oil-exporting nations will be vital to our common goals: • First, they must adopt stable price and supply policies to avoid further trauma to the international economy. • Second, the oil-exporting countries must increase their aid and recycle more of their surpluses directly to developing countries. • Third, oil-exporting countries should join with consuming nations in working for rational global energy arrangements. Developing Countries. Whatever the level, external assistance will always be a secondary factor. The major determinants are internal—the ability to use resources effectively, to encourage innovation, and to share broadly the benefits of growth. Thus, there are responsibilities that developing countries must shoulder. • First, domestic and external resources must be used efficiently and fairly, with concentration on such priority areas as energy and food. • Second, serious family-planning efforts are vital. Nine-tenths of the world’s population increase in the next 20 years will be in developing countries. No other single factor does more to darken their future. • Third, as their economic strength grows, individual developing nations should accept more responsibility for the common management of international economic problems. • Fourth, as their development proceeds, they must open their own economies to free flows of world trade. Centrally Planned Countries. The market economy countries have received dominant attention in the North-South dialogue. But the centrally planned countries have global responsibilities as well. Empty bellies will not be filled by polemics. No nation or group of nations has grounds to remain aloof from this struggle. World opinion looks to the centrally planned countries: • First, to increase their assistance to developing countries; • Second, to increase their unconditioned purchases of LDC [less developed country] products; and • Third, to cooperate in international efforts to stabilize commodity markets. Proposals For all of us, the principles I have outlined must be the basis for practical action. For our part the United States is prepared to join with others to meet the global challenge. Our most urgent task is to confront the specter of imminent famine haunting Africa. This summer alone the United States has provided an
