Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX U.K., the FRG and Benelux. Nagy and Petran are heading a Hungarian delegation to the U.S. for annual consultations on CSCE.2 Hungary continues to stand out among Warsaw Pact countries in terms of its relatively relaxed domestic situation, commitment to economic reforms, and forthcoming attitude toward CSCE implementation. In the post-Afghanistan period Hungary has continued to stress detente and CSCE. The Hungarians welcome our policy of continuing to seek further improvements in U.S.-Hungarian relations. III. ISSUES A. Afghanistan and East-West Relations —U.S. opposition to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan arises from a sincere desire to further the cause of international peace and stability. The Soviets’ use of force against a small country threatens the security of all nations and raises serious questions about their future intentions. —The actions we have taken against the Soviets, therefore, are not intended to affect Eastern Europe. We continue to sell grain and controlled technology to Hungary. While our export licensing controls have been extended, we will continue to grant exceptions to specific restrictions for exports to Hungary and other Eastern European countries. —However, as we have pointed out to Hungarian officials on a number of occasions, continued access to U.S. grain and sensitive technology will depend on Hungary’s willingness to respect our concerns regarding their end use. B. Iran —Although we appreciate Hungary’s private statements strongly disapproving of Iran’s holding of diplomatic hostages, we are disappointed by Hungary’s public statements which tend to emphasize Iran’s alleged grievances against the United States and imply that the hostages are strictly a bilateral issue. —We are actively pursuing all opportunities for discussion with Iran that could lead to an honorable resolution of the crisis. We are convinced that economic sanctions supported by nations committed 2 Nagy also met with Counselor Ridgway and Under Secretary Nimetz. In telegram 142884 to Budapest, May 31, the Department informed the Embassy of Ridgway’s discussions with Nagy, which focused on East-West relations, high-level visits, trade, economic, and cultural relations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800266– 0800) The Department transmitted the memorandum of conversation between Nimetz and Nagy on June 3, to Budapest in telegram 145697. The conversation focused on East- West relations, bilateral relations, Yugoslavia, and CSCE. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800272–0403)
