Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
19
age when almost all of the world’s people are tied together by instant
communication, the image of a country, as seen through its policies, has
a great deal to do with what it can accomplish through the traditional
channels of diplomacy.
Fourth, our policies should be aimed at building a just and
peaceful world order, in which every nation can have a constructive
role. For too long, our foreign policy has consisted almost entirely of
maneuver and manipulation, based on the assumption that the world is
a jungle of competing national antagonisms, where military supremacy
and economic muscle are the only things that work and where rival
powers are balanced against each other to keep the peace.
Exclusive reliance on this strategy is not in keeping with the char-
acter of the American people, or with the world as it is today. Balance of
power politics may have worked in 1815, or even 1945, but it has a
much less significant role in today’s world. Of course, there are ri-
valries—racial, religious, national, some of them bitter. But the need for
cooperation, even between rivals, goes deeper than all of them.
Every nation has a stake in stopping the pollution of the seas and
the air. Every nation wants to be free from the threat of blackmail by in-
ternational terrorists and hijackers. Every nation, including those of
OPEC, sits on limited resources of energy that are running out. The vast
majority of countries, including the Soviet Union, do not grow enough
food to feed their own people. Every nation’s economy benefits from
expanding two-way trade. And everyone—except perhaps the specu-
lator—has a stake in a fair and reliable international monetary system.
Our diplomatic agenda must also include preventing the spread of
nuclear weapons and controlling the flow of narcotics.
In the future, we must turn our attention increasingly toward these
common problems of food, energy, environment, and trade. A stable
world order cannot become a reality when people of many nations of
the world suffer mass starvation or when there are no established ar-
rangements to deal with population growth or environmental quality.
The intensity of these interrelated problems is rapidly increasing and
better mechanisms for consultation on these problems that affect ev-
eryone on this planet must be established and utilized.
While the American people have had their fill of military adventu-
rism and covert manipulation, we have not retreated into isolationism.
We realize that increased anarchy will not only reverse the progress
toward peace and stability that we have made, but also strengthen the
hand of our adversaries.
That is why we must replace balance of power politics with world
order politics. The new challenge to American foreign policy is to take
the lead in joining the other nations of the world to build a just and
stable international order.
