North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 consider the legal and financial implications of an overdraft mechanism. Issue 1: Direct Contribution to a Common Fund In the negotiations on a common fund the US will have to address the question of whether it will agree to provide government contributions to a common fund. These funds would be in addition to the deposits in a pooling arrangement made by individual International Commodity Arrangements (ICAs). (It is assumed that the US would agree to make contributions to a common fund which were for the administrative costs of a common fund organization.) The purpose of a US agreement to consider direct contributions would be two-fold; (1) it would permit the US, at an appropriate point in the negotiations, to move some distance toward LDC demands that a common fund have its own capital resources; (2) direct contributions might enhance the borrowing capacity of a common fund by strengthening assurances to investors of its continued operation in the event of a default by a participating ICA or by participating members of an ICA. To ensure that a direct contribution would be consistent with our objectives, we would limit its use to building a contingency reserve within the common fund. Its purpose would be to enable the common fund to promptly satisfy its obligations in the event that a member government defaulted on its obligations to a particular ICA. If that ICA were fully extended at the time and the default required putting up additional collateral, the common fund could make a bridging loan to that ICA. The common fund would not assume ultimate liability for the outstanding loans of that ICA. This liability would continue to rest with member governments of the ICA. But the bridging loan would help to keep market conditions orderly while the ICA’s procedures for dealing with default of a member government came into force. Funds made available for contingency reserve purposes could be either in cash, in the form of callable capital or in the form of loan guarantees. From the point of view of creditworthiness of the common fund, cash contributions would be preferable. They would be available as a liquid cash reserve and could enhance both the borrowing capacity as well as the terms on which the common fund could borrow. In addition, cash contributions would yield earnings on investment, which could help defray interest and other expenses the common fund might have. The callable capital option, while also enhancing the financial efficiencies the common fund could obtain, would do so to a lesser extent. Loan guarantees would be the least helpful from a capital market efficiency point of view, because they could be mobilized only in the case of default and would not be available to bridge temporary liquidity problems.
