September 1953–December 1954
779
in the final moves to upset the institutional framework of constitutional
government.
Zahedi was widely credited with having saved Iran from “a
change of regime”, which many believed would have resulted in a
Communist take-over in short order. Almost immediately, however,
some possibly disgruntled individuals began to wonder whether
Zahedi had not “fulfilled his historic mission”, or whether, at least, he
would not have done so after a fairly brief period in which he would
devote himself entirely to reestablishing orderly government. On the
whole, however, it came to be accepted that Zahedi and his backers ex-
pected him to play a larger role. Particularly after the prompt grant of
American aid, it was realized that Zahedi could not be expected to step
down before his own hand had been tried at the task of reconstruction
and reform.
It soon became apparent that Zahedi, despite his personal history
as an early partisan of the nationalist movement, and despite the pro-
testations of his supporters that Zahedi was returning the nationalist
movement to its proper course, was not being successful in repre-
senting himself as the inheritor of the nationalist mantle. The popula-
tion took it for granted that Zahedi would again accept for Iran the in-
fluence of a major power—in this case, the United States. Most of those
who regarded foreign influence as undesirable seemed to accept the
United States as a less objectionable patron than either Britain or the
USSR.
Given this background, it is not surprising that Zahedi’s personal
prestige is related to his continued close association with the monarchy
and the United States, both of whom carry more prestige with the
public under current circumstances.
Despite this tertiary position, Zahedi has maintained his personal
predominance over other politicians now “on-stage.” His personal dig-
nity and skill in handling himself publicly have earned him respect;
criticism of his government has generally not been directed at Zahedi
personally.
Criticism of Zahedi’s subordinates began almost immediately after
his rise to power.2 He has not to date satisfied original hopes that he
would fill key positions with new faces, capable of supplying real lead-
ership in a program of reconstruction. Although professedly anxious to
return to conservative patterns of government, the Iranian public nev-
2 Embassy Despatch 185 of September 25, 1953, “The Zahedi Cabinet”, gives a more
detailed analysis of Iranian attitudes toward the members of the Zahedi Government.
[Footnote is in the original. Despatch 185 is in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Files
1950–1954, 788.13/9–2553.]
