24
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
grounds for complaint. They have never been comfortable with
Poland’s crazy quilt of socialism and private enterprise. In December,
Gierek announced a series of socio-economic reforms whose purpose
is to strengthen the private sector of the economy. This surely has not
gone unnoticed in some circles in Moscow. But it would be very difficult
for Gierek to renege on his public promises, and Moscow could buy
itself a real problem if it forces him to do so.
Short-Term Prospects
The odds favor continuity over the next few months. Poland will
continue to be highly volatile and there could be a blowup similar to
last summer’s or even worse. But Gierek and company, knowing the
stakes, made policy adjustments and will probably muddle through.
Honecker will continue to feel the pressures from the West and to be
aware of the basic restiveness of the East German people, but he is not
likely to do anything drastic (e.g., significantly cut back the interchange
between the two Germanies) that would seriously threaten public order
in East Germany. The dissidents in Czechoslovakia, Romania, Hungary,
and Yugoslavia will step up their activities with an eye to the Belgrade
review conference, but the respective regimes ought to be able to cope
with them with little trouble. The dissidents in those countries are not
likely to get more popular support over the next three to six months
than they enjoyed in the past three months.
This assessment could turn out wrong if:
—Mischance, misfortune, or miscalculation intrude. While Gierek
appears to have learned from the bad mistakes he made last year, this
does not mean he will not make another. The sudden death of dissident
spokesman Jan Patocka in Czechoslovakia illustrates the sort of unex-
pected event that could narrow the gap between the dissidents and the
population, although this has not occurred thus far in Czechoslovakia.8
Moreover, the Soviets and some of the East European leaders are more
nervous and sensitive than normal about the situation in Eastern
Europe. They could overreact to trouble.
—The dissidents press their case beyond the permissible. So far, the
dissidents have acted with considerable restraint, and even finesse.
They have not forced the regimes into taking harsh actions, but they
could change their tactics and engage in activities (overt or covert
agitation, propagandizing among workers, acts of violence, civil disobe-
8 Anniversaries also sometimes prove difficult for the various regimes. For example,
oppositionists in Yugoslavia can be expected to counter or denigrate the regime-spon-
sored extravaganza planned to celebrate Tito’s 85th birthday on May 25. Among other
such anniversaries which could serve as a focal point are June 17 (the 1953 East Berlin
uprising), August 13, (Berlin wall erected in 1961), and August 20 (the Soviet-led invasion
of Czechoslovakia in 1968). [Footnote is in the original.]
