336 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement in the present circumstances. He suggested that the military might be further impressed if a military figure were included in the special mission. I said that I saw the point of sending a special mission, but it was slightly embarrassing for me; I had discussed this matter with several of my colleagues, and since I understood that Lleras had not wished special missions to be sent to the inauguration, I had indicated that we were somewhat adverse to sending one unless we found that everybody else was planning to do so. The Foreign Minister said that it was a reversal of his position also. However, he felt that the circumstances warranted it. The Foreign Minister then said that since we were talking so frankly he wanted to tell me about his experiences on the morning of May 2nd. He had gotten away from his apartment at 5 A.M. with Jorge Mejia (Minister of Agriculture) before the military police had picked him up, as they had other high government officials. They had been stopped by a patrol (he did not specify whether it was a military or police patrol), and that at that moment they saw the car of General Paris (he said “not the Junta member, but his brother”), and Santamaria had said to Mejia in English, “Let’s get into this military car”. They had thus safely reached the barracks at Usaquen. Santamaria and Mejia agreed that if they found the military had also risen they would simply get arrested a few hours before they would be in any case. They found a scene of wild confusion at Usaquen, since no one knew what was going on. Apparently “some 45 officers” were undecided what to do. He had hastily harangued them, pointing out that if Colonel Forero thought he could run the country in the face of popular opposition and the inability of Colombia to get “one dollar to finance imports”, he was greatly mistaken. The officers appeared impressed with this argument and eventually he was taken to General Gomez Arenas, who was by that time organizing the counter-­attack of the loyal forces. I then said that since we were talking so intimately I wanted to ask him a direct question: why had the Government done nothing about the other officers who were known to be implicated in the May 2nd uprising? (I mentioned no names). The Foreign Minister smiled faintly and said he didn’t know; the Junta had simply not done anything about them. [text not declassified] The Foreign Minister said that he was seriously concerned at the problem of communism in Venezuela. He had heard from various Venezuelan friends that a very dangerous trend had developed in this direction. He particularly mentioned that “Mendoza”, obviously the former member of the Junta, had told him how disturbed he was. The Foreign Minister then let me read a long draft Note which he was preparing to send to the OAS with regard to a meeting of Foreign
