Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  281
major gap in the U.S. position. We also need additional guidance on 
the conversion of ICBMs and SLBMs to space launch vehicles. The 
Soviets appear interested in making progress on this issue, but we are 
unable to answer many of their questions, some of which are detailed 
in the annotated text of the JDT prepared by the delegation last fall and 
in the reporting cable on the treaty text working group of July 14.2 An 
other issue on which progress can be made is the unit of account for 
ICBMs and SLBMs in counting against the 1600 limit. There appears 
to be no real substantive difference between the sides on this issue. I 
could continue to press them to accept deployed ICBMs and SLBMs 
as the unit of account, try to negotiate a unit of account which com-
bines deployed missiles and launchers, or accept launchers as the unit 
of account in return for Soviet acceptance of the U.S. position on related 
issues (e.g., their agreement that there are no non-­deployed heavy 
bombers). Instructions giving the delegation flexibility to pursue pos-
sible solutions to this issue would be helpful.
Memorandum of Understanding
5. I recommend that Washington conduct a thorough scrub of 
the MOU, which has been started several times, but never completed. 
This would provide the following specific results: technical data entry 
requirements that support verification needs; defined criteria for site 
diagrams, line drawings, and equipment photographs; and defined 
locational accuracies.
Mobile ICBM Verification
6. We are having intensive discussions of the new Soviet propos-
als for verifying mobile ICBM systems. Most U.S. thinking to date has 
understandably gone into the obligations related to routine movements 
and dispersals out of and into restricted areas and rail garrisons. The 
Soviets have introduced a new category of movements, called “reloca-
tions,” which involve long-­distance, one-­way transits in which launch-
ers and missiles travel separately. Examples are the initial transit away 
from the production facility and transits to a test range or C or E facil-
ity. One interpretation of the current U.S. position is that these types 
of movements should be included in our category of “routine move-
ments.” Another possibility is that these are qualitatively different 
movements from those envisioned in the “training, maintenance and 
testing” category in the Moscow elements of common ground. Aside 
from the question of what to call such movements, there is the more 
important substantive issue of what notifications should be required. 
2 Reference is to telegram 6403 from NST Geneva, July 20, 1989 (Department of 
State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D890623–0358)
