National Security Policy  165
leadership to reverse this trend. The Russian people have everything 
to gain and we have nothing to lose in a race to see which system can 
do more for its people.
This point of view was most eloquently expressed by President 
Eisenhower in his Second Inaugural Address. He said at that time:
“We honor, no less in this divided world than in a less tormented 
time, the people of Russia. We do not dread, rather do we welcome, 
their progress in education and industry. We wish them success in their 
demands for more intellectual freedom, greater security before their 
own laws, fuller enjoyment of the rewards of their own toil. For as such 
things may come to pass, the more certain will be the coming of that 
day when our peoples may freely meet in friendship.”
Again, it is unfortunate that nowhere in the policy paper do we 
find this positive objective with respect to our policy towards the USSR 
itself. Instead, we find in those paragraphs of the paper dealing with 
“Other Means of Influencing the Communist Bloc” (pp. 16, 17, 18) vague 
references to “alternatives. . .which would be acceptable to the United 
States”—“Measures which make more difficult the reversal of policies 
more acceptable to us”—“Sustaining current ferment in the thinking, 
and fostering evolutionary trends, within the Bloc”—­“Accelerate evo­
lutionary changes in Sino-Soviet policies”—­etc. Nowhere in the paper 
is there any clear indication as to what alternatives”, what “meas­
ures”, what “evolutionary trends” and what “evolutionary changes” 
we would like to see take place behind the Iron Curtain. Certainly, in 
this most important of all policies, we should have positive, specific 
objectives.
The negative tone of the paper is clearly indicated in paragraph 
33 a (5), “undermine the faith of the Communist ruling classes in 
their own system and ideology”. Why should not our policy be pos­
itive? Why should we not seek to hold up to them the advantages 
of our own system and way of life? Do we or don’t we believe that 
our system is superior to the Communist system as a way of life? 
Undermining their faith in their own system would simply leave a 
vacuum. Would it not be wiser to offer something better to take its 
place? Certainly if we have faith and confidence in our own way of 
life we should not hesitate to urge it on other peoples for their own 
good and ours as well.
I am personally convinced that as time goes on our way of life 
with its many freedoms and respect for the rights of the individual will 
look better and better to the people of the USSR. Already the Russian 
leadership is under great pressure to meet the growing demands of 
the people for more and better consumer goods. Khrushchev’s con­
stant harping on such bourgeois frills as better food, more attractive 
clothing, is a far cry from the hard-­bitten, austere communism of the 
Stalin regime. Already the communist economic system of the USSR
