793.00/75
[Document 441]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
MANCHESTER, MASS., July 9, 1925.
[Received July 10.]
No. 686
SIR: I have the honour to invite reference to the recent communications which I have
addressed to you on the subject of events in China ending with my note No. 684 of the
7th instant.32 Owing to the rapid developments of the situation and to the dangers with
which it is fraught, His Majesty’s Government consider it to be of the utmost
importance that their future policy towards China, as also that of the other interested
Powers, should be clearly defined at the earliest possible moment. I am accordingly
instructed to lay before you the following summary of the situation as it now appears to
His Majesty’s Government which, for purposes of convenience, is grouped under
geographical headings according to the areas affected by the present disturbances.
(1) North China.
Chang, after making overtures (which have not been encouraged) for support to enable
him to crush Communist elements which are fomenting the present anti-foreign
agitation, seems to be drawing in his horns with a corresponding increase of Feng’s
military power in and around Peking. Chang is apparently embarrassed by Russian
activities in that part of Northern China, which he is himself primarily concerned to
maintain as the basis of his operations. Thus the situation, as viewed by His Majesty’s
Government, is increasingly propitious for the emergence of Feng, who has a
considerable and well trained force at his disposal, and is being supplied with
munitions of war from Russia, as a national patriotic leader, pledged, with Russian
encouragement, to destroy the position of the foreign powers in China, He has already
openly declared himself in favour of war upon His Majesty’s Government. The present
state of Chinese feeling, which is being systematically and deliberately exploited by
Soviet agents, therefore makes it necessary seriously to consider the possibility that
Feng may at any moment translate his words into deeds with results which must be a
matter of grave concern to other treaty Powers as it is to His Majesty’s Government.
(2) Yang Tze Valley.
Here there have been a series of disorders which, as the latest information at the
disposal of His Majesty’s Government indicates, may at any moment be repeated and
