Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III —To establish at the outset that you personally view international economic issues—and North-South issues—as major ingredients in US foreign policy and will ensure that they are integrated with other elements. —To underline the need for formation of a PRC working group to carry out the longer-term political/conceptual effort called for in PRM–8. Political/Economic Framework US economic interests in the developing world have changed radically over the last ten years. Among the ranks of the nations who count themselves as part of the Third World are the oil-rich nations, vigorous new trading nations, nations facing the pressures of unmanageable rates of population growth, desperately poor nations, nations wanting to get into the nuclear game and to accumulate conventional arms, nations anxious to reap the benefits of the oceans, and nations demanding a larger share of the world’s economic pie. The US is likely to become increasingly dependent upon developing nations for raw materials, much as it is now upon their oil. The Commission on Supplies and Shortages estimates that in 1985 the US will import 100% of its tin, bauxite, manganese, cobalt, chromium and platinum, and more than 75% of its nickel, potassium, tungsten and lead. Developing countries account for 40% of US world trade, 26% of its direct investment abroad and 60% of the overseas loans it has provided. A number of semi-industrialized developing nations such as Brazil, Mexico, Iran, Korea and Venezuela make up the largest portions of these figures. A number of developing countries with large balance of payments deficits have the capability of disrupting severely the international financial system. And all of these countries are of great importance in dealing with such “global agenda” issues as the Law of the Sea, non-proliferation and arms control. Of late, the developing countries have approached an increasing number of issues with extraordinary solidarity. This stems partly from a deep conviction by nearly all of them that in cohesion there is strength. Just as OPEC worked together, so they believe they can likewise achieve positive results by common pressure—and implicitly, the potential use of oil as leverage—on developed nations for more financial resources, for greater control over the institutions of the international economy and for a variety of benefits in various negotiations. It is important to recognize, however, the major differences which exist among the developing countries and the variety of interests we have in the Third World. Our interests in Africa do not arise from its trade or financial importance but from the potential of its natural resource base and the danger of violent conflict. Our interests in Latin America derive both from its natural resource potential and its growing importance in world trade and finance; our strategic concerns, for the
