216 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI (A) required international on-site inspection of destruction of stocks and disposition of facilities. (B) Declaration of stocks and facilities. —General declaration of stocks prior to entry into force of the convention. —Declaration of facilities. (C) Destruction of facilities. (D) Rights and functions of inspection personnel and host state personnel during challenge on-site inspection. 4. We continue to believe it is important to resume drafting of agreed language in order to nail down general points on which the two sides appear to agree and to specify the more detailed points which are essential to make agreement on the general points meaningful and effective. For these purposes we believe that language which is more detailed than that discussed in round six is necessary. In drafting, the Delegation should be guided by the format and formulations contained in the position summary,7 which is being provided separately, and in the set of “expanded key elements,” which will be provided when it is completed. 5. Key points in the guidance package: (A) A summary of the US position is provided for transmission to the Soviet Delegation, as agreed at the end of round eight. (B) With regard to declared facilities, the Delegation is authorized to explore the concept of conversion under appropriate safeguards. Modified tactics for presenting the US position regarding mandatory on-site inspection of facilities are outlined. (C) Guidance is provided for responding to Soviet proposals regarding non-transfer and declaration of previous transfers, noncircumvention, the list of “important” precursors, and conditions for entry into force. 6. In our view the convention would completely preclude stockpiling of Chemical Weapons, regardless of any reservations to the Geneva protocol. The backstopping committee will study whether or not the US should propose a specific restriction on use in order to make this point completely clear. Depending on the conclusions of the study, further guidance may be provided. 7. Ref C reports Soviet view that question of a role for CD in CW should be taken up during US–USSR bilateral negotiations. The Delegation should seek to delay this discussion until guidance concerning CD Delegation suggestion of technical working group on toxicity 7 Not found.
