the wording of the Resolution, to which Colonel Peel had also referred, and
which possibly left it to be assumed that the Powers would guarantee or
subsidize the Chinese revenue in order to make up the amount specified. He
felt that the adoption of the Resolution would be a very considerable
departure from the purposes which they were endeavoring, with a gratifying
degree of success, to work out through other means, and that the passage of
the Resolution would be premature. He suggested that the matter be
dropped until after they had made further progress with the purposes laid
down by the terms of the Treaty.
Admiral Tsai said that he did not believe that the Chinese Delegation ever
intended that the Delegations of foreign Governments should guarantee or
subsidize the amount. He said, further, that he thought Dr. Wang had in
mind naming the $90,000,000 or $100,000,000 merely as a hypothetical
sum on which they could begin the discussion of the 2½ and 5 per cent
surtax question. Admiral Tsai said that what he had in mind principally was
the preparation of the way for beginning the collection of these taxes with
as little delay as possible, as the Chinese Government was losing
$2,500,000 a month by not being able to collect these duties.
Mr. Strawn remarked that, at the very beginning of the Conference, the
American Delegation offered to the Chinese Delegation the immediate
implementing of the Washington Treaty surtaxes of 2½ and 5 per cent, and
that he heard at that time no dissenting voice except that of China. He said
that the American Delegation was still willing to allow it to go into effect
immediately, or as soon as possible, and that if China was being deprived of
the 2½ per cent it was not the fault of the foreigners, so far as he was able to
discover. Admiral Tsai then said that Mr. Strawn was right and that the
reason China did not accept the 2½ per cent surtax without condition or
understanding was because of the state of public opinion last autumn which
would have exposed the Chinese Delegation to the charge of accepting only
the 2½ per cent in order to get something for government expenses and
letting the rest go. However, as the public had become aware that the
foreign Delegations had really approached the matter in a most generous
spirit the fear of the Chinese Delegation had passed away and they were
ready to begin the collection of the 2½ per cent surtax. Mr. Strawn
suggested that other Delegations should be heard from on the subject and
