Arms Control and Disarmament 1451 III.C, IV.B.3, and IV.B.4 of the proposed agenda be deleted. (All of these items are on page 5 of the attached document and are starred in red.) However, the State Department representatives (Ambassador Holmes, Phillip Farley and Lawrence Weiler) insisted with equal determination that these items were essential to a productive discussion of the sur­ prise attack problem. In attempting to resolve this major policy difference, two points are particularly pertinent: (1) The U.S. National Security Policy2 clearly states that this country should seek with particular urgency an international system for inspec­ tion and regulation of armed forces and armaments. The NSC policy also states, almost parenthetically, that an inspection system within the Soviet Union assumes, in and of itself, significance to the U.S. security because of its intelligence value. Unfortunately, the JCS would like to recognize only the latter statement of U.S. policy as a basis for the forth­ coming Geneva discussions. (Gen. Byers argued persistently during the staff level review of the Terms of Reference to have the entire statement of National Security Policy deleted, and was finally voted down by all others present at the meeting.) (2) The Report of the Interagency Working Group on Surprise Attack should also be considered in resolving this major policy differ­ ence. This report concluded that the Geneva discussions must consider limited arms control in order to deal effectively with the surprise attack problem. Specifically, comments on this matter are contained in para­ graphs B 1 and B 2 (pages 6 and 7 of Document No. K–TS–2509) of this report, and it states in part: “Our examination of the appendicies leads us to the view that a major reduction of the threat of massive surprise attack cannot be achieved by observation and reporting alone. Limitations on the dis­ position and readiness of forces, or on size and type of forces, appears to be necessary to create more effective safeguards against the possi­ bility of massive surprise attack. It is unlikely that the October talks can deal effectively with the threat of surprise attack unless they are extended beyond discussion of inspection and related limited measures. . . .” This report was prepared by Richard M. Bissell, Phillip J. Farley, John N. Irwin, II, General Curtis E. LeMay, USAF, Gerard C. Smith, J. R. Zacharias, and G. B. Kistiakowsky, Chairman. Although JCS has not to my knowledge made a formal defense of their position which precludes the discussion of any matter relating to disarmament, there are certain arguments that keep re-­appearing in 2 NSC 5801/1, Paragraph 40, dated 5 May 1958 and quoted on page 1 of the attached document. [Footnote is in the original.]
