850  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
The Talks in Moscow
START. Except for closing on two secondary matters, the Soviets 
simply went through the motions on START, confining themselves 
to reiterating familiar positions and reciting well known arguments. 
They did not respond to a new U.S. proposal on Backfire which, while 
modest on its face, was unmistakably an invitation to deal. They also 
did not engage us on heavy ICBMs, not even to repeat their insis-
tence that the issue was closed for the remainder of the current START 
talks. Overall, the Soviets did little more than propose that issues 
be deferred to Geneva or offer to return to them when we meet in 
Washington next week.
CFE. The problems in CFE are more serious and raise the real pos-
sibility that the Soviets may be re-­evaluating their stake in a CFE treaty. 
The Soviets introduced two new positions—­one on zones and one on the 
“sufficiency rule”—­that dramatically widen the gap between the sides. 
They indicated that both changes were required by the disintegration of 
the Warsaw Pact and the resulting need for the Soviets to single-­handedly 
balance the collective military forces of all the NATO allies.
Akhromeyev also said that there was no way the Soviets could 
include limits on land-­based naval aircraft (LBNA) in CFE. Drawing 
an explicit analogy between LBNA in CFE and ALCMs in START, he 
said that refusing LBNA limits was a matter of “national dignity,” and 
that any Soviet government that accepted such limits would be forced 
to resign.
If the Soviets are serious about these new positions—­and their 
candid assessment of their new strategic situation gives every indi-
cation that they are—­the prospects for wrapping up CFE soon have 
become extraordinarily bleak. It might be possible to work out a com-
promise on zones, and we might decide in the end to side-­step the 
LBNA issue by dropping aircraft limits from CFE. But the Soviet effort 
to increase their share of equipment permitted under CFE ­limits—­a 
reflection of their go-­it-­alone approach to the European military 
balance—­will rightly be strongly resisted by the Eastern Europeans as 
well as by most of the NATO allies.
Next Steps
If we do not complete the treaties by the end of the year, there is 
a real chance that both will slip away as the political consensus grows 
that they no longer are worth the trouble. From one perspective, that 
would not be a calamity: both treaties were conceived in (and for) 
another era and arms control has gone from being the centerpiece to 
just one more element in superpower relationship. But the political costs 
to the President of what would undoubtedly be viewed by arms con-
trol afficionados—­particularly on the Hill—­could be significant. Our
