452 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II direct diplomatic contacts, public statements, symbolic acts, consultations with allies, cooperation with non-governmental organizations, and work with international organizations. These steps have involved the 13 countries mentioned above, as well as others. There is usually a variety of views within the Interagency Group on whether the mix of our actions concerning any particular country has been optimal. We are committed to the proposition that it is preferable to use positive actions (“rewards”) and representations through normal diplomatic channels rather than “sanctions” in pursuing our human rights objectives. Along this line, we are intensifying efforts to direct a growing share of our bilateral economic assistance to governments that show respect for human rights. We are also quietly encouraging the IFI managements to channel their lending to countries with good human rights records and to programs that serve basic human needs. We have urged friendly nations to join us in conveying this message to IFI managements. These nations also consider this approach to be preferable to invoking sanctions. The absence of universally agreed upon criteria, the long lead time for project development, and some resistance on the part of bank managements and some members indicate that channeling IFI resources on the basis of respect for human rights and meeting basic human needs will be a long-term process, the result of which will not be evident for some time. While we believe that greater emphasis on “rewards” rather than “sanctions” can lead to beneficial results, the fact remains that, in addition to the thrust of our human rights policy, we are explicitly required by federal statutes to oppose certain grants or loans to human rights violators. II. Process Our efforts to implement this human rights policy and legislative requirements are the result of deliberations by the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. The Group has met regularly since April 1977 when it was established pursuant to a NSC directive. As set forth in that directive, the Group has been chaired by a representative of the Secretary of State (i.e., the Deputy Secretary) and has included representatives of the Treasury Department, the Defense Department, the NSC staff, and the Agency for International Development. Participants in the Group’s deliberations have also included representatives of the Agriculture Department, the Commerce Department, the Ex-Im Bank, and OPIC. In addition, Treasury’s representatives have usually been accompanied by the U.S. Executive Directors to the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank. Thus, several agencies, each with an interest in the subject matter, are represented at every meeting.
