National Security Policy  1167
limitations of this area on U.S. transportation capabilities will be con­
sidered in these studies.
2. Military Logistics Base plans (Mobilization Base Plans) are for­
mulated by the Military Departments in accordance with the general 
guidelines established by the Secretary of Defense. The latest guidance 
is the Secretary of Defense memorandum of 15 March 1960, subject, 
“Guidance for the Development of FY 61/62 Logistics Programs,” 
which provides for acquisition objectives, production base planning 
objectives, and materiel retention policies, for both limited and general 
war planning in the Department of Defense. There has been insufficient 
time to implement fully this guidance. It is expected that if funding per­
mits implementation of this guidance, our capability to support limited 
war situations, without degrading our general war readiness posture, 
should be improved in the near future. However, current budgetary 
limitations will not enable the Military Departments to meet in all cat­
egories the supply and equipment objectives of the logistic guidance. 
The status of Service mobilization base planning and programs is sum­
marized below:
a. Army. Detailed mobilization plans and programs to support cur­
rent limited and general war plans are in advanced state of preparation. 
Major deficiencies, as they relate to limited war operations, are:
(1) Strength, both active and reserve, dependent upon the scope 
and nature of the conflict.
(2) Planning for the support of limited war is based on the Limited 
War Plan for the Resumption of Hostilities in Korea. However, its cur­
rent status of implementation would result in degrading the general war 
posture in the event a limited war is quickly followed by a general war.
(3) While Army forces are equipped with sufficient materiel to 
support U.S. forces in limited war operations envisaged in the current 
time frame, only about one-­half would be of the preferred model and 
the balance would be of an older less effective but acceptable model. 
Recent allocation of funds will reduce this deficiency to some degree 
from a qualitative point of view in the time frame under consideration.
b. Navy
(1) The Navy logistics mobilization planning objective is to pro­
vide the materiel support to the forces needed to prosecute a limited 
war with an accompanying selective build-­up of forces, while at all 
times maintaining an adequate general war posture. Planned acquisi­
tion requirements to meet this objective are:
(a) Meet the peacetime force materiel requirement.
(b) Complete equipping of selected reserve forces.
(c) Attain a level of war readiness reserve stock not to exceed 180 
days combat support for general war for Marine Corps forces deployed
