3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
148
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
true for the first time that long-term problems will impinge on foreign
policy decisions. A CIA study still in the works suggests this.9
The problem of dissent is a difficult one. The Soviets have applied
varying tactics to neutralize it, but it continues. The most significant
change has been that what used to be an interesting phenomena for So-
viet specialists has gradually emerged as an international issue. This is
reflected in Solzhenitsyn’s stature throughout the world and awarding
of a Nobel prize to Sakharov. The Soviets, always inordinately suspi-
cious, may see the U.S. as engaged in a political offensive, but they are
nevertheless caught up in the dilemma: to repress their dissidents actu-
ally aggravates the problem abroad. It is therefore an interesting fact,
that despite some noisy propaganda, the Soviets have behaved very
cautiously since the round of quick arrests in early February. Tactically,
the Soviets may be seeking a period of quiet.
But the basic fact is that the West in general, and the U.S. in partic-
ular, has the power to greatly aggravate the Soviet dilemma. And it is
this consciousness that, in the end, will bring Brezhnev back to a for-
eign policy of moderation.
Brezhnev also knows better than we do that the situation in
Eastern Europe is not good, and that he may face an explosion in Po-
land. That possibility is the more likely if repression is intensified, but
perhaps less likely if tensions seem to be receding.
One last factor that is the most difficult to take into account is
Brezhnev’s personal situation. It is a reasonable guess that he wishes to
end his career on a high point.10 The new constitution is a testament of
sorts. Assuming the Presidency goes along with the same syndrome.
But since he is associated with detente, and particularly with SALT,
then it must be agonizing for him to contemplate that this status as a
“peace champion” will elude him in his relations with the United
States. He is a hardened old veteran, and could absorb this setback, but
it is a good bet that he is obsessed with restoring “detente” by the 60th
Bolshevik Anniversary this November.
In sum, many of the permanent factors seem to point to an even-
tual turn in Soviet policy back toward something resembling “detente”.
Obviously, as pointed out by Marshal Shulman, the U.S. could inadver-
tently or deliberately forestall such a turn. But we have the capabilities,
9 In the margin at the end of this paragraph, Carter wrote, “may be most important
of all.” The July 1977 CIA study, entitled “Soviet Economic Problems and Prospects,” is in
the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, International Economics,
Tim Deal File, Box 10, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR): 3/76–8/77.
10 Carter underlined the phrase “he wishes to end his career on a high point.”
