756
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
have demonstrated our intent to respond. We are prepared to use force
if necessary to protect the vital interests of ourselves or of our friends.
We are willing to work with all Arab countries who have shared
security concerns, to shape a consultative security framework. This is
not an attempt to split the Arab world, though we recognize that some
Arab countries are better friends than others. It is in our longer term in-
terests to increase our relations with Syria and Iraq, and we would wel-
come your suggestions on how that might be done. I have already
spoken to King Khalid about the intellectual and spiritual revival of
Islam and the importance that we attach to it. In this context, we want
to find a solution to the Arab-Israel dispute.
We see the Israel-Egyptian treaty as the beginning and a corner-
stone of a comprehensive peace settlement. The President has made
very clear his determination to use this treaty to work to protect and
preserve the rights of the Palestinians. This [is] a point of personal prin-
ciple. We hope that the treaty will establish the principle of Israeli with-
drawal and Israeli dismantlement of settlements in occupied territories.
It should also lay the basis for the United States Arab friendship since it
will result in changing attitudes on both sides. The treaty opens the
door of redressing justice for the Palestinians and creating new condi-
tions for giving the Palestinians their legitimate rights. We also believe
that anything that hurts or undermines the treaty helps our adver-
saries. The Soviets do not wish a treaty, the Arab radicals do not wish
one, the anti-Arab forces in the United States oppose it, and those Is-
raelis who want to retain all of their lands also oppose it. So we want
your cooperation over the next few months when it will be particularly
difficult after signing the treaty.
We believe at this new historical stage you and we are ready for
new wider relationships; but any economic or political sanctions
against Egypt would hurt us as well [as] Egypt. We have been encour-
aged to hear that it is not your intention to do anything to disadvantage
or hurt Egypt and that you will exert every effort to maintain normal
relations with Egypt. This is a statesmanlike position. The President in
Cairo pledged himself to work to solve the problem of the Palestinians.
I cannot imagine any President in the future willing to do so much for
the Palestinians. I would like to be able to tell him from you when we
go back that there will be no tangible actions by you that would hurt
Egypt or us. The President hopes that you will be able to visit Wash-
ington soon to discuss these matters and joint decisions to be taken. In
the meantime, we remain committed to relations with you which we
think are very deep.
Crown Prince Fahd said he was pleased when he first heard of the
visit. He saw a clear indication of the interest of the President of the
United States. All we hope for is that the efforts of President Carter con-
