3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
681
230.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, October 29, 1979, 1–3:20 p.m.
SUBJECT
The US-Soviet Relationship
PARTICIPANTS
Alexander Bessmertnykh, Minister-Counselor of the Soviet Embassy
Marshall Brement, NSC Staff Member
The substantive part of the conversation began with a reference by
me to Ustinov’s October 26 article in Pravda, in which he alleged that
Secretary Brown had said that we were aiming for nuclear superiority.
Neither I nor members of Secretary Brown’s staff were aware of any
such statements, I pointed out, and I promised to send Bessmertnykh
an authoritative pronouncement by the Secretary on this subject (see at-
tached letter).2 (C)
Bessmertnykh replied that he was glad to have this clarification.
This was especially the case in that the Soviets regard Harold Brown as
one of the most moderate and balanced officials in the Carter Adminis-
tration. One could not always say that about an American Secretary of
Defense, he added. (C)
Bessmertnykh then said that he was thinking about the course of
US-Soviet relations over the next two years and the prospects were
deeply troubling. He had a growing feeling that many key people in
Moscow were “giving up” on the US relationship and believed there
was little or nothing which could be derived from it over the next sev-
eral years, Bessmertnykh said. This was particularly true during an
election period in the United States, when many irresponsible things
are said. The mood in Moscow is therefore somber and disturbing. (C)
I did not feel that we were facing an inevitable downward spiral in
US-Soviet relations, I replied. The ratification of SALT II would be
useful in putting the relationship on a more even keel. It was true, how-
ever, that we will soon be in the midst of an election campaign in the
US. If the Soviets played an unhelpful role in fostering or engendering
destabilizing events, the various candidates of both Parties would
probably vie with each other to condemn the USSR. But if we were en-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 82, USSR: 11/79. Confidential. The meeting took place at the Soviet Embassy.
Sent under a November 8 covering memorandum from NSC staff secretary Christine
Dodson to Vance, Brown, and Turner.
2 Not found attached.
