Human Rights
9
Attachment
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)3
Washington, January 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
Background
The pattern of Congressional–Executive relationships in the area
of human rights is probably the best example of what happened during
the last Administration when congressional concern met executive dis-
dain—with results that satisfy no one. When all other efforts to influ-
ence Administration policy proved useless, Congress used its ultimate
weapon and attempted to write into law human rights guidelines for
military and economic foreign assistance. Recognizing the Executive’s
prerogative in this area, Congress attempted to keep its language flex-
ible enough for appropriate diplomacy, with the result that the Admin-
istration completely ignored it. Forced to the wall, the Congress re-
sponded by limitations or outright prohibitions of aid to certain
nations.
Kissinger was then free to make the case that the only alternative
to his own quiet and effective diplomacy was ineffective and inflexible
Congressional action. At no time in the past eight years, could
Congress elicit from the Administration any action on—or even recog-
nition of—the policy alternatives that lay between these two extremes,
including: restricting the amenities of normal diplomatic intercourse;
public statements by American Ambassadors, the Secretary of State, or
the President; initiatives taken in international forums and support by
the U.S. of initiatives taken by others; and Sense of the Congress Reso-
lutions supported—rather than undercut—by the Administration.
International human rights is an issue on which the new Adminis-
tration has one of its best opportunities to radically improve execu-
tive–congressional relations. Any action which the Administration
takes in the direction of Congressional concerns will be warmly wel-
comed, particularly by the House and Senate Foreign Relations Com-
mittees, which fully recognize the inappropriateness of congressional
attempts to manage foreign policy.
3 Limited Official Use. Tuchman did not initial the memorandum.
