Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1145 the treaty, the agreed statements annex, the definitions annex, and the memorandum of understanding (less annexes). Time did not permit initialling of the inspection protocol or its annexes. By prior agreement, no attempt was made to initial the various side agreements. 6. Brooks and Nazarkin reviewed the contents of the seven letters scheduled to be signed and exchanged by the heads of delegation. These letters had been planned for signature in Geneva, but were not fully conformed before the departure of the Soviet delegation. Nazarkin informed Brooks that Foreign Minister Bessmertnykh had signed a letter, dated July 30, stating that the Soviet letter on the phasing of heavy reductions of the same date was legally binding. Based on this, Brooks and Nazarkin agreed that the letters on the phasing of heavy reductions would be dated July 30, while all other letters would be dated July 31. 7. Nazarkin then vanished, taking the texts of all letters with him. Shortly thereafter, Nazarkin called Brooks from another office in the Foreign Ministry. Noting that General Peresypkin was with him, Nazarkin claimed that there was a problem with the letter on the Bear-D maritime patrol airplane. Peresypkin asserted that the Soviet side had never agreed that if production of Bear-D resumed, any future Bear-D airplanes would be treated as former heavy bombers. Nazarkin said that he and Peresypkin would meet with Brooks shortly. 8. Once Nazarkin and Peresypkin arrived, Brooks explained the logic of the various documents. The TU–95 was listed as an existing type of heavy bomber. Some TU–95’s were now treated as former heavy bombers. The Soviet side had sought, and the U.S. side had agreed to, an exception for 37 TU–95RTs (Bear D) which would not be considered as either heavy bombers or former heavy bombers. An agreed statement made it clear that this exemption was limited to the existing 37 airplanes. Thus, any further construction of TU–95RTs (Bear-D) would be treated as former heavy bombers. 9. Peresypkin asserted that this provision was a U.S. proposal. Brooks noted that (a) the proposal had been in the U.S. draft given the Soviet side in March, (b) the specific language had appeared in the Soviet text handed over in Geneva on July 29, and (c) the Soviet side had never raised this point previously. Peresypkin said that there would be future construction of maritime aircraft in the Soviet Union which were not of the TU–95RTs design. These aircraft could not be considered former heavy bombers. Brooks said that the letter on the TU–95RTs covered only that specific airplane and none other. Peresypkin said he was satisfied. Brooks and Nazarkin then signed and exchanged the letters, including the commitment that future TU–95RTs airplanes would be treated as former heavy bombers. 10. Brooks then sought to exchange photographs. Nazarkin said that he was prepared to exchange those photographs slated for
