The Director General shall attend, in an advisory capacity, the meetings of
the Governing Board, of the committees appointed by the Board, and of the
International Conferences of American States for the purpose of giving
such information as may be required. The necessary expenses shall be paid
out of the funds of the Pan American Union.
An Assistant Director, who shall act as secretary of the Governing Board.
The Director General shall prepare the internal regulations by which the
various divisions of the Pan American Union shall be governed, in
accordance with the provisions of the present convention, and shall submit
them to the Governing Board for approval.
The Director General shall present to the Governing Board annually, at the
regular session of the Board in November, a detailed budget for the ensuing
fiscal year.
The Director General shall submit to the consideration of each conference
of the American Republics a detailed report on the work carried out by the
Pan American Union during the period preceding the meeting of the
conference.
The Director General shall appoint, with the approval of the Governing
Board, the personnel necessary to the work of the Pan American Union,
endeavoring as far as possible to distribute the positions among nationals of
the countries members of the Union.
ARTICLE 5—MAINTENANCE OF THE PAN AMERICAN UNION
The Governing Board of the Pan American Union shall determine the quota
which is to be paid by each of the governments members of the Union for
the maintenance of the Pan American Union. But increases in the budget of
the Pan American Union exceeding by more than twenty-five per cent the
budget of the preceding year shall be approved by the unanimous vote of
the Governing Board, the representatives being given time to consult their
respective governments. The quota shall be determined on the basis of the
latest official statistics of population in possession of the Pan American
Union on the first day of July of each year. The budget shall be
