LXXII  Summaries of Compilations
trainers the United States should extract promises of better behavior 
from Duvalier. (HA–4)
The initiative shifted to Duvalier when his security forces foiled 
a coup by Haitian, Dominican, and American citizens launched from 
Miami on July 29, 1958. (HA–5) The United States publicly regreted 
and deplored the involvement of U.S. citizens. President Eisenhower 
privately soothed Haitian feelings. (HA–6) Two months later, the U.S. 
Marine training mission was approved on a temporary basis notwith-
standing Drew’s concerns. (HA–9)
Haiti’s economy suffered in early 1959 from the double blow of the 
failure of its coffee crop (less than half the previous year’s level) and a 
drop in the price of coffee. Haiti was running a large deficit and needed 
a massive injection of U.S. assistance to forestall economic paralysis and 
possible social and political chaos. The United States was prepared to 
grant Haiti $6 million in budgetary support from the President’s special 
contingency fund, but the International Cooperation Administration 
insisted over Department of State objections that the money be given 
only if Haiti agreed to controls and reforms in its economy. (HA–10)
The economic crisis occasioned serious consideration in Washington 
and at the Embassy in Port au Prince of the advisability of continuing 
to shore up the Duvalier regime. In March 1959, Ambassador Drew 
and the Country Team reluctantly concluded that Duvalier’s over-
throw would create more chaos and misery than continued Duvalier 
rule. As Drew concluded, “we cannot afford to let Haiti go through the 
wringer.” (HA–11 through 13) Ironically, in May 1959, Duvalier nearly 
died but was saved by the dispatch of a U.S. cardiologist and equip-
ment from Guantanamo Bay. (HA–14, 17)
Disturbed conditions in the neighboring Dominican Republic and 
a small-­scale invasion of Haiti from Fidel Castro’s revolutionary Cuba 
gave Duvalier serious pause in late summer 1959. Haiti requested a 
U.S. patrol of its waters and air space and offered base facilities to the 
United States. (HA–15, 18) The United States declined both requests, 
but did authorize extensions of visits and brief additional visits of U.S. 
Navy ships to Haiti. (HA–16)
When the Caribbean situation quieted, the United States concen-
trated upon the Haitian economy. This time, however, U.S. aid could 
be justified on the grounds that Haiti needed economic and military 
assistance for legitimate self-­defense against Cuba and Communism. 
(HA–21) International Cooperation Administration officials com-
plained that Haiti was not only not trying to help itself economically, 
but also refusing constructive help designed to bring economic devel-
opment. ICA argued against budgetary support, but lost to the for-
eign policy considerations of the threat of Castro. (HA–22)
