3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
357
and sign an agreement to close the matter. The trouble was that he had
not done so, and did not want to do so. He had gone to China instead,
although Gromyko did not know for what purpose. The truth of the
matter was that the Soviet Government had persuaded the Ethiopians
not to invade Somalia. (The Secretary acknowledged that he was aware
of this.) In connection with the Secretary’s remarks about Cuban forces
in the area, Gromyko would say that their numbers, as reported in the
US press, had been grossly exaggerated. He repeated that the Ogaden
matter was not yet closed. For his part, he would not preclude the pos-
sibility of further bloodshed there.
As for Eritrea, he would point out that if the Soviet Union had not
restrained the Ethiopians in that regard, blood would have flowed in
veritable rivers. The Soviet Union was in favor of Eritrea receiving the
broadest possible autonomy; however, that autonomy should be
within the framework of a unified and sovereign Ethiopian state. (Gro-
myko asked the US interpreter to be sure that he had this last sentence
down verbatim.) The Soviet Government had informed Mengistu that
it favored a very broad autonomy for Eritrea, and had also accordingly
informed the Revolutionary Council headed by Mengistu. In fact, the
Soviet Government was still continuing to impress this idea upon the
Ethiopians. It would be hard to say what might have happened if the
Soviet Government had not done so. If anyone had told the Secretary
that there were Cubans in Eritrea, Gromyko could only point out that
this was pure fabrication. The Soviet leadership had talked to the
Cubans in terms of the broad autonomy of which Gromyko had just
spoken, and the Cubans had refused to get involved and had said so of-
ficially to Mengistu and the Revolutionary Council. They did not have
military forces in Eritrea and did not intend to send a single soldier
there. Such was the true situation.
Gromyko said that with regard to the African question, the Soviet
leadership was getting the impression that some artificial pretexts were
being established, perhaps not by the United States but by its Allies, to
do certain things in Africa that should not be done. With regard to Na-
mibia and Rhodesia, as he had told the Secretary earlier, there was not a
single Soviet representative in those countries, not even a news corre-
spondent. As for the fact of arms travelling, he would ask the Secretary
if he could vouch for every single machine gun or rifle that had been
sold by the United States to someone or other perhaps years ago? He
was sure that the US could not account for many of these arms, any
more than the Soviet Union could. That was an entirely different
matter, however, one that had recently been the subject of initial discus-
sions between our two countries, discussions Gromyko welcomed.
Summing up, Gromyko asked the Secretary not to link the African
situation with SALT. To do so could only degrade the general situation,
“both yours and ours.”
