in any way whatsoever to make an outside settlement through good offices. The Secretary had been urged to do so by Chile and the Secretary was glad to do what he could to try to make a settlement that would be equitable to both parties. The Secretary naturally could not say what the decision of the Commission would be nor could he tell what attitude the Arbitrator would take but he must point out to Chile that as far as he personally was concerned he could not ignore the vast amount of cumulative evidence that he is receiving which would make it very difficult to consider as valid any election that might take place now in Arica. The Secretary stated that as a matter of fact he had brought more pressure to bear on Peru than he had on Chile in order to bring about a settlement especially a settlement on the basis of the division of territory. The Secretary thought that it was legitimate to do this and he had consequently advised Peru that it was to the interest of all that a proper settlement be made. The Secretary said that he thought he had only done what was right in making this statement. He certainly could not be charged with bringing pressure to bear on Chile to coerce her into an outside settlement that she did not want. This matter would have to be decided by Chile. If they did not want an outside settlement well and good. He would be very glad to have them say so and we will then proceed with the question of whether an election can be held or not. The Secretary did not desire to pass on this now, he could not say what the Arbitrator would eventually decide but as he had said before he must frankly say to the Ambassador that the accumulation of evidence that is being sent to him from Arica is very strong that Chile has not acted properly in this matter. The Ambassador stated that the Secretary was quite right, that the Secretary had certainly never threatened or brought pressure to bear on him. If he might venture to say so his feeling had been that if prejudiced at all the Secretary was prejudiced in favor of Chile. … One thought occurred to him, namely, that it might be possible for the Secretary to declare in favor of holding the plebiscite, as that seemed to be their fixed idea in Santiago, and then have Chile at the same time say that as soon as the plebiscite was over it would turn the provinces into the Secretary’s hands to be disposed of as he should think proper. The Secretary stated very definitely that he could not commit himself in any way to the carrying on of the plebiscite, could
