Nicaragua  849
production and place its traditional crops in a better position to com-
pete internationally. The ravages of the Panama disease practically 
destroyed banana production in the Atlantic Coast area and this is a 
seriously distressed area within Nicaragua. The Nicaraguans, in sum-
ming up, requested the United States to view the following favorably: 
(a) broad financial assistance in solving the problems confronting the 
country; (b) assistance in stabilizing coffee prices; (c) special consid-
eration for the problem which confronts Nicaragua in the sale of its 
cotton; (d) help in securing a higher sugar quota for Nicaragua on the 
world market; (e) assistance to the Central American countries in mov-
ing toward economic integration.
Request for assistance in a general way were as follows: $7,700,000 
for economic development programs of the National Development 
Institute, $8,500,000 for special works such as hydroelectric power and 
water supply programs, and $10 million for school construction and an 
undetermined amount for public health.
There appeared to be among Nicaraguans of all classes the usual 
misconception concerning the role of the United States in determining 
commodities prices and industrial prices. There appeared particularly 
on the part of opposition groups the same misconception regarding 
United States policy in regard to non-­democratic regimes. There was no 
recognition of any possible failure on the part of the Latin Americans 
in regard to their policies with respect to the United States. Where fault 
was found it was always with United States policy.
CONCLUSIONS: — Requests for financial assistance were made 
as specified above. Requests were made for United States assistance in 
stabilizing coffee and cotton prices. Criticism was addressed by oppo-
sition groups to alleged United States support for the Somoza regime. 
Widespread support was found for the idea of Central American inte-
gration. The usual belief that the resources of the United States were 
unlimited and that all problems could be solved if only the United 
States would be less “stubborn” was encountered. There was some 
grudging consent on the part of the opposition groups to the idea that 
the President may be moving toward the democratization of the regime. 
Labor groups carefully took no position for or against the Government 
and there seemed to be a generalized feeling that United States assis-
tance thus far had not filtered down to the masses.
In Nicaragua, as in other countries visited, there seemed to be a 
need for a broad inventory of national resources, both human and mate-
rial. Similar needs exist for adequate study of the feasibility of agricul-
tural diversification, for an analysis and appraisal of the potentials of 
domestic and foreign markets, including tourism, for more organized 
planning with respect to government policies in the economic field, for 
a review of the tax and trade policies of Nicaragua, and for an examina-
tion of the structure and functioning of governmental agencies.
