National Security Policy 1093 below were the Secretary of the Treasury; the Acting Director, Bureau of the Budget; and the Secretary of Commerce (attending for Items 3 and 4 and participating in action on Item 5). Also attending the meeting were the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission; the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Acting Director, U.S. Information Agency (Washburn); the Assistant to the President; the Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs, for Science and Technology, and for Security Operations Coordination; Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; Assistant Secretary of Defense John N. Irwin, II; the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; the Acting Executive Secretary (Boggs), NSC; and Mr. Robert H. Johnson, NSC.2 There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the main points taken. [Omitted here are pages 2–7.] 4. CIVILIAN READINESS BASE (NSC Action No. 2114–­c; NSC 5906/1, paragraph 59; NSC Actions Nos. 2131–­c and 2254; NSC 5912, Part 4) Governor Hoegh began his presentation by summarizing the provi­ sions of Paragraph 59–­b of NSC 5906/1 (Basic National Security Policy) and then took up each of the elements mentioned in that paragraph in turn. In his discussion Governor Hoegh also referred to the national plan for civil defense and defense mobilization which is supported by fifty state plans, 2400 community and county plans, and 240 metropolitan area plans. He said that the national plan had served as a model for many NATO countries. He pointed out that Congressional approval of administrative matching funds for civil defense will make available $1 million per month and will materially improve civil defense at the state and local level. Turning first to the civil defense program, Governor Hoegh dis­ played a chart showing some of the conclusions of WSEG (Weapons Systems Evaluation Group) Study No. 45. In particular he called the Council’s attention to the conclusion that, with an assumed 2000-­megaton attack on the U.S. and assuming no shelters and no anti-­ ICBM system, 97 million casualties would occur. With the best possi­ ble anti-­ICBM system but no shelters, casualties would be 68 million. However, with fallout shelters and no anti-­ICBM system, casualties would be 14 million. The report concluded that the effect of fallout shelters in protecting the U.S. population was far more significant than active defense alone, while the two combined would be still better. 2 Add Dr. Herbert Scoville Jr., CIA Mr. Morris Fishow, CIA Mr. Knight McMahan, CIA [Footnote is in the original.]
