854
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
U.S. is doing something unique for Egypt that is not being done for
other countries, he would be satisfied and would not insist on the addi-
tional $41 million. This is essentially the case, since no other recipient of
Title I aid (including Israel and Jordan) would be given significant in-
creases to offset rising prices.
NSC staff supports this option except for preferring to provide the
additional $41 million for Egypt.
Option V (original January budget dollar level)—Request no in-
crease for the program reducing volume to 5.3 million tons. This option
would contribute most to holding the budgetary line not only in for-
eign aid but also, by example, for all other programs. It would still
leave open the possibility of a January supplemental (though much less
than the USDA request), which could be decided on in light of the
overall 1980 budget situation. Because of the diplomatic costs, the nec-
essary reductions in developmentally sound activities and the do-
mestic political furor it would raise among farm and humanitarian
groups, no agency favors this option.
Decision
Option I Accept the USDA proposal, a $346 million supplemental.
Option II Accept the State Department recommendation, a $273 million
supplemental including the $41 million add-on and $60 million infla-
tion adjustment for Egypt.
Option III Accept the IDCA position, a $206 supplemental excluding the
$41 million Egypt add-on.
Option IV
(a) Accept the OMB/Owen recommendation, a $103 million sup-
plemental for Title II and support of the House on $59 million more for
Title I but excluding the $41 million Egypt add-on.4
(b) Add the $41 million for Egypt raising the supplemental to $144
million.
Option V No supplemental.5
4 The President added 103 and 59, totaling 162, in the left hand margin next to Op-
tion IV (a).
5 The President did not indicate his approval or disapproval of any of the options
but added a handwritten instruction: “To OMB/Owen add enough not to cut Portugal &
to increase Egypt by 100 thousand tons. Consult with Ehrlich to bring total tonnage up to
6.0 mil. J.”
