660
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Mr. Akhavi and Mr. Zanganeh said that these statements being
made by the highest officials in the United States, they feared, would
prejudice the American public against Iran. They said that obviously
someone was misreporting the situation in Iran to have so alarmed the
Secretary of State and the President. They denied any communist infil-
tration and, while admitting that the Tudeh Party was organized here,
said it was of two branches, one supported by the Soviet Union and the
other by the ex-AIOC. They said that the Government had at every turn
opposed the Tudeh Party and that the Tudeh Party was not supporting
the Government. They pointed to the recent strife at Masjid-i-Suliman
and at Khorramshahr as proof of this. Mr. Akhavi said that the Tudeh
had endeavored to organize the laborers at Masjid-i-Suliman and the
Government resisted and in the fracas several were killed. He said that
the Government endeavored to ship 10,000 tons of rice from Khorram-
shahr and that Tudeh elements, definitely traced to AIOC support, had
blocked the shipment through raising trouble on the docks with porters
and longshoremen and, in the town, with the people to the point that
the shipment was delayed until the letter of credit expired. He said the
propaganda was “why permit the Government to ship rice when we
are hungry?”
They asked what occurrences there had been in Iran to lead to the
conclusion in Washington of the rise of the Tudeh. I said that I did not
know but that certainly what occurred on July 21 might have had some
influence. They said that the Government could not fight on two fronts
at once, and was fighting now against the British and would against the
Tudeh as soon as it had eliminated the British influence, which was
being done through the plebiscite. They said that the Tudeh had
nothing to do with the result of the elections here; that, in fact, Tudeh
elements actually tried to thwart pro-Mossadegh votes, and that the
marchers to the polls were organized by pro-Mossadegh parties not in-
cluding the Tudehs.
In apparent utter sincerity they asked for advice on how to over-
come what they considered the false reporting that has led to the
change of attitude in the United States on the part of the highest offi-
cials. Dr. Akhavi suggested that special representatives of the President
or the Secretary should come to Iran and investigate the situation here
themselves and make reports.
Dr. Akhavi said that there was no desire to have any relations with
the neighbor to the north, including commercial relations, but that Iran
was being forced to deal with Russia by reason of the fact that the
United States and most of the free world would not buy its products.
He cited a public adjudication for the sale of their surplus wool which,
he said, resulted just this week in not a single bid. He said the sugar sit-
