March–August 1953
729
305.
Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans (Wisner)
to Director of Central Intelligence Dulles1
Washington, August 27, 1953.
SUBJECT
The first stages of negotiations for the settlement of the oil dispute, and other
matters pertaining to Iran
1. You are, of course, aware of the role played by this Agency prior
to your departure in alerting various other departments and agencies
(principally State and MSA) to the necessity of being prepared to pro-
vide economic assistance to Iran in certain eventualities. We have been
prompt in following up these preliminary preparations and have, I
think, done all that could be expected of us (CIA) in the direction of get-
ting things moving. As a matter of fact, this has led us inevitably into
certain aspects of the opening phases of consideration and negotiation
(hopefully) looking toward a settlement of the Anglo-Iranian oil con-
troversy. One of the reasons for our participation has been our close
knowledge of the facts, including the local temperaments and tempera-
tures in Iran, as well as the fact that our channel of communications
was used at the beginning. But in addition, we have had our own finan-
cial interest at stake in that our pocket-book is affected and will be fur-
ther affected if something is not got under way quickly to produce rev-
enues for the Iranian Government.
2. We have discussed various aspects of these related matters with
General Smith, Henry Byroade, Governor Stassen and others, making it
clear to all concerned at all times that we were most anxious to avoid
creating the impression that we are concerning ourselves with matters
not within our range of interest. One development which has occurred
and which you should know about is that (with General Cabell’s autho-
rization) I supported Henry Byroade’s appeal for assistance in the form
of getting Paul Nitze in on the State Department thinking and plan-
ning—if only on an arms’ length, no title, no pay, basis. This was over-
ruled for reasons deemed sufficient by higher echelons—a decision
which I personally regard as regrettable in view of the vast amount
of knowledge, background and experience which Paul has had
throughout the entire history of the Iranian negotiations. (It will be re-
called that he headed the US negotiation team which went to London
about a year ago.)
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 80–01701R, Box 3, Folder 10,
TPAJAX. Secret; Security Information; Eyes Only. At the bottom of the page is a hand-
written note that reads: “No other copies made—Orig shown to DDCI by FGW.”
