Human Rights
471
opposed to the Human Rights Institute bill.2 Previously, Christopher
had testified before the Committee indicating Administration neu-
trality on the issue,—a neutrality stemming in part from the President’s
policy against the creation of new agencies. Given the phone calls from
OMB, however, Fascell is now uncertain whether the Administration is
still neutral or is now opposed to the bill. Before pushing ahead with
the bill, he would like to be reassured that the Administration does not
oppose it. John suggested that it would be most desirable (and, indeed,
perhaps critical to the success of the bill) for you to call Fascell and reas-
sure him on this point. I second his recommendation.3
In calling Fascell I think the best tack to take would be to empha-
size that the Administration viewpoint is contained in Christopher’s
statement and not in phone calls from OMB. In addition to reiterating
your own personal support for the bill, you might wish to call his atten-
tion to two key statements in Christopher’s testimony:
“In pursuing our human rights policy we are receptive to new and
creative endeavors. If properly structured . . . the Institute envisioned
in your bill could make a valuable contribution to efforts on behalf of
human rights.”
“. . . Creation of the Institute through Congressional initiative would
be viewed as a reaffirmance of our national commitment to the promo-
tion of human rights. The bipartisan nature of this commitment, and
the breadth of its support, are prerequisites to the success of our efforts
in behalf of human rights.
Recommendation
That you phone Congressman Fascell assuring him that Adminis-
tration does not oppose Human Rights Institute.4
2 Inderfurth underlined a portion of the sentence beginning with the word “indi-
cating” and ending with the word “bill.”
3 Inderfurth added the following handwritten comment: “I third it. I think you
should also call McIntyre. Rick.”
4 There is no indication as to whether Brzezinski approved or disapproved the rec-
ommendation; however, Brzezinski did write the word “done” and place a check mark
on the first page of the memorandum.
