1066 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III For FY 81, we hope to have established a $50 million Contingency Fund. This is the single most significant new initiative in which we will be engaged with the Congress to provide you with broader flexibility to respond to rapidly developing threats to peace and security around the world. There are still a large number of statutory provisions which limit executive flexibility. Some of these have been enacted in the past year. They include: —prohibitions in the FY 80 economic and security assistance legislation on various forms of assistance, respectively, to Panama, Jordan, Syria, and Afghanistan,3 in each case waivable under certain conditions; —a tightening of constraints on providing assistance to countries in default on U.S. Government loans; and —requirements for Presidential certifications before security assistance may be proposed for Greece and Turkey, or before major FMS sales may be made to those countries. The FY 80 foreign assistance appropriations legislation, now in conference, may contain further constraints, the most serious being a prohibition on “indirect” assistance to certain designated countries. We are continuing our efforts to defeat these.4 Our experience in working with Congress to reduce or eliminate legislative constraints indicates that: —we have been most effective to date in arguing, not against constraints per se, but that particular constraints are undesirable on their own practical or policy merits; —Congressional concern over real and perceived past abuses of Executive authority in foreign assistance and other areas is likely to continue to be reflected in a strong Congressional desire for close scrutiny or limitation of contemplated foreign policy actions by the Executive; —many in Congress believe the need for “Executive flexibility” is adequately addressed by existing waiver authority in many individual prohibitions and by general Presidential authority to waive most prohibitions against programs under the FAA. Tom Ehrlich is leading an interagency study that will have as one of its primary subjects of focus how to simplify U.S. development assistance programs.5 I believe this should include a further review of 3 Carter underlined the words “Panama,” “Jordan,” “Syria,” and “Afghanistan.” 4 Carter highlighted this paragraph. 5 On October 18, Vance asked Ehrlich “to take the lead” on reviews of three issues: “whether our bilateral or our multilateral assistance is most effective in the long run;” “what can be done to eliminate restrictive legislative provisions and to simplify administrative practices with a view to improving the quality and flexibility of our aid;” and whether the Carter administration had “been as effective as it should be in building Congressional support for our foreign assistance programs, and particularly for our contribu-
