National Security Policy  985
MATS capacity and those who want efficient use. JSC supports Defense 
in wanting the word economical.
CALL ON  DEPUTY SECRETARY DOUGLAS
GENERAL WHITE
MR. STANS
SECRETARY MUELLER
MR. QUESADA
The next split occurs in paragraph 4, on the basis of the JCS views 
just circulated. They would omit the parenthetical sentence on the 
grounds that civil capacity should not be expanded with converted 
passenger aircraft. I think that this is an important split because the lan­
guage is proposed in order to make clear that increased use of commer­
cial carriers does not have to await the development and production of 
uncompromised cargo aircraft.
Another split occurs in paragraph 5, at the bottom of page 2. This 
paragraph is concerned with the procurement policies and practices to 
be followed when commercial airlift services are bought. After a gen­
eral statement that these procurement policies and practices should be 
better adapted to long-­range Defense requirements, so as to encourage 
and assist in sound economic growth, development, and maintenance 
of an increased air cargo capability, there is a list of possibilities whose 
feasibility is to be explored. The first of these possibilities, (1) (a), is 
increasing the amount of MATS cargo airlift moving on a common car­
riage basis with certificated carriers and supplemental carriers. The sec­
ond possibility, which is the subject of the split, might be clarified if the 
language were changed to read “and (b) requiring that all cargo carried 
by commercial carriers be so moved”. This provision would explore the 
feasibility of eliminating the awarding of contracts on the basis of the 
lowest competitive bid. Defense objects to listing this possibility as one 
whose feasibility should be explored.
CALL ON  DEPUTY SECRETARY DOUGLAS
MR. QUESADA
SECRETARY MUELLER
MR. STANS
With regard to paragraph 7, the JCS propose that the words “if 
proposed” be eliminated. This language was put in because handling 
of this legislation was being left to the regular Budget Bureau process.
The drafting group considered another recommendation which 
would have been numbered 10, but decided to delete it from the list 
because it was not the subject of a recommendation in the Defense 
report. However, the group agreed that the question be raised as to 
whether the President should be asked to send a letter to the Secretary 
of Defense asking that two matters be studied:
