could induce Chile through their good offices to consent to a neutralization
of the provinces during plebiscite period, and could in this way succeed in
bringing about an arrangement by which plebiscite could in every respect
be held actually under control of the representatives of the three countries
composing the Plebiscitary Commission as provided for in award, Peru
would go through with it very willingly and would abide by the result in
good faith. The assertion could not well be made that a plebiscite under
those conditions would be unfair to Chile or that Chile, if willing to consent
to a fair plebiscite as implied in Treaty of Ancon81 and protocol of
Washington,82 could either reasonably object to an arrangement of that sort
or could refuse to abide by the result. Question has been asked here what
would be done should Chile refuse to accept result of plebiscite if it were
adverse. I do not believe that this question is of much moment here at
present, and in my interview with President Leguía the middle of last
December he pointed out that it might well be left for future determination.
The suggestion has also been made that if military party in Chile desires
continuance of issue over the provinces (as stated in Department’s
telegram), it would use its influence against settlement by any other means
should it be successful in preventing holding of a fair plebiscite.
I realize fully difficulties of situation with which Department has to deal,
and I shall cooperate fully with Department in any aspect of representations
which may arise here; but if I may be permitted the suggestion, I am of
opinion that easiest and at same time best solution of these difficulties
would be firm and strong support of General Pershing in the spirit, intent,
and letter of conclusions he has reached and by a clear declaration of the
Arbitrator stating it.
POINDEXTER
79 Telegram in five sections.
80 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 404.
81 Foreign Relations , 1883, p. 731.
82 Ibid., 1922, vol. I, p. 505.
