1114 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 45 to get sea lift there. We might have enough airlift to get the forces postulated to Iran in the time assumed. I very much doubt we could support them by air once there. (Will look into this further.) G.W.R 267. Briefing Note for the October 6 NSC Meeting1 Washington, October 5, 1960 UNITED STATES AND ALLIED CAPABILITIES FOR LIMITED MILITARY OPERATIONS TO 1 JULY 1962 1. The principal item this morning is the 135-­page report on UNITED STATES AND ALLIED CAPABILITIES FOR LIMITED MILITARY OPERATIONS TO 1 JULY 1962, prepared by an interde­ partmental study group from the Department of State and Defense, including representatives from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Central Intelligence Agency. You will doubtless recall a similar study that was prepared in 1953 pursuant to NSC directive. Following the presentation of the 1958 study to the Council, it was agreed between the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Director of Central Intelligence Agency, and myself, that the study would be periodically reviewed and evaluated. It was later agreed that a complete revision should be made, both to account for new developments and to adjust certain assumptions made in the earlier study. Mr. Irwin, in his presentation today, will tell you of three adjustments, perhaps the most important of which relates to the possible use of nuclear weapons by the enemy. 2. The earlier study considered twelve geographic areas; the pres­ ent study addresses five: Berlin, Laos/Cambodia/Vietnam, Iran, The Off-­Shore Islands, and Korea. These areas were considered suitable for the more extensive treatment that was called for in the new study. The terms of reference, I might add, were drafted by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, approved by the Secretaries of State and Defense, and agreed to by the Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology and myself. Mr. Irwin will explain to you certain of the basic limitations of the study, but I should like to ask that you also bear in mind: 1 Source: Limited war study. Top Secret. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
