1956 843 of ultimata, and in particular I do not believe that public statements such as that issued by your government on March 4 can contribute to progress we seek. E. As I understand position you set forth at our last meeting you categorically assert that only means of peacefully discussing and ­settling our disputes in Taiwan area is by meeting of our respective Foreign Ministers. F. Also, as I understand your position, you refuse to renounce force, even temporarily, with respect to our dispute in the Taiwan area, unless my government first agrees with your government’s contention that only means of discussing and settling this dispute is by meeting of our Foreign Ministers. G. Establishment of this prerequisite and condition with respect to renunciation of force in Taiwan area logically leads to question of what new conditions and prerequisites would be presented in connection with such meeting. For example, would you consider such a renunci­ ation of force binding only up to and during holding of such meeting? If meeting did not result in complete concession to your views would your government then consider itself free to use force? Any such posi­ tion would, of course, be complete perversion of principle of renunci­ ation of force and settlement of disputes by peaceful means. It would be most glaring reversion to practice of war-­like ultimata and holding of negotiations under threat by one party of initiating hostilities in absence of peaceful surrender by other party. H. I thus find your present position difficult to reconcile with your previous apparent acceptance of at least some of principles of my pro­ posal of October 8. I also find it hard to reconcile your present position even with your December 1 draft as I had understood it. I thought that you had assured me that your December 1 draft did cover situation in Taiwan area. I did not recall your having stated it covered our dispute there only on condition that we agreed to Foreign Minister’s meeting. In fact, as I recall it, you often said that you were establishing no condi­ tions or prerequisites. Now, in statement issued by your authorities on March 4, I find demand for Foreign Minister’s meeting stated not only as condition, but in terms approaching an ultimatum. I. You will note that in necessary statement of reply made by my government it carefully avoided any such aspect, and I have and will continue to avoid such aspects here for I am convinced that they cannot contribute to that peaceful settlement of our disputes which we con­ tinue to seek. J. Position of my government was carefully and soberly set forth in its statement of January 21 and in its response your government’s state­ ment of March 4 copies of which you have. I want particularly to stress closing words of both of these statements. “United States for its part,
