916 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement seen Mr. Rubottom’s memorandum of conversation on the White House meeting on October 12 (Tab C).4 A Memorandum for the President with a suggested letter for his approval addressed to Panamanian President de la Guardia is at Tab A.5 The text of this proposed letter has been concurred in by the departments of the Army. The message refers to previous correspondence between the two Presidents and informs the President of Panama of the action taken by President Eisenhower to achieve increased understanding between the two countries by approving revised operating policies in the Zone. Discussion: General Goodpaster’s memorandum mentioned the President’s desire for the establishment of close, continuous liaison between designated working-­level representatives of the State Department and the Department of the Army on problems pertaining to the Republic of Panama and United States operations in the Canal Zone. This has not been necessary in view of the fact that such liaison has existed for some time. (Your October 19 reply to General Goodpaster is at Tab A).6 A meeting of representatives of the appropriate agencies had been scheduled at the Pentagon for October 14 and, in the light of the decisions taken at the October 12 meeting at the White House, it was possible to re-­orient the discussion toward the implementation of the President’s instructions to eliminate certain of the frictions affecting relations between the two countries. Attending the meeting were Assistant Secretary of the Army Roderick, Assistant Secretary Rubottom, United States Ambassador to Panama Harrington, Governor Potter of the Canal Zone, and Lieutenant General Gaither, CHICARIB, in addition to members of their respective staffs. While Mr. Roderick was clear in his understanding of the President’s instruction, and this coincided with Mr. Rubottom’s understanding, the Canal Zone and military representatives present displayed an antipathetic attitude toward the changes in procedures which will effect the way of life of residents in the Zone. It is believed, however, that once the initial emotional impact of the impending changes has been absorbed, distastes for these changes will diminish and it would appear that while the Zone authorities and residents will not like the new system they will realize that they must live with it. In fact, the Department of the Army already appears to be reconciled thereto. 4 Rubottom’s memorandum of this conversation is printed as Document PM–10. 5 The text of the memorandum for the President and the draft letter for transmittal to President de la Guardia are printed as Document PM–22 and Enclosure. 6 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of Herter’s reply to Goodpaster is in the Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series.
