National Security Policy 105 appropriation acts indicating that the inclusion of protective construc­ tion was contemplated. Modifications of most buildings owned by the Federal Government could be accomplished in the same manner. Incorporation of shelter in existing buildings leased by the Federal Government would, in many cases, require legislative modification specifically to exempt such expenditures from the provisions of the Economy Act. FINANCING AND ADMINISTRATION The Committee is agreed that responsibility for preparing detailed budgetary estimates to support the measures proposed should rest initially with the Federal Civil Defense Administration, except in the case of new Federal construction or modification of existing Federal buildings (Measures No. 5 and 6), in which cases the agency which nor­ mally budgets for construction would also budget for the additional cost of fallout shelter features. The Bureau of the Budget may later rec­ ommend that funds for certain of the detailed projects be obtained by other Federal agencies. CONCLUSIONS (1) The Committee has recommended measures to support the con­ cept of shelter. Such measures are put forward as first or partial steps which if adopted, could provide the Federal leadership and example necessary to stimulate State and local governments and the private economy to take necessary shelter measures. Unless such stimulation is truly effective in inducing the provision of nationwide fallout shelter under local governmental and private auspices, and unless and until improvements in active defenses are brought about, estimated civilian casualties, in the event of nuclear attack on the United States, will not be limited to a level that will permit the United States to survive as a nation. (2) With Federal leadership and example, it is believed that the direct measures proposed can be undertaken in ways that will obtain the support and cooperation of the American people. (3) With respect to public information and education, it is believed that the critical factor bearing on maintaining a low-­key program is not the level of effort expended, but rather the manner in which the nature and imminence of the threat is handled. (4) Since the measures point to a partial program, they cannot engender public overconfidence in shelter, nor yet create a public pas­ sive defense psychology. (5) Because of the emphasis which will be placed upon improved active defenses, because of the low key of the public information program on shelters, and because of existing Congressional and
