1220 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement December 10 1955 he is permitted send letter to UK Charge properly pointing out he was being prevented from returning to US. UK Charge, again in absolute conformity with agreed announcement made rep­ resentations to your govt on behalf Fr. McCarthy. What is result? In utter disregard of freely entered into commitment and provisions of announcement your govt curtly asserted it was entirely matter its sovereignty as to how it treated imprisoned Americans and refused act on UK Charge’s representations. Thus in this one example there is laid out extraordinarily complete record of not only failure your authorities release Americans accordance with their commitment Sept 10 but even permit operation of third party arrangement which was established by that announcement. E. However, even this is not end of record in this case. On Sept 1 this year Fr. McCarthy permitted again write UK Charge request­ ing interview with him, again within context announcement. Your authorities agreed permit interview and time was set for it. Acting in good faith representative UK Charge makes long journey to Shanghai, presents himself at prison at appointed time. Then, prison authorities refuse permit representative UK Charge even see Fr. McCarthy. He refused even meager privilege of interview. He refused very explicit authority set forth in announcement investigate facts in any such case. There cannot be any clearer evidence of deliberate refusal carry out every substantive provision of announcement. F. It should not even have been necessary for Fr. McCarthy write asking for interview, for UK Charge should long ago have been enabled by your authorities see all Americans who continue be held in prison. As long ago as last December your Prime Minister told UK Charge that he was not permitted visit American prisoners on grounds that Indian Embassy in US not permitted visit Chinese prisoners my coun­ try. Although this matter had not been raised during our discussion announcement on May 31 1956 at 49th meeting, I formally informed you here, and Indian Embassy in US was informed, that its representa­ tives could interview any Chinese prisoner in US whether in federal or state institutions. It solely because of inexplicable objections your govt that this was not done. On Aug 23 this year UK Charge again formally requested permission visit all American prisoners. Although there no longer even slightest basis for your authorities refuse this modest rea­ sonable request, your govt has not even yet replied his letter. G. My govt has been extremely patient in face this inexplicable continued refusal of your authorities carry out its clear commitment release all Americans. It is also seriously concerned at attempt of your authorities, as exemplified in case Fr. McCarthy, evade their obliga­ tions under announcement with respect third party functions. These
