World Hunger and Food Policy prior to the announcement of the policy. Use of a more formal mechanism would make for more visible public involvement in the process but might delay it and produce recommendations with which you might have to disagree publicly. Decision: Involve private sector informally Establish Private Consultative Group (prepare names for my review) 5. Presidential Communication with Selected Members of Congress Building on increased Congressional concern for world hunger, you should communicate your interest to members of Congress, including those advocating a Presidential Commission on World Hunger. The purpose would be to state your intention to launch an Administration program on world hunger and solicit their views on food policy issues. We believe that by discussing these matters with the House and Senate leadership you will engender support for the initiative and demonstrate your resolve to act. This also may develop additional support for overall foreign aid policies. Decision: Arrange meeting with selected members of Senate and House by early October to discuss broad issues of international food policy Prepare draft letter to selected members of Congress on my plans in this area Defer contacts with Congress on hunger issues Summary of Comments on Who Should Chair the WG The respective positions are as follows: —NSC proposes that the World Hunger Working Group be co-chaired by my office and the NSC staff in order (1) to increase coordination necessary among members of the Working Group, and (2) to ensure that the Working Group’s work is fully related to all aspects of U.S. development assistance and foreign economic policies.15 —OMB supports NSC’s recommendation that the Working Group be jointly chaired by my office and the NSC staff. OMB contends that continuing involvement of my office is obviously needed if the Working Group is to maintain the momentum already developed by my efforts these past months; however, they contend that if NSC co-chairs the Working Group, it will ensure that the world hunger ini- 15 See Document 226.
