Human Rights
571
(7) The Problem of Disappeared Persons. As a follow-up to the resolu-
tion adopted by the United Nations General Assembly,5 we will be con-
sulting with the resolution’s original sponsors, Canada and the United
Kingdom, with a view to the establishment by the Human Rights Com-
mission of an effective mechanism for dealing with the problem of dis-
appeared persons throughout the world.
(8) Importance of National Institutions in the Field of Human Rights.
We want to give every encouragement to the initiative being pursued
by the Indian delegation to strengthen the role which can be played by
national institutions supporting the international human rights activ-
ities of the United Nations. A related area which we will also seek to
promote will be the establishment of regional human rights organs.
Tactical Situation:
In pursuing the goals which we have set for ourselves in the 35th
session of the Human Rights Commission, full account must be taken
of the setting. The Commission operates pursuant to the Rules of Proce-
dure of the Functional Commissions of ECOSOC and it takes decisions
by majority vote. Of the 32 members on the Commission, 8 are from Af-
rican states, 6 from Asian states, 6 from LA states, 8 from WEO states,
and 4 from the Socialist States of Eastern Europe. Of the present mem-
bership, the following have been the object of formal complaints of
human rights violations which have been before the Commission in re-
cent years: Brazil, Iran, Burundi, Uganda, and Uruguay.
To achieve a working majority in the Commission our contacts
must take account of the key position occupied in the Commission by
the countries of the Third World. It is only from the members of this
group that we can hope to find the support which we will need if we
are to achieve our goals through the adoption of resolutions by the
Commission. In the consultations which we must carry out before the
opening of the Commission session as well as during the period of the
session itself, we must identify at least 8–10 of the Member States from
the Third World with which we must work to develop common posi-
tions in pursuit of our objectives.
5 “Disappeared Persons” (A/RES/33/173), adopted by the UN General Assembly
on December 20, 1978.
