1152  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Survivability can only be determined after thorough war gaming and it 
is to be expected that this will be a major area in which much detailed 
work needs to be done by the JCS and the Services.
h. War Gaming.
It was generally agreed that the SIOP should be war gamed by a 
group in Washington under the direct control of the JCS. This is most 
important in order to come as close as possible to an unbiased eval­
uation of this new plan and to develop factors and criteria for use in 
the succeeding plans. The SIOP also may be war gamed by the JSTPS 
which, of course, smacks of their inspecting themselves.
i. Points System.
The development of the NSTL was in large measure governed by 
the use of the SAC ALFA and BRAVO points systems—ALFA points 
being assigned to military installations and military and governmen­
tal control centers. BRAVO points to urban and industrial targets. In 
coming up with an optimum mix target list, the planners found that 
the ALFA and BRAVO points were not mathematically compatible and 
so they were forced to come up with a new type of points which they 
called OMEGA points. These OMEGA points are an arbitrary judgment 
based on amalgamation of the ALFA and BRAVO points and have no 
real mathematical validity. The SAC people are working on developing 
a new points system. The Navy is also trying to come up with a new 
points system using the talent and facilities at the David Taylor Model 
Basin.
j. The Staff and Organization.
The Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff has not up to this time been 
a truly joint staff. All key positions with the exception of the Deputy 
Director have been held by Air Force officers. Almost all of these Air 
Force officers have held concurrent jobs in the SAC Staff organization. 
We believe that the staff must become a truly joint one with equitable 
distribution of the key positions within the staff itself and that the offi­
cers assigned to the staff should have that as their sole assignment. It 
has not been possible to persuade the Army to provide as much repre­
sentation on the JSTPS as we would have liked to see and I am hopeful 
that they will realize the importance to the Army of the organization in 
Omaha.
k. Reliability Factors.
The reliability factors used in various weapons systems naturally 
have a marked effect on assurance and thus relate back in the long run 
to force levels. It is worth noting that the reliability factors used for 
missiles results in what appears to be a very high level of programming
