1978  457
102.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 16, 1978
SUBJECT
Strategic Force Modernization Plan
Harold Brown has sent you a memo (Tab A) laying out a tenta-
tive plan for modernizing our strategic forces posture. Overall, I think 
­Harold’s plan looks quite reasonable. It allows for a really serious look 
at an air-­mobile basing mode for a new ICBM. It provides for improved 
ICBM survivability during the early ’80s (by deploying Minuteman 
III on trucks). Finally, it seems to strike a realistic balance between the 
extremes of [6 lines not declassified]
The memo is reasonably short and informative; in reading it you 
might keep the following points in mind:
—Harold seems to have decided on the mostly common missile (a 
squeezed M–X) rather than the common missile (TRIDENT II). How-
ever, proceeding with full-­scale development of the mostly common 
missile means making an investment that will be largely wasted if we 
do not identify a good land-­based deployment scheme. In light of this, 
I intend to ask Harold for a short memo outlining his basis for this 
decision.
—Given the relatively high costs of an air-­mobile scheme and the 
drawbacks we are already aware of in MAP, it might be prudent to give 
the truck-­mobile system that Harold proposes for Minuteman the capa-
bility to subsequently carry a mostly common missile.2
—Harold notes that the $22B cost estimate for the air-­mobile con-
cept may be too high. However, even a better estimate would probably 
be overstated, in that the net impact on the defense budget of build-
ing this system should subtract the amounts we would have to spend 
to develop a follow-­on cruise missile carrier or an intra-­theater cargo 
transport, since the aircraft Harold has in mind can also serve these 
other purposes.
—There are a number of underlying issues that seem likely to at 
least color our attitudes toward some of the more detailed decisions 
imbedded in this plan; for example, can we develop and deploy the 
C3I systems needed to support a mobile missile system, and would 
the indicators of impending Soviet strategic attack be good enough to 
justify a significant investment in a truck-­mobile system carrying the 
mostly common missile, and how much time-­urgent, hard-­target kill 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, 
Box 5, Defense Department: 11–12/78. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.
2 Carter wrote “I agree” in the left margin next to this paragraph.
