Chapter 2, January–June 1989 249 Although the existing proposal is not ideal in serving any one of our objectives, it strikes a good balance between our verification and security requirements. It also is consistent with the U.S. constitutional protection against unreasonable search. Others believe that the list should be substantially expanded to include almost all solid rocket motor production plants that are not subject to PPM, major military storage locations (about 11 U.S. facilities, depending on the definition), and civilian railyards and open areas in which mobile launchers could be located. Option 1. Retain the existing position on Mandatory SSI. (favored by JCS and the DCI) Option 2. Retain the existing position on Mandatory SSI, but do not seek to engage the Soviets in Geneva. If the Soviets press, inform them that the issue is under review in Washington. (favored by State, ACDA and Ambassador Rowny) Option 3. Inform the Soviets that we are withdrawing our Mandatory SSI proposal pending a review of our position. (favored by OSD) NSC staff note that this issue, too, was the subject of much study in the last Administration. Except for OSD, all agencies are satisfied with our general position, and differ only on the details of which facilities would be put on the list. That work needs to be done, but it can be accomplished under Option 1 and does not require a major review as envisioned in Options 2 or 3. There appears to be no way to reconcile OSD’s broad approach with the intrusiveness concerns of the JCS and DCI. We see no merit in plowing that field again. NSC Staff Recommendation That you approve Option 1.15 5. Right-­of-Refusal SSI. There is consensus that we should maintain the current approach to permit SSI at locations not on the mandatory list, subject to a right-­of-­refusal; if a request is refused, the refusing party is required to make a “good faith” effort to resolve the concern by other means. NSC staff note that this part of our inspection regime requires more work. We agree with the consensus that the existing position is on the right track and we should not remove our position from the table pending further study. 15 Scowcroft wrote “Option 2” in the box marked “Disapprove.”
