Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1107
235.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, July 22, 1991, 1637Z
08069. Subject: START: Brooks-Nazarkin Luncheon, July 17, 1991
1. This is NST/START Memcon-XV-M-381. Secret—Entire Text.
2. Meeting Date: July 17, 1991
Time: 1:00 p.m.–2:30 p.m.
Place: Chateau de Genthod, Geneva
3. Participants:
U.S.	
USSR
Amb. L.F. Brooks	
Amb. Yu.K. Nazarkin
4. Brooks said that some Soviet advisors had suggested that the 
treaty might not actually be signed at the summit. Brooks wished to 
make clear that the U.S. position was to complete and sign the treaty. 
Nazarkin said he understood.
5. Brooks said he wanted to do final conforming and printing of the 
joint compliance and inspection protocol and the throw-weight proto-
col over the coming weekend. Brooks proposed a schedule to make this 
feasible. Nazarkin took the schedule, but made no comments.
6. Brooks said that the U.S. side was awaiting a Soviet response to 
the latest U.S. conditions for allowing launch of ICBMs or SLBMs from 
airplanes into space. Brooks urged Nazarkin to have the Soviet pro-
posal killed, stating that it was unlikely to be the basis for agreement.
7. Brooks told Nazarkin the U.S. side could accept 4350 kilograms 
as the throw-weight cutoff for defining a heavy ICBM or SLBM.
8. Brooks told Nazarkin that the U.S. side preferred to use actual 
solid propellant ballistic missiles during exhibitions, rather than inert 
missiles. Brooks noted that the use of live missiles had originally been a 
Soviet preference, but that, in Washington, the Soviet side appeared to 
back away from this preference. Brooks asked Nazarkin to ascertain the 
actual Soviet position. Nazarkin said he would do so.
9. Brooks said that, since the Soviet side had rejected the proposed 
trade of making Khabarovsk a point of entry in return for payment in 
hard currency, the U.S. side proposed to defer the issue of currency 
of payment. Nazarkin said he did not have authority from Moscow to 
accept deferral, but would check with Moscow.
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Lot 02D360, Edward M. Ifft 
Files, Baker-Nazarkin Memcons 1991. Secret; Exdis; Priority. Sent priority for information 
to Moscow, the Mission to NATO, and USNMR SHAPE.
