875.6363/211 [Document 354] The Chargé in Albania (Kodding) to the Secretary of State TIRANA, March 30, 1925. [Received April 21.] No. 419 SIR: I have the honor to report that on March 21st a call was made upon His Excellency Mufid Bey Libohova, Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs in order to present the representations authorized by the Department’s telegram No. 15 of the 17th instant concerning the state of Albanian-American relations. Before the position taken by the Department was disclosed to him the Minister for Foreign Affairs showed me as he had previously done at the time of my representations on March 11th portions of the confidential agreement signed by the Italian Minister which grants a fifty million gold franc credit to Albania. As the loan was supposed to be secret Mufid Bey did not mention details other than to state that its main purpose other than as consideration for the petroleum concession was to provide for the development in Albania by Italian interests of banking facilities, railways, tramways, bridges and agriculture. The Minister for Foreign Affairs then listened to the reading of the American representations (as set forth in an enclosure25 with this despatch) concerning (1) the unsatisfactory situation created by the failure of the Albanian Government to carry out the assurances given in its note of June 25, 1922, to Consul-General Blake,25a (2) the situation created by the unsatisfactory development of the de Long and Coleman murder case. The Minister in informally commenting on the representations showed that he had no real understanding of either situation, presenting the point of view that only one of the murderers of the two Americans remained to be apprehended and punished and offering to permit a representative of the Legation to examine the records of the court which now has the matter in charge. It was pointed out that such an examination could have no influence upon the actual apprehension and trial of the alleged murderers involved whose names are already known. The fact that the American Government might withhold the sending of a Minister to Tirana providing the unsatisfactory situations did not show improvement apparently affected Mufid Bey but very little, … The Minister for Foreign Affairs was so perturbed, however, over the fact that the Department had been requested to support a claim for indemnity for Messrs. de Long
