Yugoslavia 3. Last July, three months after Tito’s death, we concluded that the transition was proceeding as expected, that is, fairly smoothly. The collective leadership, while hardly brilliant or decisive, was functioning satisfactorily and maintaining outward unity; the political-security situation remained generally stable, despite certain pressures to liberalize and some consequent calls for internal vigilance; Yugoslavia’s serious economic problems were being addressed, albeit with inadequate results to date; and Yugoslavia’s traditional foreign policy priorities remained unaltered—preservation of independence through heavy commitment to non-alignment, stability and balance in dealing with Moscow and Washington, and as good relations as possible with its neighbors. 4. Today, more than eight months after Tito’s death, these judgments remain valid. The situation, however, is anything but static. Indeed, pressures are building—particularly from the troubled economy—which are forcing the pace of change and open debate, posing difficult choices for the collective leadership, and highlighting the issue of where real power should reside in post-Tito Yugoslavia. Among these pressures are: —The further deterioration of the international situation. When Tito died, Soviet-backed aggression in SE Asia, turmoil in Iran, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and the near paralysis of the Non- Aligned Movement were already weighing heavily on the new Yugoslav leadership.5 Since then, the Gulf War, Poland, the threatened collapse of detente, and increased energy and trade dependence on Moscow have put new pressures on the leadership—underscoring Yugoslavia’s heavy commitment to the NAM, and forcing difficult (and no doubt internally contentious) trade-offs between foreign policy principles, smooth relations with Moscow, and the self-interest in preserving socialism. —Continuing economic difficulties. The economic chickens of Titoera economics are now coming home to roost and the new leadership is having to foot the bill. The economy, beset by inflation, declining living standards, imbalanced trade, low productivity, and chronic unemployment, thus remains the make-or-break issue for the new
