352
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
under way in Washington. Begin said he was sorry but on this question
he was speaking from the heart as well as the brain. Focusing on para 2
rpt 2 of reply 4(a), Begin drew attention to the phrase that “the final
status of Jerusalem could be different . . .” from the rest of the West
Bank. He said this could be interpreted as meaning that Jerusalem in
toto is part of the West Bank.
12. Question 4(d) rpt 4(d): Begin said he did not know what the
term “Israeli security personnel” means when at Camp David everyone
had spoken of the IDF. Where, he asked, had it been agreed that, after 5
years, we will negotiate about the presence of the IDF in Judea, Samaria
and Gaza. Israeli security was unimagineable without the IDF in Judea,
Samaria and the Gaza Strip. That is why the CDA spoke of a presence
for five years and “beyond.” When Dayan returned from the meetings
at Leeds Castle,8 Begin reported, Dayan had told him (Begin) that the
US agreed that the IDF could stay in those areas. The President had told
Begin that it was his impression these forces should be in the Jordan
Valley. Begin had explained the need to have forces in the Samarian
Highlands and the President had agreed. Now, Begin said, you
promise Hussein we will have to negotiate continued IDF presence.
This is a violation of the CDA.
13. Question 4(e) rpt 4(e): Begin objected to the use of the phrase
“legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.” He said that the Pres-
ident had agreed to delete this language at Camp David at Israeli insist-
ence and substitute “requirements.” Now suddenly “aspirations” reap-
peared. Why?
14. Question 5 rpt 5: Begin next questioned the concept of an inter-
national supervisory authority, “nothing in the Framework excludes,
etc.” “The self-governing authority, of course, means administration
council,” Begin asserted. He said that there was nothing in the CDA on
this and no mention of the UN as there is in the US answer. The ques-
tion of such an international authority was never even discussed at CD
he said. Why was it inserted? “We would have rejected it of course.” It
was absolutely not consistent with CDA. I interrupted to agree that this
was not discussed at CD but was raised in Hussein’s question and our
answer was an effort to respond to him honestly.
15. Question 6(b) rpt 6(b): Begin drew attention to the statement re-
garding the participation of the “Arab inhabitants of East Jerusalem: in
elections to constitute the self-governing authority. This, he said, was
never mentioned at CD. Israel had not agreed. It was not in CDA.
16. Question 7(a) rpt 7(a): Begin expressed surprise at the sugges-
tion that Egypt would be a participant in the negotiations to establish
8 See footnote 3, Document 3.
