802 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 resist Soviet penetration and the growth of radical leftist forces. This will not be popular with Oveissi and others who have convinced themselves that they have the capability to go for Khomeini’s jugular. However, it provides a practical and realistic objective which is shared by virtually all the dissident groups—and a large part of the Iranian population. An Azerbaijan Strategy The greatest immediate danger of Soviet penetration is in Azerbaijan. We have recently had reports that the Soviets are offering attractive commercial credits to the powerful guilds in the bazaar in Tabriz. We know that a Soviet intelligence infrastructure remains from the days when a puppet Soviet regime ruled the region. We suspect that the efforts of the Moslem Peoples Republican Party (MPRP—representing a moderate Shariatmadari alternative to mullah rule) to build support in the military in Azerbaijan was thwarted because of Soviet penetration. [1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified] [1½ lines not declassified] Azerbaijan is not only vulnerable to the Soviets, but it is the historical center of political movements for change. The Azeris are the largest minority group in Iran. They are not only a regional force, since they dominate the Tehran bazaar and hold key positions in government, military and commerce throughout Iran. They have a potential alternative religious leader to Khomeini—Shariatmadari—who will be of supreme importance in maintaining order if and when Khomeini’s regime collapses. [1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified] Propaganda and Disinformation Bob Komer feels strongly that we should be more active and imaginative in discrediting the Soviet role in Iran and cynical Soviet support for the Khomeini forces. You may want to ask him to speak to this and suggest some ideas of how we could be more aggressive. Turkey and Pakistan In the long run, our best opportunity for developing ties to a hostile Iranian regime lies through its two neighbors. This meeting is not the place for a full-scale discussion of this issue. However, I recommend that State, CIA and perhaps JCS be asked to develop some thoughts on how we can begin to encourage closer ties between these three neighbors and how we might best exploit such ties to promote some degree of political stability. Obviously, if a serious Azerbaijan strategy begins to develop, Turkey will be key. We have some indications that Turkey [less than 1 line not declassified] may be willing to play this game.
