January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1191 The President said that yes, it can. Minister Kubersky said that there is an interval after May 27th. The President disagreed. It can start at the same time as the inauguration of the Self-Governing Authority. Minister Kubersky said this could take many months. We (i.e. the autonomy talks) can continue to exist. The President agreed. He cannot speak for Sadat, but he guesses that, in 40 days, if there is obvious progress and good faith, then probably—he doesn’t know, but he hopes so—Sadat will let us continue as we are now. When the Self-Governing Authority is set up, then issues can go to the Continuing Committee and be resolved. Prime Minister Begin said that the problem of international communications is a serious problem. There are problems of taxation and customs. Israel wants an economic entity, with a free movement of goods—and there are other problems, they can make a list. Therefore, this (reference) should be expressed in general terms: “Matters of common concerned shall be . . .” They would like to consult tomorrow, and submit proposals. The word “augmented” creates certain impressions. It is a change. They don’t want Egypt to say it is a change, and therefore why not others? In practice, this may be a dangerous precedent. We need to keep to the Agreement. For two weeks at Camp David, it was hard to get an agreement. The President said that he hopes before Wednesday6 afternoon, Minister Burg and others can talk about powers and responsibilities. Minister Burg said there is too much. The President asked if it was 20 areas? . . . And Israel should say which it would give, which it wishes to retain, and others—on which we would either say we failed or put into the Continuing Committee. Therefore, this list will undoubtedly be different from what Egypt decides. This is for the 40 days of negotiations. Prime Minister Begin said that, on the categories, Ambassador Linowitz had suggested them, and so they were approved: those for complete transfer; those that are shared; and those that are reserved. This should be accepted. Does Ambassador Linowitz have comments on the Israeli paper? Ambassador Linowitz said that the negotiators had agreed on 18 powers and responsibilities. This paragraph will not be put in the agreement for 30 or 40 days. The Palestinians will want to ask questions about land, water, economic relations—so it will help to have them in 6 April 16.
