612  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Bill Perry began addressing the questions that had been posed 
about the option variations, especially cost. To do Option 5 in silos with 
a 100 mobile missile component as well as 300 improved missiles would 
average $15B across the mobile modes—­leading to a rough total force 
cost of $90B, compared to the $50B minimum modernization baseline 
force.
Dr. Perry then briefly showed some calculations on the effective-
ness of different RV loadings vs. nominal soft and hard target sets. He 
showed that [6 lines not declassified]
Howard Stoertz commented that some work DNA is now doing 
suggests that Soviet silos may be harder than DOD is assuming. Harold 
Brown responded that the CEPs being discussed would put the silos 
inside the nuclear fireballs.
Dr. Perry then turned to an argument in favor of development of 
the Trident II SLBM. He said it would be a good idea whatever we did 
about ICBMs because its higher RV loading would permit a reduced 
number of boats and consequently reduced procurement and operating 
costs of $13B. This is because the Trident boat is already configured to 
receive larger D–5 missiles and at least 12 Tridents will be under con-
tract before construction of a new class SSBN could begin.
Harold Brown observed that the Trident II issue is really a question 
of when you do it. Dr. Perry noted that depending on the D–5 missile 
decision we would plan a force of 12, 15, or 18 Trident boats and then 
develop a new and smaller follow-­on submarine.
Dr. Perry then turned to describing the open trench basing concept 
involving 5000 miles of trench [1 line not declassified]
[2 lines not declassified] no one really knows how hard they are.
Cy Vance asked how long it took to move between shelters. Dr. Perry 
answered that it would take about 3 minutes to get to the first neigh-
boring shelter and about 2 minutes for each succeeding shelter down 
the line. Thus, in 30 minutes of ICBM flight time, location uncertainties 
of about 30 shelters could be obtained. The missile would launch from 
outside the shelter. Roofs over the trench and shelters would enhance 
denial of location information but could be opened for verification. The 
concept could be operated either with roofs opened most of the time 
and closed for movement or with roofs closed most of the time and 
open for inspection.
Currently, the main security issue being raised about this system 
Perry said was the possibility of missile location reparting by implanted 
close-­in sensors. One way to look at the system is as a grid of shel-
ters separated by a mile in all directions and connected by trenches 
along one dimension. Tactical warning could allow the missile to move 
once to a new shelter before elements of the track were destroyed. The
