1328
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
fact;7 the other, a decision to move the Prime Minister’s office to East Je-
rusalem, now appears a certainty but may be delayed for several
weeks. The first point the President wishes to make is that, after having
given careful reflection to the considerations Sadat has raised, he does
not repeat not believe that suspending the autonomy talks in response
to either of these moves would be a wise decision. It will clearly not
cause the Israelis to change their position and would leave us in a quan-
dary as to how subsequently we can restore momentum to the peace
process. As difficult as this Israeli move is for us, we should not allow it
to derail us from the peace strategy in which we, Egypt and Israel have
invested so much. The President believes that the latest round of
technical-level talks in the autonomy negotiations covered useful new
ground and revealed a genuinely better atmosphere for making
progress. We are sufficiently encouraged to believe that however our
two governments decide to react to the Israeli moves on Jerusalem
we should not allow this issue to place a further burden on the
negotiations.
5. We nevertheless agree with Sadat that the Israeli moves pose a
definite challenge and that our two governments must make clear we
do not accept them as in any way determining the future of Jerusalem
which can only be resolved through negotiations. We see the Knesset
bill as essentially a legal matter. While we view it seriously, we believe
our reaction to it can be adequately and effectively handled by the
statement we have already issued (reftel D), which states in simple
terms that we do not accept the new law as determining the status of
Jerusalem. The bill does not change anything on the ground as far as we
can determine and we do not contemplate any further action with re-
spect to it at this time.
6. We would also be concerned about Israeli announcement of
moving the Prime Minister’s office to Jerusalem, which, as a physical
act, is likely to evoke a greater reaction in Arab and Islamic countries,
and to have a more negative impact on the prospect for negotiations.
We plan to take the following steps if and when the Israelis carry out
this move:
—(A) We will issue a statement expressing our clear opposition to
and disapproval of the move and reaffirming our policy that we do not
accept such unilateral acts as determining the future of Jerusalem.
—(B) We will maintain our present policy of refusing to allow our
Ambassador or any other administration official to meet with Israeli of-
ficials (including the Prime Minister) in East Jerusalem.
7 See Document 394.
