Yugoslavia Kardelj hoped there would be more Soviet-American efforts but stressed that in discussing problems, the US and the Soviet Union should talk with the non-aligned nations. All nations should take part if they have an interest—for instance, in southern Africa. There is distrust, and it is not easy for parties to accept cooperative efforts. Yet those efforts are still positive; the more that non-aligned and other nations take part, the more chance there is of reaching solutions. In particular, the superpowers ought to act to increase the strength of non-aligned nations. There are always tensions and the possibility of local wars. If the major blocs appear to be behind those tensions, then arms pour in, aggravating local tensions. Thus, the non-aligned nations should participate in the attempt to preserve peace. Kardelj indicated that President Tito wanted to know the President’s view on non-aligned nations and their role. US Global Policies The President indicated that he had to leave soon but wanted to make several points before he did. He first asked Kardelj for his assessment of the Middle East, the controversy between Ethiopia and Somalia, and other areas of tension. He said that Yugoslav views were important, and he wanted to hear them, particularly on the Middle East. The President recognized that some policies of the United States would create problems for the Yugoslavs. He hoped that Kardelj would be able to resolve those difficulties in his conversations at the State Department. It is hard to change the policies, but he wanted to diminish the problems caused for the Yugoslavs by them. He expressed the hope that US investments in Yugoslavia would grow. We would like to build plants and other facilities in Yugoslavia. However, there is a problem with US policy on investment guarantees. He and Congress prefer that those guarantees go to the poorest nations. Yugoslavia had done so well that it was difficult to justify extending guarantees to it. The US would do the best it could, but if guarantees could not be given, the President wanted the Yugoslavs to understand that there was no anti-Yugoslav motivation. With regard to arms transfers, the President said that the US would like to supply some of Yugoslavia’s needs; the Secretaries of State and Defense would be prepared to discuss that subject further. The United States is attempting to work with arms suppliers to reduce overall transfers. One means of doing so is to induce consumers to reduce their purchases. But the US is prepared to sell some weaponry to Yugoslavia, and we will talk further with the Yugoslavs. However, those discussions are within the context of a general promise—applying to all countries—to the American people to cut overall transfers each year. We will work with the Yugoslavs.
