International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1029 village organization and lack of community participation, difficulties in program management, organization and administration, and the relatively low level of government commitment. In Bolivia, active Government opposition to birth control continued, resulting in serious constraints on all family planning activities. The 1976 census showed a total population of one million less than had been previously estimated. Forward movement in the establishment of family planning programs in Africa has been slow. Government programs do exist in a few countries, e.g., Kenya, Ghana, Tanzania, and Zaire, but their results have not been significant, although there are signs of improvement. However, most governments in sub-Saharan Africa do not provide family planning services in regularized national programs. A growing number do permit, and even support, the activities of private family planning associations. Family planning in Nigeria is largely provided by private institutions such as hospitals and the Family Planning Council, although the Government, through its newly created National Population Council, has begun to subsidize these activities. Togo recently joined the one or two other Francophone countries in this region which have established national family planning programs. There is widespread tradition in Africa favoring child spacing, and family planning is increasingly perceived as an important public health measure. In many African countries, the extension of health programs into rural areas, organized attempts by rural women to promote their own interests, increased school attendance, and other manifestations of social progress can be viewed as foundations on which to base future African family planning programs. Population and development. While the pace of population growth appears to be slackening, it remains excessive in too many developing nations, substantially offsetting economic gains and reducing prospects for significant improvements in levels of living. In the poorest developing countries, the average gain in gross domestic product (GDP) between 1970 and 1975 (in 1970 prices) was a meager one dollar per person per year. This group of low-income, non-oil exporting developing countries with per capita GDP in 1970 of less than $200, contains over one billion people, or nearly 60 percent of the developing country population, excluding China. In view of the growing focus on basic needs of the poorest strata in less developed countries, population trends are assuming greater importance in national developmental policies and plans. In earlier decades, the primary objective of development was to promote the growth of aggregate product. On the premise that the benefits would eventually trickle down to the masses, income distribution was of secondary concern. Excessive population growth impedes the attainment
