International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1029
village organization and lack of community participation, difficulties in
program management, organization and administration, and the rela-
tively low level of government commitment.
In Bolivia, active Government opposition to birth control con-
tinued, resulting in serious constraints on all family planning activities.
The 1976 census showed a total population of one million less than had
been previously estimated.
Forward movement in the establishment of family planning pro-
grams in Africa has been slow. Government programs do exist in a few
countries, e.g., Kenya, Ghana, Tanzania, and Zaire, but their results
have not been significant, although there are signs of improvement.
However, most governments in sub-Saharan Africa do not provide
family planning services in regularized national programs. A growing
number do permit, and even support, the activities of private family
planning associations. Family planning in Nigeria is largely provided
by private institutions such as hospitals and the Family Planning
Council, although the Government, through its newly created National
Population Council, has begun to subsidize these activities. Togo re-
cently joined the one or two other Francophone countries in this region
which have established national family planning programs. There is
widespread tradition in Africa favoring child spacing, and family plan-
ning is increasingly perceived as an important public health measure.
In many African countries, the extension of health programs into rural
areas, organized attempts by rural women to promote their own in-
terests, increased school attendance, and other manifestations of social
progress can be viewed as foundations on which to base future African
family planning programs.
Population and development. While the pace of population growth
appears to be slackening, it remains excessive in too many developing
nations, substantially offsetting economic gains and reducing pros-
pects for significant improvements in levels of living. In the poorest de-
veloping countries, the average gain in gross domestic product (GDP)
between 1970 and 1975 (in 1970 prices) was a meager one dollar per
person per year. This group of low-income, non-oil exporting devel-
oping countries with per capita GDP in 1970 of less than $200, contains
over one billion people, or nearly 60 percent of the developing country
population, excluding China.
In view of the growing focus on basic needs of the poorest strata in
less developed countries, population trends are assuming greater im-
portance in national developmental policies and plans. In earlier
decades, the primary objective of development was to promote the
growth of aggregate product. On the premise that the benefits would
eventually trickle down to the masses, income distribution was of sec-
ondary concern. Excessive population growth impedes the attainment
