Peru  1029
conscious of your deep personal concern with international affairs and 
of the steadfastness with which you and your representatives have sup-
ported constructive measures to advance the cause of world peace with 
justice. I have also followed with great interest the impressive progress 
made during your administration in the consolidation of true democ-
racy in Peru and in the maintenance of a free and stable economy.
Peru and the United States share a firm dedication to the principles 
of liberty and freedom, and we have also dedicated ourselves with high 
purpose to the Organization of American States, an inspiring example 
of peaceful regional cooperation among nations. Long united by bonds 
of closest friendship, our countries will, I am confident, work together 
with even greater good will and understanding in the years to come.
In extending my personal regard to Your Excellency, I desire to con-
vey to you and to your countrymen the sincere best wishes of the peo-
ple of the United States for the continued welfare of your great nation.5
Sincerely,
5 In his reply of May 13 to President Eisenhower, President Prado commented 
favorably on the subjects raised in President Eisenhower’s letter and he stressed the 
need for U.S. participation in efforts to achieve [illegible in the ­original] in Latin America. 
(723.11/5–2358)
PE–6.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in 
Peru (Achilles)1

Lima, May 7, 1958.
SUBJECT
Political and Economic Situation
PARTICIPANTS
Manuel Prado, President of Peru
Raúl Porras Barrenechea, Foreign Minister (last part only)
Richard M. Nixon, Vice President of the U. S.
Roy R. Rubottom, Asst. Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs
Theodore C. Achilles, Ambassador to Peru
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-NI/5–1358. Confidential. The 
source text, sent to the Department of State under cover of despatch 848 from Lima, May 
13, bears the notation that it was approved in draft by Assistant Secretary Rubottom.
