164  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
evaluation, all agencies concluded that such a provision was more com-
plicated than expected and of limited military benefit. Moreover, the 
U.S. position would permit conversion of a limited number of ballis-
tic missiles to space launch vehicles, further limiting the impact of an 
elimination requirement. As a result, no additional treaty requirement 
was developed. Thus, the existing U.S. approach would not require the 
elimination or conversion of any Soviet SLBMs or existing silo-­based 
ICBMs other than SS–18s, but could result in such missiles simply being 
placed in a nondeployed status.
The magnitude of the problem this proposal is intended to address 
depends on: how many missiles are exempted from NDM limits (see 
Issue 1), how many NDMs are permitted in the constrained categories, 
and how many space launch vehicles (SLVs) may be converted from 
NDMs in the constrained categories. If there are no NDM limits, then 
there need be no missile eliminations. If the numerical NDM and SLV 
limits are set relatively high, or if several categories of existing mis-
siles are excluded from NDM and SLV limits, then few, if any, missiles 
would have to be eliminated. In either of these cases, a missile elimina-
tion requirement could result in visible missile destructions. The per-
ceptual impact of these destructions would be mitigated, however, if 
NDM/SLV limits on future types were so high that a side could build a 
significant legal inventory of refire/breakout missiles.
One view is that requiring the elimination of a missile for every 
launcher destroyed has all the drawbacks of an NDM limit with none 
of the advantages. Some believe that we will have a pressing need for 
missiles removed from launchers to support force restructuring and 
for such uses as RDT&E boosters, space launch vehicles, operational 
spares, flight testing, or conversion to other ballistic missiles. Such 
requirements may run to several hundred missiles. Production lines 
for the bulk of our existing missiles are now closed. We simply cannot 
afford to destroy millions of dollars worth of missile inventory only to 
subsequently be compelled to reopen those production lines at a cost of 
many more millions.
Eliminating missiles removed from operational deployment would 
still allow the Soviets to retain refires and produce new missiles. The 
United States, however, would be unable to retain missiles for research 
and testing.
Some would attempt to balance the political requirement for forc-
ing elimination with the requirements for continued use of removed 
missiles. Approaches to doing this might attempt to meet following 
objectives:
— Treating the initial seven years of the treaty, when both sides are 
engaged in reducing to new limits and thus the objective is to lower
