1550 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement the staff of the U.S. delegation are now interested in exploring possibili­ ties of agreement. Mr. Dulles said that he had been disappointed that so little prog­ ress toward agreement was made in the December talks. He thought that the area of surprise attack safeguards was one which offered some prospects for agreement. He did not expect that there would be sub­ stantial reduction of armaments by detailed agreement. There must be confidence before arms can be reduced. Surprise attack safeguards might contribute to mutual assurance that an attack was unlikely, and thus lead indirectly to reduction in the arms burden. Mr. Foster said that it was a consensus among participants in the discussions that it would be useless to resume the talks on the narrow technical-military basis to which the delegation had been restricted in its instructions. He thought, however, that broader exploration of possi­ ble limitations on armaments in conjunction with inspection and obser­ vation measures might be fruitful and in the U.S. interest. This might include, for example, analysis of a hypothetical basis of political agree­ ments such as the proposed Rapacki plan. We should be able to show the unsoundness of such schemes, and at the same time make progress toward mutual understanding of the characteristics of sound measures. Mr. Lovett questioned whether surprise attack talks could be resumed at this time on the broader basis recommended by Mr. Foster. The Berlin and German questions are now crucial ones. He was finding in his contacts with European business people that many of them were looking sympathetically at the Rapacki plan. The Secretary thought that any U.S. studies preparatory to possible resumption of surprise attack talks might take account of and be pointed toward problems of Germany and European security. General Gruenther agreed that studies should be undertaken promptly and said that he assumed such studies were under way in connection with missile negotiations on Berlin and on proposals for “thinning out” in Germany. The Secretary said that there had been studies but only by the Department of Defense and General Norstad rather than by a broader and more flexible group. It was conceivable in present circumstances that some kind of zone in the middle of Europe might be acceptable if that was the price for a reunified Germany. Mr. Foster pointed out that we might well be thinning out our forces in Europe on economy and if this was the case we ought to con­ sider how we could bargain in such a way as to get something in return. Mr. McCloy pointed out that the study so far of the Draper Committee had not shown any disposition on the part of Norstad or the Depart­ ment of Defense to reduce force requirements in Europe. Mr. McCloy, having just returned from a trip to Europe, gave an assessment of his impressions as follows: He found the situation in England uncertain and in some ways reminiscent of the tendency toward compromise so prominent in the days of Neville Chamberlain.
