International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
703
244.
Memorandum From the United States Trade Representative
(Askew) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Color Television Receiver Relief Extension
PROBLEM
By June 30, 1980, you must decide whether to proclaim an exten-
sion of import relief for the U.S. color television industry. We need your
decision before you leave for the Summit because one option recom-
mended is to extend the existing orderly marketing agreements
(OMAs) with Korea and Taiwan, and these would have to be renegoti-
ated by June 30. The United States International Trade Commission
(USITC) unanimously advised that termination of import relief on
color television receivers and subassemblies from Taiwan and Korea
would have an adverse economic effect on the domestic industry. By
law, relief can be extended for a maximum of 3 years and at a level no
greater than that in effect immediately before such extension. Attached
is a paper summarizing further background on this case.2
COMPACT,3 a coalition of eleven labor unions and three pro-
ducers supports a continuation of relief. As of Friday, June 13, you had
received 11 Congressional letters on this issue.
Within the interagency Trade Policy Review Group (TPRG), the
Departments of Labor, State, Treasury, Commerce, Interior, and the USTR
support an extension of relief. The CEA, COWPS, IDCA, and Justice favor
termination.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 51, Memos from President [1]. Confidential. Carter initialed
“C” at the top of the page.
2 Not attached; however, Attachment 1, an undated paper entitled “Background,”
is attached to another copy of Askew’s memorandum in the Carter Library, Staff Office
Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 39,
Hutcheson, Rick [9].
3 Allied Industrial Workers of America, International Union; American Flint Glass
Workers Union of North America; Communications Workers of America; Glass Bottle
Blowers’ Association of the United States and Canada; Independent Radionic Workers of
America; Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO; International Association of Ma-
chinists; International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers; International Union of Elec-
trical, Radio, & Machine Workers; United Furniture Workers of America; and United
Steelworkers of America. [Footnote in the original.]
