902 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 the regime of the Shah, and punish the U.S. President who protected the Shah (an avowed target of Khomeini’s hate). The protraction of the hostage situation achieves some of these objectives specifically; humiliation of USG, and punishment of the President by theoretically reducing his potential for reelection. 3. (C) Based upon ongoing events in Iran, such as the continuing purge of military and political leaders with Western backgrounds, increasing control by IRP, and selection of IRP Islamic hardliner as Prime Minister it is clear that secular (moderate) influence is declining as the power of the hardliner and clerics rises. These influences are not likely to assist in obtaining a political solution to the hostage situation. 4. (TS) Based upon the foregoing the following projection of events is provided for planning purposes. (A) No hostages will be released prior to U.S. Presidential elections unless USG meets Iranian demands or another hostage medical problem occurs. (B) Reporting on possible trials will increase, but actual trials of individuals is unlikely although a “grand jury style” of indictment proceedings is possible. (C) Tempo of activity will pickup with the approach of U.S. elections, reaching a peak in mid-late October. (D) If President Carter loses the election, Khomeini thru the Majlis may direct the incremental release of most of the hostages, retaining some number (5–10) as spies and war criminals, hoping to obtain concessions from the new President in January. However, if President Carter were to be reelected it is extremely doubtful that any of the hostages would be released without significant concessions by the USG. 5. (TS) In summary, the current JTF analysis is that no breakthrough is likely prior to the U.S. Presidential elections and knowledge of actual locations will continue to be extremely restricted while extensive deception actions will continue to be employed.3 3 According to message 0293, August 14, Vaught agreed with this assessment but estimated a 50 percent likelihood of individual hostage trials and incremental release of hostages before the election. Trials would make the location of some hostages available. He added: “A concerted [less than 1 line not declassified] collection program in Iran remains the ‘sine qua non’ for a successful rescue operation.” (Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–07–0002, Records of J–3 DDSO, Box 2, Iranian Hostage Crisis 1979–1984, B270–280 Intelligence Assessment)
