566 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ported to their respective leaders, they will contact Secretary Vance and a decision will be made on when and where another meeting should take place. (I anticipate a meeting in Washington or Europe in about mid-January.) (S) While the tone of the talks was constructive, I do not think we are much closer to solutions on the most difficult issues. Dayan may also have difficulty, as he has in the past, in delivering Begin on some of his proposed compromises. At best, we may be able to resolve the differences over the interpretive notes in another Dayan-Khalil meeting. That would leave the “linkage” issues—the target date and exchange of Ambassadors. I doubt if these points can be resolved without a Carter- Sadat-Begin Summit, perhaps in February. (S) 163. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State and the White House1 Amman, December 30, 1978, 1325Z 9618. Subject: Message to President From King Hussein. (S-entire text) 1. Embassy has been requested to forward following letter to President Carter from King Hussein. 2. Begin text: Dear Mr. President, you were kind enough, some time ago now, to ask me to keep in touch with you on developments in the Middle East. I am writing to you once again in the spirit of friendship that has grown between us, on the Arab-Israeli problem which is the core of instability in this entire area. Mr. President, I do not belittle the genuine desire you have shown and the continuing and relentless efforts you have made for a solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict. I recall that in our meetings2 you have been 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 71, Brzezinski, Chron: 1/1–16/79. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. At the top of the telegram, Carter wrote: “CC Cy & Zbig. I am not interested in any visit by Hussein. No need to answer this for a while. JC.” The telegram was found attached to a January 2, 1979, covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance. (Ibid.) A signed copy of Hussein’s letter is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Jordan: King Hussein, 2/77–2/79. 2 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977– August 1978, Documents 30–31 and 182.
