1322  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
The Secretary took a very strong position in his press conference 
of February 5. We have been looking through the Geneva records for 
the best documentation that we can find based on Wang’s remarks. Of 
course we have the Wang statement about the handling of the prison­
ers being influenced by the state of relations between the two coun­
tries and the tie in between visits by American citizens and the “state 
of relations”. We have found nothing along this line dated later than 
September 28, 1955. I presume neither you nor Dave recalls anything 
later or more specific than this. I understand you got a copy of the 
Secretary’s press conference separately, but to make sure that you have 
it, a copy is enclosed herewith. We still hope to hold the line by voluntary 
action of the press, plus limited administrative action where necessary. 
No acourt action is being considered but we may run into difficulties 
even here with administrative passport action. The line up against us is 
pretty solid, especially since Senator Humphrey has entered the picture 
with a proposed Senate investigation, and since the American Society 
of Newspaper Editors has sent a resolution to the President.
2. We anticipate that your instructions for the February 14 meet­
ing will follow the usual line. We expect you to hammer hard at Wang 
on the subject of the interview of December 28 between O’Neill and 
Huang Hua in which Huang Hua virtually repudiates the Agreed 
Announcement by saying it has no application to the Americans while 
they are imprisoned. I sent you a copy of O’Neill’s report to Prague 
with my last letter of January 30. I hope you received it. As a precaution 
another copy of O’Neill’s report is enclosed herewith.
3. Also enclosed is a working draft of a proposed new press release 
on travel to Communist China. It has been drafted largely with a view 
to clarifying the questions and ambiguities which seem to exist as a 
result of the events of last week. Bear in mind that this has not been 
approved and may undergo further changes if it is put out at all.
4. In answer to the question raised in your letter of January 28 
from Prague, the Department did intend for you to have the copy of 
Instruction A–159 to Taipei as well as the NIE 43–56.
5. We are working hard on a replacement for Osborn. The Embassy 
in London is very shorthanded now in the sections which cover both 
FE and Middle Eastern Affairs. It would be difficult for them to spare 
Ed Martin at all till June. I believe we could get him then. We have your 
telegram 389 agreeing to Dave Popper as an interim measure if we can 
get him. We intend to sound out Geneva on this today and will prob­
ably authorize you to take it up with Gowen while you are in Geneva 
this week. We fear that Geneva will feel that they cannot spare Popper. 
We will work out some solution in any event.
