International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
327
In our January 19 memo to you (copy attached),4 Secretary Blu-
menthal and I identified a number of disadvantages to the Treasury’s
borrowing in foreign currencies. Borrowing from the private market
has even more serious problems. Hence, we rejected this approach for
now and considered it a future option only for borrowing from foreign
official institutions if market conditions did not permit an unwinding
of foreign currency swaps within one or two years.
The Ambassador’s letter suggests that borrowing in Swiss francs at
3½ percent would save money for the Treasury. It would not. Swiss
franc interest rates are generally in the neighborhood of 3½ percent, in
part reflecting the low inflation rate in Switzerland. If we borrow in
Swiss francs, given low Swiss inflation, we would probably have to
repay more dollars because of an appreciating Swiss franc. In general,
borrowing in the currency of foreign countries with low interest rates
would probably cost about as much as in dollars, but the risk is clearly
greater.
The Ambassador has already received a reply through Secretary
Vance to his earlier cable to the Secretary concerning the proposals of
the Swiss bankers.5 The reply gives our view that foreign currency bor-
rowing would not be effective. I suggest you do not reply to the letter
you received, but forward it to Secretary Vance for appropriate
handling.
one which we have examined thoroughly but found both ineffective and undesirable. We
are not prepared to use such securities and hope that discussion of this idea will quickly
die out. Please do not encourage it in any way.” Both letters are in the Department of the
Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat, 1978 Files, 56–83–69.
4 Printed as Document 98.
5 Vance’s reply to telegram 491 from Bern (see footnote 3 above) is contained in tele-
gram 31572 to Bern, February 7. (Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Ex-
ecutive Secretariat, 1978 Files, 56–83–69)
