528
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
and prevent it from actively subverting Iraq’s majority Shia Muslim
population. [4 lines not declassified]
Ideological Basis
The leaders of Iran have consistently believed that their revolution
should be a model for other countries in the region. Former Foreign
Minister Yazdi commented right after the fall of the Shah’s government
in February 1979 that the monarchy’s collapse signaled a “new era
of Islamic struggle triggered by our revolution.” [portion marking not
declassified]
Khomeini, Bani-Sadr, Yazdi, and other Iranian leaders believe that
their revolution was a triumph of Islamic values over the decadence
of a corrupt, repressive, Westernized regime. They stress that the revo-
lution was based on Islamic idealism—a spiritual awakening—which
in turn led to the polarization of society between the enlightened masses
and the corrupt elite. As a result Tehran’s revolutionary lessons are
not exclusively Iranian but common to all Muslim countries and even
all Third World countries. [portion marking not declassified]
Iran’s leaders argue—with some justice—that their revolution is
unique in the modern history of the Middle East. Rather than seizing
power through a military coup, they achieved their goal through the
mass mobilization of society. Their people are first reminded of the
virtues of Islam, which alienates them from their corrupt rulers. Armed
with faith in Allah and the justice of their cause, this argument goes
on, the people as a whole are ready to confront the regime. [portion
marking not declassified]
PLO chief Yasser Arafat, Ayatollah Khomeini’s son Ahmad, and President
Bani-Sadr expressing solidarity with the world’s “oppressed” at the celebra-
tions marking the first anniversary of the Iranian revolution.
The revolutionary leadership believes that if Iran fails to export its
revolution, the country will be isolated in an unfriendly environment
of hostile regimes. Most of these leaders are preoccupied with the
example of Prime Minister Mossadegh’s government in 1953, which,
