2. There has meanwhile been apparent a revulsion of Chinese feeling
against the continuance of the Conference under present circumstances
from which expected financial advantages would accrue to sole benefit of
allied Wu and Chang factions. Violent protests have been made to me by
Eugene Chen in behalf of the Canton regime and by a spokesman of the
Kuominchun. Although previously published in local press, texts of both
these protests were in fact received only yesterday afternoon. The following
are extracts from Chen’s letter addressed to the consul general at Canton,
July 14, for communication to me.
[The extracts have been omitted. For full text of the letter, see page 844 [Pg.
844 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636].]
3. There seemed to me so great a danger that the present unrecognized
Peking regime would misrepresent us as committed to support Wu and the
allied factions as against claims of other factions in China, that I felt it was
a matter of urgency to offset any such impression of partiality by replying
to Chen’s protest, and making public that reply, in terms which would make
clear our freedom from commitment to any particular group and emphasize
our desire in this and related matters to act for the’ benefit of China as a
whole. After consultation with Strawn, I accordingly telegraphed Jenkins as
reported in my July 24, 3 a.m.
4. I regret that, under the necessity of taking immediate action to avert our
being placed in false light of partisanship towards the military coalition now
occupying capital, I was compelled to take a positive position in this
delicate matter without the opportunity of obtaining your instructions; and
my having done so may indeed result in diminishing chances that this
Cabinet might obtain recognition either of our own or of other
governments; and it must be realized that there is at the present time no
reasonable prospect nor any expectation among representative China
[Chinese] of the formation in the immediately foreseeable future of a
government commanding the general support of the country. I felt no
hesitancy in taking the responsibility of this decision, however, in view not
only of known internal dissensions within the coalition and of its apparently
hopeless military situation but because I feel that we could not escape
popular judgment that we were playing favorites with Wu and Chang if we
