632
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Africa
The President expressed concern about the increased use of military
force and of Cuban forces by the USSR in Africa.
President Ceausescu said that Romania has frequently spoken out
against foreign troops on the territory of any independent state. We
do not at all welcome the presence of Cuban troops in Africa, although
formally it was requested by the respective governments. It would be
much better if they were not there.
China
The President expressed interest in President Ceausescu’s forthcom-
ing meetings with the Chinese leaders. We would like to see our
relations with China normalized. Our exchange of information through
our liaison office has been adequate, but we wish to improve our
relations.
It might be useful if, with Chinese knowledge, you could send me
a private letter after your visit and with your views about further steps
we might take to improve relations with China. We need your good
offices in improving that relationship.
President Ceausescu said that the normalization of US-Chinese
relations is proceeding with some difficulty. It might be good to think
of giving a fresh impetus to the process of normalization through
establishing full diplomatic relations. This will require a solution to
the Taiwan question by putting into practice something the US has
already done, i.e., recognizing Taiwan as an integral part of China and
therefore a matter for China alone to resolve. Considering the rapid
rate of change in international affairs, it may be of special importance
to have diplomatic relations with China. China plays and is bound to
play an increasingly important role in international life, to say nothing
of China’s economic potential which would give the United States great
opportunities.
The President said that the major obstacle is the Mutual Defense
Treaty with the Republic of China, and the People’s Republic has not
been prepared to state that the dispute over Taiwan is to be resolved
solely by peaceful means. If we could find a solution to that problem,
we could take rapid action in our relations with China. The Chinese
leaders share our wish to see this problem solved, and if that can be
done, we shall recognize the PRC.
President Ceausescu said the Chinese leaders have stated on more
than one occasion that they seek a peaceful resolution to the Taiwan
problem and I think that is their intention. If the US withdraws there
will be no need to resort to force, considering the close ties between
the people of Taiwan and China. Giving a specific commitment to the
US, however, would be difficult. It was apparent in my talks with
