928 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Brown argued that it may be easy for the allies to do more to defend themselves than to contribute more to the defense of the Persian Gulf. (S) Dr. Brzezinski disagreed. He fears that would lead to more detente, not more defense in Europe. (S) The President said that he wanted to underscore a second major point. In his State of the Union Message he said that an attack on the Persian Gulf would be met by all means including U.S. military force.4 It is obvious that we do not have adequate forces to respond and defeat a Soviet attack in the Persian Gulf. The press was quick to point that out. He said he has made some statements and also authorized Dr. Brzezinski and Harold Brown to make some, pointing out that we would not confine our response to the Persian Gulf alone. We would look for other areas as well. There is no way to defeat the Soviets in the Persian Gulf with conventional forces. We have not made it clear to the world that a Soviet attack there would necessarily lead to a wide conflict, that we would not confine our responses to that region alone. (S) Brown said that it is hard to find other places to threaten the Soviets where the costs would be as great to them as the loss of Persian Gulf oil would be to us. (S) The President admitted that it is hard, but the Soviets have vulnerabilities with their allies and with access to the seas. (S) Brown argued that this is not a credible deterrent unless the threat is of an equal loss. (S) The President said that this may be so, but that the Soviets will be confronting a broader response. Turner’s comments about an economic strategy are good. We have tried that to a degree, not all the way to economic warfare. The President noted that he is not constrained legally in taking economic sanctions. At least this was the case in post-Afghanistan and in connection with Iran. The law gives the President very great power in the economic area. (S) What has been spelled out as the “Carter Doctrine,” the President continued, disavowing any enthusiasm for that label but noting that it has some currency, has not been understood fully in all its ramifications. The press rightly pointed out that we cannot meet the Soviets with conventional forces and match them successfully in the Persian Gulf. (S) David Aaron asked Brown why he believed nuclear weapons would not be a credible deterrence in the Persian Gulf but would be credible in Europe. (S) 4 Carter’s 1980 State of the Union address, delivered on January 23, is in Public Papers: Carter, 1980, pp. 194–200.
