154
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
37.
Address by Secretary of State Vance1
Athens, Georgia, April 30, 1977
Human Rights and Foreign Policy
I speak today about the resolve of this Administration to make the
advancement of human rights a central part of our foreign policy.
Many here today have long been advocates of human rights within
our own society. And throughout our nation that struggle for civil
rights continues.
In the early years of our civil rights movement, many Americans
treated the issue as a “Southern” problem. They were wrong. It was
and is a problem for all of us.
Now, as a nation, we must not make a comparable mistake. Protec-
tion of human rights is a challenge for all countries, not just for a few.
Our human rights policy must be understood in order to be effec-
tive. So today I want to set forth the substance of that policy and the re-
sults we hope to achieve.
Our concern for human rights is built upon ancient values. It looks
with hope to a world in which liberty is not just a great cause, but the
common condition. In the past, it may have seemed sufficient to put
our name to international documents that spoke loftily of human
rights. That is not enough. We will go to work, alongside other people
and governments, to protect and enhance the dignity of the individual.
Let me define what we mean by “human rights.”
First, there is the right to be free from governmental violation of
the integrity of the person. Such violations include torture; cruel, in-
human, or degrading treatment or punishment; and arbitrary arrest or
imprisonment. And they include denial of fair public trial and invasion
of the home.
1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, May 23, 1977, pp. 505–508. Under an April 26
cover memorandum, Brzezinski sent Vance a handwritten note, dated April 26, from the
President. In it, Carter wrote: “The Law Day speech is very good. I’ll do a much broader
speech at Notre Dame. Good luck in Georgia. They’ll like you & the speech. J.C.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 17, State: 4/77)
Vance delivered the address as part of the Law Day ceremonies at the University of
Georgia School of Law. The Department transmitted the text of the address in telegram
98034 to all diplomatic posts, April 30; the telegram is printed in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 39. In his
memoirs, Vance explained the purpose of his address: “I wanted to make clear the shape
and substance of our human rights policy, and the fact that it was universal in applica-
tion, yet flexible enough to be adapted to individual situations.” (Hard Choices, p. 46)
