48
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
a. A general overhauling of the Iranian intelligence and security
services.
b. Greater influence upon the Iranian press.
c. The possible establishment of a clandestine radio station in Iran.
d. Greatly intensified political warfare.
e. Accelerated organization, with better prospects of success, of re-
sistance groups and escape and evasion nets for operations in the event
of Soviet occupation.
This expanded scale of CIA operations would not be possible of ac-
complishment covertly without the pretext and cover which only a
greatly increased overt program would provide.
CIA’S ROLE IN IRAN
1. In view of the seriousness of the Iranian situation, CIA is striving
to do what it can to help reduce the possibility of the country’s falling
into Soviet hands and to foster the establishment of an enduring pro-
Western alignment. Existing conditions are such, however, as to make
all CIA operations exceptionally difficult and uncertain of outcome. Of
the various circumscribing factors, the most serious is a mounting dis-
trust of the West, including the US, which makes it almost impossible
to send additional covert agents into the country, restricts the move-
ments and effectiveness of those already there, severely limits the
number of Iranians willing to cooperate with the US in clandestine op-
erations, and makes the people in general unreceptive, if not downright
hostile, to US overtures. US policy has not succeeded in demonstrating
to the Iranians that the US is genuinely interested in their country or in
convincing them that their salvation lies in firm alignment with the
West, and not in rapprochement with the USSR nor in an untenable
course of neutrality.
2. It is believed that the conditions noted above will obtain so long
as US assistance to Iran is maintained at the present rate or at a rate
which is not substantially more vigorous than at present. It is question-
able whether the program provided for in NSC 1073 even if fully and
speedily executed would suffice to reverse the unfavorable trend.
Under these circumstances, CIA can do little more than intensify its
psychological-political warfare campaign in an effort to prevent or re-
tard further deterioration of the Iranian situation. Specifically, CIA is
currently augmenting the following existing programs in Iran:
a. Providing for increased subsidization of newspapers, for the
preclusive buying of newsprint or printing facilities, and (if circum-
stances warrant) for the establishment of new newspapers. These meas-
3 Document 6.
