1957 1317 to American prisoners. We anticipate that this will give you plenty of material for the February 14 meeting. 5. We released our statement on Chinese Communist failure to release imprisoned Americans on January 29. A copy is enclosed for your files. We are also sending a copy to Osborn. We thought Chou En-lai’s statement in Nepal about a possible “exchange of prisoners” gave us a good occasion to issue the statement. However it has not received as much play in the press as we hoped for. 6. There has been a new development in the Powell case. Having been authorized by the judge to travel to Communist China as an officer of the court, leaving his passport in Hong Kong, the defense attorney, Wirin, now claims to have received a cable from his contact in Peiping stating that he will not be admitted without a validated pass­ port and that the United States Government should communicate with the Chinese Communist authorities concerning his travel. (Copies of the defense motions are enclosed.) Wirin is reported to have mentioned orally to the judge that the Geneva talks would be a suitable channel for communicating with the Communists concerning his travel. The Department of Justice attorney who is handling the Washington end of the case informed us that the judge categorically turned down Wirin’s request for a court order that his passport be validated for travel to Communist China and North Korea. The judge said he had no author­ ity to issue such an order. The judge is reportedly unsympathetic to Wirin’s latest gambit. He has asked that appropriate government authorities provide him with an affidavit setting forth the United States Government’s position with regard to the Chinese Communist and North Korean regimes, travel by Americans to those areas and the facts concerning the Geneva talks. We are preparing material on these sub­ jects for Justice, which will then prepare the affidavit. A hearing is set for February 2, when the judge will consider this information. It seems clear that the Chinese Communists are using the Powell case as another lever to compel a change in our policy regarding travel to Mainland China. They probably feel that they are in a strong position in this case, since if the U.S. Government blocks Wirin’s travel to Communist China, there is a good chance that the case against the Powells will be dismissed. Thus, whichever way we move, the Communist movement would stand to gain. Peiping’s tactics in this case strongly suggest that they are not interested in utilizing the Powell case to revive the germ warfare charges against the U.S. If they were, they would certainly be more inclined to facilitate Wirin’s travel. Their propaganda, too, has supported this conclusion, since they have played up the Powell case as another attempt by the U.S. to persecute journalists who try to tell the truth about Communist China. Germ warfare has been barely men­ tioned. We are giving Justice the information we have on the various
