Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I assistance program.11 Energy will be a major focus of the work of the institute as it both helps strengthen scientific and technological capacities in developing countries and also identifies domestic American research relevant to development abroad. And we are providing substantial direct and indirect financial assistance to help developing countries acquire the energy technology they need. The Export-Import Bank authorized approximately $2 billion in energy-related loans and guarantees to developing countries in fiscal year 1978. This has produced more than $3 billion in U.S. exports of energy equipment. The World Bank, to which we are the largest contributor, has already provided about $10 billion for financing of conventional power projects. And the other development banks also are active in this area. But we must and will do more. • We will respond positively to additional requests from developing nations for help in evaluating their energy resources, needs, and strategies. • We will encourage the regional development banks to expand their energy programs and to consider new approaches to encourage further private capital flows into mineral and energy development in their regions. • President Carter and other heads of state at the Bonn economic summit last July12 pledged to increase assistance for harnessing the vast energy potential of the Sun, the wind, the oceans, and other renewable resources. We are now in the process of formulating a coordinated effort which will be discussed at the Tokyo summit in June.13 • With strong U.S. backing, the United Nations will hold a World Conference on New and Renewable Energy in 1981. We intend to play an active role in that effort. • We will increase our support for research, development, and training efforts of national and regional energy institutions in developing countries. We will encourage other nations to join us in this effort. • We will also work with other nations to determine whether it would be useful to supplement the work of such institutions. Together we will seek to identify gaps in current efforts, and ways to fill them, including the possible establishment of new institutions. For example,
