March 1952–February 1953 281 derstand mtg is being arranged this afternoon between Qavam and Ala. 6. We are somewhat disturbed at situation which is developing as result of inability of Qavam and Shah to cooperate fully at this critical moment. While Tudeh is strengthening its position by acquiring allies in the disgruntled Natl Front, Qavam is apparently sitting idly at his house and Shah is hesitating to take needed decisions. 7. I hope later this evening to be able to discuss new developments with Middleton who is out of town today. 8. We are hopeful that with aid Ala, Shah and Qavam will come to effective working agreement. In meantime shld not (rpt not) slacken our efforts to perfect arrangements for extending financial aid to Iran on urgent basis. Henderson 92. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, July 21, 1952, 5 p.m. 308. 1. Nine o’clock this morn emissary from Qavam called to inform me he had good news. Qavam had recd msg last night that Shah wld like see him early this morn and Qavam had understood from msg that Shah finally prepared give him necessary powers. Emissary said he understood Qavam already on way Palace. At 11 o’clock this emissary telephoned that apparently there had been some mistake. After waiting several hours for expected call from Palace Qavam had become discouraged and had again relapsed into state of complete passivity. Since center Tehran was at time engaged in what amounted to civil war, it seemed to me fantastic that PriMin shld be sitting passively at his home as result some kind misunderstanding with court. I therefore told Ala by telephone what I had heard. Ala said Shah had decided not (rpt not) to talk to Qavam this morn but to one of Qavam’s lieutenants; that Shah had told this lieutenant that he cld not (rpt not) just now (rpt now) grant powers Qavam desired; that Shah’s attitude was being explained to Qavam and it was his understanding that Qavam wld accept 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.13/7–2152. Secret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 12:04 p.m.
