March 1952–February 1953
447
their acknowledgment of the value to Iran of Point Four aid would
probably check any inclination they might have either to terminate
Point Four aid or to expel the military missions.
40. Iran’s official relations with the USSR will probably remain
cool and guarded. Although both governments will seek to increase
trade between Iran and the Soviet Bloc, the National Front will almost
certainly avoid any action which would subject Iran to Soviet domina-
tion. On the other hand, it will not wish to destroy the USSR’s value as a
counterweight to the West. In the UN, Iran will probably take a neu-
tralist, anti-colonialist position and support any attempt to establish a
neutral Arab-Asian bloc.
41. For its part, the USSR appears to believe that the Iranian situa-
tion is developing favorably to its objectives. While continuing its sup-
port of Tudeh and its violent radio attacks on the government and the
Shah, the Soviet Union is unlikely to take any drastic action to influence
the Iranian situation during 1953 except in the unlikely event of a far
more serious deterioration of Iranian internal stability than is foreseen
in this estimate.
42. The USSR, however, has the capability for greatly increasing its
interference in Iran at any time, to the detriment of US security in-
terests. Its capabilities include: greatly increased support of disaffection
and subversion in Azerbaijan, including the infiltration of Soviet Azer-
baijanis; greatly increased financial support for Tudeh; offer of eco-
nomic and financial inducements to Iran; stirring up of the Kurds; and
heavy pressure for the removal of the US missions, legalization of
Tudeh, and removal of legal bans on the Tudeh press. The USSR would
probably refrain from use of Soviet armed forces in Iran, because of the
possible global consequences of such intervention. Soviet intervention
short of the use of Soviet armed forces would probably not result
during 1953 in the direct overthrow of the Iranian Government or the
detachment of Azerbaijan but could have a seriously adverse effect on
the stability and integrity of Iran and on US security interests there.
43. Negotiations on the future of the USSR’s Caspian Sea Fisheries
concession, which expires 31 January 1953, may provide an indication
of a change in Soviet-Iranian relations, although both Iran and the
USSR will probably confine themselves at most to hard bargaining.
