800  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
intercontinental striking power. Because such comparisons are essen-
tially static in nature, however, they cannot fully reflect differences 
between the two forces and their capabilities that arise from qualita-
tive asymmetries. These differences can be better illuminated by using 
an analytical technique—­quasi-­dynamic analysis—­that has been an 
integral part of this Estimate for the past several years. This analysis 
addresses the potential of one side’s ICBMs to attack the retaliatory 
forces of the other side and then compares the residual destructive 
potentials. The respective arsenals are reduced by subtracting those 
ICBMs needed for the attack and those retaliatory forces destroyed in 
the attack; the ICBMs of the side attacked are assumed to ride out the 
attack without being launched. The residuals are on-­pad potentials, cal-
culated without considering such factors as specific targeting doctrines, 
command and control degradation, attrition by air defenses, and other 
operational variables.
45. The calculations in the analysis do not attempt to simulate 
actual conflict outcomes. Rather, they seek to display comparative capa-
bilities and limitations in a manner most relevant to nuclear deterrence 
in its most elementary form—­that is, assured destruction. The analysis 
illustrates the retaliatory destructive potential that a side contemplat-
ing an attack would have to expect to survive on the side attacked. It 
also compares this surviving destructive potential with the destructive 
potential remaining to the attacking side, a consideration important to 
both sides.
46. The measures employed in the analysis—­lethal area poten-
tial and hard-­target potential—­describe the remaining and surviving 
potentials of each side to apply a prescribed overpressure over a wide 
area or to attack representative hardened silos on the other side.10 The 
analysis makes no estimate of which of these or other capabilities, or 
what mix of them, national leaders would elect in retaliatory or second 
strikes. But the comparison of the US and Soviet potentials does give 
some feel for the options that would be available to national leaders, 
and the composition of the residual potentials provides insights about 
the suitability of the forces for rapid or delayed response.
47. There is a view in the Intelligence Community that the quasi-­
dynamic residual analysis in this Estimate produces misleading results 
with respect to trends in the strategic balance, sheds little light on the 
question of deterrence, and comprises a net assessment from the US 
perspective which is not a proper function of intelligence. According 
to this view, only analysis of comprehensive two-­sided exchanges can 
10 The Soviet hard-­target potential is gauged against representative US silos hardened to 
[text not declassified] The US potential is gauged against representative Soviet silos of hardnesses 
[text not declassified]. [Footnote is in the original.]
