North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 political cohesiveness to the area and a possible framework for future security cooperation. The Japanese have announced their own large technical cooperation and aid package for the ASEAN region as they seek to protect their markets and sources of raw materials. The United States has given only modest support for the regional institutions; allowing the Japanese complete freedom in the area may risk U.S. markets for exports and lose attractive investment opportunities for U.S. business. Africa: Regional integration may be the only means of ensuring economic survival, let alone progress, for some of the poorer and politically insecure nations of the African continent. Especially given the mounting tensions in Rhodesia and South Africa, regional cooperation may be the only means of strengthening the economies and political security of countries such as Zambia, Botswana, Tanzania and Zaire. Once Zimbabwe and Namibia attain independence, substantial new opportunities for regional economic cooperation will arise which should be planned now and grasped when the independence comes if regional stability is to be maintained. Another promising venture in Africa is the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), strongly backed by Nigeria and the Ivory Coast and linking 16 anglophone and francophone West African states. We could evidence our support for regional cooperation in Africa by molding the special requirements fund and the Zimbabwe Development Fund toward regional development in southern Africa, supporting the African Development Fund in regional development projects and encouraging the new ECOWAS fund. As you examine the various strategies put forward to you, I recommend that you request a further study and options concerning assistance to regional integration efforts in the developing world. Recommendation: That you direct the NSC to chair a study and prepare options for you on assistance to regional economic groupings.4 4 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation, writing below it: “Within existing AID study & ’79 budget effort. J.”
