LXII  Summaries of Compilations
In March 1960, retired General Edwin S. Clark convinced President 
Eisenhower to authorize him to make a secret visit to Cuidad Trujillo 
(Santo Domingo) to convince Trujillo to step down from power. Clark’s 
unofficial scheme contemplated creating a foundation funded by the 
money amassed by the Trujillo family during its 30 years of rule. To be 
administered by former Latin American and American presidents, the 
fund would be used for the benefit of the Dominican Republic. It was 
designed to prevent confiscation of the Trujillo fortune by a successor 
government and assure that Trujillo did not take his vast fortune with 
him into exile. (DR–16, 17)
Trujillo’s support in the Dominican Republic was weakening rap-
idly, according to U.S. intelligence assessments. (DR–18, 20) When the 
situation was brought to the attention of the National Security Council 
in April 1960, there was general concern that the U.S. policy of building 
a moderate potential transition government might be too little and too 
late. Vice President Nixon worried that it was the “old story” being 
repeated: the pro-Castro elements with definite objectives were the 
only minority capable of strong leadership. Nixon recommended that 
the United States consider intervention if this group threatened to come 
to power. The Council agreed that the United States must be prepared 
to take rapid action. (DR–19)
General Clark returned to Washington from conversations with 
Trujillo in late March 1960 without a promise from the Generalissimo 
to retire. Meeting with Secretary of State Herter and General Clark on 
April 25, President Eisenhower discussed the possibility of “a plan for 
removing Trujillo from control of the country, and to establish in his 
position a controlling junta which would immediately call for free elec-
tions and make an attempt to get the country on a truly democratic 
basis.” (DR–20)
When the National Security Council next considered the question 
of the Dominican Republic in July 1960, Eisenhower concluded that 
the Trujillo dictatorship was seriously deflecting attention from the 
real problem in Latin America, Fidel Castro. (DR–25) It was difficult 
to brand Castro a dictator and call for sanctions against him as long as 
Trujillo was in power. The new Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs, Thomas Mann, solicited advice from Deputy Chief of 
Mission Henry Dearborn who was the highest level diplomatic official 
now that U.S. relations with the Dominican Republic were suspended 
in conjunction with an OAS decision that the Dominican Republic had 
attempted to assassinate President Betancourt of Venezuela. Invited 
to give his “very personal and confidential” appraisal, Dearborn sug-
gested that as long as Trujillo remained in the Dominican Republic—­as 
Governor of Santiago province or “dog-­catcher”—­he would domi-
nate the country and there would be no chance for a true opposition.
