Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III the fund’s ability to borrow. Such funds could not be withdrawn by individual ICAs. From a financial point of view the desirability of such contributions is related to the deposit ratio issue discussed below. The lower this ratio the greater the desirability of such contributions. This approach has the attraction of offering a limited compromise on the central source issue—still the major conceptual gap between our approach and that of the G–77—and providing the fund with minimal direct resources to assure its continued operation in the event of default by a participating ICA or participating members of an ICA. Unless we could convince the Congress that such resources were essential to the fund’s operations and would not be used for the benefit of ICAs of which we were not a member, such support would probably not be authorized. And even if we could provide such assurances, the need to obtain Congressional support would be a major constraint in introducing the proposal. And were Congress to go along, we might expect that these appropriations would be at the expense of other foreign assistance programs. 11. Lower the proportion of cash ICA resources which must be deposited with the fund. By thus reducing initial budgetary outlays, this step would make the fund more attractive to members of ICAs. But there is then a risk that if support for the back-up mechanism ever shifted from callable capital pledged through ICAs to direct contributions, we could end up with a fund that a) required substantial amounts of direct resources and b) required participating countries to support borrowing on behalf of ICAs of which they are not members. To avoid this problem, we would have to seek agreement on the nature of the back-up mechanism before settling the deposit ratio and other basic issues. 12. Endow the fund with an overdraft within the World Bank or IMF that would be activated in the event of an IMF-certified recession and if the common fund had exhausted its commercial borrowing capacity. This step would be consistent with our position that there are benefits to all countries in sustaining production and employment by propping up commodity prices in the event of a severe decline. When this idea was raised earlier this year with other industrialized countries, it was generally opposed and we have not discussed it further in the OECD framework. The objections raised to the proposal were: a) the existence of such a facility would tend to reduce the incentive for ICAs to raise the appropriate amount of their own financing when the agreements are negotiated; b) the ICAs themselves might have to be amended in order to obtain financing significantly in excess of 100% of their negotiated financial requirements;
