862
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the fund’s ability to borrow. Such funds could not be withdrawn by in-
dividual ICAs. From a financial point of view the desirability of such
contributions is related to the deposit ratio issue discussed below. The
lower this ratio the greater the desirability of such contributions. This
approach has the attraction of offering a limited compromise on the
central source issue—still the major conceptual gap between our ap-
proach and that of the G–77—and providing the fund with minimal di-
rect resources to assure its continued operation in the event of default
by a participating ICA or participating members of an ICA. Unless we
could convince the Congress that such resources were essential to the
fund’s operations and would not be used for the benefit of ICAs of
which we were not a member, such support would probably not be au-
thorized. And even if we could provide such assurances, the need to
obtain Congressional support would be a major constraint in intro-
ducing the proposal. And were Congress to go along, we might expect
that these appropriations would be at the expense of other foreign
assistance programs.
11. Lower the proportion of cash ICA resources which must be de-
posited with the fund. By thus reducing initial budgetary outlays, this
step would make the fund more attractive to members of ICAs. But
there is then a risk that if support for the back-up mechanism ever
shifted from callable capital pledged through ICAs to direct contribu-
tions, we could end up with a fund that a) required substantial
amounts of direct resources and b) required participating countries to
support borrowing on behalf of ICAs of which they are not members.
To avoid this problem, we would have to seek agreement on the nature
of the back-up mechanism before settling the deposit ratio and other
basic issues.
12. Endow the fund with an overdraft within the World Bank or
IMF that would be activated in the event of an IMF-certified recession
and if the common fund had exhausted its commercial borrowing ca-
pacity. This step would be consistent with our position that there are
benefits to all countries in sustaining production and employment by
propping up commodity prices in the event of a severe decline. When
this idea was raised earlier this year with other industrialized coun-
tries, it was generally opposed and we have not discussed it further in
the OECD framework. The objections raised to the proposal were:
a) the existence of such a facility would tend to reduce the incen-
tive for ICAs to raise the appropriate amount of their own financing
when the agreements are negotiated;
b) the ICAs themselves might have to be amended in order to ob-
tain financing significantly in excess of 100% of their negotiated finan-
cial requirements;
