1955  527
2. Towards end of meeting Wang pressed me very hard with 
some obvious but unknown purpose in mind to commit myself to 
discussion his draft at next meeting while flatly and categorically 
rejecting our draft as any basis for further discussion. Although pur­
pose unknown I was quite clear that he had some specific move in 
mind if I had given flat negative reply. I of course avoided any com­
mitment, repeatedly replying in response to his demands for flat yes 
or no that I had been and would continue striving for agreement on 
a text while expressing disappointment lack his concrete responses 
to specific questions concerning wording to which they objected in 
our draft.
3. I opened meeting with statement on implementation accordance 
para one Deptel 1281 to which he made brief reply along usual lines.
4. I followed with long prepared statement on renunciation. Only 
somewhat new point I made was that these talks were normal and nat­
ural way discussing and settling differences. I said that if his govern­
ment is as desirous of peaceful settlement disputes as my government, 
it will enable him make full and honest efforts negotiate and discuss 
differences here before raising question terminating these talks and 
substituting another method of negotiation. “When we have succeeded 
in resolving questions we are called upon to deal with here, then our 
governments will naturally be in better position consider what further 
steps might be taken.” 
5. Wang replied with long prepared statement repeating for­
mer arguments rejecting our draft, adding nothing new. However he 
included statement with respect to trade embargo rejecting “US pro­
posal for lifting trade embargo in exchange for PRC agreement US draft 
announcement on renunciation of force.”
6. In my reply and during much give and take I attempted keep 
discussion focussed upon concrete discussion our draft but he avoided 
all discussion our draft beyond that contained his original prepared 
statement and insisted on coming back his draft.
7. Next meeting Thursday, December 1.
8. Departing for Prague this evening, returning Tuesday, Novem­
ber 29.
Gowen
