414  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The President then stated a basic viewpoint with regard to the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff, which is that a staff should be organized as the 
boss wants it organized. Minute organizational details he described as 
“straining at a gnat.” Regardless of the wording of the law, the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff are direct subordinates of the Secretary Defense—­they 
are his military staff. He recognized that the Joint Chiefs are probably 
concerned most about being placed under the Assistant Secretaries. 
General Twining assured the President that any arrangement will work 
and that this disagreement as to organization is largely a matter of pres­
tige; the President then went on to summarize his conviction that in 
the defense of the United States the Joint Chiefs of Staff are far more 
important as a corporate body than as a collection of individual Service 
Chiefs; that if he were the Secretary of Defense he would not object to 
anything designed to maintain the dignity of the Joint Chiefs; and that 
the Joint Chiefs serve the Secretary of Defense primarily.
After Admiral Burke reinforced General Twining’s opinion as 
to the importance of the Joint Chiefs of Staff vis-­a-­vis the Assistant 
Secretaries, General Taylor showed the President a diagram indicat­
ing an organization with the Joint Chiefs carried separately from the 
Office of the Secretary of Defense. To this the President commented 
that military chiefs have always been technically considered advis­
ers to the President (ever since 1903); but he is anxious that the Joint 
Chiefs be recognized as primarily a military staff for the Secretary of 
Defense. Therefore, he criticized drawing the line on the chart from 
the Joint Chiefs to the President equally as dark as that drawn from 
the Joint Chiefs to the Secretary of Defense. (The line to the Secretary 
of Defense should be solid, indicating direct line of responsibility.) He 
admitted that the Joint Chiefs do have an additional responsibility 
and stated that he will always see the Chief of a Service on matters of 
importance to that Service.
In summation, the President stated that he would solve the organi­
zation diagram by drawing two boxes, one for the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
and the other for the Office of the Secretary of Defense. These two boxes 
should be joined with a dotted line, indicating close coordination, and 
he did not object to another dotted line running from the Joint Chiefs 
to the President. He recognized that the problem that would exist if the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff were incorporated directly into the Department of 
Defense office in that Assistant Secretaries might be prone to oversu­
pervise. He stated further that Assistant Secretaries are created in order 
to make the job of the Joint Chiefs easier; and are not designed to be 
their superiors.
*******
The President then proceeded to a problem corollary to that just 
discussed. He said that he did not see why we continue to use the
