Afghanistan 321 This is equally known by us and by the Afghanistani Government which sent us these requests.4 I want to once more stress that the purpose of the limited Soviet contingent in Afghanistan has only one goal—to provide assistance in repulsing the acts of external aggression, which have been taking place for a prolonged time and have now taken on even greater scale.5 It is absolutely impermissible, [Also entirely unacceptable] and not in conformance with actuality, is the claim (accusation) [assertion], which appears in your message that the Soviet Union allegedly did something to overthrow the Government of Afghanistan. I must with all certainty [definiteness] stress that the change in the Afghanistani government was the result of [carried out by] the Afghanistanis themselves and only by them. Ask the Afghanistani Government itself [about this].6 Also not corresponding to reality is that which is said in your message in relation to the fate of the families of the former leaders of Afghanistan.7 We have at our disposal information contradicting [Information at our disposal refutes] the information you have received. I must further clearly state to you that the Soviet military contingents did not take any military action against Afghanistan and we clearly do not intend to do so.8 You have reproached us in your message that we did not consult with the USA Government in reference to the Afghanistani matter before introducing our military contingents into Afghanistan.9 Permit us to ask you—did you consult with us prior to beginning the massive concentration of naval forces near Iran and in the region of the Persian 4 The alternate translation of the last sentence reads: “We, the Soviet Union, know this; it is known in equal measure by the Afghanistani side, which sent us such requests.” 5 The alternate translation of this paragraph reads: “I want to once more stress that the sending of limited Soviet contingents to Afghanistan has only one goal—to provide help and assistance in repulsing acts of external aggresion, which have been taking place for a prolonged time and have now taken on even greater scale.” In the left margin beside this paragraph, Carter wrote: “from where?” 6 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “SU brought in [illegible] invasion force, the new puppet leader.” 7 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “They’re dead or they’re new SU puppets.” 8 The alternate translation of this paragraph reads: “I must further clearly inform you that the Soviet military contingents have not taken any military action against the Afghanistan side and we of course do not intend to take such action.” 9 The alternate translation of this sentence reads: “You have reproached us in your message for our not consulting with the USA Government on Afghanistani matters, prior to introducing our military contingents into Afghanistan.”
