ample sense of the word.
The advantage of this suggestion is understood and Peru applauds it; but
even more than the demilitarization of the territories, what is needed in
America, as in the rest of the world is to diffuse or impose the spirit of
peace and solidarity between the peoples, and above all that of justice in the
order of their relations, because without the basis of justice nothing lasting
can be built.
With the aforesaid suggestion comes also the one of declaring the city of
Arica a free port by means of a tripartite convention making arrangements
to insure that no tariff or differential duties be established between the three
countries, Chile, Peru and Bolivia and that the same be done about the
railroad or about any other means of communication within the same
territory which now is composed of the provinces of Tacna and Arica. This
suggestion is not clear enough. Is the port to be free only for Peru, Chile
and Bolivia or it is [is it] to be free to all commerce of the world?
The memorandum of the Honorable Secretary of State continues stating in
short, the reasons which in his high opinion better the idea of ceding the
territories of Tacna and Arica to Bolivia. He believes that they offer the way
to substitute the dispositions which have not been complied with of article
three of the Treaty of Ancon and end the controversy which has existed
since the treaty was signed; that is to say that he recognizes the necessity of
revising the Treaty of Ancon from the moment that he recognizes that
clause number three has not been fulfilled. The reasoning ratifies and
strengthens and exalts the Lassiter motion.
The proposal of the Honorable Secretary of State does not end the
controversy nevertheless, his Memorandum far from simplifying the
solution complicates it.
It is affirmed in the Memorandum that the proposal it contains cannot
wound any national susceptibility neither Peruvian nor Chilean, because
neither one of these two countries makes any concessions to the other. Peru,
it is convenient to state, would not only make concessions but would be the
one to cede its territories of Tacna and Arica to Bolivia, leaving Chile the
