September 1953–December 1954
817
into a force which, under the leadership of the Shah, can unquestion-
ably dominate the internal situation so as to leave no doubt as to its
ability to prevent civil disorder and preserve order and security; and at
the same time act as a defensive screen for Iran’s northern frontier. It is
not suggested that an attempt should be made to build up the military
strength of Iran to the degree which would be necessary to provide the
capability of resisting overt military aggression. There should however
be sufficient military capacity over and above that required for the
maintenance of internal order to provide a border control force capable
of dealing with irregular and covert forms of violation of Iran’s territo-
rial integrity.
6. The manner in which this military assistance program is negoti-
ated with Iran will have a very important effect on its value to the
United States. We are convinced that for the United States to obtain full
benefit from such a program it must appear to the Iranian nation that
the Shah has been primarily responsible for its successful negotiation.
This will cement the loyalty of the strengthened Army to the one ele-
ment in Iran (namely the Shah) that we feel is unequivocally committed
to the West.
340.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, October 30, 1953, 1 p.m.
1004. During talk which I had with Shah October 27, he told me he
would be grateful if I would request members Embassy staff Tehran re-
frain from political discussions with officers Iranian armed forces. He
anxious these officers not become accustomed discuss political matters.
I told him I would make request but would not be frank if I did not
point out Iranian Army officers frequently approached not only
members Embassy staff but myself to discuss political matters. For in-
stance, Batmangilich, Chief Staff, few days ago had urged me have talk
with Baqai, for whom he expressed greatest admiration, and even of-
fered make appointment for me with Baqai. I said Chief Staff and his
two deputies on various occasions had tried persuade members Amer-
ican representation Iran that Baqai one of great men of country who
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/10–3053. Secret;
Security Information. Repeated to London. Received at 9:34 a.m.
