“1. No discussion of principle bearing on the conventional rights of the Powers can be accepted before the complete reestablishment of order. “2. Such a revision cannot be envisaged except in so far as the Chinese Government conscious and mindful of its responsibilities will seem to be in a position to assume effectively the obligations which are incumbent upon a sovereign state for the protection of foreigners throughout entire territory of a thoroughly open China. “3. As soon as the reestablishment of order is effected the conference for the revision of the customs can be evoked at once. “It will be given power to examine, after the accomplishment of its normal task, the conditions under which China will be able to obtain gradually in the future new customs agencies until it recovers its customs autonomy. “4. The conditions under which China will gradually be able to obtain the relinquishment of extraterritoriality will be examined before its adjournment by the commission on extraterritoriality naturally qualified for this work.” In a later report of August 6 the American Embassy at Paris stated20 that it had been informed by the Chief of the French Cabinet, Mr. Leger: “That when the French Government had received the draft declaration proposed by the British prior to the receipt of our text, they had informed the British their text was acceptable suggesting only a slight modification which he indicated had reference to the reestablishment of China’s financial credit. He added that they had later received the Japanese draft; that as the differences of opinion involved only the preamble or declaration of principle he presumed these differences would be thrashed out in Peking. Leger further said they considered our draft too mild and liberal in tone; that the British was perhaps too sharp and states that French Government therefore favored the Japanese draft as a good compromise.” KELLOGG 19 Telegram not printed. 19 Telegram not printed. 19 Telegram not printed. 20 Telegram not printed. 20 Telegram not printed.
