Afghanistan
179
threat, both in its current stage and if it worsens.3 ([classification marking
and handling restriction not declassified])
As opposition to the Afghan government has increased over the
past year, the Soviets have gradually augmented their military advisory
presence. Early this year, at least five generals and an estimated 750–
1000 military advisors were stationed in the Kabul area, assisting newly
promoted officers in the Ministry of Defense and training Afghan
recruits. Since then, the Soviet presence has grown to at least 2,500.
Moreover, the role of Soviet troops has increasingly changed from a
mere advisory one to active participation in and supervision of a wide
variety of activity including logistics and combat planning functions
as far down as some regimental and battalion-level units. They are
apparently heavily involved in guiding Afghan combat operations, as
well as logistics and administration. Some unconfirmed reports allege
that Soviet helicopter pilots, with Afghan co-pilots, have flown strike
missions against the insurgents and that Soviet tank personnel have
participated in combat operations. In addition, Soviet advisors have
reportedly suffered about 80 casualties. If these reports are true, the
Soviets are also actively participating in combat on a small and limited
scale with Afghan units. ([classification marking and handling restriction
not declassified])
[less than 1 line not declassified] in early September that the Soviets
have moved up to 3,600 troops into Kabul within the past two or three
weeks to protect Soviet facilities and personnel there. The information
has not been corroborated, but Embassy Kabul has submitted similar
reports from two other sources in the diplomatic community.4 It is
possible that such a force, without heavy equipment, could have been
brought into the city from the USSR undetected by the US, particularly
if this was done incrementally over a few weeks or so as part of the
ongoing airlift of material for Afghanistan. Such a movement of forces
by the Soviets would suggest increased security precautions and an
escalation of Soviet involvement beyond an advisory role. The Soviets
might consider such a move into Kabul to be prudent in view of the
uprisings that have occurred in Kabul this year and the continuing
3 The mission of the Deputy Chief of the Soviet General Staff, General I.G.
Pavlovskiy, to Afghanistan, August–October 1979, was reported in telegram 6604 from
Kabul, September 2. The Embassy surmised that the visit of the high-ranking general
possibly signaled a Soviet decision to lay a “detailed contingency groundwork for the
future intervention of Soviet forces in Afghanistan.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790400–1145)
4 The clandestine source reporting of early September was not found. [text, 1 line,
and citation not declassified] In telegram 6672 from Kabul, September 6, the Embassy
estimated the number of Soviet military advisers at between 3,000 and 3,500. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790410–0099)
