International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
555
signatory countries and non-covered market sectors, this merged aim
might shift around another interested group who will be working ac-
tively with or against us.
G. Specialized Programs for Sensitive Industrialized Sectors
A number of sectors would respond favorably to across-the-board
programs that would reflect genuine government concern about their
needs and an appreciation of some of their international difficulties.
Such sectors are steel, chemicals, textiles, and perhaps non-ferrous
metals. The individual elements of these programs have already been
developed within STR and other departments or are anticipated, but
they need to be packaged and communicated as a cohesive series of ac-
tion steps to obtain positive public impact.
H. Continued Export Effort
The recent program of the President to expand the U.S. export ef-
forts could be reinforced as a part of the overall trade package. This is of
keen interest to Congress where there is considerable sentiment that
more needs to be done. This interest was emphasized during MTN
briefing sessions recently in Geneva with Representatives Ullman and
Gradison and Senator Moynihan.
I. Automatic Import Licensing
In the current international economic environment, we face
problems of rapid import buildups in sensitive industries in unpredict-
able amounts from communist countries. Unfortunately, our ability to
monitor these rapid shifts has not increased appreciably over the years.
In fact, many in Congress and in industry complain that trade informa-
tion in sensitive products is neither good enough nor up to date.
Therefore, we should take advantage of the trade agreement’s uni-
form rules on automatic import licensing to establish an import li-
censing system of our own. Through this system, we could require an
import license, which would be nondiscriminatorily and automatically
granted, for shipments from communist countries and for sensitive
products. In the case of sensitive products, this would allow the gov-
ernment some early warning on potential escape clause cases. In a situ-
ation such as this year’s textile import surge, this system would have al-
lowed us to get a handle on where the explosive growth was coming
from.
As we have experienced over the past few years, our economy is
vulnerable to exports from communist countries. Their labor situation
and lack of relevant cost structure, combined with their hunger for
hard currencies, causes apprehension of potential trade disruption and
unemployment among domestic industry and labor. An automatic im-
port licensing system would enable us to monitor all key movements,
