March 1952–February 1953
383
2. The Government believes that once the British have gone that
the spying and attempts by the British Government to control Iran will
be reduced, but hardly eliminated. Bagai ascribed to pro-British officers
of the Iranian Government the failure of the Government to collect in-
come or duty taxes. He coupled a combination of those men and the
premature Mosadeq demand for rural reform as the basis for the re-
fusal of the large landowners to pay the taxes levied on them.
3. He professed to believe quite sincerely that the American Gov-
ernment has been the tool of the British in Iran (and the whole of the
Middle East). He sees as the only succor to Iran either tankers sent from
the United States (despite any legal actions which the British might
take) or cash help. He at once discounted my estimate of the unem-
ployment in Tehran at 40,000–50,000 (halving it), and yet said that
Tudeh was growing daily, especially among the “great numbers” of
unemployed.
4. He said that although it was true that his party was founded on
the concept of raising the standards of living for the poor, that the de-
velopment of such a program would not be possible without the pre-
liminary step of ridding the country of the British. He claimed to agree
with the Government that it must prepare an oil-less economy, but
stated that the Government (and he) have no plans for the gradual
movement away from the concentration of unemployed workers in
Khuzistan. He said that earlier he had proposed to the Government
that it use the unskilled labor to build irrigation canals in the south and
roads in the north but the Government did not favor it.
5. He believes that his split with Maleki will go on indefinitely,
with Maleki gradually losing the intellectuals’ support he now has; that
no worker does, or will, support Maleki. He pictures a withering away
of Maleki as a Titoist communist element and symbol.
6. He contends that with the departure of the British that America
will have an opportunity to have a new, independent and enlightened
oil policy for Iran. He spells that out in terms of distribution and mar-
keting facilities. Failing that he believes that America will be under de-
served attack, not only by the leftist people and papers, but also by Ira-
nian patriots who will realize that the Tehran Declaration was without
meaning.
7. He apparently hinges a part of his hope on the coming American
election, believing that a Republican President would at least act inde-
pendently of (if not in open opposition to) the British. On this score he
linked the American Democratic and British Conservative Parties in
their international relations. He thought that Point IV was doing some
good work, but that Iran not only did not need the Military Missions,
but that they were dangerous to Iranian neutrality. He suggested, in an
involved way, that Iran could hardly count on military defense from
