288 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement beginning to feel vulnerable, both on the sea and in the air. He added that during the present century Chile has had naval superiority in tonnage ranging from three to eight times Peruvian strength, but that now the strength of the two countries is just about the same. The acquisition of two cruisers by Peru from Great Britain, one of which has already been delivered, is a matter of serious concern and the armed forces are consequently pressing the Government for arms purchases which it can ill afford. The Minister added that should Chile continue its present line while her neighbors continue to grow militarily, a point may be reached at which the armed forces, public opinion and the Congress will “say something strong”. Referring to the Minister’s mention of the Peruvian purchase of cruisers, the Secretary said that we have assumed that this purchase was motivated more by the Peru-Ecuador boundary situation than by any problems Peru may have with Chile. The Minister of Defense rejoined that Ecuador has neither cruisers nor destroyers and, given the manifest weakness of the Ecuadoran Navy, this Peruvian contention is unacceptable. Mr. Rubottom commented that it would be difficult to find more frustrated people than we of the United States Government in so far as these questions of arms are concerned. He said that the Congress is criticizing the Department of State for making too many arms available to Latin America. He added that Prime Minister Baltran of Peru has asked us to limit arms sales to Peru, at the same time confessing that he cannot prevent Peruvian Government attempts to purchase arms. At the same time, he went on, some of our other Latin American friends feel that they have not been fairly treated, as evidenced by the Foreign Minister’s prior remarks. Mr. Rubottom said that we certainly are sympathetic and understand the problem of the Chilean Government and are anxious to be as helpful and constructive as possible. We consider that President Alessandri’s initiative in trying to put this arms question into the proper perspective is one of the most heartening things we have seen in recent years and we hope that it will prove feasible to work something out along these lines within the inter-American system. Meanwhile, Mr. Rubottom continued, he thought President Eisenhower’s words today made it clear that we regard the Rio Treaty as the shield on which the nations of the Americas can depend for protection against aggression. For this reason, he thought, governments might be enabled to resist patriotic pressures for increased military programs in their own countries. The Minister of Defense then reverted to the question of the two destroyers which were to be made available to Chile under the 1958
