768
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
right dissents to the Secretary rather than attempting to rework the
present draft. It is possible that they may try for a major postponement
in the intra-Departmental due date to write a major alternative presen-
tation. In either case, there is reason to be concerned with the proba-
bility of success of their challenge, since the “official” draft has been
handled through all the proper channels, and perhaps with minor
changes, will probably receive the endorsement of the Under Secretary
for Economic Affairs.
Given this situation some consideration should be given to with-
drawing PRM–8 before it proceeds any further. A new PRM with much
more lead time and a newly written mandate would then present the
opportunity for a much broader consideration of the relevant issues.
Alternatively, what you referred to as a “study group” approach might
be attempted in place of the PRM approach.
Pros:
1. If the PRM–8 process is to produce anything of value, much
more time is needed and a rather lengthy intra-State Department re-
view process will be required. The only other way to circumvent a
choice between a bad PRM and postponed deadline would be for you
to intervene directly with Secretary Vance to express concern that the
State draft is totally out of character with the President’s campaign
themes on the subject and in no way aids in the process of thinking
about the issues from a new perspective. The draft is presently charac-
terized as “pre-Kissinger” by thoughtful critics within the Department.
And unless you desire to intercede shortly, it might be far better to
withdraw PRM–8 than to let it proceed. For if, without very major
changes, it does survive the EPG/NSC process, it will serve the Presi-
dent very poorly.
2. A hand-picked study group might be the only way to get imagi-
native thinking on a rather new subject from the bureaucracy.
3. Is an early North-South PRM needed? A good one would be nice
to have, but with the present odds against getting one out of PRM–8, a
withdrawal of the request may be the best way to avoid the unfortunate
set of choices entailed in the options.
Cons:
1. Decisions will have to be made on some issues on the
North-South agenda shortly, i.e., a position on the Common Fund, and
on CIEC issues. The latter, of course, can be postponed for a few
months.
2. Withdrawal of PRM–8 may avoid a minor disaster, but it pro-
vides no positive answer to the need for serious inter-Agency consider-
ation of North-South issues.
3. Perhaps, despite the lead role of State in PRM–8 preparation,
other agencies will object so strongly to State drafts that the exercise can
be saved.
