250
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
tell him in so many words that Shah had endeavored thru me to find
out what Brit attitude might be if approached by new friendly Iran
Govt. I have however made it clear to him that Shah seemed to be gen-
uinely worried as to whether new govt cld expect friendly and reason-
able treatment from Brit. Middleton indicated to me that he inclined be-
lieve his govt had not (rpt not) made up its own mind as yet what its
final position re Iran oil dispute should be. He said he had impression
there was considerable difference opinion among various groups in
London.
9. Ala told me during my talk with him noon June 11 that Shah had
returned Tehran earlier than planned at earnest request Ala who had
urged him for sake his own prestige to return at once. Ala said rumors
re army plots for Tudeh coup totally unfounded. He added he had sev-
eral very frank talks with Shah since latter’s return. He had urged Shah
to decide at once who successor to Mosadeq shld be to inform that suc-
cessor and to suggest to that successor that he prepare immed for
Shah’s exam tentative list members new Cabinet. He had told Shah that
unless Shah moved with speed and determination respect for him
among leaders of country wld decline to such extent that throne might
be endangered. Financial situation had become so acute that at Cabinet
meeting on June 10 Finance Minister had warned other ministers that
country was now “in state of danger” and that he did not (rpt not) want
to be held responsible for what might happen. Ala said list possible
PriMins now (rpt now) apparently reduced to three, Qavam, Hakimi
and Mansour, in that order. I told Ala of my conversation preceding
even with Qavam pointing out that Qavam had not (rpt not) asked me
intervene on his behalf and that I had no (rpt no) intention doing so.
Ala seemed to be somewhat more in favor of Qavam than he had been
in our previous conversations. Altho he was not (rpt not) enthusiastic
about any of candidates he mentioned fact that Shah also seemed to be
more friendly towards Qavam than previously. He said one advantage
of Qavam was that latter’s stature in Iran so great that foremost leaders
of country wld not (rpt not) feel it below their dignity to serve under
him. He told me I was to see Shah on 11 o’clock morning June 12. He
was sure Shah wld ask my advice and he hoped I wld not (rpt not) hesi-
tate to let Shah know that time had come for positive action. I told Ala I
had been reliably informed that Shah was still intimating in confidence
that US Govt had been and was supporting Mosadeq. I intended
during my conversation with him to try to enlighten him in this respect.
I surprised that in view my various talks with His Majesty and state-
ments which I had made to Ala, Shah seemed misunderstand US atti-
tude. Ala said only explanation he cld offer was that possibly various
persons hostile to Mosadeq had been telling Shah that Mosadeq had
survived thus far only because of US support.
