1977вҖғ 135
primarily by diplomatic and economic efforts, and any limited military 
intervention would require drawing down forces dedicated to other 
purposes.
AIMS IвҖ”This AIMS is based on the premise that support of US 
objectives requires a raising of the NATO nuclear threshold through a 
stronger conventional defense, while maintaining approximately cur-
rent capabilities outside Europe. The raised nuclear threshold would be 
accompanied by a slight increase in the current strategic nuclear levels. 
All present US strategic advantages would be retained, with assurance 
of a hard-Вӯtarget kill capability against all Soviet silos. As in AIMS H, 
the US, in conjunction with NATO Allies, would have the conventional 
capability to absorb a determined Warsaw Pact conventional attack in 
Europe and restore the pre-Вӯwar borders within about 90 days. (Two 
excursions, to size US war reserve stocks for 180 days and for an indef-
inite time, but without change to combat forces during those periods, 
were evaluated.) In addition, the US would maintain a limited air and 
naval capability to confront the Soviets worldwide in the event of Euro-
pean war. In contrast to AIMS H, essentially the current programmed 
military deployments in East AsiaвҖ”Вӯless land forces in KoreaвҖ”Вӯwould 
be retained. Other global interests would be advanced by a moder-
ate capability for unilateral military action without drawing down on 
forces dedicated to other purposes.
AIMS JвҖ”This AIMS is based on the premise that decreased levels 
of strategic nuclear forces are desirable. A significant and sustainable 
conventional military capability permits such decreased nuclear depen-
dence. Thus, US nuclear capabilities would be reduced to the level of 
assured retaliation onlyвҖ”Вӯthe capability to substantially destroy Soviet 
economic and leadership resourcesвҖ”Вӯand minimal counter-Вӯmilitary 
capability would be provided, with no attempt made to match or offset 
strategic force asymmetries in the SovietsвҖҷ favor. As in AIMS H and I, 
the US, in conjunction with NATO Allies, would have the conventional 
capability to absorb a determined Warsaw Pact conventional attack in 
Europe and restore the pre-Вӯwar borders within about 90 days. US war 
reserve stocks, however, would be sized to provide for indefinite com-
bat to avoid NATOвҖҷs having to resort to nuclear weapons should the 
Pact be able to sustain the conflict beyond 90 days. Contrary to AIMS 
H and I, the US would maintain naval and air forces capable of taking 
conventional initiatives outside Europe against the USSR which would 
further enhance deterrence in Europe. In East Asia, approximately 
the current programmed military deploymentsвҖ”Вӯless land forces in 
KoreaвҖ”Вӯwould be retained. Other global interests would be advanced 
by a significant capability for unilateral military action without draw-
ing down on forces dedicated to other purposes. This intervention
