Afghanistan 675 —You may tell President Sadat you are pleased that the purchases of arms from Egypt for Afghanistan are proceeding smoothly. Training in the use of the Egyptian-supplied hand held antiaircraft missiles is nearing completion and the missiles should be moving into Afghanistan in the next few weeks. It is quite likely Sadat will ask you for a reading on the present situation in Afghanistan and prospects for the insurgents. [Omitted here are items unrelated to Afghanistan.] —You may tell Sadat that we hope the Middle East briefings which have been arranged for him have been satisfactory. A joint CIA/State/ DoD team briefed him in October 1979, but another joint team we sent in February 1980 was unable to see him but briefed Vice President Mubarak. FYI: Since the beginning of 1978 we have also sent two other teams to brief Sadat but he was unavailable to receive them. 250. [text not declassified] Research Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 CR 80–11069 Washington, April 1980 [Omitted here are a title page, a security information page, and a cover page.] PREFACE The opposition to the Soviet-backed government of Babrak Karmal in Afghanistan currently comprises three political elements. The most active is the disorganized collection of independent Afghan tribes currently waging vigorous guerrilla warfare against occupying Soviet troops and their Afghan clients. A second element is the royal family, headed by former King (1933–73) Zahir Shah, who lives in exile in Rome. The third force, and probably the most potentially significant, is a group of six religious leaders, each heading an opposition party based in Peshawar, Pakistan. Collectively they enjoy a wide following among their countrymen, including many of the Afghan refugees in 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Insurgents. Secret. A statement on the cover page reads: “The author of this paper is [name not declassified] Near East/Africa Division, Office of Central Reference. This paper was coordinated with the Office of Political Analysis, the NFAC Afghanistan Task Force, and the Directorate of Operations.”
