884  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The President asked whether it would not be wise to remove 
expensive equipment from tunnels in an earthquake area. Mr. McCone 
said some scientists believed that the tunnel would not be ruptured by 
an earthquake.
The National Security Council:
Noted and discussed an oral presentation of the status of the atomic 
energy program, by the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, based 
on Part 3 of NSC 5912 and recent developments.
Marion W. Boggs
213.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, November 5, 1959
Dr. Kistiakowsky
General Goodpaster
The President said he had had a question on nuclear weapons test­
ing at his press conference. He had brought out that the problem of 
atmospheric testing can apparently be managed. The Soviets now seem 
to be ready to have serious technical discussions concerning inspec­
tion of underground testing. Dr. Kistiakowsky said that the problem 
is extremely difficult. The McRae report brings out that there is no 
immediate need for the resumption of testing, but that over the longer 
term testing will give valuable progress, the nature of which cannot be 
estimated now. In his judgment the questions regarding suspension of 
testing are now a matter of political judgment rather than technical. 
Although the safety test question had been emphasized a great deal, in 
actual fact it is not of great importance since the tests may be conducted 
with zero or essentially zero yield. In addition, there will always be 
some possibility of nuclear accident, and the problem recently raised is 
probably not of tremendous importance.
After an explanation of possibilities for nuclear accident by Dr. 
Kistiakowsky, the President commented that the possibility seemed to 
1 Source: Possibility of suspending nuclear testing; reliance on deterrence; mak­
ing choices in defense programs; problems with Titan; problems with federally-­funded 
research. Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on 
November 6.
