1246 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX With best wishes and regards. Sincerely, Mohammed Anwar El Sadat End text. 4. As I did with Boutros Ghali last night, I told El-Baz that, according to our information, their interpretation of the Knesset action on the Jerusalem bill was erroneous; it had been introduced by an opposition member of the Knesset and the government had moved to bury it in committee. El-Baz refused to buy this explanation, saying that the government could have taken the position that submission of this bill was untimely and opposed its introduction at this time. Instead, the government had permitted the bill to be introduced and referred to committee. 5. I then asked El-Baz what the GOE considered should happen before negotiations resume. He said their position was as stated in last night’s oral message—namely, that there should be assurances that the Jerusalem bill will not be voted into law while negotiations are going on. In addition, Israel should stop provocative announcements of plans for new settlements such as that in the recent Dobbles’ report; it was one thing for Israel to state its position in negotiations that it had a right to settlements but quite another thing to announce specific plans to establish new settlements. 6. Noting that President Sadat’s letter called for coordination and a common strategy between us, I reiterated the point I had made last night to Boutros Ghali that the GOE announcement which caught us by surprise was hardly an example of coordination and consultation and could not help but make a bad impression in the United States, after President Sadat’s statement to President Carter and in his People’s Assembly address that Egypt was prepared to resume negotiations. This would inevitably be seen as a reversal of the Egyptian position. I thought it useful to make this point again since Mansour Hassan, Minister of State in the presidency, with responsibility for information and cultural affairs, was in El-Baz’s office during our conversation. Hassan was apparently there to discuss a press briefing which El-Baz was going to give immediately after our meeting to further clarify the Egyptian position on the autonomy talks. I believe the Egyptians are genuinely worried about the effect on President Sadat’s credibility which their announcement has created and are seeking to minimize the damage, particularly with the American press. 7. Department may wish to repeat this message to Tel Aviv.4 Atherton 4 The Department transmitted the text of the telegram to Tel Aviv in telegram
