560 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement magnetism through persuasive, sometimes demagogic oratory, personal honesty, and a broadly defined program promising benefits both to the laboring classes and to business interests. Nicknamed El Loco (the crazy one), Velasco is temperamental, nationalistic, unpredictable, and although he recognizes the benefits derived from association with the United States, he places greater emphasis upon Hispano-Americanism than upon Pan-Americanism. Aware of the dangers of communism, Velasco has nevertheless publicly played upon the possibility of a closer association with Cuba and the Soviet Bloc in an attempt to further Ecuador’s position in its boundary dispute with Peru. Committed by his campaign to a program of prompt and effective economic development, Velasco, since his inauguration on September 1, instead has placed major emphasis on the long standing boundary dispute. By agitation of this issue Velasco has apparently hoped to obtain a revision of the Rio Protocol of 1942 which ended a limited border war between the two countries on terms generally favorable to Peru. The United States, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile countersigned the protocol as "guarantors". As a consequence of Velasco’s affirmation that the Rio Protocol is null because Ecuador had agreed to it under duress, and after a telegram from Foreign Minister José Chiriboga to the guarantor powers pressing this thesis, the four guarantor powers issued a statement on December 7 which basically reaffirmed the protocol’s validity short of an agreement by both countries for its modification or adjudication. The Ecuadorean reaction to the guarantors’ statement was sharp and the popular demonstrations which followed were directed almost exclusively against the United States.2 The Minister or Government, Manuel Araujo, a rabidly pro-Castro left-winger, has taken advantage of the widespread resentment to urge that Ecuador turn to the Soviet Bloc for support. The cabinet voted to establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union and Communist China and the Vice President, Julio Arosemena, publicly advocated declining the “dubious honor” of hosting the XI Inter-American Conference, once postponed and now rescheduled for Quito beginning March 1, 1961. However, there has already been substantial opposition to these gestures toward the Soviet Bloc by the more moderate elements within Ecuador and President 2 In despatch 292 from Quito, December 12, 1960, Ambassador Bernbaum reported on the Ecuadoran reaction to the guarantor powers’ declaration of December 7, stating that the physical damage to the U.S. Embassy and other U.S. buildings in Quito and Guayaquil was considerable. He predicted that Ecuador would neither acccept nor implement the guarantor declaration in the foreseeable future. (622.233/12–1360) A memorandum of December 15 from Deputy Director Samuel O. Lane of the Office of West Coast Affairs sent through Deputy Assistant Secretary Coerr to Assistant Secretary Mann summarized anti-U.S. demonstrations in Quito on December 9, and Guayaquil, December 9–10 and 13, resulting from the guarantor statement of December 7. (722.00/12–1560)
