United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 13 2. If, as seems probable, commodity prices continue to decline and balance of payments problems worsen the U.S. (through the Eximbank or Treasury) should be prepared increasingly to extend temporary balance of payments support, in concert with such support from the IMF (private banks where possible) upon evidence that the countries concerned are taking reasonable self-­help measures. 3. Determine the reasons for the relatively low volume of recent IBRD loans to Latin America and, if so indicated, take appropriate steps such as high level representations by the Department to IBRD management to induce an increased volume and broader range of IBRD loans to Latin America (including increased financial and technical assistance to national development financing agencies). 4. Taking into account world-­wide requirements, employ DLF credits in Latin America in accordance with the criteria of the DLF. 5. Participate actively in the study called for by Resolution XVIII of the Buenos Aires Conference concerning the desirability for establishment of an Inter-American development bank.12 Particular attention should be given to the type of operations appropriate to such a bank and capital contributions to it, as well as management and voting rights. III Petroleum Development Policy There has been in force an informal, but nevertheless rigid, prohibition against U.S. financial assistance to foreign government petroleum agencies. It is recommended that the rule be changed as follows: (a) In the light of developing circumstances, we should work carefully in the direction of limited and selective loan assistance to petroleum projects of foreign governments, subject to the condition that foreign policy objectives will be served, and particularly in the expectation that the attitude toward American private capital will be improved by such loans. (b) Loan assistance may be granted for surface geological work, transport, storage, refining and marketing. Except for exporter credit facilities, the loan assistance contemplated will not be granted for exploratory or developmental drilling. IV U.S. Trade with Latin America The very cornerstone of our relations with Latin America is trade. When trade is maintained at high levels and commodity prices are 12 For text of the resolution, see Economic Conference of the Organization of American States, Buenos Aires, Argentina, August 15–September 4, 1957: Report of the Delegation of the United States of America With Related Documents (Department of State Publication 6679, Washington, 1958), pp. 48–50.
