Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 • We will vigorously negotiate for a system of internationally coordinated national food reserves. • And for once, we are taking the United Nations very seriously on economic and social issues. The general principles I have suggested tonight are only a shorthand for reality. This is especially true when one speaks in the abstractions of economics. Our statistics and our analyses concern the lives of billions of people in the coming generation—people here in America and people abroad. If we turn inward, toward protectionism and indifference, the human cost would be intolerably high. That is the essential problem we will be addressing on almost every foreign policy issue we now face. Contributions of scholars such as yourselves can be threefold. • Your objective analyses of events in Latin America and Africa are valuable as scholarship. They are also valuable for policymakers trying to understand the facts with which we must deal. • Equally valuable would be your thoughts on some of the policy dilemmas I have discussed. I am quite sincere in hoping each of you will consider writing me with your views and suggestions. Asking you to do so is one of the reasons I came here. • And finally, whatever your views, let me urge you to press them on decisionmakers in both the executive branch and the Congress and to contribute to the public debate on these issues. Such involvement may seem, to many of you, inconsistent with the objectivity of a scholar. I have no quarrel with such an individual conclusion. But before reaching it, I hope you will consider one point. We are emerging now from the most contentious period in the last 100 years of our nation’s history. The war in Vietnam so engaged the passions of us all—as it should have done—that we began to think too easily about all policy issues in terms of simple categories: right or wrong, interventionism or noninterventionism, realpolitik or idealism. As I have tried to suggest tonight, the time has passed when we can think in the simple terms of any doctrine, whether derived from Munich or Vietnam. The complexities of our challenges, the necessary breadth of our priorities, and the depth of our dilemmas elude such simple formulas. If we are to have a decent public debate on our policies—which we want—and if we are to show how progressive policies abroad are in our long-term national interest—as we must—then there can be no substitute for the participation in those debates of scholars such as yourselves. For one essence of scholarship is to help us comprehend more clearly the complexities we must address, without retreat to a world of comforting simplicity.
