attempting to flee, he was fired at; a member of my staff heard the shots and later inspected the man’s injuries. The victim stated that he had appealed for protection to a policeman who refused to escort him to a place of safety. Still later in the same evening another Peruvian was assaulted, apparently without provocation, and badly injured; he, too, was examined by a member of my staff. Victim alleged that a policeman arrived as he was fleeing from pursuit by his assailants, but arrested none of them. Details have not arrived of other assaults reported as having taken place same evening. Incidents reported elsewhere include one of stone thrown through glass door of Peruvian house in Arica, witnessed by member of my staff. … On May 10 an American electoral official in Pachia was insulted and threatened with a revolver by an intoxicated man in presence of local carabineers, Chilean electoral officials, and others. All Chilean witnesses later denied being present at any such incident. On May 20 the judge of the Special Tribunal sentenced a Peruvian to three years for engaging in street fight at Tacna with Chileans whom he alleges assaulted him as he was passing. Peruvian used no weapon except his fists. The judge is the same one who punished no one for the mob attacks on Peruvians at Tacna on January 6. 2. I have detailed the above incidents, as they are illustrative of the conditions which now obtain here. Everything points to an attempt on the part of Chilean authorities to force action of some kind, and I can not continue to maintain attitude of mere inaction towards the plebiscite. Situation might develop here which would not only be prejudicial to the negotiations but also to our prestige and to the interests of the three countries involved. In absence of any clearly defined statement of policy, my position is very embarrassing. In my effort to maintain status quo I am unable to deal adequately with serious situations arising. Nothing is to be gained, I am sure, by attempting to resume plebiscite. I should like to have your views as soon as possible on policy I am to follow. Lassiter. VON TRESCKOW 2 Telegram in two sections.
