508  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
power, the U.S. would inevitably be presented with problems similar to 
those it has with Cuba.
12. The Trujillo government has declared that it will not renew its 
missile tracking station agreement with the U.S. at its expiration in 1961. 
This may be an attempt to extort U.S. support for the regime in its present 
difficulties. If Trujillo should fall before the expiration of the agreement, 
the attitude of a successor regime would depend on the contingencies 
set forth in paragraphs 10 and 11 above. A moderate government would 
probably feel obliged to demonstrate Dominican sovereignty, but would 
also be influenced by its need for U.S. aid. A Castro-­type government 
would probably denounce the tracking station agreement.
DR–22.	
Memorandum of a Conference with President 
Eisenhower1
 
May 13, 1960
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretary Dillon
Secretary Rubottom
Ambassador Farland
General Persons
General Goodpaster
The President began by saying that he was being bombarded by 
people who are opposed to Castro and Trujillo. Mr. Pawley and Senator 
Smathers were in his office earlier in the day on this matter. Smathers 
has an idea that Trujillo wants to get out, and that this can be arranged 
if we are skillful—­i.e. that there can be a changeover without Castro-­
type forces coming into power. This would, however, take time and 
care to bring about.
They had added that there now exist juntas with planes already 
chartered, in Miami, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Venezuela ready to 
pounce at the first sign of weakness. They think public opinion toward 
Trujillo both among the people and in the Army is favorable—­that he is 
regarded as a great benefactor. They see the great danger as being from 
abroad, a revolutionary movement of the Castro type, linking up with 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary’s Records. Top Secret. Drafted by 
Goodpaster on May 16, 1960. Information on the source text indicates that this conference 
took place in the White House at 2:00 p.m.
