1158 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 347. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Task Force on Global Resources and Environment (Speth) to President Carter1 Washington, September 22, 1980 SUBJECT Global 2000 Follow up: Problem Areas Needing Priority Attention When you established the Task Force on Global Resources and Environment to recommend policy and program responses to the Global 2000 Report, you requested from it an early identification of “problem areas needing priority attention by the Task Force.” We now have completed this initial task, drawing on the views of all affected Federal agencies, and on consultations with informed members of the public and the Congress. In our priority selection process we have attempted to identify areas in which there is a convergence between key problems of global significance and viable opportunities for the United States and other nations to initiate new and effective remedial measures.2 Over the next several months the Task Force proposes to concentrate its efforts in the following general problem areas, with a view toward developing a series of policy and program recommendations to address specific problems in which immediate and long-term action is necessary and possible. • Rapid Population Growth • World Food Supply (including agricultural land conservation) • Energy Conservation and Alternative Sources • Tropical Deforestation • Species Extinction and Loss of Genetic Diversity • Environmental Contamination • Water Supply • Conservation of Coastal and Marine Resources • Underdevelopment and Poverty 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800149–0022. No classification marking. Sent for information only. Attached to Pickering’s October 24 briefing memorandum to Muskie, printed as Document 348. 2 During a campaign trip to California, the President referenced the report in his remarks delivered at the San Jose City Hall on September 23, following an energy and technology briefing: “Our goals have been spelled out very clearly in the Global 2000 Report, which indicates to us the challenges to the world society unless we address these issues directly and take action to prevent the catastrophes which could occur from a burgeoning population throughout the Earth, constant depletion of our reserve supplies of oil, coal, and other fossil fuels, and a failure to move forward on technology that gives us renewable supplies of energy derived directly or indirectly from the Sun.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, September 29, 1980, pp. 1897–1898)
