1158
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
347.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Task Force on
Global Resources and Environment (Speth) to
President Carter1
Washington, September 22, 1980
SUBJECT
Global 2000 Follow up: Problem Areas Needing Priority Attention
When you established the Task Force on Global Resources and En-
vironment to recommend policy and program responses to the Global
2000 Report, you requested from it an early identification of “problem
areas needing priority attention by the Task Force.”
We now have completed this initial task, drawing on the views of
all affected Federal agencies, and on consultations with informed
members of the public and the Congress. In our priority selection
process we have attempted to identify areas in which there is a conver-
gence between key problems of global significance and viable opportu-
nities for the United States and other nations to initiate new and effec-
tive remedial measures.2
Over the next several months the Task Force proposes to concen-
trate its efforts in the following general problem areas, with a view
toward developing a series of policy and program recommendations to
address specific problems in which immediate and long-term action is
necessary and possible.
• Rapid Population Growth
• World Food Supply (including agricultural land conservation)
• Energy Conservation and Alternative Sources
• Tropical Deforestation
• Species Extinction and Loss of Genetic Diversity
• Environmental Contamination
• Water Supply
• Conservation of Coastal and Marine Resources
• Underdevelopment and Poverty
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800149–0022. No
classification marking. Sent for information only. Attached to Pickering’s October 24
briefing memorandum to Muskie, printed as Document 348.
2 During a campaign trip to California, the President referenced the report in his re-
marks delivered at the San Jose City Hall on September 23, following an energy and tech-
nology briefing: “Our goals have been spelled out very clearly in the Global 2000 Report,
which indicates to us the challenges to the world society unless we address these issues
directly and take action to prevent the catastrophes which could occur from a burgeoning
population throughout the Earth, constant depletion of our reserve supplies of oil, coal,
and other fossil fuels, and a failure to move forward on technology that gives us renew-
able supplies of energy derived directly or indirectly from the Sun.” (Weekly Compilation
of Presidential Documents, September 29, 1980, pp. 1897–1898)
