60
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ongoing question, “we cannot exclude the possibility that a coup will
be attempted in the immediate months, if not weeks, ahead if the
opposition groups believe themselves to be adequately prepared or
should their existence become known to the regime and extinction
become a threat.” Dubs also believed that concerns of the opposition
groups regarding possible Soviet intervention were valid: “the Soviets
would come to the assistance of the present regime should there be a
call for help, should they perceive that the countercoup is ‘reactionary,’
and should time permit effective intervention.” From a military infra-
structure perspective, Dubs noted that the Soviets were well prepared
to take such action should they deem it necessary. He further agreed
with the consensus in Washington that the United States should not
encourage the counter-coup plotters, which “would raise unwarranted
expectations among the coup leaders about our ability to influence
events decisively in and area where our options and leverage are,
unfortunately, minimal.” Still, Dubs concluded, a policy of non-interfer-
ence need not prevent the United States from independently deterring
the Soviets from intervention, or condemning intervention should it
occur. (Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Intel-
ligence Liaison Files, TIN 980643000018, Box 14, Kabul, 1965–79) Dubs
noted, in telegram 6159 from Kabul, July 30, that while there were
many potential threats to the Taraki regime, from both leftist and
rightist groups, a “paucity of hard information” hampered accurate
assessments about the real viability of the Afghan Government. “Only
the wildest rumors can be disregarded completely,” Dubs commented.
“Matters are clearly simmering and could quickly boil over at any
time.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780312–0956)
The viability of internal threats to the DRA was downplayed by
the CIA later that year, when again rumors of an impending coup
proliferated in Kabul. On December 5, an intelligence information cable
representing the views of the CIA’s “senior officer on the scene,”
reported: “we doubt if there is a workable coup plan in existence,”
and that the “loose talk” of a coup around Kabul was not a secret to
the Afghan Government, which was taking proactive measures by
arresting dissidents and promoting loyalists. Noting that opposition
to the DRA was no more organized than it was in May, and that the
Soviet Union remained committed to supporting the revolution that
ushered in Taraki’s rule, the December 5 cable concluded that “the
longer this government stays in power the stronger it becomes. It is
sinking in its roots.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezin-
ski Material, Country File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1/77–3/79)
