National Security Policy 619 247. Soviet policy in Southeast Asia appears to operate jointly with that of Communist China on the principle of shared influence. The Soviets will probably continue to give primary emphasis to cultivating closer relations with neutralist governments in the area. They will main­ tain their effort to disrupt SEATO and to align uncommitted states with the Sino-Soviet Bloc on all broad international issues. They will also stress their willingness to extend economic aid to the Southeast Asian states and will tout the value of Communist methods as the best way to achieve the economic development these countries so desperately seek. However, we believe that, should favorable opportunities arise and should they estimate that the gains would outweigh the losses, the two Communist powers might support a local Communist party in an attempt to seize power. At present, Indonesia or Laos seem the most likely places for such a development eventually to occur. 248. Africa. As part of its effort in the underdeveloped areas, the USSR will almost certainly increase its activities in Africa during the next five years. It is already developing diplomatic and economic relations with the newly independent states of Morocco, Tunisia, and Ghana, and is devoting somewhat greater efforts to Libya and the Sudan. It has offered trade, aid, technical assistance and, in some cases, arms. Although Soviet policy is somewhat constrained by the desire not to appear to compete too obviously with Nasser in the primarily Arab and Moslem areas in which he hopes to extend his influence, the USSR will almost certainly expand its efforts to establish its diplomatic and economic presence on the continent, to encourage nationalist and anticolonial movements, and to attempt to end the exclusiveness of Western influence in most of the area. 249. Up to the present the USSR has followed a policy of restraint toward North Africa, largely out of regard for Soviet relations with France and for the position of the French Communist Party. At some point, however, the USSR may abandon this policy. Internal develop­ ments in France or in Algeria might convince the Soviet leaders that they would gain more from open support of North African national­ ism. In any case, material support may be given to the Algerian nation­ alists, though probably through Egypt rather than directly. Arms and economic aid offers will probably be pressed on the Tunisian and Moroccan Governments. 250. Western Europe. Current Soviet policy in Europe appears to be aimed more at consolidating the USSR’s position in Eastern Europe than at an early expansion of Soviet power beyond the present fron­ tiers of the Bloc. In order to achieve greater security for Communist control of Eastern Europe, as well as to weaken the position of Western Europe, the Soviets are bound to regard the dissolution of the NATO alliance and the withdrawal of US military power from Europe as
