Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I —The Reagan Platform is an escape from reality.18 The Platform and Reagan’s own statements seem to view the world only in terms of the U.S.-Soviet struggle and by over-simplifying virtually every world problem. There is no recognition of the new forces in the world nor of the need for the United States to give historical change a positive direction. (Reagan also calls for massive defense increases, while also promising a tax cut.) —Reagan is nostalgic for the past, especially in his dangerous hankering for strategic superiority which would produce a massive arms race, as well as the general nostalgia for the world of the 1950s, when American military and economic preponderance were the consequences of the collapse of Europe and Japan in World War II.19 —The Reagan Platform is a repudiation of even the limited achievements of past Republican foreign policy.20 This comes across most strongly in Reagan’s skepticism regarding arms control.21 Given his objection to SALT II, is Reagan for or against Nixon-Kissinger’s arms control centerpiece, SALT I? —The Reagan Platform is an endorsement for what Carter has been doing. In its few positive parts, the Reagan Platform in effect endorses what the Carter Administration has been doing on the Middle East (though the words “Camp David” are never mentioned), your efforts to enhance NATO and defense capabilities, your tough response to the Soviets on Afghanistan (though it undercuts the latter by recent expedient statements on the grain embargo). —Moreover, Reagan’s approach is woefully inadequate on arms control, which it slights, and in regard to the Third World, which it largely ignores. It could also jeopardize the expanding U.S.-Chinese relationship by inflaming the Taiwan issue (with the emphasis on the U.S.-Taiwan military connection).22 In brief, his foreign policy is unrealistic, simplistic, and indifferent to moral issues. It is historically antiquated and potentially dangerous. It is easy to slide from over-simplification into extremism, and Reagan’s foreign policy would take America on such a slide. III. Dangers that we might confront: Public debate over foreign policy aside, this coming fall could be punctuated by a series of crises, the handling of which could decisively 18 The President underlined “escape from reality.” 19 The President underlined “strategic superiority” and “massive arms race.” 20 The President underlined “repudiation” and “past Republican foreign policy.” 21 The President underlined “arms control.” 22 The President placed a dash in the right-hand margin next to this sentence.
