1220  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
35. This issue came to a crisis on 9 July, when Brigadier General 
Castro León,9 then Minister of Defense, privately demanded of the 
Junta that it expel both Acción Democrática and Communist party mem-
bers from the administration. After eleven days filled with rumors and 
excitement, he repeated this demand to the cabinet. He was thereupon 
dismissed by the Junta, but refused to vacate his office. Instead, he solic-
ited the support of COPEI and URD for a military coup. They reported 
this approach to the Junta Patriótica, which immediately invoked a 
general strike. In the face of this situation, an all-­night meeting of rep-
resentative officers refused to support Castro León in a coup and he 
was forced to submit to the Junic del Gobierno, which sent him out of 
the country. At the same time the Junta refused popular demands for a 
wholesale purge of the armed forces which probably would have pro-
voked a military coup.
36. With the departure of Castro León, Col. Jesús Manuel Pérez 
Morales (Army), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, became the puta-
tive leader of the armed forces. He is esteemed an abler man than Castro 
León, and therefore potentially more dangerous to the regime. At the 
same time, he apparently headed a “wait and see” school among the 
military and was at least contingently loyal to the government. On 24 
August Pérez Morales was summarily removed from office. This move 
by the Junta to gain control of the armed forces might have precipi-
tated a coup, but had no such effect. Pérez Morales himself has publicly 
adopted a cooperative attitude, describing his relief as routine.
37. Castro León and Pérez Morales have been replaced, respec-
tively, by Brigadier General Josue Lopez Henriquez and Colonel Régulo 
Pacheco Vivas. Neither of them appears to be a threat to the government. 
However, many officers remaining in service may well feel disgruntled 
and insecure. In addition, an impressive number of outstanding officers 
are now in exile with strong motivations against the Junta. A potential 
leader of the latter group is Lt. Col. Martin Parada, former Chief of Staff 
of the Air Force.
38. Because, from 1935 to 1958, every Venezuelan government 
existed only at the sufferance of the military, it is commonly supposed 
that the armed forces still have the power to make and break govern-
ments at will. This supposition, however, is doubtful in present circum-
stances. The rank-­and-­file of the Army are ill-­trained and unreliable 
conscripts who might well refuse to impose the will of their officers on 
9 Castro León, 5C, comes of a family of poor farmers and has been described as 
“rank happy.” He conspired against the Betancourt (AD) regime in 1946 and was a stal-
wart supporter of Pérez Jiménez in the internal politics of the military Junta of 1948–1952. 
Nevertheless, he was a leader of the abortive military conspiracy against Pérez Jiménez 
in late 1957. [Footnote is in the source text.]
