Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II We should avoid supplying the internal security forces of governments which deny freedom of expression to their critics, whether or not those governments find it necessary actually to lock the critics up. Here too there might be occasional exceptions. The recent approval of a sale of handguns to South Korea’s Presidential guard, even while denying a similar sale to its regular police, is a case in point. But in general we should reverse the past practice in which economic assistance has borne the brunt of the human rights policy, while sales to police (and military) forces remained relatively unscathed. When there is an improving but still unsatisfactory overall human rights situation, we should lift economic sanctions first while continuing to distance ourselves from the security forces of a repressive regime. Bilateral economic assistance might be adjusted to particular situations. You know S/P’s aversion to denying assistance which furthers the economic human rights of poor people who have the misfortune to live under a repressive regime. Nonetheless there are more needy people worldwide than we have resources, and the President has directed us to channel bilateral assistance to countries with a good or improving human rights record. Moreover, there is a significant difference between bilateral programs which we can control and adjust, and IFI loans, on which we usually must vote when and as they are presented to us. Thus, we could reprogram aid levels away from repressive regimes and toward governments showing more support for political freedom, rather than continuing to use the IFIs to pressure countries which have ceased violations of the person. Finally, we need to do more about the positive promotion of human rights. For all our rhetoric (in speeches and in PD–30)6 about preferring positive approaches to sanctions, our policy in practice still is skewed toward the latter. That is understandable since we have to react to IFI loans and arms sales requests as they come to us, while devising positive approaches appropriate to cultures different from our own requires effort and imagination. Some of our Embassies (e.g., Djakarta, Seoul, Nairobi) have volunteered interesting suggestions, based on extensive personal experience in those societies. But too many in the regional bureaus still see the human rights policy as a “problem” of sanctions; if that threat is removed they seem to think no active human rights policy is required of them. If we are going to lift sanctions on governments which still deny political freedoms it will be essential that we demonstrate (not least to human rights activists on the Hill) what we are doing instead to promote the expansion of those freedoms. The reports now being prepared on steps taken and planned to integrate 6 See Document 119.
