North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
913
January 10.2 Because of the complexity of the issues raised by Manley
and the differences within the government on appropriate ways to re-
spond, I recommended that you send an interim response to Manley,
expressing your appreciation for his gifts to you and informing him
that you would send a more detailed response shortly. The interim
letter was sent on January 25, 1978.3 The more detailed response is at
Tab A.
In his letter at Tab B, Manley described what he considers to be the
core issues of the North-South dialogue: commodity price stabilization;
preventing the erosion of the purchasing power (through exports) of
the developing countries and including energy pricing; and massive re-
source transfers. He also suggests that we address the debt problem
and take Perez’ proposal (to transfer the increase in the price of petro-
leum to the needy countries) seriously.4 Finally, he expresses hope that
you will respond positively and that a “genuine dialogue” between our
countries can begin.
In your letter, you note that Dick Cooper will be inviting Manley’s
representative to Washington to discuss these and other issues. The rest
of your letter responds in a fairly positive and always candid way to the
points Manley raised.
2 In his December 22, 1977, letter to Carter, attached at Tab B but not printed,
Manley noted his desire to follow up on the discussion of North-South economic issues
that he had had with Carter during his recent visit to Washington. A memorandum of
conversation of a December 16, 1977, meeting between Carter and Manley is in the Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 36, Memcons:
President: 11–12/77.
3 Carter’s January 25 letter to Manley is in the Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10,
Jamaica: Prime Minister Michael Norman Manley, 5/77–12/78. In a January 23 memo-
randum to Brzezinski, Erb noted that his and Pastor’s efforts to secure a draft reply to
Manley’s letter to Carter from the Departments of State and the Treasury had produced
“only a preliminary draft and a request from Dick Cooper for time to prepare a more con-
structive and substantive letter. The Manley letter goes to the heart of the North-South
policy issue which you and I have discussed. We can use the letter to foster a constructive
overall response to North-South issues.” Noting that it would take time to prepare “an
adequate reply,” Erb and Pastor recommended the dispatch of an interim reply to
Manley. (Ibid.)
4 On December 20, 1977, during an OPEC Summit in Caracas, Pe´rez suggested that
the profits from an increase in oil prices of between 5 to 8 percent be given to debt-ridden
less developed countries. (Juan de Onis, “But It Asks a ’78 Meeting to Consider Rise Tied
to Aiding Poorer Nations,” The New York Times, December 21, 1977, p. 71) The Embassy in
Caracas reported: “Pres Perez’s proposal to increase assistance to the third world appar-
ently fell on deaf ears, in part possibly due to his over enthusiastic efforts to promote it
among the assembled OPEC Ministers.” (Telegram 12394 from Caracas, December 22,
1977; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770479–0764)
