Negotiating Channels
491
the hostages’ release would increase but would still be uncertain. [less
than 1 line not declassified] there may be some fanatical Revolutionary
Guards inside the Embassy who are prepared to execute the hostages
in the event that any attempt is made to secure their release. [portion
marking not declassified]
In sum, we doubt that the Iranian government’s forces can secure
the release of the hostages unharmed against the wishes of the militants.
The compound is so large that it would be a relatively easy task to hold
off a government rescue force long enough to kill all of the hostages.
If some of the hostages have been moved from the compound as some
reports have suggested, the government’s task would be even more
difficult.2 [portion marking not declassified]
2 Attached but not printed are five tabs. Tabs A and B are “A DIA Working Paper,
Capability of the Government of Iran to Secure the Release of the Hostages,” February
19, and a CIA memorandum, “CIA Views on the Release of the Hostages,” February
19. Tabs C–E are papers prepared by the Joint Task Force: “Hostage Location/Situation
Projects,” February 16; “Analysis of ‘Student’/Militant Options,” February 9; and “Short
Term Assessment,” February 4.
187.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Paris, February 21, 1980, 9:20 a.m.
MEMORANDUM OF MEETING BETWEEN
MINISTER FRANCOIS-PONCET AND SECRETARY VANCE
France
United States
Jean Francois-Poncet
Cyrus R. Vance
Foreign Minister
Secretary of State
Gabriel Robin
Arthur A. Hartman
Political Director
US Ambassador to France
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
Vance said that he would like to discuss Iran for a moment. He
said we had thought until the last couple of days that the hostages
1 Source: Department of State, Records of the Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot
84D241, Jan/Feb/Mar 1980 Memcons. Secret; Nodis; Super Sensitive. The meeting took
place at the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Drafted on February 26, presumably
by Hartman.
