1316
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1. A statement4 making clear that we consider the move detri-
mental to the peace negotiations, reiterating our position on Jerusalem,
and calling on the Government not to implement the decision.
2. A determination that neither our Ambassador nor visiting Ad-
ministration officials will call at Begin’s East Jerusalem office.
In evaluating these steps, we need to consider carefully our basic
alternatives in handling this situation.
—It may be difficult over the long run to sustain a position that
U.S. officials will not call on the Prime Minister in East Jerusalem. Cer-
tainly there will be many Congressional delegations that would not feel
bound to comply with such a restriction. Moreover, the Israelis would
be able to mount a strong argument—one that would receive sympa-
thetic resonance in some quarters in the U.S.—that such a posture was
inconsistent with our policy of not seeking to redivide the city. If we de-
cide these considerations have the most weight, it may make sense to
keep our response low key and try to get the issue behind us as quickly
as possible.
—The alternative is to decide that to do less than this would do un-
acceptable damage to the credibility of our policy on Jerusalem—in
terms of our relations with the Arab states, the stake we have in eventu-
ally persuading the Palestinians to engage in the negotiations, the diffi-
cult position in which we would place Sadat, and our own image of
consistent and firm policy.
We believe that while the former considerations are important and
must be seriously taken into account, they are outweighed by the latter
arguments. We therefore recommend that if Begin goes through with
his move, we be prepared to issue a statement along the lines of the at-
tached draft, which would restate our policy on Jerusalem and have the
Spokesman say, in answers to a question, that no U.S. official will meet
with Begin in his East Jerusalem office.
Ambassador Lewis reports5 that all the Western European Ambas-
sadors in Israel have received instructions that they will not be per-
mitted to call on the Prime Minister in East Jerusalem. Ambassador
Lewis has several times (most recently on June 25) told Begin that he
would expect to be instructed not to call in East Jerusalem if Begin
moves his office there; some time back Begin alluded to this publicly,
remarking that he and the Ambassador “would do business by mail” in
that case.
4 A draft statement, drafted by Korn on July 22, is attached but not printed.
5 Lewis’s report is not further identified.
