National Security Policy 757 5. There is no reason why nuclear weapons can’t be used against us in the less developed areas. The Chinese Communists can handle planes that can deliver nuclear weapons. 6. Basic National Security Policy should state that nuclear weapons will be used whenever such use is to our military advantage. 7. The definition of general war in the current strategic concept gives us the opportunity to take advantage of overt Soviet participation in military action against us to launch our strategic power against the USSR (the Admiral attributed this view to the President). If the USSR is willing to fight us openly, it must be ready for general war. Assistant Secretary SMITH made the following major points: 1. The US–­USSR strategic balance has changed since 1953, and decisions made then as to our military posture are not necessarily valid in 1959. It was this consideration which led the President at the conclusion of the 1958 review of Basic National Security Policy to direct that the military paragraphs of that document be kept under continuing review. 2. The definition of general war in the current strategic concept is too restrictive. When rigidly applied as in the State-­Defense limited war study of 1958 it results in unrealistic assumptions about the non-­use of nuclear weapons by the Communists in limited war. The military have, moreover, found it necessary to disregard the definition in some of their planning for certain contingencies. 3. State is trying to prevent our becoming dependent upon nuclear weapons in almost all kinds of military situations. Mr. GRAY made the following major points: 1. The basic issues are a. to what extent should nuclear weapons be used in limited war, b. what is general war, c. does local aggression occur only in less developed areas and d. is the prompt defeat of local aggression by application of the degree of force necessary the best way to avoid general war or are there cases in which a lesser response to restore the status quo ante would be the best way to avoid general war. 2. We muddled through the 1958 Quemoy crisis without any clear understanding as to whether and in what circumstances we would use nuclear weapons.
