at the end of the first paragraph of Article X to which the Department
indicated in instruction No. 527 it would be willing to agree. It is
understood, therefore, that the final draft of the Treaty will contain this
sentence.
Article XI. Commercial travelers. The Department has noted from your
explanation that the Austrian Trade Law does not permit commercial
travelers to sell to anyone and that the prohibition extends even to the sale
of samples by salesmen of Austrian nationality. You state that the law is
regarded as almost fundamental and organic. In view of your statements the
Department is disposed to accept the Austrian suggestion that section (c) of
article XI be stricken out. In agreeing to the omission of this section the
Department would like to receive the assurance of the Austrian negotiators
that if during the life of the Treaty the right stipulated in section (c) should
be conferred by law, treaty or otherwise upon commercial travelers of any
other country, the same right would be extended to American commercial
travelers in Austria by virtue of section (i) of Article XI. As noted in your
despatch under acknowledgment the omission of section (c) will necessitate
the relettering of all the sections of Article XI following section (b).
In the interest of uniformity in the treaties of the United States and of the
possibility of peddlers of Austrian nationality vending wares in the United
States, the Department would like to retain section (g) as it appears in the
original draft. Inasmuch, however, as it agreed on page 8 of instruction No.
527 of December 1, 1926, to accept the provision “Salesmen who vend
directly to the consumer shall not be considered commercial travellers” as a
sufficient provision in regard to this matter, you are authorized to adopt that
provision in lieu of section (g) of the original draft.
Article XII. Commercial travelers. Note has been made of the fact that
Austrian negotiators have accepted this Government’s suggestion that the
words “or other competent authorities” be inserted in the third line of the
second paragraph of section (b) of Article XII after the word “officials” and
that accordingly the word “customs” in the ninth line of the same paragraph
should be stricken out. The section as amended will read as set forth on
page 10 of instruction No. 527.
