Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1069
Europe Sunday. This is an accurate and complete summary of the sub-
stance of the letter.
3. The Soviet translation is very rough, no doubt due to the arrival 
of the message late on Saturday night. But the content is very clear:
 On the definition of new types of ICBMs and SLBMS, Gorbachev 
recognizes that the US took a significant step with our 30 percent throw 
weight/5 percent length proposal, and counters with 15 percent throw 
weight/5 percent length. 15 percent throw weight represents a mod-
est step from the 5 percent and 10 percent numbers they proposed in 
Houston. We will need to do better than this—at least 20–25 percent—
and his statement that a mutually acceptable figure should be between 
10 and 30 percent indicates this will in the end be achievable. The argu-
ments against higher throw weights (e.g. inability to apply the 40 per-
cent rule) are spurious.
 On downloading the letter proposes to prune somewhat their 
Houston proposal. In Houston they proposed to download 2 types by 
up to 5 RVs per missile and a total of 1250 RVs, plus the SS–N–18. Here 
they propose to download 2 types by up to 4 RVs per missile and a total 
of 750 RVs, plus the SS–N–18.
 More important though, the letter proposes to handle both 
Minuteman III and SS–N–18 outside downloading. This is actually a 
step away from the US approach, seeking to expand US downloading 
rights rather than contract theirs.
 To deal with the argument that downloaded RVs could be rapidly 
restored, the letter reintroduces an old Soviet idea that the platforms 
on which RVs are mounted would have to be replaced, if more than 
2 RVs are downloaded. The US rejected this in the past, because we 
plan no changes in the platforms in our downloading. Since we plan to 
download at most 2 RVs per missile, this new formulation would have 
no effect on the US. But in the case of Minuteman III, the letter calls for 
new platforms, which we do not plan.
 The confusing paragraph about missile bases and oceans is sim-
ply a restatement of the move they made in Houston to accept our base-
by-base and ocean-by-ocean approach.
 On balance, the new proposal still calls for Soviet downloading of 
2 Soviet types plus the SS–N–18, and does not take us closer to resolution.
 On data denial, the letter does not mention deferral, calls for 
achieving the maximum possible by the time of signing the treaty, and 
says specialists are being sent to Geneva.
 To summarize:
— The outcome on new types is in sight (but not in hand).
— They are engaging on data denial rather than calling for deferral.
—  The new ideas on downloading do not bring us closer to 
resolution.
