1622 Foreign Relations, 1958ÔÇô1960, Volume III, Supplement understanding of concealment possibilities. It was clear from the find┬ş ings of both panels that attempts to conceal tests, either underground or in outer space, would be very costly. The Concept of Probability or Calculated Risk In our policy-┬şmaking, we should recognize that no technological system is going to be perfect or absolute in its performance. We must consider the effect of such technological inspection systems in terms of probability and consider their restraining value on the basis of an esti┬ş mated probability to detect within stipulated limits. In a world of rapidly-┬şchanging technology, it may be impossible to devise fool-┬şproof monitoring systemsÔÇöeither for nuclear test cessa┬ş tion or for other forms of agreed arms limitation. The most that these systems may accomplish will be to make evasion very costly and very uncertain. These may be the principal functions of monitoring systems. Hence, if they are to be of maximum use to us, they would have to be supplemented by highly-┬şdeveloped intelligence systems of our own and with appropriate military measures. Political-┬şTechnical Factors in Geneva Negotiations The current Geneva negotiations indicate that there are very great difficulties in reaching a satisfactory agreement with the Soviets on the critical questions of voting, staffing, and inspection. The pres┬ş ent Soviet position on these questions is clearly unacceptable since it would eliminate even the deterrent effect of the Geneva System. We should not seek to find our way out of the present impasse in Geneva by relaxing our requirements on the critical political aspects of the control organization. It would, therefore, seem desirable at this stage to draw back from our original efforts to achieve a system as comprehensive as that discussed by the Geneva Conference of Experts last summer and to settle for some more limited form of test agreement that would simplify both the technical and political requirements of the control organization. The most obvious possible alternative approach would be to seek an agreement which would provide for no testing in the atmosphere but would permit testing underground and at high alti┬ş tudes. The timing and method of introducing this alternative is not dealt with here. It would seem important that if we seek to agree to exclude atmo┬ş spheric testing that we propose doing so by formal agreement (rather than by unilateral action) which involves some system of monitoring and which thus preserves the principle of monitoring and, perhaps, inspection and provides experience with such a system. Such an agreement might include specific provisions for a phased, evolutionary extension of the test ban to include coverage of testing
