March 27–December 31, 1979
953
3. In addition to the non-paper, following is the text of a message
from Bob Strauss to you which, as the text states, he feels you might
wish to give or show to Burg and Khalil in order to underscore the in-
formal nature of this exercise.
4. Begin text: Dear Jim:
You will recall that I told you before I left Israel that I was going to
get Ned and Ralph5 to take some notes I made and prepare a number of
informal suggestions regarding the question of powers and responsi-
bilities. I have attached these suggestions but want to make it clear to
you and ask that you make it clear in turn to the Egyptians and Israelis
that even I have questions about some of the ideas contained in these
suggestions. I am aware that you will probably have similar reserva-
tions about some points as will the other two parties. I do hope, how-
ever, that at least a substantial part of these suggestions will be found to
be useful by you and by our Egyptian and Israeli colleagues as we at-
tempt to make progress over the next few months.
I would be grateful if you would make it clear to your partners that
they need not worry about any formal response to these ideas which
are suggested to serve as a basis for discussion. When you distribute
the following, you should make clear the very informal nature of this
non-paper. If it would help you to make this point, you should feel free
to distribute copies of this letter to your colleagues. Sincerely, Robert
Strauss. End text.
5. Begin text. Alternative approach to powers and responsibilities
as a result of many conversations and after much staff work, we believe
both sides might welcome informal thoughts on how to approach the
subject of powers and responsibilities in further meetings. It is not ex-
pected that either Egypt or Israel will necessarily accept these sugges-
tions in their entirety. Indeed, there may be aspects which may prove
very difficult for one side or the other. They do, however, attempt to
build on certain areas of agreement reached thus far and, in particular,
on the common desire to move this portion of our negotiations forward
so that we may begin to deal with these issues in greater detail at a tech-
nical level.
Under this approach, the plenary would authorize the formation
of technical committees, composed of experts from each side, whose
work would be guided by the working group and who would report to
the plenary through the working group.
Cairo, September 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840131–
2495)
5 Edward S. Walker and Ralph J. Gerson, both Special Assistants to the President’s
Special Representative to the Middle East Peace Negotiations.
