Costa Rica 417 Operational Aspects of U. S. Technical Assistance5 a. Balance Between Programs, Both U.S. and Other. The overall “program” of United States assistance and other activity in Costa Rica, in addition to the work of the Embassy itself, is composed of the following essential elements: (1) The Mutual Security Program devoted to technical assistance in agriculture, health, education, housing, public administration, the complementary training program in these and certain other fields, a loan of 2 million dollars for the construction of the Children’s Hospital; (2) Eximbank loans in the amount of approximately $21,000,000; (3) the international Exchange of Persons program involving a limited number of leader grants, exchange of teachers, and training activities; (4) the Military Mission, which comprises a program of training and assistance to the public forces of Costa Rica; (5) the Inter-American Geodetic Survey, carrying out aerial and other surveys required for an extensive mapping project; (6) the sizable grants made available or the construction of uncompleted portions of the Inter-American highway through Costa Rica, administered for the United States by the Bureau of Public Roads; (7) the public information program of USIS including principally press, radio and motion pictures. The problem of ensuring the maintenance of a proper balance among the elements of these programs and among the programs themselves is a continuous preoccupation of the Embassy. A systematic approach to the exchange of information and consultation on new projects, particularly between the Embassy and USOM, is provided in general meetings of agency heads with the Ambassador, and day to day consultation between officers of the Embassy and those of other agencies. In addition, the detailed program submissions of USOM have been thoroughly reviewed by the Chief of the Economic Section of the Embassy with the appropriate officers of USOM. As a result of this continuous, and as required, special review, it is the Embassy’s view that there are no special problems of imbalance between the various United States programs and activities in the country. Since the activities of the Inter American Geodetic Survey (IAGS), an agency of the Department of the Army, are in the mapping field and therefore not primarily military, the only military program is that carried out by the Army Mission. An underdeveloped country, Costa Rica therefore receives the major portion of assistance from the United States in the economic rather than the military field. Given the general 5 The following comments are made with special reference to Paragraph 2, Cirtel, May 6, 1958. [Footnote in the source text, Cirtel, May 6, 1958, was not found in Department of State files.]
