Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII seemingly accepted Amin and reached a modus vivendi with him. Last week, when I asked the Hungarian Ambassador about Moscow’s alleged unhappiness over the purges of Taraki and Watanjar, and the reported coolness between Amin and Moscow, he cautioned against reading too much into this. He said, “As long as Afghanistan does not change its basic policies (read Communism and a pro-Moscow foreign policy), Moscow doesn’t care who is in charge.” From Moscow’s and Amin’s behavior since September 14, I think the Ambassador may be right. 6. This is not to say that the Amin-Soviet relationship has been or will be an easy one. Before Sept 14, there was tugging and pulling on both sides—and now there may be distrust. A few days ago, an Asian Ambassador here aptly described the situation when he said: “They are like a husband and wife who don’t much care for each other but nightly keep climbing into the same bed, because each has compelling needs and no options.” 7. If Amin survives, a relevant concern for the U.S. will be whether, in shaping foreign policy, he will keep a low profile such as did Hungary’s Kadar or be bent on playing an active international role like Fidel Castro. The departing Pakistani Ambassador (to be Pakistan’s Foreign Secretary) fears the latter. He sees Amin as irredentist, and told me that during his farewell call on Amin, the latter’s evasive answers on Pushtunistan and Baluchistan heightened rather than assuaged his fears. This is notwithstanding assertions, like Foreign Minister Shah Wali made to me last week, that Afghanistan has “no territorial ambitions.” 8. As for U.S.-Afghanistan relations, if Amin and his Khalqi Party survive (and I fear time is working in their favor), we will have to give thought as to what kind of presence and role we can have here. Can we exert a moderating influence? I am not sure we can, though the Sept 14 incident involving the Soviets gives some grounds for cautious hope. Certainly Amin would welcome resumption of U.S. economic aid—on their terms—but I am doubtful this would necessarily give us leverage. When we had a $17 million aid program here, we enjoyed almost no influence. 9. I doubt, too, that Amin would ever sincerely turn to us (or to the Chinese or Yugoslavs) as a political alternative to the Soviets. For one, our political ideology is so different from his. I also don’t think the Soviets would allow it, and Amin must realize this. Yet, I cannot ignore that in years past, nationalism has been a powerful force in Afghanistan, rejecting foreign influence. It is conceivable that over the next year or so it could assert itself in ways which would diminish the Soviet presence. The insurgency is one manifestation of this. Though so far the rebellion has disappointed many well wishers, and does not immediately threaten this regime, it may gain momentum.
