234 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 we are going to give to them so that they will feel it worthwhile talking to us, [1 line not declassified] but indicate we need a lot of latitude on it depending on what turns up. Overall, I think we just need to discuss the art of entering into such a covert action in a tutorial sort of way, interleaving it with the specifics of money and names. [portion marking not declassified] [Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.] Stansfield Turner2 2 Turner signed “Stan” above this typed signature. 90. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, December 7, 1979 1. Briefing of Hostages’ Families: Your appearance today at the meeting with the families of the hostages was greatly appreciated, as I am sure you could tell. We found the families understanding of the difficult circumstances and supportive of our actions. They were very appreciative of the job that Dave Newsom, Hal Saunders and Hodding Carter did in answering their questions. Many of them remarked afterwards that your willingness to spend so much time with them in the afternoon convinced them of your determination to get our people out of Tehran. They particularly appreciated your expression of restraint.2 2. Permanent Residence for the Shah: Following our approach to him yesterday, the South African Ambassador responded this afternoon that Prime Minister Botha wants us to know that he will consider the matter very seriously over the next several days. He will probably 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14. Secret. Carter wrote “Cy, J” in the upper right corner of the memorandum. 2 Carter, Vance, and other officials met with the families of the hostages at the Department of State on December 7. No official record of the meeting was found, but the press reported the families’ comments and reactions. (Molly Ivins, “Hostages’ Relatives Relieved After Briefing,” New York Times, December 8, 1979, p. 6, and Margot Hornblower, “Families of the 50 Hostages in Iran Converge in Washington,” Washington Post, December 8, 1979, p. A10) After the meeting, Carter addressed employees in the lobby of the State Department. For text of his remarks, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, p. 2205.
