748
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—The Soviets (and our allies) understand that progress in East-
West relations is possible if Moscow shows restraint, and that we re-
main committed to arms control.
—And, perhaps most important, we will be able to move rapidly on the
two key issues that can unlock other doors: SALT II and the Arab-Israeli
negotiations.
One caveat before turning to a discussion of these core issues:
while they should be given priority attention in your public statements,
we must avoid giving the impression that these issues now represent
the sum and substance of all our foreign policies. To the degree that we
have made our response to Afghanistan synonymous with our foreign
policy in recent months, we have made the Russians seem stronger
than they are; the U.S. weaker than we are; our allies concerned that
there has been a basic American shift back towards a bipolar view of
the world; and our foreign policy appear more reactive than it is.
At Tab A3 is a summary of broader themes you may wish to review
as background for your coming speeches.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.]
3 Not found attached. Tab A, a 3-page paper entitled “Themes,” is attached to a
draft of the memorandum in the National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—
Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981: Lot 82D298, Box 18, TL Sensi-
tive Six Months Project 5/80.
151.
Address by Secretary of State Muskie1
New York, July 7, 1980
The Costs of Leadership
I welcome this opportunity to address the Foreign Policy Associa-
tion and to raise with you an issue of fundamental and long-term im-
portance to our nation. It is a matter that cuts across all aspects of our
foreign policy. It will decide whether the United States can have an ef-
fective, affirmative foreign policy in the years ahead—or be left simply
to wring our hands and react to crises.
1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, August 1980, pp. 28–29. Muskie delivered his
address before the Foreign Policy Association.
