144
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
nation. Interdependence has gone from being a slogan to being a prac-
tical reality in everyday life.
“Thus the summit meetings will not produce spectacular new ini-
tiatives or proposals for new institutions; that is not what is required,
now. Instead, the various leaders need to begin thinking in common
about problems in common. This can result in a framework for dealing
jointly with basic issues; about building a broad framework of indus-
trial state concerns leading to coordinated action. It is the creating of
ways and working together—ways that can be developed and will en-
dure over the coming years—that is the real ‘news’ to be expected from
the summit, and the groundwork of future progress.
“Your energy policy is part of this new time of building. It will en-
able the United States to play a more effective role in the world. Clearly,
foreign and domestic policies are related more closely together than at
any other time in peacetime history.
“Basic Themes
“A number of basic American themes, to which you have been al-
luding in the past three months, will become clearer at the summit
meetings:
“Leadership and Purpose: The emergence of the United States from a
time of doubt and uncertainty, in which even some of our friends and
allies abroad questioned our ability and willingness to act. An Amer-
ican sense of purpose has returned: but it is more mature, and is di-
rected towards political and economic relations and developments—
the building of new patterns of behavior and action for the future, in a
shared leadership with other nations.
“Economic Actions: The need for coordinated strategies for ending
the recession, and for breaking loose from the ‘stagnation’ pattern that
led to the current difficulties (e.g. 15 million OECD unemployed). In all
of the commercial issues—non-proliferation, arms transfers, defense
procurement, advanced technology—there must also be a sharing of
benefits. In defense procurement, a clear two-way street.
“Institutions: The importance of strengthening the work of existing
institutions, whether NATO (where the issue is following-through on
its potential) or the Multilateral Trade Negotiations, or the OECD, the
IMF, the World Bank, and the IEA.
“Global Problems: The need for common effort on the global
problems that are either here, or are emerging: including the spread of
nuclear weapons (an issue that is inseparable from secure energy re-
sources for all nations), the transfer of conventional arms, the relation-
ship between rich and poor countries. In each, industrial-state leader-
ship is needed.
“Developing World: The importance of not seeing the industrial
states as an exclusive club, but directly concerned with what is hap-
