990 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX with us in a position, if need be, to hold their expectations within limits of the possible. 5. Unilateral steps which we ought to consider include: —A restatement by the Carter administration, at no lower level than the Secretary of State, of US support for Yugoslavia’s independence, territorial integrity, and unity; —A statement confirming continuity in this policy from a senior figure in the incoming Reagan administration, preferably Mr. Bush or the President-elect himself, but at no lower level than the Secretarydesignate; —A similar statement in the NATO context, by SYG Luns, might also be wise, particularly as a warning to the Soviets. But in Yugoslav eyes it would probably be regarded as more “provocative” than bilateral statements by Western powers. 6. Our statements should be measured, not too strident. We must not be seen to be contributing to heightened uncertainty about Yugoslavia’s future. A simple, straightforward reiteration of US support in the usual formulation, if made at the right moment and in a broader context, should accomplish our objective. 7. Joint steps: We may well find the Yugoslavs receptive to a visit by a senior US official (whether the President-elect should be represented in some way is beyond our ken). Such a visit would be described (properly) as consultations. The US visitor should neither be seen as a prelude to a US effort to “envelope” the Yugoslavs, nor should his presence be construed by the Yugoslavs as presaging a USG blank check. Some initial thoughts follow on what might be on the agenda during such consultations: —An exchange of views on the situation in Europe, Soviet intentions, Western reactions, etc. —In this context, we might offer to establish a joint exchange of intelligence with the GOY on the situation in Poland and Eastern Europe. —The Yugoslav military may well seek to use the occasion to obtain further support, i.e., a speed-up of delivery of items already in the pipeline or under negotiation and/or more forthcoming responses to requests for state-of-the-art weapons and equipment. (Para 7 below describes what they could be looking for.) —If a crisis in Poland occurs before the current balance of payments loan negotiations are completed, the GOY would wish to lock those resources in as fast as possible and might again approach us for assistance in this regard. —It is also possible, depending on the circumstances, that the GOY, aware of the Polish request for substantial direct economic assistance
