Negotiating Channels
369
to have them here. All agreed that we did not have to take a decision
on this until after we see what happens with sanctions at the UN.
Depending on that vote, this action might be included as part of a
package. The issue will be reviewed again on Monday. (C)
Political-Military Issues:
1. Shah. We have reports that he wants us to locate a different
country of residence for him.7 What are our responsibilities? Mr. Chris-
topher noted that the complaint was registered by the Shah’s staff,
specifically Armao, who has been plagued by poor relations with the
Panamanians. It was not clear whether this request came from the Shah
or from Armao and others. The Shah may want to move off the island,
and he might be happier doing that, or perhaps he would feel less
bilked by the Panamanians. Our information indicates that relations
with Royo and Torrijos are at least superficially good. We need to take
a hard line.8 Until the hostages are released, we have no capability to
find another residence. The Shah is going to have to learn to live in a
country where he is not king. He was unhappy in Morocco, in the
Bahamas, in Mexico and now in Panama. We have no alternatives
available. It was agreed that Lloyd Cutler and Mr. Christopher will
talk to Armao when he comes to Washington this weekend and see
what can be worked out. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the Shah might
pick up on the President’s statement to congressional leaders that, in
the event of a threat of extradition, the President would accept the
Shah back to the United States. However, this situation appeared to
be more of a case of being dissatisfied with his accommodations. (S)
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
4. Senate Select Committee. Mr. Aaron noted that there are reports
that the SSC on Intelligence had requested declassification of the CIA
analysis on the effects of permitting the Shah to return to the United
States. Admiral Turner said he was unaware of this, but no action
would be taken without a high level review. (S)
7 As reported in telegram 6660 from Panama, January 7, Armao described to Moss
a long list of difficulties faced by the Shah and his entourage in Panama. He wanted
Jordan’s and Cutler’s assistance in moving the Shah from Panama as soon as possible.
Moss recommended no U.S. involvement, not least because the Shah “has no where else
to go.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box
60, Panama 6/79–1/80)
8 Carter wrote in the left margin next to this sentence: “Minimize our involvement.”
