102 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ETA–41. Memorandum of Conversation, by Rudy V. Fimbres of the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs1  Washington, July 26, 1960. SUBJECT Visit of Felipe Herrera, President, Inter-American Development Bank, to South America PARTICIPANTS Felipe Herrera, President, Inter-American Development Bunk Robert Cutler, U.S. Executive Director, Inter-American Development Bank Douglas Dillon, Under Secretary of State Roy R. Rubottom, Assistant Secretary of State Thomas E. Mann, Assistant Secretary of State Theodore Achilles, Counselor Henry Ramsey, S/P Dixon Donnelley, U Ambassador Harry R. Turkel, REA Alex Rosenson, REA Wymberly Coerr, WST Alton Hemba, EST Rudy Fimbres, ARA/P (The meeting was arranged at the request of General Cutler to give Department officers an opportunity to hear Mr. Herrera’s impressions of his South American tour.) Mr. Herrera commenced the discussion by mentioning that the purpose of his trip was to discuss quota payments with member countries of the Bank, and also to recruit technicians for his organization. He said that he had been impressed by the great interest in the Bank, and the emotional attachment which people in South America have for it despite the fact that few know the details concerning its structure and proposed method of operation. Latin Americans fought for it for many years and are particularly gratified that it will be a cooperative and multilateral undertaking from which the United States—­which holds 40 percent of the quota—­asks no benefit. He stated that the countries he visited presented a variety of institutions through which the Bank could work. He, however, had emphasized cooperation with private capital. There were complaints everywhere of a shortage of capital, especially for local financing, which some people blamed on IMF stabilization programs. Attacks on the IMF have shifted, however, to national leaders, apparently because they have made IMF policies their own. There was, particularly in Brazil, 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 371.314/7–2660. Limited Official Use.
