544 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI how no idea should in any way impede our completion of the START treaty. I said I hoped he would give us a response when he comes to Washington in two weeks. He told me that he would try to have an answer by that time, and emphasized that he very much “valued” our presenting new ideas, and especially in this fashion. He added they were working on new ideas on strategic stability, that none had crystalized yet, that their military and members of the Supreme Soviet were often times “emotional” on all such ideas, and that they too would do nothing to impede an agreement. As he put it, “our first objective is to complete the START agreement.” [Omitted here is material not related to START] Baker 90. Letter From President Bush to Soviet President Gorbachev1 Washington, March 20, 1990 Dear Mr. President: Our two countries have made dramatic and historic progress in our efforts to invigorate and accelerate the arms control process. Our own talks at Malta and the recent meetings between Secretary Baker and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze in Moscow and Ottawa2 have imparted significant momentum to the negotiations and have injected important new ideas that can help resolve the major issues quickly. I believe the time is right to build on this momentum by taking a bold initiative in START. Our two sides are in agreement that the principal goal of START is to enhance strategic stability. As we have discussed in the past, this means more than reducing numbers of systems—­it also means shaping 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, Special Separate USSR Notes Files, Gorbachev Files, OA/ID 91126–006, For the President. No classification marking. 2 Reference is to the Open Skies Ministerial Conference of NATO and Warsaw Pact Foreign Ministers in Ottawa, February 11–13. Memoranda of Baker and Shevardnadze’s conversations are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts.
