258
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
ized power. The Shah’s firm control over the country during most of
the 1960s and 1970s was an exception to the general rule. With the
Shah gone, rival power centers are reasserting themselves. The Azerbai-
janis have now joined the Kurds in actively pressing Tehran for
autonomy.
Khomeini, given his many problems, has no chance for the present
of reestablishing firm control over all elements of Iranian power. Thus,
the key question is whether he has the flexibility to reach necessary
compromises with other competing power centers—the tribes, the left,
the ethnic minorities. Khomeini’s experience and style so far indicate
a complete lack of flexibility. Consequently, his chances of reimposing
full authority or of reaching a modus vivendi with these dissidents are
not good. Maintaining central government control will, thus, remain
a major problem.
The Opposition
During this difficult time, the government will be faced by pressure
from four different directions by forces that would like to see the
replacement of the Khomeini regime.
Ethnic and Tribal Minorities. The minorities seek as much decentral-
ized power as possible.
—The largest group is the Azerbaijanis under Ayatollah Shariat-
Madari. Their recent seizure of power in Tabriz, demanding changes
in the constitution to permit greater autonomy, will be difficult for the
government to handle. The Azerbaijanis have a powerful, recognized
leader and widely shared grievances.
—The Kurds, of course, are continuing to fight for greater auton-
omy as well, although they lack the heavy weapons necessary to be
able to consolidate control over the urban centers in their area.
—The Arabs are quiet now but are capable of causing trouble again.
—Elements of the Qashaqai and Bakhtiari tribes are armed.
—The Baluchis have ambitions but have not done much to accom-
plish their aims.
Individually, none of these groups can overthrow the regime, but
they present it with a great challenge which must be met if Tehran’s
authority is to be countrywide. This becomes a chicken-and-egg prob-
lem in which the minorities are not likely to accept terms until a strong
government insists on them, but a strong government is not likely to
exist until the minorities give up their opposition.
The Left. Iran’s leftist forces are not prepared to assault Khomeini
frontally. Instead, they ride his coattails where they can and strengthen
their own position for the longer run. They are already represented in
several key places: the student movement, the oil workers, the fedayeen
movement, the PLO’s activities.
Three leftist organizations are particularly significant:
