334 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI in the document. Cooper said he would like to see a change in this approach; it would be a positive sign if the Soviet side agreed to work on text, just as the sides had done for the predictability protocol. This would be a basis for progress. 51. Grinevskiy asked whether anyone on the Soviet side wished to comment. (No one did.) Compliance 52. Turning to the subject of compliance, Bartholomew cited the Secretary’s statement last May that the President feels strongly that the arms control process cannot be sustained without scrupulous observance of all arms control agreements and undertakings related to them. He recalled that at the last round of the standing consultative commission the U.S. side had dropped some issues from the SCC agenda. Bartholomew noted that on other compliance concerns which the U.S. side had raised the Soviet side had not responded. He cited the examples of the U.S. requests that the two remaining flat twin radars be dismantled and that the Soviet side cease concurrent operations. Bartholomew said he wished to underscore the need for the Soviet side to move immediately to correct the serious ABM Treaty violation at Krasnoyarsk, which is a significant violation of a central provision of the treaty. He said the Soviet side should state—­without conditions—­ how and when the dismantlement of this illegal radar would occur. Bartholomew wanted to make clear what he had said at the previous arms control working group meeting: the U.S. side could not agree to Soviet proposals linking dismantlement of the Krasnoyarsk radar to agreement by the parties to observe the ABM Treaty as signed in 1972. Similarly, he said, the Soviet proposal linking dismantlement of Krasnoyarsk to dismantlement of the large Phased-Array Radar (PAR) at Thule and no construction of the Fylingdales PAR is unacceptable. 53. Bartholomew said the U.S. side took this position with the view that compliance with agreements is not something that can be traded for something else. Bartholomew said U.S. criteria for determining whether the violation has been corrected remain: treaty-­prohibited radar capability and lead-­time advantage must be eliminated; verification by NTM; no new verification requirements. The U.S. side continues to believe that satisfying these criteria would require the Soviet side to dismantle the transmitter and receiver and their foundations, Bartholomew said. The U.S. side remains willing to listen to any new proposals from the Soviet side that would meet our criteria; the U.S. side cannot sign START or Defense & Space agreements until the Krasnoyarsk violation has been corrected. Concluding, Bartholomew said the Krasnoyarsk radar is a significant violation of a central element of the ABM Treaty and will continue to raise the question of material breach and proportionate response until it is resolved.
