March 27–December 31, 1979
855
—Sadat, Begin, the Secretary were together for a time and then the
Secretary left the two of them alone for almost half an hour. It was
partly during this period that the two of them began mapping a polit-
ical strategy for the next couple of months which includes the regulari-
zation of negotiating sessions, visits to Egypt by Burg and Dayan, and
Sadat’s invitation to Begin to visit Alexandria the first week in July. The
hope is that out of the Burg and Dayan visits the new negotiations can
be put on a sound footing. Burg and Khalil both want to talk about the
precise organization of the negotiations by working groups. While
Dayan wants to stay away from talking about the new negotiations and
to concentrate on consolidating the Egyptian-Israeli relationship, Khalil
sees Dayan’s visit to Egypt as an opportunity to understand the polit-
ical dynamics of Israeli decision making on this subject and to explore
Dayan’s creativity on solutions in the autonomy negotiations.
—Burg and Khalil seem to be having a good private conversation,
apparently getting off to a reasonable beginning in their relationship as
heads of respective delegations. Burg and Khalil sat next to each other
at lunch and, while the substance of their conversation concentrated on
problems of scheduling the next negotiating sessions, they did get
acquainted.
—During the inaugural flight, Dayan got to talk with Sadat for
about twenty minutes. This came after talks with Boutros Ghali in
which Dayan was persuaded that the Egyptians genuinely wanted him
to come to Cairo. Dayan clearly does not want to get himself out in
front of Burg in discussing the autonomy negotiations and was clearly
suspicious of Egyptian motives in pressing him to come to Cairo.
9. The plan of meetings over the next two weeks as it now appears
probable has Burg going to Egypt at the end of this week, Dayan vi-
siting Egypt at the beginning of the following week, and the next nego-
tiating session beginning either June 7 or 10. At the first session7 in
Beersheva last Friday it had been agreed that the next session would be
June 6–7, but the Israelis in Sunday’s talks mentioned that the Herut
Party conference will not end until the night of the 6th so some slippage
will probably be necessary. On the other hand, by the end of Sunday’s
talks, Burg’s visit to Cairo was being described almost as a preliminary
negotiation, dealing at least with semi-substantive issues such as the re-
sponsibilities of working groups.
10. Jim Leonard will use the next few days in Israel to call on each
member of the Israeli negotiating team individually and to talk with
other Israelis who can give insight into Israel’s thinking on the West
Bank/Gaza negotiations. Assuming the schedule remains pretty much
7 See Document 256.
