22  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
within the U.S. Government and perhaps submit a specific recom-
mendation at a later date.
Latin Americans persistently contend that existing sources of 
public capital are inadequate. Our experience, however, in that there 
is a dearth of well planned and engineered projects eligible for financ-
ing, but no dearth of financial resources. The Export-Import Bank 
has recently accelerated its activities in Latin America, and with the 
additional lending authority it is now seeking should be in a position 
to meet all reasonable requirements. The level of International Bank 
lending in Latin America has been low, although recently the Bank 
has been somewhat more active in that area. We will continue our 
efforts to induce an increased volume and broader range of loans to 
Latin America—­including increased financial and technical assistance 
to national development financing agencies. An encouraging factor is 
that the first investments of the International Finance Corporation have 
been in private enterprises in Latin America.
We now have the Development Loan Fund which can consider 
projects in Latin America for which other financing is unavailable, 
and will be in even better position to do so if the additional resources 
it is now seeking are forthcoming. One problem in Latin America 
has been that some countries, for a variety of reasons, have tended 
to exceed their borrowing capacity. In these situations they should 
have access to the Development Loan Fund within limits imposed by 
its criteria and world-­wide commitments, since the Fund can accept 
repayment in local currencies.
For some years the Latin American countries have agitated for the 
establishment of an Inter-American Development Bank. At the Buenos 
Aires Economic Conference last summer, a resolution was adopted call-
ing for a study of the desirability of establishing such a bank. We feel that 
the United States should actively participate in this study, without any 
commitment as regards our ultimate participation in the bank. Although 
the United States has opposed its establishment, we may wish to recon-
sider our position as a result of the further study if sentiment develops in 
favor of an institution which is truly international in character, i.e., on the 
capital contributing as well as capital receiving aids.
Regional Integration
Various proposals for economic and customs unions in Latin 
America have been considered from time to time, and the Latin 
American countries have observed very closely the developments in 
Europe toward regional economic integration. However, circumstances 
in Latin America are quite different from those in Western Europe, as 
Latin American economies are not generally complementary and the 
volume of trade between them is quite small. Nevertheless, there is
