64 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement effective political power. But these parties, even when out of power, exercise a strong influence upon their governments, and some of them may gain power, or come to share more effectively in it, during the next three to five years. We believe this pressure will continue and that it will eventuate in high-­level talks with the USSR. However, we also believe that most European leaders do not expect significant results from such talks, since they see no indication that either side is prepared to make substantial concessions. 35. On balance, we believe that the potentially disruptive forces within the Western alliance system have been stimulated more than the cohesive forces by the recent changes in the world situation. In Europe, these changes have led to much soul-­searching about the military and political adequacy of NATO, and about the role each country should play in it. Despite widespread interest in various proposals for national or collective disengagement, the alliance remains essentially intact; but its character is undergoing a gradual change in response to the chang­ ing world power situation and the increased military vulnerability of the US. The UK and the major continental powers have asserted a more independent position within the alliance, and we believe this tendency will continue. 36. Over the next decade, France, or more likely several continen­ tal European countries jointly, will almost certainly try like the UK to develop a capability in nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles suffi­ cient to constitute in their view some independent deterrent to Soviet aggression. In some respects, the achievement of such a capability would strengthen the alliance. On the other hand, it would enable the European allies to pursue somewhat more vigorous policies in defense of their individual interests, with effects which may or may not further the interests of the alliance. Moreover, they could then afford to be more flexible in dealing with the Soviet Union; and they would be better able, if so inclined, to remain neutral in the event of a local conflict in which their vital interests were not engaged (for example, in the Far East). A gradual transformation of the Atlantic alliance could thus come about, although we do not believe that the major European powers will wish to stand alone against the USSR without a US security guarantee. 37. Trends toward neutralism will probably occur among the allies in the Middle East and Asia, with certain notable exceptions, such as Turkey and Australia. Some of the members of the Baghdad Pact are already beginning to question the advantage of maintaining their mem­ bership. In various countries, domestic groups who favor a more neu­ tral position are becoming increasingly vocal. Japan’s relationship with the US also seems likely to undergo considerable change. The Japanese are restive over restrictions upon trade, both with Communist China and the US, and they will become reluctant to withhold recognition of
