September 1953–December 1954
827
agreement. He pointed out that General Zahedi, an honest but ideal-
istic and therefore dangerous13 military man, seemed to believe it pos-
sible to obtain by means of rigged elections a Majlis which would ap-
prove any oil settlement which he might propose. This, he felt, was a
great mistake, since the only way that approval of a lasting oil settle-
ment could be obtained was by electing in a free and legal manner a
truly representative Majlis once the country had been properly pre-
pared for this move. To the Ambassador’s observation that regardless
of the feeling of the Iranian people there were only five months left in
which to act, Baqai had no rejoinder.
The interview terminated with the Ambassador and Dr. Baqai ex-
changing thanks for each party’s frank and complete presentation. Be-
fore leaving at approximately 9 p.m., Dr. Baqai professed his readiness
to discuss the oil question further with the Ambassador at the latter’s
convenience.
13 Richards underlined the phrase “therefore dangerous” and wrote a question
mark in the margin.
342.
Monthly Project Status Report Prepared in the Directorate of
Plans, Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated.
Summary
A. Mission: The mission of the project is to establish an effective in-
strument in Iran with which to work toward our political and psycho-
logical objectives. Individuals and groups that show a potential to orga-
nize and direct attacks against the Communists in Iran are supported
and used to contact and direct various religious, political, labor and
other leaders of important factions in Iran.
B. Plan: [5 lines not declassified].
C. Summary of PP Action: The immediate aims of the project are to
emphasize the Soviet sponsorship of the Tudeh Party, and hence its
danger to Iranian freedom, and to prevent the Communists from capi-
talizing on the present unstable condition of Iran.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 59–00133R, Box 5, Folder 13,
[cryptonym not declassified]. Secret; Security Information. The report covers Operation
[cryptonym not declassified] for October 1953.
