336
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
1. German Growth Prospects
After delivering your letter,2 I inquired about German growth
prospects for 1978, but did not put any pressure on Schmidt to accel-
erate these efforts nor directly ask for a raising of the 3.5% target they
have set for 1978. Obviously the Germans assumed I would be doing
some of these things and the Chancellor almost immediately gave a
very defensive analysis, making three points:
(1) doing more than 3.5% was not possible;
(2) he thought the chances of achieving this number were rela-
tively good;
(3) while he might consider a further stimulus if the economy per-
formed badly, he was unwilling to so indicate now.
I restricted myself to noting that 3.5% was a relatively modest
target; that he was starting practically from a no-growth situation, and
that, therefore, to get a 3.5% average implied an increase in the German
economic growth rate to 4.5% by year end. I also said that bringing
about that kind of result would be quite an achievement and would
constitute considerable progress over 1977.
2. The Summit
The Chancellor raised this issue with a 20-minute lecture on the
political importance of the Summit. He said it was obvious that these
meetings may be called Economic Summits, but that they are really po-
litical. The London Summit had been useful for reasons quite apart
from the discussions of economic issues, and the need for a similar
meeting was urgent for it would provide opportunities to discuss such
matters as the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, SALT, and other polit-
ical matters. I agreed that a Summit meeting between world leaders
provides opportunities for discussions beyond economics, but reiter-
ated our position that there was no escaping an “economic” label, and
that the Summit, with no hope of success in that area, would be coun-
terproductive. The conclusion here is obvious: the Chancellor is vitally
interested to insure that the Summit does take place in Bonn in July. If
handled well, it does give us some leverage with him.
3. The Need for German “Leadership” in Europe on Economic Matters
I told the Chancellor that I thought Germany had a responsibility
to provide leadership, particularly to help other European countries
emerge more quickly from the recession of the mid-1970s. The U.S.
could not be expected to provide such “leadership” alone.
This argument caused the Chancellor to engage in another lengthy
lecture on the dangers of Germans taking the lead on anything. The
main point was that the fear of Germany remains great and war-time
2 See Document 103.
