December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
631
on Egyptian-Israeli issues dependent on progress on Palestinian issues.
That would enable Sadat and potential supporters to argue that Egypt’s
military and diplomatic leverage was being applied on behalf of the
Arab cause. Israel, however, is not likely to accept such linkage. Almost
any treaty, therefore, will provoke Arab criticism. [handling restriction
not declassified]
In the Arab view, an Egyptian-Israeli treaty must contain some Is-
raeli commitment to withdrawal, and it must, at minimum, not fore-
close the possibility of an independent Palestinian state. More specific
Arab demands revolve around two issues; Israeli withdrawal from
Arab territory—including East Jerusalem—captured in the 1967 war;
and Palestinian self-determination. NFAC has no reporting to indi-
cate a significant softening of these terms. [handling restriction not
declassified]
If a treaty does not make some allowance for such views, the
Saudis probably would feel compelled to reaffirm the sanctions voted
against Egypt at Baghdad3 though they might seek to delay implemen-
tation. They would be under great pressure to align themselves more
closely to hard-line Arab states such as Iraq and Syria. Syria, the
toughest on terms, would quicken its efforts to form a new Arab con-
sensus around its leadership. King Husayn would initially equivocate
if confronted with a treaty, but because of Jordan’s contiguous bor-
der with Syria and Iraq and its heavy dependence on external financ-
ing, he would follow the lead of Damascus, Baghdad and Riyadh. He
would not isolate himself with President Sadat. [handling restriction not
declassified]
Insofar as a treaty would require the early participation of other
Arabs in negotiations, we do not believe that Jordan, Syria and Saudi
Arabia would “accept” the treaty and participate. Their willingness
over time to adjust to the situation and allow Egypt to return to the
Arab fold would depend on several developments, including the atti-
tudes of the Palestinians and President Sadat, and on Israeli policies.
[handling restriction not declassified]
3 See footnote 7, Document 91.
