3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
824
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
he cannot ignore those pressures. The Secretary suspected that he had
been selected for the office of Secretary of State precisely because he
had a political constituency that would take pressure off the President.
He was willing to do that. In that spirit he had come to the present
meeting in order to explore possible solutions. He hoped that its result
would be more than simply he and Gromyko gaining confidence in
each other. He hoped that some ideas for solutions would emerge from
this meeting, enabling both sides to pick up the policy of detente, which
in the Secretary’s view was the only sensible and serious course to
follow. Both of them had said things to each other that were un-
pleasant, trying to be frank. Perhaps they would be able to communi-
cate some of these sentiments to those they represented.
Iran
Gromyko first wanted to reply to the Secretary’s comments about
the Tudeh Party. This was an internal domestic political force in Iran,
and the Soviet Union had nothing to do with it. It seemed to be an old
habit of political leaders in Washington to refer to special relationships
between the Soviet Union and such forces as the Tudeh Party. He could
only say that these political leaders were victims of their own
inventions.
As for the Soviet radio broadcasts to Iran of which the Secretary
has spoken, Gromyko could only point out that these broadcasts stated
official Soviet policy, i.e., condemnation of the military means con-
templated by the U.S., condemnation of the actions of the U.S. fleet of
contemplated blockade and mining. That was official Soviet policy and
it had been stated in the broadcasts. It was difficult for the Soviet Union
to understand why such military actions were being contemplated or
undertaken. In particular, the last rescue operation seemed to him to be
contrary to the purposes the United States wanted to accomplish. Had
it continued, it would surely have led to the death of all the hostages
and perhaps many other people. It would surely be much better to get
the hostages out alive. As for the broadcasts the Secretary had men-
tioned, if one were to compare these broadcasts with those the United
States beamed at the Soviet Union, one could only come to the conclu-
sion that if medals were awarded for hostile statements, the United
States would walk away with all the medals. He would only ask the
Secretary not to consider these to be Olympic medals since the United
States obviously did not believe in the Olympics.
Gromyko said that the only policy toward Iran the Soviet Union
was pursuing was aimed at seeing an independent, sovereign state,
peacefully developing its own interests without any outside interfer-
ence or intrusions.
Gromyko noted that they were now approaching the end of their
conversation and surmised that each of them would probably be asked
