800.51 W 89Belgium/34b: Telegram [Document 59] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) [Paraphrase] WASHINGTON, May 29, 1925—4 p.m. 32. (1) Thomas W. Lamont called at the Department on May 25 to discuss the negotiations for proposed loan of $50,000,000 from J. P. Morgan and Company to Belgium. After consultation with the President and with the approval of Secretary of the Treasury Mellon and Secretary of Commerce Hoover, I informed Mr. Lamont that the Government of the United States would not look with favor upon any further loans to Belgium until that Government took definite steps in the direction of funding its indebtedness to the United States. I gave Mr. Lamont the substance of our recent note to Belgium and emphasized fact of Belgium’s discrimination against us in the matter of post-armistice relief debt. He said that his firm would not make loan if the United States objected. He also read me a cable from his European representative saying that the Belgians had stated that they were unable to take any steps toward funding their indebtedness to the United States until a new Government had been formed and until they had prescribed and passed their budget; and that they thought that they would be able to discuss a refunding arrangement about September. I informed Mr. Lamont that I regarded this prospect as unsatisfactory, that it was merely a repetition of what had taken place in the past, and that this was not the first time that the Belgian Ambassador was going over to discuss situation with his Government. If his Government could now negotiate for and contract a loan for $50,000,000 with American bankers, it should certainly take up negotiations on the debt to this Government. (2) You will immediately seek appointment with the appropriate Belgian officials and will make the following oral statement: The Belgian Government is at present negotiating with American bankers for sale to the American public through them of $50,000,000 of Belgian bonds. While the Government of the United States does not wish to oppose flotation by Belgium in the American market of loans essential to the financial reconstruction of Belgium, nevertheless the Belgian Government will appreciate that the Government of the United States has a responsibility which must lead it to see that national interests are protected. Further delay on Belgium’s part in funding its indebtedness to the Government of the United States might lead to differences between the two Governments which should be avoided. A settlement is clearly in the interests of both Governments. The Government of the United States will not interpose objection to flotation in the United States of proposed $50,000,000 loan
