250  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
see purpose remaining on first item agenda after 40 days of discussion 
and after reaching agreement. Under second item both sides could 
raise questions at issue between two countries in accordance original 
proposal of US which was confirmed at beginning of talks.
12. I said it was not my choice we spent 40 to 45 days discussing 
item one. At outset I suggested quick expeditious way resolve item one 
was permit those who wanted to return to return. He did not find that 
suggestion acceptable and I acceded to his position. Of those Americans 
about whom we started our discussion August 2 there are still 19 not yet 
able to return. We agreed on the agenda. I fully honor that agreement and 
was prepared enter into discussions item two at proper time.
13. Wang asked what “proper time” meant and when could item 
two be discussed.
14. I replied it was very simple matter. It would be when it was 
clear terms announcement were being faithfully implemented. I stated 
announcement says “further appropriate measures will be adopted so 
they can expeditiously exercise their right to return”. He had informed 
me names some Americans now being enabled to return and I hoped he 
would soon be able inform me of others as well. My government intended 
fully and faithfully carry out terms announcement and I would keep him 
fully informed on measures taken to this end. He had told me some mea­
sures his government had taken. This was helpful and useful and I hoped 
next meeting he could give me further information this regard.
15. Wang insisted he failed see connection between implementa­
tion of agreement and second item of agenda which we were going 
to discuss. He said we have already discussed at great length means 
for return of nationals of both sides and he could not see why we 
remained on item one and did not enter on discussion item two. Did 
we desire return to old ground covered in discussing return civilians? 
He thought it would be meaningless if we returned to arguments on 
item one because agreement reached and consent of both governments 
had resolved and settled that question. He failed to see how we could 
put aside item two and return to item one.
16. I replied I was as interested as he in item two but it was of 
tremendous importance we have best possible atmosphere in which to 
discuss these matters.
17. Wang said he thought my line of argument very peculiar and 
regrettable. He was disappointed after we reached agreement on item 
one we should put aside item two and return to item one.
18. I said we were not returning to item one but we were only still 
discussing it. Agreed statement represented progress. I had no desire 
go over old arguments and no such intention, but discussion of imple­
mentation was very useful and I had hoped he felt the same.
