Chapter 4, February–April 1990  655
Bartholomew: Is there anything you want to say? Karpov: 
Shevardnadze made a great effort personally to move toward the US 
position. This was not an easy task in interagency consultation, there 
were difficulties. These proposals are now approved as a basis for fur-
ther discussion. We are not saying this and nothing else. We are ready 
to negotiate, to seek a common solution acceptable to both sides. This 
is what we could offer.
Bartholomew: On a first quick reading, and taking into account the 
fact that where language looks different it may be the result of double 
translation, and being careful not to get ahead of the story tomorrow 
with the Secretary, let me first say I respect the effort. That said, I can 
identify in your paper some if not all of the issues that I banged my 
head on with Akhromeyev. Let me make some observations and per-
haps ask some questions.
Bartholomew: Many of the elements here are troublesome. One 
troublesome problem that is not here is any mention that tactical air-
craft with conventional ALCMs count in START. I note that the 600 km 
ALCM range, the ALCM heavy bomber limit of 115, the number 100 
versus 115 for converted heavy bombers are all still elements of your 
position which are unacceptable to us. I have a question about the 
distinguishability language concerning the specifics in parentheses. 
Karpov: Those are examples, not a definition.
Bartholomew: On SLCMs, I note the 600 km range, the specific 
agreed numerical limit, the introduction of distinguishability for 
SLCMs, and the reference to cooperative measures for verification in 
addition to NTM, all of which are problems for us.
Bartholomew: You deserve a more considered response than I can 
give you here. I note that while there are some things I am happy not 
to see, we must recognize that many others still remain problems car-
rying over from the conversation with Akhromeyev. I also take note 
of the spirit in which you presented these proposals on behalf of your 
Minister.
Bartholomew: You will come with Omelichev tomorrow at 10:00. 
Will there be just the two of you? Karpov: Amb. Dubinin would like to 
be present.
Bartholomew: I will get this to Secretary Baker this evening. We 
will take it from there in the meeting with the Secretary tomorrow. I 
have nothing more to say at this point.
Karpov: As for SLCMs, we have in there in effect two small pack-
ages. As we discussed in Moscow and again in Washington, the range 
and the inclusion of nuclear only or non-­nuclear too are related. We 
have that solution in the package. As Akhromeyev informed you there 
might also be a trade between the acknowledgement of some ceiling for
