United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 55 the “B” department as an integral part of our proposals on the Bank. He accordingly invited the Latins to give him the benefit of their views on this question also. However, because of the lateness of the hour it was agreed to defer this part of the discussion to another early occasion. ETA–18. Memorandum from the Officer in Charge of Economic Development, Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs (Rosenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1  Washington, February 4, 1959. SUBJECT Inter-American Bank: Issues A second informal and “off the record” meeting was held on the evening of February 2 in the home of Mr. Rafael Glower to continue the discussions which took place several nights before at Mr. Upton’s home.2 It will be recalled that at the previous informal meeting the Latins asked for four concessions from the United States proposals. These related to: 1) increase in U.S. subscription to callable capital, 2) reduced Latin American dollar-­subscriptions, 3) stretch-­out payments, and 4) voting power. At the meeting of February 2 the discussion narrowed down to essentially two issues, i.e. the nature of the soft-­loan department of the institution, and the amount of callable capital in the hard-­loan department. Several of the Latins present thought that the soft operations of the Bank ought to be separated from the hard loans even more sharply than contemplated in the United States proposal which called for two separate departments within a single bank. It was suggested that there should be a special “Fund”, organizationally entirely separate from the Bank but administered by the latter as a trust. This idea had been put forward earlier in a session of Subcommittee I by representatives of Venezuela and 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 61 D 279, “Inter-American Development Bank 1959.” Official Use Only. The source text is an uninitiated carbon copy. 2 Apparent reference to the meeting held on January 29; the memorandum of conversation of the meeting is Document ETA–17.
