628  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
104.	 Draft Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 6, 1990, 9:30 a.m.–1 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Verification, Compliance and Implementation, Lot 
06D436, Verification, Compliance and Implementation Subject Files, 1983–2005, Box 25, 
Ministerials: Washington April 4–6 1990. No classification marking. The meeting took 
place in the EUR Conference Room.
2 Not found.
U.S.
Richard Burt
Linton Brooks
Edward Ifft
David Smith
Soviet
Yuriy Nazarkin
Lem Masterkov
Gennadiy Khromov
Yuriy Roslyakov
Victor Koltunov
Burt: I would like to raise some questions with regard to road-­
mobile ICBMs. Mr. Khromov at our first meeting raised one idea for 
verifying road-­mobile ICBMs, i.e., a small restricted area (5 square 
kilometers), and a large deployment area (16,000 square kilometers). 
Notification of movement outside the restricted area would be for visits 
to maintenance facilities, etc. Yesterday you proposed a new approach. 
Please explain the second, and its relationship to the first.
Nazarkin: The two are alternatives; they are independent of each 
other. Col. Koltunov will explain them.
Koltunov: In the second variant, the territory of the restricted area 
is determined by the number of launchers in it: 1–2 road-­mobile launch-
ers per 25 square kilometers. Routine movement and training would be 
within the deployment area. Notification would be provided when a 
road-­mobile launcher leaves its restricted area for routine movement 
if, at the moment when the launcher leaves the restricted area, the total 
number outside the restricted area is greater than 50% of the total num-
ber in that restricted area. Notification would take place no later than 
24 hours after the launcher left the restricted area. There would be no 
limit on the number of road mobile launchers outside the restricted 
area, but all would be in the deployment area.
Burt: Thank you for the very clear and competent presentation. 
I have a few questions. Personally, I am attracted to several elements 
of the proposal, particularly that having to do with notification. But I 
am confused about several things. First, in the paper2 you talk about a 
restricted area on the basis of 1–2 mobile launchers for each 25 square 
kilometers. What does that mean for the total size of the Soviet restricted 
area; for example, if you are talking about 10 launchers?
