armament, that their respective navies should be maintained at the
lowest level compatible with national security and should not be
of the size and character to warrant the suspicion of aggressive
intent and finally that a wise economy dictates that further naval
construction be kept to a minimum.
The Government of the United States remains willing to use its
best efforts to obtain a basis of further naval limitation
satisfactory to all the naval powers, including those not
represented at the Three Power Conference in Geneva, and is
willing to take into consideration in any conference the special
needs of France, Italy or any other naval power for the particular
class of vessels deemed by them most suitable for their defense.
This could be accomplished by permitting any of the powers to
vary the percentage of tonnage in classes within the total tonnage;
a certain percentage to be agreed upon. If there was an increase in
one class of vessels it should be deducted from the tonnage to be
used in other classes. A proposal along these lines made by
France and discussed by the American and French representatives
would be sympathetically considered by the United States. It
expects on the part of others, however, similar consideration for
its own needs. Unfortunately the Franco-British agreement, so far
as its purport can be ascertained from the summary given, appears
to fulfill none of the conditions which, to the American
Government, seem vital. It leaves unlimited a very large class of
effective fighting ships and this very fact would inevitably lead to
a recrudescence of naval competition disastrous to national
economy.
In a letter of July 31, 1928, from the British Embassy and the
letter of August 3, 1928, from the French Embassy the following
practically identical statement occurs:
‘The final disarmament conference to fix the maximum
tonnage applicable to all powers.’
The United States does not understand the precise meaning of this
statement. Does it mean that the disarmament conference will fix
