324
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
fied in terms of decisions made by the “security committee.” The cap-
tors whom they met all appeared to be genuine students, although
some of them, particularly the numerous armed guards, appeared to be
very young. Coffin described one as a student of electrical engineering
named Mohammad. He was deeply moved by the Christmas services
and even took notes on Coffin’s sermon. Bishop Gumbleton thought
that the students did not occupy quite as commanding a role as Coffin
ascribed to them. He said that the students had not wanted the clergy
to come and that Ghotbzadeh had arranged this through Khomeini.
He also noted that, in the controversy over the numbers, Ghotbzadeh
after talking to the clergy may have played a role in persuading the
students to acknowledge that some hostages had not been seen.
III. Other Meetings: The clergy had a long meeting with Ghotbzadeh
and found him genuinely interested in finding a solution. He and
others whom they talked with seemed to feel that the holding of the
hostages was an embarrassment, but nevertheless felt very strongly
about the Shah’s crimes and the need for the U.S. to recognize their
grievances. The clergy also met with a group of religious figures where
they again found very deep feelings about the Shah’s crimes and an
insistence that the U.S. could easily arrange the Shah’s extradition
from Panama.
IV. U.S. Policy and Outlook for the Hostages: Reverend Howard was
persuaded that, barring some unforeseen development, the hostages
might be there a very long time. All three believed that the U.S. and
Iran are approaching the problem from totally different perspectives
and seem unlikely to find common ground. Howard also noted the
problem of reaching Khomeini and the students. He noted that it meant
nothing to the students when the clergy argued with them that they
would look bad in the eyes of the world if the clergy did not hold the
services. Their ideas were fixed and rigid. Reverend Coffin argued that
the U.S. needs to find ways to hear the legitimate grievances of the
Iranians who had suffered under the Shah. All three clergy believed
that economic sanctions against Iran would only harden the position
of Iranians and make matters worse. Howard said it will “move them
to martyrdom.” Howard also argued in contrast to Coffin’s position
that any dramatic proposal offered by the U.S. would only lead the
Iranians to believe that the holding of hostages was yielding results
and would not lead to their release. Without specifying a specific
formula, Howard felt that we should look for some way to make small
gestures from our side which might produce a change in Iranian
thinking.
V. Public Statements on the Hostages: After considerable discussion,
the clergy appeared to agree that they would only release the names
of the hostages if the families agreed to their doing so. Coffin appeared
