610
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
the confidentiality of his words, but to improve the stories they publish
to reflect the facts more accurately. There is another development. We
have had good support from the European and Japanese allies who
have weighed in with Bani-Sadr. The President had talked to Margaret
Thatcher (who was with Chancellor Schmidt) and with Giscard yester-
day. We also know that the Prime Ministers of Japan and Italy sent
strong messages to Bani-Sadr. Giscard reported today that Bani-Sadr
told the French Ambassador, “I don’t attach too much importance to
threats.”7 But the action of all the allies, the President thought, had
made a real impression. Bani-Sadr told us via Giscard that the hostages
would be released at the time of the convening of the Majlis and that
Khomeini had agreed to this, to avoid long debates on the subject. The
Congressional leadership will be here within an hour, and the President
intended to bring them up to date in the same way. He saw nothing
wrong in informing them of the decisions we understand had been
taken in Tehran, indicating that we would monitor developments care-
fully, with an announcement to be made tomorrow. He thought that
would carry us over the night.
ZB said the President should read the message he had sent to
Bani-Sadr.
Powell wondered about reading the text.
ZB said they already know the substance.
JP said that parts of it could be turned against us, e.g. the emphasis
on American public opinion.
HJ said we are in a hell of a fix when the media believes the Iranians
instead of us. We should weigh in officially with the Iranians that joint
control of the hostages is unsatisfactory.
CV said we already have but we can do so again.
HJ said the speech at midday tomorrow will force Bani-Sadr to
take a position.
ZB said we should be ready to move if the speech is again dilatory.
The Pres asked where we got this latest information.
CV replied from Bourguet. We were checking the information with
the Swiss.
The Pres said he had jotted down some thoughts about a statement
to the US people to the effect that we had been informed by top Iranian
leaders that the US hostages were to be released from the militants
. . . it was not yet official . . . we would see it as a constructive step
. . . it was necessary to assure the safety and well-being of the hostages
7 As relayed in telegram 10455 from Paris, March 31. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P900077–1842)
