1955 59 54. Memorandum of Conversation, Koo and Robertson1 Washington, August 9, 1955 SUBJECT Negotiations with Chinese Communists PARTICIPANTS Ambassador V. K. Wellington Koo, Chinese Embassy Walter S. Robertson, Assistant Secretary—FE Walter P. McConaughy, Director—CA Ambassador Koo said he had noted the remarks of the Secretary in his press conference of August 2. The Chinese Government was uneasy over the apparent possibility of a high level meeting with the Chinese Communists. The Ambassador was instructed by his Government to state that it would look with strong disfavor on any meeting between the American Government and the Chinese Communists at the Foreign Minister level. He said he would be very gratified if he could be given a confirmation that no such meeting is in prospect. Mr. Robertson said that there was no change whatever in the Amer­ ican position on this. The situation was the same as when the Secretary held his press conference. There was no likelihood of such a meeting then, and there was none now. Ambassador Koo expressed his gratification at the receipt of this information. He said his Government was also gratified to have received through the American Embassy in Taipei, a summary of the Secretary’s instructions to Ambassador Johnson for the talks at Geneva. He said that his Government felt the instructions were not objection­ able “as far as they go”. Mr. Robertson said that Ambassador Johnson’s authorization went no further than the instructions summarized for the information of the Chinese Government. The limitations on the discussions were clearly set forth in the instructions, and there were no instructions beyond those which had been paraphrased in the Chinese Foreign Office. Ambassador Koo said that his Government was interested in learning of the latest developments in the talks at Geneva. Mr. Robertson said there had been no tangible progress so far on the question of the release of the American civilians. The main purpose of the talks was to get our people out. Wang Ping-­nan was trying to make an issue of alleged interference with the travel to the mainland of 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–955. Confidential. Drafted by McConaughy on August 12.
