1979  711
—We should then define the broad criteria that define future stra-
tegic aircraft posture. (C)
Unless General Ellis gains ground for his FB–111 B/C (some report 
that he is doing so), these ought not be big issues in the FY 81 budget. 
They should be quite significant for FY 82. (C)
157.	 Editorial Note
On September 7, 1979, President Jimmy Carter, joined by Secre-
tary of Defense Harold Brown, spoke to reporters in the Old Executive 
Office Building to announce details of his decision to develop a new, 
mobile land-­based intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) system, the 
MX, as part of his administration’s plan to strengthen the U.S. strategic 
Triad of sea-, air-, and land-­based nuclear weapons. At 95 tons with 
10 independently targetable warheads each, the MX was the largest 
ICBM system to date and was comparable to the Soviet SS–18 ICBM 
system (its largest in 1980). (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pages 
1599–1601)
In his remarks, Carter outlined the five criteria for the MX basing 
system: “First, it must contribute to the ability of the strategic forces to 
survive an attack. Second, it must be verifiable so as to set a standard 
which can serve as a precedent for the verifiability of mobile ICBM sys-
tems on both sides. Third, it must minimize the adverse impact on our 
own environment. Fourth, its deployment must be at a reasonable cost 
to the American taxpayer. And fifth, it must be consistent with existing 
SALT agreements and with our SALT III goal of negotiating for sig-
nificant mutual reductions in strategic forces.” Carter then announced 
the development of a system of 200 MX missiles, transportable among 
23 shelters via specially constructed roadways in Western states of the 
United States at a projected cost of $33 billion. Carter concluded by 
stating that MX was “not a bargaining chip,” but rather a necessary 
addition to ensure national security Carter concluded: “As long as the 
threat of war persists, we will do what we must to deter that threat to 
our Nation’s security. If SALT II is ratified and SALT III is successful, 
then the time may come when no President will have to make this kind 
of decision again, and the MX system will be the last weapon system 
of such enormous destructive power that we will ever have to build. 
I fervently pray for that time, but until it comes we will build what 
we must, even as we continue to work for mutual restraint in strategic 
armaments.” (Ibid.)
