274  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
the diversion of the government’s own revenues towards meeting the 
local costs of such projects, thus subtracting from the total funds which 
could have otherwise been available for such fields of development as 
highways, ports, schools and public health. The President continued 
that in certain fields such as public power it would be very difficult, 
if not impossible, to reverse what had already been done, but that his 
government was determined to limit the use of government funds for 
projects which should properly be developed by private capital to an 
absolute minimum, using the government’s resources in those fields 
which could only be developed with public funds. He said therefore 
he and his government obviously were in favor of the investment of 
private capital both domestic and foreign, and of giving every possible 
encouragement to private initiative to do what in reality he felt it could 
do better than the government in any case. In return he did hope that 
there could be somewhat more flexibility in credits made available to 
the government and necessary projects in the public sector, particularly 
in giving consideration to the needs for the local currency costs of such 
projects. He closed these remarks by emphasizing that Chile was most 
grateful for the help given by the United States to his government and 
that he was not complaining but only pleading for a broad and flexible 
approach to this old problem of economic development. He mentioned 
specifically a lack of flexibility in the use of local currency accruing 
under PL-480.
The Senator replied that he was very grateful for having the 
President’s views, which to a large extent corresponded to his own. 
Senator Morse continued that the President might think it odd com-
ing from him as a Liberal, but that he had long felt that the most 
important export the United States could make, particularly to the 
underdeveloped countries of the world, was its faith and belief in eco-
nomic freedom. He emphasized his conviction that political freedom 
of choice could not long exist without economic freedom of choice, 
and that a strong and vigorous system of private enterprise was the 
best guarantee of such economic freedom. Hence he was delighted to 
know at first hand that the President shared his views on the respec-
tive roles that should be played by private enterprise and by the gov-
ernment in the economic development of the country. He also was 
happy to have the President’s assurances of his receptivity to for-
eign investment as an aid in achieving such development. He added 
that he had long felt that in addition to the direct investment which 
could be made by foreign capital, further ways should be sought by 
which the foreign credit agencies, both national and international, 
could assist through loans in providing the capital to make possible 
a healthy growth of domestic free enterprise within these countries.
