National Security Policy  739
the program to decline from $900 million in FY–59 to $619 million in 
FY–60, and $500 million in FY–61, these figures representing substan­
tial reductions over previous planning.
Dr. Killian asked whether there has been any thought of giving 
the NIKE–ZEUS a capability against aircraft. General Lemnitzer said 
that, within resources available, it has been thought best to concentrate 
on the main goal, which is anti-­missile use. The President said he did 
not see why a missile that could shoot down another missile could not 
shoot down an incoming airplane.
Mr. Stans spoke about budgetary trends. Under existing Defense 
programs, he could foresee budgetary expenditures in the range of $43½ 
billion to $44 billion coming in FY–61. Although reductions in program 
were being discussed, these were reductions in programs that had not 
yet been approved by funding, and he was desirous that action should 
not imply funding approval. He suggested that an over-­all study of 
air defense later this year might result in knocking the BOMARC out 
entirely, as an item of very low priority. The President commented that 
the process of concentration upon the things that are most useful might 
lead us to eliminate a good deal now included in the programs to which 
Mr. Stans referred.
Dr. Killian said he understood that the current discussion in no 
way precludes another thoroughgoing look later on, on a more com­
prehensive basis, including consideration of the F–­108, hardening, con­
cealment, and other features. Mr. McElroy said he thinks that the F–­108 
is a very vulnerable proposition, i.e., he doubts that it can be justified 
for continuation. He recognized the Air Force might not agree with this 
and said he is not prejudging the matter at this time.
Mr. Nixon asked whether this presentation would tend to com­
mit the Administration to these air defense programs for FY–61. Mr. 
Gates said it would be difficult to cancel these programs later this year 
if the presentation is made as now proposed; therefore this decision 
does commit us somewhat. General White said that in his opinion 
this should be a firm decision as of the present, but that each segment 
would of course be re-­examined each fiscal year. Mr. Nixon stressed 
the need for an “escape hatch” of some kind, perhaps a statement that 
we are watching developments so as to revise the program from time 
to time.
The President asked how much the Soviets are exercising their 
bomber aircraft at the present time. General White said that our infor­
mation is that they are conducting an extensive training effort. The 
President said there is reason not to get complacent over the fact that 
the estimate of Soviet bombers has been cut back.
