Arms Control and Disarmament 1277 3. A SYSTEM FOR DETECTION AND IDENTIFICATION OF CLANDESTINE NUCLEAR TESTS WITHIN THE USSR. This section will discuss a Long Range Detection System within the USSR and China designed to meet the following requirements: (1) The detection and identification of tests as small as 1 KT between the surface and 50 kilofeet, and (2) Detection of underground explosions, and possibly their identification, in a yield range of 1 KT and above. a. Seismic Net. In considering the deployment of seismic stations within the USSR to give 90% capability of detecting tests of 1 KT or larger, three problems of major magnitude appear: (1) The band of low signal level between 500 and 1100 miles from the source. (2) The high microseismic noise level expected at stations in aver­ age localities. (3) The frequency of earthquakes of yield equivalent to 1 to 5 KT which because of small signal amplitudes are the most difficult to identify. As a result of the loss in signal level between 500 and 1100 miles, it is expected that signals from a one kiloton explosion in this distance range will be smaller than the prevailing microseismic noise. It is to be expected that the noise level at a station removed from sources of cultural noise would be as high as .005 microns. An inspection of Figure 6 will show that such a station would be unlikely to detect an explosion at a distance greater than 400 miles. This loss in detectability makes it necessary to use more elaborate techniques than are currently employed at AFOAT–1 stations in order to detect 1 KT without cov­ ering the USSR and China with an inordinately large number of sta­ tions. It is believed possible to obtain an improvement in detectability of about a factor of four at individual seismic stations by employing arrays of about 20 seismometers at each station. A spacing between the seismometers can be chosen which should result in considerable cancellation of microseismic noise without appreciable degradation of signals of interest. The seismometers would be distributed approxi­ mately uniformly over an area of about six square kilometers. With the signal-­to-­noise improvement of about four to one, it may be seen from Figure 6 that signals of the order of three millimicrons would be detect­ able between 0 and 500 miles and again between 1100 and 2000 miles. In addition, it is believed that ultra-­long period seismometers (par. 2c(1)) under study may add considerably to the detection of long period surface waves from small subsurface tests. To date, long period surface waves were observed on Wigwam but not on Rainier. However, these instruments would be included in addition to the improved arrays of the present instruments to supplement detection at ranges possibly unfavor­ able to the present equipment mentioned above if future tests confirm the existence of long period surface waves from small subsurface tests.
