28
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ment Bank5 which could involve comparably difficult decisions and
similar needs for communication.
e. Consultations with the Congress. You could talk with several
leading Congressional advocates of human rights—both in the near fu-
ture and after the completion of the Department’s overall review of
human rights policy. In your early meetings with such Hill repre-
sentatives, you could seek out their views, promise close cooperation,
and report on the first steps taken by this Administration. Other De-
partment officers could meet with members of Congress and staff to
seek ideas for our own policy review.
2. Development of longer-term strategy. Although we do not advocate
prolonged study, we do see value in putting specific decisions into a
larger and more balanced context. We believe that either State Depart-
ment studies or any possible PRM’s on human rights should avoid pre-
cipitate recommendations and instead stress formulation of a more
general framework for US decisions. We therefore suggest consider-
ation of the following:
a. Formulation of overall policy strategy. Such an exercise should in-
clude general principles, factors to be considered on a case-by-case
basis, the range of available responses, potential risks and/or limits to
human rights initiatives, and elements of a proposed strategy. (See Tab
A for draft S/P outline for human rights strategy paper.) S/P could
take the lead on this exercise, in conjunction with D/HA and the rele-
vant bureaus. An initial draft could be available for review by the
Deputy Secretary this month.
b. Statement of criteria for implementation of human rights provisions in
current legislation. Because there is so much confusion about what con-
stitutes a “consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally rec-
ognized human rights” (basis for decisions on US economic assistance,
security assistance, and loans to some international financial organiza-
tions), the Department of State, in consultation with the Congress,
should try to clarify criteria so that we can be more responsive, both to
the Hill and overall US foreign policy objectives. S/P, in consultation
with D/HA, has taken a preliminary cut at this problem (see Tab B).6
We could refine a draft for review by the Deputy Secretary.
c. Drafting and coordination of bureau strategy papers. Papers, to be
done in parallel with the above, could help provide balance between,
on the one hand, stress on human rights and Congressional concerns
and, on the other, broader regional/functional foreign policy concerns.
They should concentrate on identifying those national governments
5 See footnote 10, Document 4.
6 Printed as the attachment to Document 1.
