Afghanistan 209 both sides—a result of the insurgents’ shortage of supplies and the DRA’s likely desire to reorganize in the wake of both a long spring/ summer campaign and recent political changes in Kabul. 4. It is too early to estimate precisely what effect the limited funding may have had on the insurgency. Indeed, some of the funds are still in the pipeline and have not yet reached the insurgents. The creation of a production mechanism to prepare propaganda materials, and the delivery of two radio transmitters to Pakistan to give the insurgents their “own radio” are significant steps. However, the effect of a propaganda operation is incremental and is part of a larger effort. The intensification of the insurgency will be abetted by these support efforts. 5. The insurgents have a continued critical need for funds. Timing is important. The current need is particularly relevant in view of both the expected hard winter, which will impede any resupply efforts, and an anticipated increase in Afghan Government pressure on the insurgents—possibly this winter, almost certainly in the spring. Specific proposals on expending this sum are: —An approach to the Saudis stating that we have already provided aid to the insurgents—citing funds, medical supplies, and radio broadcast transmitters. We would tell the Saudis that we wish to provide additional aid—[amount not declassified] for non-military support—and would inform the Saudis of our interest in discussing what support they may wish to provide in concert with our efforts. (This step is intended to accomplish several ends: to spur significant Saudi contributions, thus increasing the total amount of aid provided; to give evidence to the Saudis of the U.S. Government’s determination, expressed in concrete terms, to oppose communism; and to meet a recent Pakistani liaison request for our assistance in coordinating external support for the insurgents.) [less than 1 line not declassified] informal discussions with the Saudis indicated Saudi receptivity. —Depending on our discussions with the Saudis, we may subsequently participate in joint discussions with the Saudis and Pakistanis on coordinated support to the insurgency. —[amount not declassified] would be reserved for unilateral passage to insurgents or for subsequent passage to liaison. —[amount not declassified] would be utilized to continue and expand propaganda activities, including support for insurgent clandestine radio broadcasts. Risk: Operational risks are low. However, the insurgency has placed great strain on the Afghan Army and challenges the continued survival of the Government. To counter this, the Soviets have gradually augmented their military advisory presence, and the role of Soviet troops has increasingly changed from an advisory one to active partici-
