468 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 105. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, November 28, 1978 SUBJECT Nuclear Targeting Policy Review (U) I am forwarding to you our recently completed review of nuclear targeting policy that you requested in August 1977 as one of a number of follow-­up actions in PD–18. The study outlines several broad policy alternatives and also makes a number of specific recommendations with respect to nuclear weapons employment policy. It suggests some major changes both in the thrust of current policy and in the procedures for planning SIOP and non-SIOP options. Some issues will require further study and several of the broader policy issues should be the basis for interagency discussion. In the meantime, I plan to initiate action within DoD on those matters noted below that are within the framework of current policy, and which I believe can be acted on now. The basic theme of the study is that employment policy will make its maximum contribution to deterrence—­our basic strategic objective—­if our employment policies make a Soviet victory, as seen through Soviet eyes, as improbable as we can make it, independent of Soviet employment policy and of any particular scenario. These plans should include targeting options against Soviet military forces, command and control, and military support that would maximize the threats to the objective targets, while minimizing collateral damage. We should also have a capability to threaten escalation. To lend credibility to a US threat to escalate, we need employment options and supporting capabilities which the Soviets might perceive to be advantageous to us. Such options require greater flexibility and endurance than we now have in our nuclear posture. As you will note, the study makes a number of specific recommendations to these ends. In particular, it proposes specific measures to improve our capabilities to target and attack Soviet forces, C3 and [less than 1 line not declassified] It also suggests that we develop both plans and capabilities that will permit us to withhold attacks on [less than 1 line not declassified] targets as a means of coercion if a nuclear war is prolonged; and in general, that we focus our plans and our capability on the possibility of an extended exchange, rather than (as now) principally on an essentially instantaneous all-­out spasm exchange. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 35, Nuclear Targeting Policy Review: 11–12/78. Top Secret; Sensitive.
