700
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
must take steps to protect its independence. He pointed out how easy
it was to kick out the Americans and commented given the same degree
of Soviet involvement, Iran would have a difficult time getting rid of
the Soviets.
5. In spite of Bakhtiar’s conversation with Saddam Husayn, Bakh-
tiar remains concerned about what to do with General Oveisi, and his
desire to attempt to overthrow the Khomeini regime militarily. Oveisi,
Bakhtiar says, considers it essential that a military decision be obtained
before the politicians move in. Bakhtiar is concerned at the amount of
support that Oveisi is getting from the Iraqis who find Oveisi’s argu-
ments persuasive mainly because they fit in with the Iraqi view of Iran.
([less than 1 line not declassified]. Comment: [2 lines not declassified]) On
11 April, Oveisi was on the Iraqi-Iranian border assessing the situation.
Reportedly he also conferred with Kurdish tribal leader Sardar Jaf.
When he went up to the border, forces loyal to Oveisi occupied twelve
deserted Iranian border posts. Oveisi will stay in Iraq until circa 16
April trying to determine whether it will be possible for his forces to
carve out a substantial area of operations inside Iran, whereupon he
will return to France.
6. Commenting on his own movement’s efforts, Bakhtiar said that
part of his plan is already in operation and bearing fruit. He was
referring to the propaganda campaign currently being conducted by
two radios under his control and clashes between his supporters and
the Iranian Pasdarans. In noting the success of his growing propaganda
campaign, Bakhtiar pointed out that he is coming under increasing
attack in the Iranian media. He believes this is an indication that his
message is getting through. He has sent tapes back to Iran where they
are copied and distributed throughout the country. Bakhtiar said that
he would like to see more public relations support from Western coun-
tries. He is attempting to generate more support from liberal European
groups. He plans a public appearance on 22 April in Brussels which
is being supported by a liberal political group. He also plans to meet
with West German Socialist Party leader Willy Brandt in Strasbourg
at the end of April.
7. As his propaganda campaign increases, Bakhtiar will begin the
next phase of the plan which will be to sabotage the transportation of
refined oil products. Bakhtiar has obtained the advice of experts who
say that the pumping stations on refined products pipelines are very
vulnerable as Iran does not have the spare parts and expertise to repair
them. Bakhtiar’s supporters are planning now to blow up some of these
pumping stations. Large amounts of explosives have already been sent
to Iran. Bakhtiar said that Saddam Husayn told him the major oil
companies assume there will be sabotage operations against Iranian
oil. As a result, Iraq has already been approached by the Japanese and
