244  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
b. Fallout shelter will save 67 million, while 27 million will survive 
in any event, since the areas where they live will be substantially free 
from fallout.
c. The people who emerge from fallout shelter will be able to sur­
vive in the postattack environment, provided that emergency food 
supplies have been located at suitable distribution points prior to the 
attack.
d. The nation will be able to rehabilitate itself, provided that meas­
ures have been taken to insure the availability of refined petroleum at 
key locations.
e. The struggle for survival and recovery will be long and difficult, 
and the rehabilitated United States may bear little resemblance to the 
pre-­attack nation.
4. STATUS OF SHELTER MEASURES AS OF JUNE 30, 1958. Very 
little has been done to carry out the concept of shelter approved by 
the President on April 2, partly because no appropriation has been 
made for the purpose. It was then estimated that $28.5 million would 
be required for the program in FY ’59. The figure recently approved 
by the Budget Bureau is $11.35 million but a request for this amount 
has not yet been sent to Capitol Hill. Because of the lateness of the 
time it is possible that no appropriation for shelter will be made at this 
session of Congress.
COMMENT. If, as indicated in report No. 3 above, fallout shel­
ter could save 67 million Americans in a future war, the Government 
should move more rapidly and with more vigor to carry out the concept 
of shelter. This is especially necessary because the States and individ­
ual citizens will do little if the attitude of the Executive and Legislative 
branches of the Government is lukewarm. The President has not yet 
mentioned the subject publicly.
RECOMMENDATION: That at the NSC meeting, which is expected 
merely to note these reports, you stress the need for more urgency in 
the shelter program because of the present and long-­term danger to the 
United States from nuclear war.
Attachments:
Tabs A, B, C and D
