PAPERS RELATING TO THE FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE See PE FLV ao

Pz:

VOLUME I

(IN TWO VOLUMES)

DEPARTMENT OF STATE WASHINGTON

Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1924,

Volume I United States Government Printing Office Washington U.S. Department of State Office of the Historian Bureau of Public Affairs This ebook was generated on May 26, 2018. Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity. In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it. The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is errorfree and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback. To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage , and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState . Office of the Historian Bureau of Public Affairs U.S. Department of State May 2018

Contents Message of the President of the United States to Congress, December 3, 1924 List of Papers General: Proposals for the adherence of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the Spitzbergen Treaty of

liquidate relief loans made to certain European states (Documents 66-73) Negotiations on behalf of the World War Foreign Debt Commission for the settlement of debts owed the United States by foreign governments (Documents 74- Agreement between the United States and Austria and Hungary for the establishment of a claims commission,

Maintenance by the United States of unofficial relations with the revolutionary government in Albania (Documents 244-264) Postponement of negotiations for a treaty between the United States and Albania (Documents 265-266) Bolivia: Disinclination of the Secretary of State to offer the good offices requested by Bolivia for modification of the

Chile: Resignation of President Alessandri and the exercise of informal relations between the United States Embassy and the new administration at Santiago (Documents

Further postponement of the meeting of the Commission on Extraterritoriality in China (Documents

responsible for the murder of an American missionary (Documents 565-569) Colombia: Boundary dispute with Panama. (See under General.) Boundary dispute with Peru. (See under General.) Cuba: Passage of an amnesty bill by the Cuban Congress (Documents 570-571) Czechoslovakia: Exchange of notes between the United States and Czechoslovakia prolonging the customs agreement of

Purchase of the properties of the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company by the Dominican Government (Documents 618-631) Rejection of claim by a British subject against the United States for injuries at the hands of Dominican bandits (Documents 632-633) Ecuador: Resumption of interest payments by Ecuador on the bonds of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company (Documents 634-639) Claim of the Mercantile Bank of the Americas against Ecuador for the debt of the Cacao Growers Association (Documents 640-649) Boundary dispute with Peru. (See under General.) Egypt: Refusal by the United States to assent to the collection of the Gaffir tax from American nationals (Documents

Consent of the United States to increased duties on imports into Syria pending ratification of the Syrian mandate treaty (Documents 675-680) Opinion by the Department of State regarding jurisdiction over American nationals in Syria (Documents 681-682) Further protests by the United States against the grant of exclusive privileges to French archeologists for research in Albania and Afghanistan (Documents 683- 686) Discrimination against American shipping by French authorities in refusing to recognize classification and inspection of vessels by the American Bureau of Shipping (Documents 687-691) Index

Message of the President of the United States to Congress, December 3, 1924 TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES: The present state of the Union, upon which it is customary for the President to report to the Congress under the provisions of the Constitution, is such that it may be regarded with encouragement and satisfaction by every American. Our country is almost unique in its ability to discharge fully and promptly all its obligations at home and abroad, and provide for all its inhabitants an increase in material resources, in intellectual vigor and in moral power. The Nation holds a position unsurpassed in all former human experience. This does not mean that we do not have any problems. It is elementary that the increasing breadth of our experience necessarily increases the problems of our national life. But it does mean that if we will but apply ourselves industriously and honestly, we have ample powers with which to meet our problems and provide for their speedy solution. I do not profess that we can secure an era of perfection in human existence, but we can provide an era of peace and prosperity, attended with freedom and justice and made more and more satisfying by the ministrations of the charities and humanities of life. Our domestic problems are for the most part economic. We have our enormous debt to pay, and we are paying it. We have the high cost of government to diminish, and we are diminishing it. We have a heavy burden of taxation to reduce, and we are reducing it. But while remarkable progress has been made in these directions, the work is yet far from accomplished. We still owe over $21,000,000,000, the cost of the National Government is still about $3,500,000,000, and the national taxes still amount to about $27 for each one of our inhabitants. There yet exists this enormous field for the application of economy. In my opinion the Government can do more to remedy the economic ills of the people by a system of rigid economy in public expenditure than can be accomplished through any other action. The costs of our national and local governments combined now stand at a sum close to $100 for each inhabitant of the land. A little less than one third of this is represented by national expenditure, and a little more than two-thirds by local expenditure.

It is an ominous fact that only the National Government is reducing its debt. Others are increasing theirs at about $1,000,000,000 each year. The depression that overtook business, the disaster experienced in agriculture, the lack of employment and the terrific shrinkage in all values which our country experienced in a most acute form in 1920, resulted in no small measure from the prohibitive taxes which were then levied on all productive effort. The establishment of a system of drastic economy in public expenditure, which has enabled us to pay off about one-fifth of the national debt since 1919, and almost cut in two the national tax burden since 1921, has been one of the main causes in reestablishing a prosperity which has come to include within its benefits almost every one of our inhabitants. Economy reaches everywhere. It carries a blessing to everybody. The fallacy of the claim that the costs of government are borne by the rich and those who make a direct contribution to the National Treasury cannot be too often exposed. No system has been devised, I do not think any system could be devised, under which any person living in this country could escape being affected by the cost of our government. It has a direct effect both upon the rate and the purchasing power of wages. It is felt in the price of those prime necessities of existence, food, clothing, fuel and shelter. It would appear to be elementary that the more the Government expends the more it must require every producer to contribute out of his production to the Public Treasury, and the less he will have for his own benefit. The continuing costs of public administration can be met in only one way—by the work of the people. The higher they become, the more the people must work for the Government. The less they are, the more the people can work for themselves. The present estimated margin between public receipts and expenditures for this fiscal year is very small. Perhaps the most important work that this session of the Congress can do is to continue a policy of economy and further reduce the cost of government, in order that we may have a reduction of taxes for the next fiscal year. Nothing is more likely to produce that public confidence which is the forerunner and the mainstay of prosperity, encourage and enlarge business opportunity with ample opportunity for employment at good wages, provide a larger market for agricultural products, and put our country in a stronger position to be able

to meet the world competition in trade, than a continuing policy of economy. Of course necessary costs must be met, proper functions of the Government performed, and constant investments for capital account and reproductive effort must be carried on by our various departments. But the people must know that their Government is placing upon them no unnecessary burden.

TAXES Everyone desires a reduction of taxes, and there is a great preponderance of sentiment in favor of taxation reform. When I approved the present tax law, I stated publicly that I did so in spite of certain provisions which I believed unwise and harmful. One of the most glaring of these was the making public of the amounts assessed against different income-tax payers. Although that damage has now been done, I believe its continuation to be detrimental to the public welfare and bound to decrease public revenues, so that it ought to be repealed. Anybody can reduce taxes, but it is not so easy to stand in the gap and resist the passage of increasing appropriation bills which would make tax reduction impossible. It will be very easy to measure the strength of the attachment to reduced taxation by the power with which increased appropriations are resisted. If at the close of the present session the Congress has kept within the budget which I proposed to present, it will then be possible to have a moderate amount of tax reduction and all the tax reform that the Congress may wish for during the next fiscal year. The country is now feeling the direct stimulus which came from the passage of the last revenue bill, and under the assurance of a reasonable system of taxation there is every prospect of an era of prosperity of unprecedented proportions. But it would be idle to expect any such results unless business can continue free from excess profits taxation and be accorded a system of surtaxes at rates which have for their object not the punishment of success or the discouragement of business, but the production of the greatest amount of revenue from large incomes. I am convinced that the larger incomes of the country would actually yield more revenue to the Government if the basis of taxation were scientifically revised downward.

Moreover the effect of the present method of this taxation is to increase the cost of interest on productive enterprise and to increase the burden of rent. It is altogether likely that such reduction would so encourage and stimulate investment that it would firmly establish our country in the economic leadership of the world. WATERWAYS Meantime our internal development should go on. Provision should be made for flood control of such rivers as the Mississippi and the Colorado, and for the opening up of our inland waterways to commerce. Consideration is due to the project of better navigation from the Great Lakes to the Gulf. Every effort is being made to promote an agreement with Canada to build the St. Lawrence waterway. There are pending before the Congress bills for further development of the Mississippi Basin, for the taking over of the Cape Cod Canal in accordance with a moral obligation which seems to have been incurred during the war, and for the improvement of harbors on both the Pacific and the Atlantic coasts. While this last should be divested of some of its projects and we must proceed slowly, these bills in general have my approval. Such works are productive of wealth and in the long run tend to a reduction of the tax burden. RECLAMATION Our country has a well-defined policy of reclamation established under statutory authority. This policy should be continued and made a selfsustaining activity administered in a manner that will meet local requirements and bring our arid lands into a profitable state of cultivation as fast as there is a market for their products. Legislation is pending based on the report of the Fact Finding Commission for the proper relief of those needing extension of time in which to meet their payments on irrigated land, and for additional amendments and reforms of our reclamation laws, which are all exceedingly important and should be enacted at once. AGRICULTURE No more important development has taken place in the last year than the beginning of a restoration of agriculture to a prosperous condition. We must

permit no division of classes in this country, with one occupation striving to secure advantage over another. Each must proceed under open opportunities and with a fair prospect of economic equality. The Government can not successfully insure prosperity or fix prices by legislative fiat. Every business has its risk and its times of depression. It is well known that in the long run there will be a more even prosperity and a more satisfactory range of prices under the natural working out of economic laws than when the Government undertakes the artificial support of markets and industries. Still we can so order our affairs, so protect our own people from foreign competition, so arrange our national finances, so administer our monetary system, so provide for the extension of credits, so improve methods of distribution, as to provide a better working machinery for the transaction of the business of the Nation with the least possible friction and loss. The Government has been constantly increasing its efforts in these directions for the relief and permanent establishment of agriculture on a sound and equal basis with other business. It is estimated that the value of the crops for this harvest year may reach $13,000,000,000, which is an increase of over $3,000,000,000 in three years. It compares with $7,100,000,000 in 1913, and if we make deduction from the figures of 1924 for the comparatively decreased value of the dollar, the yield this year still exceeds 1913 in purchasing power by over $1,000,000,000, and in this interval there has been no increase in the number of farmers. Mostly by his own effort the farmer has decreased the cost of production. A marked increase in the price of his products and some decrease in the price of his supplies has brought him about to a parity with the rest of the Nation. The crop area of this season is estimated at 370,000,000 acres, which is a decline of 3,000,000 acres from last year, and 6,000,000 acres from 1919. This has been a normal and natural application of economic laws, which has placed agriculture on a foundation which is undeniably sound and beginning to be satisfactory. A decrease in the world supply of wheat has resulted in a very large increase in the price of that commodity. The position of all agricultural products indicates a better balanced supply, but we cart not yet conclude that agriculture is recovered from the effects of the war period or that it is permanently on a prosperous basis. The cattle industry has not yet

recovered and in some sections has been suffering from dry weather. Every effort must be made, both by Government activity and by private agencies, to restore and maintain agriculture to a complete normal relationship with other industries. It was on account of past depression, and in spite of present more encouraging conditions, that I have assembled an Agricultural Conference made up of those who are representative of this great industry in both its operating and economic sides. Everyone knows that the great need of the farmer is markets. The country is not suffering on the side of production. Almost the entire difficulty is on the side of distribution. This reaches back, of course, to unit costs and diversification, and many allied subjects. It is exceedingly intricate, for our domestic and foreign trade, transportation and banking, and in fact our entire economic system, are closely related to it. In time for action at this session, I hope to report to the Congress such legislative remedies as the conference may recommend. An appropriation should be made to defray their necessary expenses. MUSCLE SHOALS The production of nitrogen for plant food in peace and explosives in war is more and more important. It is one of the chief sustaining elements of life. It is estimated that soil exhaustion each year is represented by about 9,000,000 tons and replenishment by 5,450,000 tons. The deficit of 3,550,000 tons is reported to represent the impairment of 118,000,000 acres of farm lands each year.

To meet these necessities the Government has been developing a water power project at Muscle Shoals to be equipped to produce nitrogen for explosives and fertilizer. It is my opinion that the support of agriculture is the chief problem to consider in connection with this property. It could by no means supply the present needs for nitrogen, but it would help and its development would encourage bringing other water powers into like use. Several offers have been made for the purchase of this property. Probably none of them represent final terms. Much costly experimentation is

necessary to produce commercial nitrogen. For that reason it is a field better suited to private enterprise than to Government operation. I should favor a sale of this property, or long-time lease, under rigid guaranties of commercial nitrogen production at reasonable prices for agricultural use. There would be a surplus of power for many years over any possibility of its application to a developing manufacture of nitrogen. It may be found advantageous to dispose of the right to surplus power separately with such reservations as will allow its gradual withdrawal and application to nitrogen manufacture. A subcommittee of the Committees on Agriculture should investigate this field and negotiate with prospective purchasers. If no advantageous offer be made, the development should continue and the plant should be dedicated primarily to the production of materials for the fertilization of the soil. RAILWAYS The railways during the past year have made still further progress in recuperation from the war, with large gains in efficiency and ability expeditiously to handle the traffic of the country. We have now passed through several periods of peak traffic without the car shortages which so frequently in the past have brought havoc to our agriculture and industries. The condition of many of our great freight terminals is still one of difficulty and results in imposing large costs on the public for inward-bound freight, and on the railways for outward-bound freight. Owing to the growth of our large cities and the great increase in the volume of traffic, particularly in perishables, the problem is not only difficult of solution, but in some cases not wholly solvable by railway action alone. In my message last year I emphasized the necessity for further legislation with a view to expediting the consolidation of our railways into larger systems. The principle of Government control of rates and profits, now thoroughly embedded in our governmental attitude toward natural monopolies such as the railways, at once eliminates the need of competition by small units as a method of rate adjustment. Competition must be preserved as a stimulus to service, but this will exist and can be increased under enlarged systems. Consequently the consolidation of the railways into larger units for the purpose of securing the substantial values to the public

which will come from larger operation has been the logical conclusion of Congress in its previous enactments, and is also supported by the best opinion in the country. Such consolidation will assure not only a greater element of competition as to service, but it will afford, economy in operation, greater stability in railway earnings, and more economical financing. It opens large possibilities of better equalization of rates between different classes of traffic so as to relieve undue: burdens upon agricultural products and raw materials generally, which are now not possible without ruin to small units owing to the lack of diversity of traffic. It would also tend to equalize earnings in such fashion as to reduce the importance of section 15A, at which criticism, often misapplied, has been directed. A smaller number of units would offer less difficulties in labor adjustments and would, contribute much to the solution of terminal difficulties. The consolidations need to be carried out with due regard to public interest and to the rights and established life of various communities in our country. It does not seem to me necessary that we endeavor to anticipate any final plan or adhere to any artificial and unchangeable project which shall stipulate a fixed number of systems, but rather we ought to approach the problem with such a latitude of action that it can be worked out step by step in accordance with a comprehensive consideration of public interest. Whether the number of ultimate systems shall be more or less seems to me can only be determined by time and actual experience in the development of such consolidations. Those portions of the present law contemplating consolidations are not sufficiently effective in producing expeditious action and need amplification of the authority of the Interstate Commerce Commission, particularly in affording a period for voluntary proposals to the commission and in supplying Government pressure to secure action after the expiration of such a period. There are other proposals before Congress for amending the transportation acts. One of these contemplates a revision of the method of valuation for rate-making purposes to be followed by a renewed valuation of the railways. The valuations instituted by the Interstate Commerce Commission 10 years ago have not yet been completed. They have cost the Government

an enormous sum, and they have imposed great expenditure upon the railways, most of which has in effect come out of the public in increased rates. This work should not be abandoned or supplanted until its results are known and can be considered.

Another matter before the Congress is legislation affecting the labor sections of the transportation act. Much criticism has been directed at the workings of this section and experience has shown that some useful amendment could be made to these provisions. It would be helpful if a plan could be adopted which, while retaining the practice of systematic collective bargaining with conciliation and voluntary arbitration of labor differences, could also provide simplicity in relations and more direct local responsibility of employees and managers. But such legislation will not meet the requirements of the situation unless it recognizes the principle that the public has a right to the uninterrupted service of transportation, and therefore a right to be heard when there is danger that the Nation may suffer great injury through the interruption of operations because of labor disputes. If these elements are not comprehended in proposed legislation, it would be better to gain further experience with the present organization for dealing with these questions before undertaking a change. SHIPPING BOARD The form of the organization of the Shipping Board was based originally on its functions as a semijudicial body in regulation of rates. During the war it was loaded with enormous administrative duties. It has been demonstrated time and again that this form of organization results in indecision, division of opinion and administrative functions, which make a wholly inadequate foundation for the conduct of a great business enterprise. The first principle in securing the objective set out by Congress in building up the American merchant marine upon the great trade routes and subsequently disposing of it into private operation can not proceed with effectiveness until the entire functions of the board are reorganized. The immediate requirement is to transfer into the Emergency Fleet Corporation the whole responsibility of

operation of the fleet and other property, leaving to the Shipping Board solely the duty of determining certain major policies which require deliberative action. The procedure under section 28 of the merchant marine act has created great difficulty and threatened friction during the past 12 months. Its attempted application developed not only great opposition from exporters, particularly as to burdens that may be imposed upon agricultural products, but also great anxiety in the different seaports as to the effect upon their relative rate structures. This trouble will certainly recur if action is attempted under this section. It is uncertain in some of its terms and of great difficulty in interpretation.

It is my belief that action under this section should be suspended until the Congress can reconsider the entire question in the light of the experience that has been developed since its enactment. NATIONAL ELECTIONS Nothing is so fundamental to the integrity of a republican form of government as honesty in all that relates to the conduct of elections. I am of the opinion that the national laws governing the choice of members of the Congress should be extended to include appropriate representation of the respective parties at the ballot box and equality of representation on the various registration boards, wherever they exist. THE JUDICIARY The docket of the Supreme Court is becoming congested. At the opening term last year it had 592 cases, while this year it had 687 cases. Justice long delayed is justice refused. Unless the court be given power by preliminary and summary consideration to determine the importance of cases, and by disposing of those which are not of public moment reserve its time for the more extended consideration of the remainder, the congestion of the docket is likely to increase. It is also desirable that the Supreme Court should have power to improve and reform procedure in suits at law in the Federal courts

through the adoption of appropriate rules. The Judiciary Committee of the Senate has reported favorably upon two bills providing for these reforms which should have the immediate favorable consideration of the Congress. I further recommend that provision be made for the appointment of a commission, to consist of two or three members of the Federal judiciary and as many members of the bar, to examine the present criminal code of procedure and recommend to the Congress measures which may reform and expedite court procedure in the administration and enforcement of our criminal laws. PRISON REFORM Pending before the Congress is a bill which has already passed one House providing for a reformatory to which could be committed first offenders and young men for the purpose of segregating them from contact with hardened criminals and providing them with special training, in order to reestablish in them the power to pursue a law-abiding existence in the social and economic life of the Nation. This is a matter of so much importance as to warrant the early attention of the present session. Further provision should also be made, for a like reason, for a separate reformatory for women.

NATIONAL, POLICE BUREAU Representatives of the International Police Conference will bring to the attention of the Congress a proposal for the establishment of a national police bureau. Such action would provide a central point for gathering, compiling, and later distributing to local police authorities much information which would be helpful in the prevention and detection of crime. I believe this bureau is needed, and I recommend favorable consideration of this proposal. DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA WELFARE The welfare work of the District of Columbia is administered by several different boards dealing with charities and various correctional efforts. It

would be an improvement if this work were consolidated and placed under the direction of a single commission. FRENCH SPOLIATION CLAIMS During the last session of the Congress legislation was introduced looking to the payment of the remaining claims generally referred to as the French spoliation claims. The Congress has provided for the payment of many similar claims. Those that remain unpaid have been long pending. The beneficiaries thereunder have every reason to expect payment. These claims have been examined by the Court of Claims and their validity and amount determined. The United States ought to pay its debts. I recommend action by the Congress which will permit of the payment of these remaining claims. THE WAGE EARNER Two very important policies have been adopted by this country which, while extending their benefits also in other directions, have been of the utmost importance to the wage earners. One of these is the protective tariff, which enables our people to live according to a better standard and receive a better rate of compensation than any people, any time, anywhere on earth, ever enjoyed. This saves the American market for the products of the American workmen. The other is a policy of more recent origin and seeks to shield our wage earners from the disastrous competition of a great influx of foreign peoples. This has been done by the restrictive immigration law. This saves the American job for the American workmen. I should like to see the administrative features of this law rendered a little more humane for the purpose of permitting those already here a greater latitude in securing admission of members of their own families. But I believe this law in principle is necessary and sound, and destined to increase greatly the public welfare. We must maintain our own economic position, we must defend our own national integrity. It is gratifying to report that the progress of industry, the enormous increase in individual productivity through labor-saving devices, and the high rate of wages have all combined to furnish our people in general with such an abundance not only of the necessaries but of the conveniences of life that

we are by a natural evolution solving our problems of economic and social justice. THE NEGRO These developments have brought about a very remarkable improvement in the condition of the negro race. Gradually, but surely, with the almost universal sympathy of those among whom they live, the colored people are working out their own destiny. I firmly believe that it is better for all concerned that they should be cheerfully accorded their full constitutional rights, that they should be protected from all of those impositions to which, from their position, they naturally fall a prey, especially from the crime of lynching, and that they should receive every encouragement to become full partakers in all the blessings of our common American citizenship. CIVIL SERVICE The merit system has long been recognized as the correct basis for employment in our civil service. I believe that first, second, and third class postmasters, and without covering in the present membership the field force of prohibition enforcement, should be brought within the classified service by statute law. Otherwise the Executive order of one administration is changed by the Executive order of another administration, and little real progress is made. Whatever its defects, the merit system is certainly to be preferred to the spoils system. DEPARTMENTAL REORGANIZATION One way to save public money would be to pass the pending bill for the reorganization of the various departments. This project has been pending for some time, and has had the most careful consideration of experts and the thorough study of a special congressional committee. This legislation is vital as a companion piece to the Budget law. Legal authority for a thorough reorganization of the Federal structure with some latitude of action to the Executive in the rearrangement of secondary functions would make for continuing economy in the shift of Government activities which must follow every change in a developing country. Beyond this many of the independent agencies of the Government must be placed under responsible

Cabinet officials, if we are to have safeguards of efficiency, economy, and probity. ARMY AND NAVY Little has developed in relation to our national defense which needs special attention. Progress is constantly being made in air navigation and requires encouragement and development. Army aviators have made a successful trip around the world, for which I recommend suitable recognition through provisions for promotion, compensation, and retirement. Under the direction of the Navy a new Zeppelin has been successfully brought from Europe across the Atlantic to our own country. Due to the efficient supervision of the Secretary of War the Army of the United States has been organized with a small body of Regulars and a moderate National Guard and Reserve. The defense test of September 12 demonstrated the efficiency of the operating plans. These methods and operations are well worthy of congressional support. Under the limitation of armaments treaty a large saving in outlay and a considerable decrease in maintenance of the Navy has been accomplished. We should maintain the policy of constantly working toward the full treaty strength of the Navy. Careful investigation is being made in this department of the relative importance of aircraft, surface and submarine vessels, in order that we may not fail to take advantage of all modern improvements for our national defense. A special commission also is investigating the problem of petroleum oil for the Navy, considering the best policy to insure the future supply of fuel oil and prevent the threatened drainage of naval oil reserves. Legislative action is required to carry on experiments in oil shale reduction, as large deposits of this type have been set aside for the use of the Navy. We have been constantly besought to engage in competitive armaments. Frequent reports will reach us of the magnitude of the military equipment of other nations. We shall do well to be little impressed by such reports or such actions. Any nation undertaking to maintain a military establishment with aggressive and imperialistic designs will find itself severely handicapped in the economic development of the world. I believe thoroughly in the Army

and Navy, in adequate defense and preparation. But I am opposed to any policy of competition in building and maintaining land or sea armaments.

Our country has definitely relinquished the old standard of dealing with other countries by terror and force, and is definitely committed to the new standard of dealing with them through friendship and understanding. This new policy should be constantly kept in mind by the guiding forces of the Army and Navy, by the Congress and by the country at large. I believe it holds a promise of great benefit to humanity. I shall resist any attempt to resort to the old methods and the old standards. I am especially solicitous that foreign nations should comprehend the candor and sincerity with which we have adopted this position. While we propose to maintain defensive and supplementary police forces by land and sea, and to train them through inspections and maneuvers upon appropriate occasions in order to maintain their efficiency, I wish every other nation to understand that this does not express any unfriendliness or convey any hostile intent. I want the armed forces of America to be considered by all peoples not as enemies but as friends, as the contribution which is made by this country for the maintenance of the peace and security of the world. VETERANS With the authorization for general hospitalization of the veterans of all wars provided during the present year, the care and treatment of those who have served their country in time of peril and the attitude of the Government toward them is not now so much one of needed legislation as one of careful, generous and humane administration. It will ever be recognized that their welfare is of the first concern and always entitled to the most solicitous consideration on the part of their fellow citizens. They are organized in various associations, of which the chief and most representative is the American Legion. Through its officers the Legion will present to the Congress numerous suggestions for legislation. They cover such a wide variety of subjects that it is impossible to discuss them within the scope of this message. With many of the proposals I join in hearty approval and commend them all to the sympathetic investigation and consideration of the Congress.

FOREIGN RELATIONS At no period in the past 12 years have our foreign relations been in such a satisfactory condition as they are at the present time. Our actions in the recent months have greatly strengthened the American policy of permanent peace with independence. The attitude which our Government took and maintained toward an adjustment of European reparations, by pointing out that it was not a political but a business problem, has demonstrated its wisdom by its actual results. We desire to see Europe restored that it may resume its productivity; in the increase of industry and its support in the advance of civilization. We look with great gratification at the hopeful prospect of recuperation in Europe through the Dawes plan. Such assistance as can be given through the action of the public authorities and of our private citizens, through friendly counsel and cooperation, and through economic and financial support, not for any warlike effort but reproductive enterprise, not to provide means for unsound government financing but to establish sound business administration, should be unhesitatingly provided. Ultimately nations, like individuals, can not depend upon each other but must depend upon themselves. Each one must work out its own salvation. We have every desire to help. But with all our resources we are powerless to save unless our efforts meet with a constructive response. The situation in our own country and all over the world is one that can be improved only by hard work and selfdenial. It is necessary to reduce expenditures, increase savings and liquidate debts. It is in this direction that there lies the greatest hope of domestic tranquillity and international peace. Our own country ought to furnish the leading example in this effort. Our past adherence to this policy, our constant refusal to maintain a military establishment that could be thought to menace the security of others, our honorable dealings with other nations whether great or small, has left us in the almost constant enjoyment of peace. It is not necessary to stress the general desire of all the people of this country for the promotion of peace. It is the leading principle of all our foreign relations. We have on every occasion tried to cooperate to this end in all ways that were consistent with our proper independence and our traditional policies. It will be my constant effort to maintain these

principles, and to reinforce them by all appropriate agreements and treaties. While we desire always to cooperate and to help, we are equally determined to be independent and free. Bight and truth and justice and humanitarian efforts will have the moral support of this country all over the world. But we do not wish to become involved in the political controversies of others. Nor is the country disposed to become a member of the League of Nations or to assume the obligations imposed by its covenant. INTERNATIONAL COURT America has been one of the foremost nations in advocating tribunals for the settlement of international disputes of a justiciable character. Our representatives took a leading part in those conferences which resulted in the establishment of The Hague Tribunal, and later in providing for a Permanent Court of International Justice. I believe it would be for the advantage of this country and helpful to the stability of other nations for us to adhere to the protocol establishing that court upon the conditions stated in the recommendation which is now before the Senate, and further that our country shall not be bound by advisory opinions which may be rendered by the court upon questions which we have not voluntarily submitted for its judgment. This court would provide a practical and convenient tribunal before which we could go voluntarily, but to which we could not be summoned, for a determination of justiciable questions when they fail to be resolved by diplomatic negotiations. DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE Many times I have expressed my desire to see the work of the Washington Conference on Limitation of Armaments appropriately supplemented by further agreements for a further reduction and for the purpose of diminishing the menace and waste of the competition in preparing instruments of international war. It has been and is any expectation that we might hopefully approach other great powers for further conference on this subject as soon as the carrying out of the present reparation plan as the established and settled policy of Europe has created a favorable opportunity. But on account of proposals which have already been made by other governments for a European conference, it will be necessary to wait to see what the outcome of their actions may be. I should not wish to propose or

have representatives attend a conference which would contemplate commitments opposed to the freedom of action we desire to maintain unimpaired with respect to our purely domestic policies. INTERNATIONAL LAW Our country should also support efforts which are being made toward the codification of international law. We can look more hopefully, in the first instance, for research and studies that are likely to be productive of results, to a cooperation among representatives of the bar and members of international law institutes and societies, than to a conference of those who are technically representative of their respective governments, although, when projects have been developed, they must go to the governments for their approval. These expert professional studies are going on in certain quarters and should have our constant encouragement and approval. OUTLAW OF WAR Much interest has of late been manifested in this country in the discussion of various proposals to outlaw aggressive war. I look with great sympathy upon the examination of this subject. It is in harmony with the traditional policy of our country, which is against aggressive war and for the maintenance of permanent and honorable peace. While, as I have said, we must safeguard our liberty to deal according to our own judgment with our domestic policies, we can not fail to view with sympathetic interest all progress to this desired end or carefully to study the measures that may be proposed to attain it. LATIN AMERICA While we are desirous of promoting peace in every quarter of the globe, we have a special interest in the peace of this hemisphere. It is our constant desire that all causes of dispute in this area may be tranquilly and satisfactorily adjusted. Along with our desire for peace is the earnest hope for the increased prosperity of our sister republics of Latin America, and our constant purpose to promote cooperation with them which may be mutually beneficial and always inspired by the most cordial friendships.

FOREIGN DEBTS About $12,000,000,000 is due to our Government from abroad, mostly from European Governments. Great Britain, Finland, Hungary, Lithuania and Poland have negotiated settlements amounting close to $5,000,000,000. This represents the funding of over 42 per cent of the debt since the creation of the special Foreign Debt Commission. As the life of this commission is about to expire, its term should be extended. I am opposed to the cancellation of these debts and believe it for the best welfare of the world that they should be liquidated and paid as fast as possible. I do not favor oppressive measures, but unless money that is borrowed is repaid credit can not be secured in time of necessity, and there exists besides a moral obligation which our country can not ignore and no other country can evade. Terms and conditions may have to conform to differences in the financial abilities of the countries concerned, but the principle that each country should meet its obligation admits of no differences and is of universal application. It is axiomatic that our country can not stand still. It would seem to be perfectly plain from recent events that it is determined to go forward. But it wants no pretenses, it wants no vagaries. It is determined to advance in an orderly, sound and common-sense way. It does not propose to abandon the theory of the Declaration that the people have inalienable rights which no majority and no power of government can destroy. It does not propose to abandon the practice of the Constitution that provides for the protection of these rights. It believes that within these limitations, which are imposed not by the fiat of man but by the law of the Creator, self government is just and wise. It is convinced that it will be impossible for the people to provide their own government unless they continue to own their own property. These are the very foundations of America. On them has been erected a Government of freedom and equality, of justice and mercy, of education and charity. Living under it and supporting it the people have come into great possessions on the material and spiritual sides of life. I want to continue in this direction. I know that the Congress shares with me that desire. I want our institutions to be more and more expressive of these principles. I want the people of all the earth to see in the American flag the symbol of a

Government which intends no oppression at home and no aggression abroad, which in the spirit of a common brotherhood provides assistance in time of distress. CALVIN COOLIDGE THE WHITE HOUSE, December 3, 1924.

List of Papers [Unless otherwise specified, the correspondence is from or to officials in the Department of State.]

GENERAL PROPOSALS FOR THE ADHERENCE OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS TO THE SPITZBERGEN TREATY OF FEBRUARY 9, 1920 Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Mar. 20 From the Norwegian Minister Inquiry whether the United States would raise any objection if Russia should be invited to adhere to the Spitzbergen Treaty at the same time as other nonsignatory powers. Information that other governments signatory to the treaty have also been approached. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. Apr. 30 To the Norwegian Minister Opinion that the question raised by Norway appears to be covered by provisions of article 10 of Spitzbergen Treaty. (Footnote: Text of pertinent clauses of article 10 of treaty.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3] Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the French Ambassador, June 21, 1924 Ambassador’s suggestion of a protocol providing for Russian adherence to Spitzbergen Treaty notwithstanding provisions of article 10 of the treaty. Secretary’s promise to consider whether the suggestion amounted to amendment of article 10, which could not be accomplished without consent of the Senate. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3] June 23 From the Norwegian Minister Synopsis of replies received by Norway from France, Netherlands, Great Britain, Italy, Denmark, and Sweden in regard to Russian adherence to the treaty. Request for U. S. reconsideration. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

(Footnote: Synopsis of Japanese reply to Norwegian inquiry.) June 27 To the Norwegian Minister Information that the United States would raise no objection should the powers signatory to the Spitzbergen Treaty desire to invite the adherence of Russia, provided such absence of objection is not construed as constituting recognition of the present regime in Russia. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5] Undated To the French Embassy Proposed draft of agreement relative to adherence of regime of Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to Spitzbergen Treaty. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

REMONSTRANCE BY GREAT BRITAIN AGAINST A PROPOSED INCREASE IN GUN ELEVATION ON AMERICAN CAPITAL SHIPS RETAINED UNDER THE WASHINGTON NAVAL TREATY Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Feb.

expressing hope that necessary legislation may be secured. Aug. (718) From the British Ambassador Information that proposal has also been made to Japan regarding an undertaking concerning gun elevations, with a further suggestion for exchange of information as to increases in gun elevations already made.

Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. 22 From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.) Informal inquiry from Secretariat of the League of Nations whether the United States has decided to accept the Council’s invitation to appoint representatives to cooperate with the Temporary Mixed Commission, meeting at Geneva, February 4, for the preparation of a new convention relating to traffic in arms.

French. Impossibility of obtaining complete separation from the League of Nations of the supervision of the control of traffic in arms. Feb. From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.) Tacit agreement of Commission to discuss traffic in arms and private manufacture of arms simultaneously but to draft separate conventions to cover the two subjects; indications, however, that the French still hope for one convention. Cecil’s statement that the League should have supervision over control of arms traffic; his resolution (text printed) intended to cover nonconflicting general principles of 1919 convention; French opposition to resolution.

arms and traffic in arms; also that the Department’s chief objections to the 1919 treaty were not with respect to investment of administrative control in the League of Nations, but with respect to the freedom of parties to the convention to sell arms to each other and the prohibition against selling to others. Doc. Doc. and Doc. Feb. (11) From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.) Suggestion as to methods for conveying to the Commission the U. S. views on private production, received after adjournment of the Commission. His statement of February 6 reminding the Commission of his inability to discuss control of private manufacture of arms (text printed); belief that the Commission now understands that the administration of control of traffic in arms was not the all-important U. S. objection to the 1919 convention.

Council of the League and eventually to an international conference. Reference of the separate draft convention for control of private production to a drafting committee. May 12 (1504) From the Chargé in Switzerland Draft convention of March 27, 1924 (text printed) amending the 1919 arms convention.

third committee of the Assembly which will discuss the draft convention. Minister’s reply (text printed) conveying U. S. reasons for not attending third committee’s meetings, but indicating a favorable attitude toward participation in an international conference. Doc. 29 and Doc. 30] Oct. 14 (170) From the Minister in Switzerland Communication from the Secretary General of the League of Nations, October 9 (text printed) enclosing letter dated October 7 to the Secretary of State (text printed) inquiring whether the United States would be prepared to participate in an international conference to be held in April or May 1925 to conclude a convention for the control of traffic in arms. (Footnote: Information concerning U. S. favorable reply made on December 7.)

ACCEPTANCE BY THE UNITED STATES OF CERTIFICATES OF IDENTITY ISSUED BY THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS TO RUSSIAN AND ARMENIAN REFUGEES IN LIEU OF PASSPORTS Date and Number Subject Page 1922 Sept. From the Russian Financial Attaché Inquiry concerning U. S. attitude toward arrangement with regard to the issuance of certificates of identity to Russian refugees, adopted by the conference

of the certificates of identity for Russian refugees and assumption that the United States will recognize the certificates of identity for Armenians also. Information that U. S. communication will be released to the press on October 10. Doc. 37 and Doc. 38] Oct. (75) To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.) Instructions to inform the Secretary General that the Department will consider identity certificates for Armenian refugees as appropriate documents in lieu of passports.

instructing the Secretary General to invite to the second conference all members of the League and all parties to the 1912 convention. Invitation to the United States to be represented at the second conference and information concerning the setting up of a preparatory committee to draft the program, the committee to be nominated by the Advisory Committee and to consist of six members, including one U. S. representative. Feb. (12) From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.) Personnel of the preparatory committee; necessity for immediate selection of American delegate and technical experts to accompany him.

that Peru will find it possible to restrict cultivation of the coca leaf plant. (Instructions to repeat, mutatis mutandis, to Bolivia.) Doc. 45 and Doc. 46] Sept. (163) To the High Commissioner in Turkey (tel.) Note for Turkish Government (text printed), expressing the hope that Turkey will participate in the international opium conference and will cooperate in measures to restrict the production and transportation of raw opium. (Footnote: Information received October 24 that Turkey had appointed a delegate to the conference.)

Reminder that the United States has not accepted invitation to participate in opium conference. portions of Doc. Doc. Doc. and Doc. Oct. (78) To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.) Instructions to inform the Secretary General of the League that the United States accepts the invitation to be represented at the opium conference. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. Doc. Doc. and Doc. Oct. (300) From the Ambassador in Peru Foreign Office note stating that the Peruvian Chargé at Prague will represent Peru at the opium conference and that the question of restricting cultivation of the coca leaf plant has been communicated to appropriate authorities. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. Doc. Doc. and Doc. Oct. (84) To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.) List of American delegates to the opium conference; instructions to notify the Secretary General of the League and also appropriate Swiss authorities. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. Doc. and Doc. Nov. (1118) From the British Ambassador Information concerning the adjournment of the conference to November 21 and the danger of complete break-down because of the Japanese-British [Pg. includes portions of

controversy over the transit of opium through Hongkong. Opinion that the matter is one for negotiation between the two Governments and not for submission to the conference. Suggested compromise. Desire for U. S. support at Tokyo and Geneva. Doc. Doc. and Doc. Nov. 25 To the British Ambassador Information that the British note has been telegraphed to the U. S. delegation at Geneva and to the U. S. Ambassador at Tokyo with instructions to support the suggestion that the Japanese-British controversy be solved through negotiation between the two Governments rather than through submission to the conference. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56] Undated Suggestions of the United States Presented to the Second Opium Conference A text of the international opium convention of 1912 so amended as to show all the additions and deletions desired by the United States. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57] Dec. 4 From the Consul at Geneva (tel.) From Porter: Report that U. S. suggestions for carrying out chapter 2 of the 1912 convention had not so far been presented to second conference, as the first conference had not yet completed its labors or adopted an agreement; that the U. S. delegation had reserved its right to amend the agenda of the second conference if the first conference failed to reach a satisfactory agreement; that first conference had confessed itself unable to set date for eventual suppression of use of prepared opium; that British and Japanese had reached an agreement on transit of opium through Hongkong. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58] Dec. 5 To the Consul at Geneva (tel.) For Porter: British aide-mémoire, December 3 (text printed) holding as outside scope of conference the U. S. suggestions concerning restriction of production and distribution of raw opium to use for medical or [Pg. includes portions of

scientific purposes only and progressive suppression of use of prepared opium; suggestion that the U. S. delegate support the British delegate in a proposal for a commission with an American chairman to investigate and report on further measures for repression. Department’s intention to refuse to acquiesce in the British suggestions and to intimate that questions should be determined by conference itself. Request for comments. Doc. 58 and Doc. 59] Dec. 8 From the Consul at Geneva (tel.) From Porter: Opinion that the proposed U. S. reply to the British aide-mémoire would materially strengthen the U. S. position; concurrence in the hope that the conference will not be jeopardized, and willingness to accept any reasonable proposal. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61] Dec. 12 To the British Embassy Inability of U. S. Government to acquiesce in the British suggestions; advisability of leaving question at issue entirely to the determination of the conference itself; assurance that the U. S. delegation will accord utmost consideration to any proposals made to the conference by the British delegation. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61] Dec. 17 From the Chairman of the American Delegation Transmittal of copy of agreement reached at the first conference, but not yet signed, with comments by Bishop Brent and himself. Opinion that the agreement is not in strict compliance with intent of chapter 2 of the 1912 convention and that United States should adopt a determined attitude. Information that the British, Dutch, and Japanese were prepared to go further than the agreement indicates, but that the agreement represents all the French and Portuguese were prepared to accede to. (Footnote: The agreement was signed at Geneva, February 11, 1925.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

1925 Feb. From the Consul at Geneva (tel.) From Porter: Conviction that the conference cannot reach an agreement satisfactory to the United States or which will be an improvement over the 1912 convention; recommendation that the U. S. delegation be withdrawn from the conference. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63] Feb. 2 To the Consul at Geneva (tel.) For Porter: Authorization to withdraw the U. S. delegation. Press statement to be issued by the Department announcing the withdrawal (text printed). Instructions concerning statement to be made to the conference. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64] Undated [Rec’d Feb. 6] From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Statement to be enclosed in letter to the president of the conference (text printed), announcing the withdrawal of the U. S. delegation, giving reasons for the withdrawal, and stating the intention of the United States to continue efforts to suppress traffic in habitforming drugs on the basis of the Hague convention of 1912. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

REFUSAL BY THE UNITED STATES TO JOIN OTHER CREDITOR NATIONS IN FORMING AN INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION TO LIQUIDATE RELIEF LOANS MADE TO CERTAIN EUROPEAN STATES Date and Number Subject Page 1923 Sept. 26 From the French Chargé Request for U. S. views respecting desirability of establishing a coordinating agency to deal with questions arising out of the liquidation of relief credits granted in 1920 and 1921 to governments in central and eastern Europe. [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 66] Dec. 14 To the French Ambassador Inability to acquiesce in suggestion concerning establishment of a coordinating agency to deal with [Pg. 128 includes portions of

questions arising out of the liquidation of relief credits. Opinion that such questions are susceptible of adjustment through existing channels. Doc. 66 and Doc. 67] 1924 Feb. (129) From the British Chargé Information that the British Government, in conjunction with the French Government, has had under consideration the advisability of establishing a coordinating agency to deal with the relief credits question and has suggested that a Relief Credits Committee be set up. Hope that the United States will delegate a representative of the World War Foreign Debt Commission to attend meetings of the Committee in London. Memorandum on relief credits (text printed). [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68] Mar. 13 To the British Ambassador Opinion that the establishment of a coordinating agency to deal with relief credits is unnecessary, as relief credit questions are susceptible of adjustment through existing channels. Information that the suggestion that a representative attend the meetings of the Relief Credits Committee has been referred to the World War Foreign Debt Commission. [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69] May (396) From the British Ambassador Inquiry whether it is yet possible for the United States to express views concerning delegating a representative of the World War Foreign Debt Commission to attend meetings of the Relief Credits Committee. [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. Doc. 70, and Doc. 71] June 3 To the British Ambassador Information that it has been found impracticable to have a representative of the World War Foreign Debt Commission attend the meetings of the Relief Credits Committee, but that the U. S. Ambassador at London will be instructed to keep in close touch with work of the Committee. [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. Doc. 70, and Doc. 71]

June 17 (236) To the Ambassador in Great Britain Transmittal of correspondence exchanged with the French and British representatives at Washington regarding coordinating agency for settling relief credits questions. Opinion that the United States should keep closely in touch with proceedings of the proposed Relief Credits Committee. Instructions to telegraph any significant developments in connection with the Committee. [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72] July 18 (226) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Instructions to have representative of the Embassy attend meetings of the Relief Credits Committee when it meets July 29. [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. Doc. 73, and Doc. 74]

NEGOTIATIONS ON BEHALF OF THE WORLD WAR FOREIGN DEBT COMMISSION FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF DEBTS OWED THE UNITED STATES BY FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS Date and Number Subject Page 1924 May 1 From the Lithuanian Chargé Chargé’s authorization to enter into negotiations with the United States with regard to the settlement of the indebtedness of Lithuania to the United States. Request that the World War Foreign Debt Commission be informed. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. Doc. and Doc. May 12 To the Lithuanian Chargé Acknowledgment of the Chargé’s note and information that its substance has been communicated to the Chairman of the Debt Commission, with whom it will [Pg. includes portions of Doc.

be proper for the Chargé to enter into direct negotiations. Doc. and Doc. July 30 (118) From the Minister in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania Lithuanian Government’s inquiry whether the United States would protest the ratification by the Lithuanian Assembly of the trade agreement with Germany which provides for mutual cancelation of all claims arising out of the war, German occupation, reparations, postbellum supplies, etc. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. Doc. and Doc. Aug. (38) To the Minister in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania (tel.) Memorandum for appropriate Lithuanian official (text printed) stating that the United States would not be disposed to raise any objection to ratification of the trade agreement with Germany, if assurance be given that an agreement will in fact be concluded providing for the refunding of the Lithuanian debt to the United States, similar to the agreement concluded between the United States and Finland. Treasury opinion that ratification of trade agreement with Germany seems to release security definitely provided for Lithuania’s obligations. [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 77] Sept. 11 (43) To the Minister in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania (tel.) Debt Commission’s denial of requests for inclusion of most-favored-nation clauses in negotiations with governments indebted to the United States. Instructions to report whether Latvia intends to designate representative to negotiate with Debt Commission. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78] Nov. 20 (183) From the Chargé in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania Decision of Latvian Government to inaugurate funding negotiations through the Latvian consul at New York. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

Dec. (88) To the Minister in Greece (tel.) Instructions to make representations to Greece, in connection with the flotation of the proposed refugee loan in the United States, regarding (1) exchange of notes in respect to most-favored-nation treatment, (2) loan agreement of 1918, and (3) funding of Greek indebtedness to United States. Department’s attitude that Greece has violated the agreement of 1918 through arrangement with Canada and that the United States, therefore, is no longer obligated to make advances to Greece. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80] Dec. 15 (116) From the Minister in Greece (tel.) M. Roussos’ refusal to renounce Greek claim to remainder of 1918 credits, claiming that Canadian agreement did not affect these claims, as it covered materials purchased in Canada; his intention to go to Washington to discuss question of credits and refunding of debts. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81] Dec. 31 (99) To the Minister in Greece (tel.) View that the 1918 loan agreement was violated when Greece pledged additional revenues for service of an external loan without obtaining U. S. consent; that the United States is therefore relieved from further obligation in the matter; and that discussion with representative of Greek Government with respect to further advances under this agreement would serve no useful purpose. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83] AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND AUSTRIA AND HUNGARY FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A CLAIMS COMMISSION, SIGNED NOVEMBER 26, 1924 Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Feb. (610) To the Minister in Austria Transmittal of a draft tripartite agreement providing for the determination of amounts to be paid by Austria

and Hungary in satisfaction of their obligations under treaties concluded by the United States with Austria

regarding liability and division of responsibility and making concrete suggestions for enlarging the jurisdiction of the commissioner. May 21 (27) From the Minister in Hungary (tel.) Foreign Minister’s comments and proposals regarding the draft agreement.

Providing for the determination of amounts to be paid by Austria and Hungary in satisfaction of their obligations under treaties concluded by the United States with Austria on August 24, 1921, and with Hungary on August 29, 1921. INTEREST OF THE UNITED STATES IN THE DISPOSITION OF THE PROPOSED LIBERATION BONDS OF THE AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN SUCCESSION STATES Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Feb. (64) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) From Logan: Problems with regard to the disposition of the proposed liberation bonds of the Austro- Hungarian succession states.

CONVENTIONS FOR THE PREVENTION OF LIQUOR SMUGGLING INTO THE UNITED STATES GREAT BRITAIN, JANUARY 23, 1924 Date and Number Subject Page

1924 Mar. (77) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) British note conveying information that the concurrence of Canada and other Dominions in the ratification of the liquor convention is being sought. (Footnote: Information received on March 15 that Australia, Newfoundland, New Zealand, and South Africa had concurred in ratification, and on April 10 that Canada and the Irish Free State had assented.)

1924 Jan. (17) To the Minister in Sweden Request Request for a report on Sweden’s views with respect to the negotiation of a liquor convention. Information as to status of conventions with Great Britain and the Netherlands.

NORWAY, MAY 24, 1924 Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the Norwegian Minister, March

article 1. Norway’s maintenance of desire concerning reciprocity and 10 miles distance from shore as limit within which vessels may be boarded, and hope that the United States will meet Norway’s desires in a possible revision of the convention under article 5. Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113] May 23 To the Norwegian Minister Opinion that the liquor conventions should be of the same tenor and that the United States might find difficulty in accepting provisions differing from the convention with Great Britain.

DENMARK, MAY 29, 1924 Date and Number Subject Page 1924 May

Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the Italian Ambassador, March 20, 1924 Secretary’s presentation to the Ambassador of a draft liquor convention similar to the one concluded with Great Britain, with the exception of articles 1 and 4. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119] June 3 Convention between the United States of America and Italy For the prevention of liquor smuggling into the United States. 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 120] GREAT BRITAIN IN RESPECT OF CANADA, JUNE 6, 1924 Date and Number Subject Page 1924 June 4 To the British Ambassador Acceptance of Canadian draft of the proposed convention for suppression of illicit liquor traffic across the international boundary, etc., with minor exceptions capable of adjustment. Desire that plenipotentiary come to Washington for concluding convention before Congress adjourns.

1924 May 28 From the Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs, Department of State Record of a telephone conversation with the Panaman Minister, who stated that he was authorized to sign the liquor convention, but that his Government desired an exchange of notes making reservations as to special conditions existing between Canal Zone and Panama and the question of the 3–mile limit and stating that signing of liquor convention will in no manner prejudice the article concerning enforcement of Volstead law in the Canal Zone, agreed upon for inclusion in treaty to replace the Taft Agreement. [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124] June 6 Convention between the United States of America and Panama For the prevention of liquor smuggling into the United States. [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124] June 6 To the Panaman Minister Confirmation of understanding that the signing of the convention will in no wise affect the inclusion of the article concerning enforcement of the Volstead law in the Canal Zone in the treaty under negotiation to replace the Taft Agreement. [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 126] July From the Panaman Minister Acknowledgment of U. S. confirmation of understanding regarding article to be inserted in treaty to replace the Taft Agreement. [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 126] FRANCE, JUNE 30, 1924 Date and Number Subject Page

1924 Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the French Ambassador, June

July 29 To the Netherland Minister Accession to request for exchange of notes.

Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. (DE–2) From the Salvadoran Chargé Representations against an amendment to the immigration bill, suggested by the Secretary of Labor, which would extend the quota arrangement to include Salvador.

Feb. 19 To the Salvadoran Chargé Information that the immigration bill as reported to the House of Representatives does not contain a provision which would extend the quota arrangement to Salvador.

1923 July 17 (20) To the Minister in Denmark (tel.) Instructions to inquire whether Denmark would grant permission for a U. S. Army officer to investigate conditions in Iceland in order to secure data for a projected round-the-world flight of U. S. Army airplanes in the spring of 1924, the itinerary to include Iceland.

Sept. 19 (3490) From the Chargé in France Foreign Office note, September 15, 1923, stating that French air service and hydrographic service will give U. S. Army officers all possible information and data.

world flight will leave April 1; that flight will be divided into five divisions, with one advance officer to each division and a sixth advance officer for coordination. Instructions to request permission for advance officers and flight to cross British territory and for flight to land at agreed-upon points; to request waiver of aerial photographic restrictions; and to convey information as to itinerary across British territory. (Sent, mutatis mutandis, to diplomatic representatives in Austria, Bulgaria, China, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Persia, Rumania, Siam, Turkey, and Yugoslavia.) portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159] 1924 Jan. 10 (34) From the British Chargé Information that Canada has no objection to projected visit of U. S. officer over proposed route of the flight through British Columbia; also that Royal Canadian Air Force will render every possible assistance.

Jan. 18 (13) To the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Instructions to express gratitude for informal consent, and to telegraph when written confirmation is received. Information that Lieutenant Nutt, advance officer, has left the Philippines for Tokyo and that the War Department would be glad if a Japanese officer would accompany him on pathfinding expedition. (Footnote: Information that, on January 25, the Chargé reported he had received written confirmation of the Japanese consent.)

Doc. 168, and Doc. 169] Jan. 22 From the Minister in Bulgaria (tel.) Bulgaria’s permission for the flight.

printed); also of the favorable replies received from the majority of governments from whom permission was requested. Doc. 173 and Doc. 174] Jan. 30 (22) From the High Commissioner in Turkey (tel.) Telegram from Consul Treat at Angora, January 29 (text printed) reporting Turkey’s objections to the flight and refusal of a British request of a similar nature.

granting permission for the flight under certain conditions. Doc. 179 and Doc. 180] Feb. 15 (61) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Foreign Office note expressing willingness to facilitate flight and afford any assistance or advice; and conveying information that Canada will give every assistance, that Iraq has no objections, and that waiver of photographic restrictions is under consideration.

to proceed on a Japanese destroyer, but to state that as an alternative course he might proceed along route on U. S. destroyer. Information that it is essential that fueling and landing details be handled by a U. S. officer familiar with the flight. portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186] Mar. 22 (54) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Consent of Japanese military and naval authorities to allow one U. S. destroyer to proceed to Bettobu and another to Kashiwabara on condition that the expedition be solely for the purpose of taking supplies and that the destroyers’stop at Hongkong to take on board one Japanese Army officer and one Japanese Navy officer to remain during the trip to the Kurile Islands.

Mormon missionaries; the Crown Council’s decision to expel them, the vice president of the Church in Sweden being permitted to remain a month to wind up Church affairs. portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192] Apr. (17) To the Minister in Sweden (tel.) Instructions to request that nothing drastic be done until matter of expelling Mormon missionaries from Sweden can be fully investigated. [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192] Apr. (40) From the Minister in Sweden (tel.) Foreign Minister’s regret at inability to alter Government’s attitude toward expulsion of Mormon missionaries. Status of property of Mormon Church in Sweden. [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192] Apr. 5 To the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.) Information that British diplomatic and consular officers are refusing visas to Mormon missionaries going to South Africa. Instructions to investigate and report. (Instructions to repeat, mutatis mutandis, to Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway, and Switzerland.) [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195] Apr. (20) To the Minister in Sweden (tel.) Instructions to telegraph the Swedish Government’s reasons for expelling Mormons, and to repeat request that action be delayed. [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195] Apr. (43) From the Minister in Sweden (tel.) Crown Council’s maintenance of its decisions concerning expulsion of Mormon missionaries, after [Pg. 248 includes portions of

consideration of a petition of all Swedish Mormons. Reasons for expulsion. Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195] Apr. (11) From the Minister in Norway (tel.) Norwegian reasons for refusing visas to Mormon missionaries; intimation that an official request by the United States would result in careful reconsideration of matter. [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199] Apr. (14) To the Minister in Norway (tel.) Instructions to request reconsideration of matter and to ask that no drastic action be taken until case can be fully investigated. [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199] Apr. (21) To the Minister in Sweden (tel.) Instructions to state that the Mormon Church invites investigation by the Swedish Government and offers to pay expenses of investigator. [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199] Apr. 28 (46) From the Minister in Sweden (tel.) Report that there is no change in the situation. Foreign Office note (text printed) refusing invitation of Mormon Church to send an investigator to Utah. [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199] Apr. 30 (54) From the Minister in the Netherlands (tel.) Information that Netherlands has no objection in principle to the entrance of Mormon missionaries; that [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 199,

recent refusals of admission were because of housing shortage. Doc. 200, and Doc. 201] May (36) From the Minister in Denmark (tel.) Information that the Government has no definite policy on granting of visas to Mormon missionaries; that, upon request of Senator Smoot the previous summer, it was decided to grant visas to a limited number of Mormon missionaries to proceed to Denmark to look after property interests; that the Ministry of Ecclesiastical Affairs is opposed in principle to their admission. [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 199, Doc. 200, and Doc. 201] May 28 (1845) From the Minister in Norway Minister’s formal representations, April 12; and the Foreign Minister’s reply, May 24, that no general instructions had been issued to diplomatic and consular officers to refuse visas to Mormon missionaries but that the Central Passport Bureau, to which such matters must be submitted, would very likely refuse all or a majority of such requests. [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202] May 28 (440) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Report that South African Government does not desire to encourage entry of Mormon missionaries into that country. [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204] 1922 Dec. 26 (162) To the Chargé in Switzerland Inadvisability of making representations to Swiss Government on behalf of Mormon missionaries denied residence in Swiss cantons on ground that article 1 of convention of 1850 entitles them to privileges of residence in Switzerland. Authorization, however, to inform the Political Department that polygamy is forbidden by the Mormon Church and by the laws of the United States and to express the hope that Swiss authorities would not discriminate against Mormon missionaries. [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

1923 Jan. 22 To Senator Reed Smoot Report from the consulate general at Cape Town that, as result of representations, elders of Mormon Church are now entitled to usual travel concessions granted ministers of the Gospel and missionaries under regulations effective January 1, 1923. [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206] Oct. 19 (286) From the Minister in Norway Information that, at the instance of Senator Smoot during his visit in Norway in the summer of 1923, representations had again been made with the result that the Norwegian Government had reversed its previous decision. [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206] 1924 Jan. (101) From the Minister in Sweden Minister’s representations on behalf of Mormon missionaries. Information that the Swedish Legation at Washington and the consulate at San Francisco have been instructed to make a new investigation of the activities and standing of the Mormon Church. Request that Senator Smoot be informed. [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207] Feb. (666) From the Minister in Denmark Danish assurance that leniency will be exercised with regard to admission of Mormon preachers; probability that all visa restrictions between Denmark and the United States will soon be abolished. [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210] June (19) From the Minister in Sweden (tel.) Report that hereafter visas for Mormons will be subject to same regulations as are applied to all foreigners in Sweden. [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210] Oct. 7 To the Consul at Zurich Opinion that the consul can take no action in the matter of Swiss opposition to continued presence of Mormon missionaries, other than to see that they are [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 208,

accorded the protection to which they may be entitled under the laws of Switzerland. Doc. 209, and Doc. 210] Oct. (166) From the Minister in Switzerland Request for instructions with regard to cases of Mormon missionaries resident in Switzerland who have been refused renewal of residence permits by certain cantonal authorities. [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211] Oct. 27 (85) To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.) Authorization to exercise good offices to prevent undue hardships in individual cases of expulsion; and to make representations should it become clear that the cantonal authorities of Zurich intend gradually to refuse renewal of residence permits in all cases of Mormon missionaries as a class. [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212] Nov. (206) From the Minister in Switzerland Memorandum of the Political Department, October 31, 1924, explaining that the cantons alone are capable of deciding questions of residence and that the refusals to prolong residence permits of certain missionaries have been necessitated by their proselytizing methods. Information that measures taken by cantonal authorities do not apply to Mormon missionaries as a class; and opinion that Legation has no grounds for further representations. [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213] 1925 Apr. 27 (3839) To the Chargé in Germany Instructions to make representations regarding American Mormon missionary expelled from East Prussia without opportunity of defense, on ground that such action constitutes an arbitrary exercise of authority. [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214] STATEMENTS BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE THAT THE QUESTION OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE IS EXCLUSIVELY A DOMESTIC PROBLEM OF THE UNITED STATES Date and Number Subject Page

1924 Mar. 25 From the Chairman of the Committee on Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives Inquiry whether the granting of independence to the Philippine Islands would be contrary to any provisions of the Four-Power Pact.

BOLIVIA AND PARAGUAY Date and Number Subject Page 1924 July (247) To the Chargé in Paraguay Information, in reply to the Chargé’s report concerning Bolivia’s protest to Paraguay against a Paraguayan grant of land in the Chaco to Canadian Mennonites and Bolivia’s inquiry as to possible U. S. intervention, that the United States would be unwilling to intervene in the boundary dispute unless requested to do so by both countries.

Nov. 26 (596) From the Chargé in Bolivia Information that the divergence of views of Bolivia and Paraguay has no connection with the choice of arbitrator, but is a question of what the arbitrator shall be called upon to decide and the form in which the protocol is to be drawn up.

COLOMBIA AND PANAMA Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the Colombian Minister, March

May 8 To the Colombian Minister Transmittal of copies of the procès-verbal and of the Panaman Minister’s note of May 8.

COLOMBIA AND PERU Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. (107) From the Ambassador in Peru President’s failure to submit Peruvian-Colombian boundary treaty to Congress for ratification, notwithstanding his assurances to the Ambassador. Brazil’s opposition to ratification of the treaty.

Nov. 17 (312) From the Ambassador in Peru Conversation with Foreign Minister in which Minister had shown him British memorandum expressing opposition to the boundary treaty; conclusion that the Peruvian Congress is not likely to ratify the boundary treaty.

Colombian boundary treaty, left at the Department, November 14, by the Brazilian Chargé. Request for comments. Doc. 239 and Doc. 240] Undated Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the Peruvian Ambassador,

ECUADOR AND PERU Date and Number Subject Page 1924 June (35) From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.) Protocol signed June 21 between Peru and Ecuador at Quito providing for submission of boundary settlement to arbitration at Washington.

ALBANIA MAINTENANCE BY THE UNITED STATES OF UNOFFICIAL RELATIONS WITH THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT IN ALBANIA Date and Number Subject Page 1924 May (40) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Report of agitation launched by the opposition which may result in revolution. [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245] May 18 (43) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Report that arms are being distributed to reserves; that movement on Scutari is planned; that portion of Tirana garrison is of doubtful loyalty. Recommendation that a destroyer be sent to Durazzo for communication purposes. [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245] May 19 (44) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Report that officers of Tirana garrison objected to precipitating civil war by moving on Scutari; that the Assembly has sent a delegation to confer with recalcitrant members at Scutari. Recommendation that the Embassy at Rome be instructed to communicate direct with the admiral in case a destroyer is needed. [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248] May 20 (31) To the Minister in Albania (tel.) Arrangements for a destroyer to be dispatched to Durazzo upon receipt of request to that effect from the Minister or from the Embassy at Rome, the Embassy at Rome having been advised in the premises. [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248] June (104) From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.) Dispatch of an Italian destroyer to Durazzo, communications having been interrupted. Relay to the [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 246,

naval attaché at Athens of the request of the U. S. Minister at Tirana for a destroyer. Doc. 247, and Doc. 248] June (105) From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.) Evidence that the Albanian revolution is succeeding. [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251] June (49) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Declaration of armistice, evening of the 4th of June, at the instance of the Government; flight of the majority of officials to Durazzo; measures to insure public safety; arrival of the destroyer Bulmer. [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251] June (111) From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.) Report that Italy and Yugoslavia have no intention of interfering in internal affairs of Albania. [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251] June 11 (114) From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.) Telegram from the Minister to Albania, June 8 (text printed), reporting the flight of the Prime Minister and other officials to Durazzo; expectation that insurgent forces would enter Tirana the next day. [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253] June 19 (56) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Formal written announcement of the appointment of a new Cabinet received by foreign representatives. Questionable legal authority of the remaining regent to form a Cabinet. Attitude of other foreign representatives toward the new regime. Minister’s intention to refrain from any act which could be [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

construed as recognition, pending instructions from the Department. June 21 (58) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Information that both Italy and Yugoslavia have replied to communications from the Albanian Prime Minister and Foreign Minister in terms usual after there has been a normal change of ministry and that recognition was not mentioned. [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255] June 22 (59) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Conversation with the Prime Minister in which the Prime Minister made a plea for U. S. recognition in the same terms as transmitted through the Albanian consul at New York; and the Minister referred to U. S. policy of avoiding hasty recognition, especially in Europe, and reminded the Prime Minister of the failure of the late regime to fulfill its promises as to equality of opportunity and bringing the murderers of the two Americans to justice. [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255] June 24 (39) To the Minister in Albania (tel.) Authorization to continue relations with the present Government, if in his opinion the Government is properly constituted, stable, and in control of the country. [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257] June 25 (41) To the Minister in Albania (tel.) Information that the Department has no record of any message from the Prime Minister, either through the Albanian consul at New York or any other source. Approval of suggestion that the present regime be impressed with the importance of prompt action for the punishment of those responsible for the murder of the two Americans. [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257] July (62) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Information concerning the attitude of other [Pg. 312 includes

governments toward recognition of the new regime, Greece alone having given unconditional recognition; new regime’s lack of legal status under the constitution; Minister’s intention not to address any formal communications to the Foreign Minister. portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259] Sept. 16 (71) From the Chargé in Albania (tel.) Report of a growing dissatisfaction with present regime; British Minister’s belief revolution will occur within 2 weeks. [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259] Oct. 10 (78) From the Chargé in Albania (tel.) Report that there is no improvement in the weakened position of the Government. Belief that it will not serve U. S. interests to take up formal relations with the present regime. [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 259, Doc. 260, and Doc. 261] Nov. 20 (355) From the Minister in Albania Decree issued November 13 calling for elections for a legislative body, to be held December 20–January 20. Probability that one of the first acts of the new Parliament will be to overthrow the present Prime Minister. [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 259, Doc. 260, and Doc. 261] Dec. 12 (91) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Report of threats of incursion by refugees from Yugoslav territory, increasing as election approaches. [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 261, Doc. 262, and Doc. 263] Dec. 16 (93) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Report of incursions of armed bands from Greece; strategic points to the east occupied by Ahmed Bey [Pg. 314 includes portions of

Zogu’s forces; fighting along Yugoslav border; public demonstrations at Tirana and Durazzo. Doc. 261, Doc. 262, and Doc. 263] Dec. 25 (100) From the Minister in Albania (tel.) Report of Ahmed Bey Zogu’s entrance into Tirana. [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265]

POSTPONEMENT OF NEGOTIATIONS FOR A TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND ALBANIA Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Mar. 25 (83) To the Minister in Albania Request for opinion as to the advisability of undertaking the negotiation of a treaty to define and regularize relations between the United States and Albania; for views on points to be covered in such a treaty; and for a copy of the Albanian-Italian treaty of commerce and navigation, signed January 23. [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265] June (274) From the Minister in Albania Opinion that the exchange of notes dated June 23 and

BOLIVIA DISINCLINATION OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO OFFER THE GOOD OFFICES REQUESTED BY BOLIVIA FOR MODIFICATION OF THE BOLIVIAN–CHILEAN TREATY OF 1904 Date and Number Subject Page 1924 May 5 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs, Department of State Conversation between the Secretary of State and the Bolivian Minister concerning the Minister’s note requesting the United States to use its good offices to bring about a modification of the treaty of 1904 between Bolivia and Chile in order that Bolivia might obtain an outlet to the sea; the Secretary’s refusal to take the action requested, since the other party to the treaty had not yet requested the United States to intervene. [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 267]

BRAZIL EXPRESSION OF CONCERN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE AT BRAZIL’S NAVAL BUILDING PROGRAM Date and Number Subject Page 1924 June (24) From the Chargé in Brazil (tel.) Naval building program submitted to the Brazilian Minister of Marine by Rear Admiral Vogelgesang, head of the U. S. Naval Mission to Brazil. [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269] June 11 (18) To the Chargé in Brazil (tel.) Instructions to convey to Admiral Vogelgesang the Department’s grave concern over the proposed naval building program and the Secretary’s view that to carry out the program on the scale proposed would afford ample justification for the criticism which has already been directed against the Naval Mission; instructions also to request Vogelgesang to submit a full explanation and, if possible, to stop action in the matter, pending the Department’s consideration. [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269] June 15 (27) From the Chargé in Brazil (tel.) Vogelgesang’s explanation of his recommendations to the Minister of Marine for a 10–year replacement program; information that Ambassador Morgan, now in the United States, has a copy of the recommendation. [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270] June 26 (27) To the Chargé in Brazil (tel.) Danger that the proposed naval building program for Brazil will start a competition in naval building for Argentina and Chile. Instructions to request Vogelgesang to revise the naval program on the principle of no new construction or replacement greater than the maximum of Argentina, Brazil, or Chile. [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

July (38) From the Chargé in Brazil (tel.) Information that the recommendations for the naval program made by the Naval Mission have been withdrawn for revision. [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274] Dec. (77) To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.) Instructions to cable facts concerning press report that Naval Committee of the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies had adopted a resolution recommending the construction of 12 warships. [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274] Dec. 10 (103) From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.) Confirmation of press report concerning resolution adopted by Naval Committee of the Chamber of Deputies. Information that the Naval Mission was in no wise responsible. [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274]

BULGARIA EXTRADITION TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND BULGARIA, SIGNED MARCH 19, 1924 Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Mar. 19 Treaty between the United States of America and Bulgaria For the extradition of fugitives from justice. 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 275]

CANADA RATIFICATION OF THE FISHERIES CONVENTION SIGNED ON MARCH 2, 1923, BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND GREAT BRITAIN Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. 10 To the Canadian Deputy Minister of Marine and Fisheries Information that the halibut fisheries convention has been referred to the Senate for further consideration, but that provisions of section 9 of the halibut fisheries act passed in June 1923 by the Canadian Parliament will make it difficult to obtain Senate approval of the convention without reservations. Suggestion that the act be amended so as to eliminate section 9.

May (408) From the British Ambassador Inquiry whether the convention has been resubmitted to the Senate and whether the Senate has agreed to its ratification without reservation.

285, and Doc. 286] June 4 To the British Ambassador Adoption of Senate resolution, May 31, giving advice and consent to ratification of the convention. Arrangements for exchange of ratifications. (Footnote: Ratifications exchanged at Washington, October 21; proclaimed by the President, October 22.)

RENEWED CONSIDERATION OF A JOINT PROJECT FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE ST. LAWRENCE WATERWAY Date and Number Subject Page 1923 Nov. 17 To the British Chargé Inquiry whether the Canadian Government would now be inclined to give consideration to a joint project for the improvement of the St. Lawrence Waterway and to enter into negotiations along the lines suggested by the United States in its note of May 17, 1922. 342 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 288] 1924 Jan. 30 (97) From the British Chargé Canada’s desire to give further consideration to U. S. suggestions of May 17, 1922; disposition, however, to act without delay upon the International Joint Committee’s proposal to enlarge the Joint Engineering Board with a view to its preparing a final report on the project, including costs; intention to form a national committee to inquire into wide questions involved; inquiry as to U. S. views on the number of engineers to be appointed by each Government to the Board; readiness to nominate technical officers to discuss with U. S. technical officers form of instructions to the 342 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 288]

enlarged Board; suggestion concerning simultaneous publication of proposals. Feb. 27 To the British Chargé Intention to appoint a national committee also. Assent to proposal that Joint Engineering Board be enlarged and suggestion that two engineers be added to the Board by each country, thus increasing Board to six members. Proposal that the two national committees be empowered to meet in joint sessions to formulate instructions for Board, etc.; and that the Board’s first instructions include certain fundamental questions which the Board presented in its 1921 report; suggestions concerning publication of proposals. 343 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 289] Mar. 12 (228) From the British Ambassador Canada’s concurrence in U. S. suggestion that two engineers be appointed by each Government to the Joint Engineering Board; preference that instructions, etc., for Board be formulated by technical officers rather than by the two national committees, since suggested duties would be inconsistent with Canada’s purpose in constituting her national committee; agreement with suggestion concerning questions to be included in first instructions to the Board; suggestion concerning publication of correspondence. 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 290] Apr. 28 To the British Ambassador Appointment of a national committee with Herbert Hoover as chairman; acceptance of proposal that technical officers be appointed by each Government to formulate instructions for the Joint Engineering Board, such instructions to be subject to review and approval by the Governments; names of U. S. representatives on the Board and of U. S. technical officers. 347 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 291]

PROTESTS BY THE CANADIAN GOVERNMENT AGAINST FURTHER DIVERSION OF THE WATERS OF THE GREAT LAKES

Date and Number Subject Page 1923 Dec. 29 (1111) From the British Chargé Canada’s maintenance of attitude of opposition to further diversion of waters from Lake Michigan and inquiry as to present status of legal proceedings instituted by the U. S. Government against the Sanitary District of Chicago to prevent unauthorized diversion of water from Lake Michigan. [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292] 1924 Feb. 13 (144) From the British Chargé Canada’s protest against legislation being considered by U. S. Congress providing for a waterway from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico and for the diversion of water from Lake Michigan for the sewage disposal system of Chicago. [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 293] Feb. 16 To the British Chargé Information that the suit for injunction instituted by the U. S. Government against the Sanitary District of Chicago is still pending on appeal in the Supreme Court of the United States and that an attempt will be made to advance the case for early argument. [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294] Mar. 21 (256) From the British Ambassador Canada’s maintenance of attitude of opposition to pending U. S. legislation, with intimation of its possible unfortunate effect upon St. Lawrence Waterway negotiations. Inquiry as to attitude of U. S. authorities; also whether W. J. Stewart, chief hydrographer of Canada, will be permitted to attend the hearings of the special committee of the Senate on the proposed waterway from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico. [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295] Apr. 2 To the British Ambassador Information that the special committee of the Senate is not holding hearings, but that the House Committee on Rivers and Harbors will resume its hearings on April 15 on bills dealing with diversion of water from [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 295,

Lake Michigan and that the committee will be glad to have Mr. Stewart attend its hearings. Doc. 296, and Doc. 297] June 13 (533) From the British Ambassador Canada’s renewed protest and request for comprehensive statement of views of U. S. Government; also Canada’s intention to publish note no. 256 of March 21. [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297] June 28 To the British Ambassador Inability of U. S. Government to formulate a comprehensive statement of views concerning diversion of water from Lake Michigan because questions involved are under consideration by Congress and the Supreme Court, both of which are in recess. Willingness to include subject among questions to be referred to the Joint Engineering Board appointed for further investigation of the proposed St. Lawrence Waterway. [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

CHILE RESIGNATION OF PRESIDENT ALESSANDRI AND THE EXERCISE OF INFORMAL RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES EMBASSY AND THE NEW ADMINISTRATION AT SANTIAGO Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Sept. (53) From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.) Information that President Alessandri has resigned rather than accede to the demands of the military junta and that he and members of his family have sought asylum at the Embassy. Ambassador’s press statement (text printed) that Alessandri requested and was granted hospitality of the Embassy.

Sept. 13 (42) To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.) Press reports that Alessandri’s resignation has been accepted by the junta and that Alessandri claims he was banished and that there is no constitutional government in Chile. Instructions to avoid formal relations with new regime until situation clears.

CHINA CIVIL WAR IN NORTHERN CHINA RESULTING IN THE OVERTHROW OF PRESIDENT TSAO KUN AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Aug. 26 (304) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Rumors of the possibility of a conflict involving Wu Pei-fu, Chi Hsieh-yuan, Lu Yung-hsiang, and ultimately Chang Tsolin; reports of mobilization in Chekiang and Kiangsu Provinces; and apprehension that clash will bring on a Chihli–Fengtien war. [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 308] Aug. 28 (312) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram from the consul general at Shanghai, August 27 (text printed) reporting disruption of rail service and suggesting immediate dispatch of destroyers. Telegram from the consul at Nanking (text printed) reporting mobilization of Kiangsu troops at border of Chekiang near Soochow. Press reports of interruption of Nanking-Shanghai railroad service and of fighting between troops of Chi and Ho Feng-lin. [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 308] Aug. 29 (313) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Note addressed to the Chinese Foreign Minister, August 28, by the American, British, French, and Japanese representatives (text printed) reminding the Chinese Government of its obligations to prevent loss of life and property of members of the foreign community in and around Shanghai. [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 309] Aug. 30 (314) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram dated August 28 from the consul general at Shanghai (text printed) reporting imminence of an attack on Woosung forts by naval forces from Nanking and Foochow, and requesting that the U. S. commander in chief be informed so that he may [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 311]

protect U. S. shipping at Woosung and on the lower Yangtze. Aug. 30 (315) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Oral representations by American, British, French, and Japanese representatives to the Chinese Foreign Minister against the impending battle between Woosung forts and Nanking navy, with intimation of purpose to enforce neutrality in respect of the river and its mouth if the Chinese fail to make a declaration of neutrality with respect to the same. [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 311] Sept. (318) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram from Shanghai, September 1, from the military attaché (text printed) reporting expected opening of hostilities on September 4. Excerpts from a press interview given August 27 by Chi. Belief that Chi, Wu, and the Peking Government intend to eliminate Lu. Fear that Chang will attack Wu and all of China will become embroiled. [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312] Sept. 3 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) The breaking out of hostilities near Shanghai between the forces of Chi and Ho; arrangements by foreign naval contingent to land forces to protect the foreign settlement, if necessary. [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315] Sept. (324) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Orders issued by opposing Chinese admirals restricting traffic on the Yangtze; foreign representatives’ inquiry of their governments whether to use force to prevent such restriction; opinion of the American commander in chief that he should use force only to protect American lives and property. [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315] Sept. (325) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Return of the naval attaché from inspection trip to Harbin and Mukden and his report that there was no [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 313,

evidence that Chang intended to move in the immediate future. Doc. 314, and Doc. 315] Sept. (213) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Instructions that use of American naval forces on Yangtze and Whangpoo should be confined to protection of American lives and property, but that exigencies of situation demand an appropriate cooperation and that the Whangpoo should be kept open from Shanghai to the sea. Assumption that the naval authorities of the powers in those waters will use proper means to that end. [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 317] Sept. (329) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Request for elucidation of the Department’s position regarding use of American naval forces on the Whangpoo, as instructions appear somewhat contradictory. [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 317] Sept. (330) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram, September 7, from the consul at Mukden (text printed) reporting Chang’s announcement to foreign consuls of his intention to order mobilization in the Three Eastern Provinces in self-defense. [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320] Sept. (331) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Report that the Chekiang and Nanking naval forces will observe the notification that no firing on Whangpoo will be permitted. [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320] Sept. (332) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Presidential mandate, issued September 7 at the [Pg. 368 includes

request of Chi and Wu, depriving Lu and Ho of offices, ranks, and decorations for defying the Central Government and attacking Kiangsu on September 4; also ordering Chi to mobilize forces to cope with the situation. Chang’s alleged letter of August 30 to President Tsao, published September 3, sharply critical of the Peking administration and threatening armed intervention. portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320] Sept. (334) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Chinese oral reply, September 3, to the representations of August 30, conveying assurances of protection for foreign lives and property but omitting any reference to neutralization of the Whangpoo. Memorandum, in reply, by the American, British, French, Italian, and Japanese representatives, regretting the Chinese failure to mention neutralization of the Whangpoo and intimating the possibility that they might have to use forcible measures to prevent fighting on the Whangpoo. [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 321] Sept. (214) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Instructions that exigencies of situation on the Whangpoo seem to require appropriate cooperation with other naval powers represented in those waters for suitable protection of American lives and property; also that should restrictions imposed by the Chinese regarding the Yangtze endanger American lives and property naval authorities would be expected to afford protection. [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323] Sept. 9 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Report on indecisive fighting near Shanghai by Kiangsu and Chekiang forces; inactivity of Nanking and Fukien naval forces; precautionary measures taken by foreign naval contingents. [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323]

Sept. 10 (151) To the Chargé in Japan (tel.) The Department’s attitude of strict neutrality in Chinese disturbance, its chief concern being protection of American lives and property; denial that there has been an exchange of views with any of the interested powers. Text of the Department’s telegram no. 214, September 8, to Peking, transmitted for the Chargé’s information. [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 324] Sept. 10 (227) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Foreign Minister’s assertion of neutral attitude of Japan toward struggle in China, and reference to press reports alleging that Wu was being backed by the United States and Chang by Japan and that Great Britain and United States were exchanging views on Chinese situation. [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] Sept. 11 (339) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Report that both sides in conflict have agreed to neutralization of the Whangpoo and to revocation of regulations regarding the navigation of the lower Yangtze and the Whangpoo. [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] Sept. 12 (154) To the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Instructions to communicate orally to Shidehara the first part of the Department’s telegram no. 151 of September 10. (Instructions to repeat to Peking for information the same portion of telegram no. 151.) [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] Sept. 12 (342) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Disagreement of foreign diplomatic representatives with proposal of the senior foreign naval officers at Shanghai to occupy Woosung forts and hoist foreign flags. [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329]

Sept. 13 (343) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Foreign Office reply to note of August 28, giving assurance that every effort will be made to protect foreign lives and property in the vicinity of Shanghai, and requesting that a warning be issued to foreign nationals not to become involved in hostilities. Legation’s circular instructions to consuls to this effect. [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329] Sept. 13 (216) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Approval of action taken regarding proposal of senior naval officers at Shanghai to occupy Woosung forts. Letter of September 12 to the Secretary of the Navy (text printed), disapproving, as unneutral and unwarranted, the action of senior foreign naval officers at Shanghai in notifying the Chekiang gunboats that the Nanking navy, representing the Kiangsu forces, will not be permitted to enter the Whangpoo. [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 330] Sept. 14 From the Chargé in China (tel.) Report of heavy troop movements from Mukden southward. [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333] Sept. 15 (217) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Approval of action in circularizing consuls as indicated in the Chargé’s telegram no. 343 of September 13. [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333] Sept. 17 (352) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram dated September 16 from the consul at Mukden (text printed) reporting the invasion of Chihli [Pg. 376 includes portions of

by Fengtien forces on September 15. Confirmation of reported invasion; of heavy troop movements north from Peking; and of Wu’s arrival in Peking. Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333] Sept. 17 (353) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Hope that the action of the senior foreign naval officer at Shanghai in notifying the Chekiang admiral that vessels of his fleet must not leave the Whangpoo and the Nanking admiral that his vessels must not enter the Whangpoo, meets with the Department’s views as to neutrality. [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 335] Sept. 17 (354) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Foreign Minister’s memorandum reiterating the charge that Chekiang started the fighting, taking exception to intimation of representatives of interested powers that they might have to use forcible measures to prevent fighting on the Whangpoo, renewing assurances concerning protection of foreign lives and property, and expressing desire to restrict area of military operations by neutralization of certain areas of Shanghai and Woosung. Memorandum, in reply, by American, British, French, Italian, and Japanese representatives (text printed) refusing to express an opinion on the neutralization scheme. [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 335] Sept. 18 (356) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Presidential mandates of September 17, ordering all commanders of troops to proceed against Chang and the advancing Fengtien troops, appointing Wu Pei-fu commander in chief to suppress rebellion, and making other appointments. [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 336] Sept. 26 (364) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Memorandum of the diplomatic body at Peking sent September 25 to the Chinese Government and to Chang (text printed) expressing concern over use of [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc.

airplanes for bombing of undefended towns, and declaring that authority ordering airplane attack on Peking or any treaty port would be held strictly accountable for loss of foreign lives or property. and Doc. 337] Oct. (381) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that Chekiang vessels left the Whangpoo September 21 and have gone over to the Government; that Chargé and British Minister on October 8 refused to consent to the request of the Chinese Government that Admiral Lu’s vessels be permitted to enter the Whangpoo in view of the changed circumstances. [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 338] Oct. 11 (383) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Wu’s departure from Peking to direct operations at northern front. [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341] Oct. 13 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Report that Generals Lu and Ho have deserted. [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341] Oct. 13 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Confirmation of report that Generals Lu and Ho have deserted and have sailed for Japan. [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341] Oct. 13 (386) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Interruption of train service between Tientsin and Shanhaikwan. Decision of foreign commandants to set up a limited international train service. [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 342,

Doc. 343, and Doc. 344] Oct. 13 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Probable reasons for the desertion of Generals Lu and Ho. Appointment of new commissioner of police for Shanghai and Woosung to replace Ho’s appointee. Precautionary measures to prevent retreating Chekiang forces from seeking shelter in concessions. [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344] Oct. 15 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Occupation of Lunghua arsenal and yamen by Kiangsu troops October 14; Chi’s expected arrival at Shanghai; appointment of new officials. Efforts of Hsu to reorganize the Chekiang forces. [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344] Oct. 23 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Chi’s return to Nanking without visiting Shanghai. Improvement in local conditions. [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, and Doc. 346] Oct. 23 From the Consul General at Tientsin (tel.) Radio message from the Chargé at Peking (text printed) reporting General Feng’s return to Peking and his peaceful occupation of the city. [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, and Doc. 346] Oct. 24 From the Consul General at Tientsin (tel.) Radio message, October 23, from the Chargé at Peking (text printed) reporting C. T. Wang’s statement that he and Huang Fu, Minister of Education, participated in Feng’s coup d’état; that other members of the Cabinet [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347,

have been arrested or are under surveillance; that there will be a government by a committee which will invite Chang, Sun, Tuan, and others to a conference. and Doc. 348] Oct. 24 (405) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Tuan’s message announcing his intended arrival at Peking on October 26 as commander in chief of the National People’s Army and requesting moral support of the U. S. Government. Presidential mandates, issued under pressure, ordering cessation of hostilities, relieving Wu of offices, etc. Note of treaty powers insisting upon restoration of means of communication. Measures to increase Legation Guard. [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348] Oct. 26 (410) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Wu’s arrival at Tientsin, with the evident intention of trying to reestablish himself in Peking. [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 350] Oct. 29 (416) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Report that Tuan has replaced Feng as commander of National People’s Army, and that friction and jealousy exist, causing difficulty in agreeing upon appointments; question whether Wu or Feng will receive support of provincial leaders. Arrival of additional marines. [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 350] Oct. 31 (418) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Recommendations to the commander in chief of Asiatic Fleet to send U. S. naval vessel to Tientsin as additional protection to American lives and property. [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 352] Nov. (425) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Mandate, issued October announcing the resignation of all members of the Cabinet except Huang Fu and the appointment of a new Cabinet with Huang Fu as Premier and C. T. Wang as Foreign [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc.

Minister. Noncommittal attitude of provincial leaders toward Feng and lack of public optimism in regard to Feng’s plan for national conference. and Doc. 352] Nov. (427) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Report that Wu’s position at Yangtsun has collapsed and his forces are disorganized; that Chang Tso-lin has captured several towns and controls railroad to Peitang; that President Tsao Kun resigned November 2 and the Cabinet will perform the President’s duties; that Tuan and Sun are expected soon at Peking; and that C. T. Wang assumed duties as Foreign Minister on November 1. [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 353] Nov. (429) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Official notification of the President’s resignation on November 2 and the Cabinet’s assumption of his duties. Wu’s departure from Tangku November 3, leaving Feng’s troops in complete control. Sun’s intended departure from Canton for Peking November 6. Resumption of daily international train service to Tientsin. [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 355] Nov. (269) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Report that the American consul at Tsingtau has agreed with his British and Japanese colleagues to advise Wu not to land at Tsingtau. Instructions to inform the consul of the Department’s disapproval of such intervention in Chinese internal affairs. (Instructions to repeat to Tokyo.) [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 355] Nov. (434) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Eviction of Manchu ex-Emperor and entourage from the Forbidden City and their removal to Prince Chun’s palace. Call paid by British, Netherland, and Japanese Ministers upon Foreign Minister to be assured of the safety of the ex-Emperor. Belief of credible persons that the action against the ex-Emperor was Bolshevik inspired. [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 356]

Nov. (435) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Excerpt from Foreign Minister’s press statement, November 6 (text printed) implying intention to take up question of treaty revision. [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358] Nov. (436) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Correspondence with naval officers and consuls at Tsingtau and Chefoo (texts printed) regarding arrangements to prevent Wu from landing, Department’s disapproval of such interference in China’s internal affairs, and withdrawal by the consul at Tsingtau of his sanction of arrangements. [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358] Nov. 12 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Telegram, November 11, from the consul at Nanking (text printed) reporting that Chi and Lu have dispatched a vessel to meet Wu, who is expected to arrive on the 13th for a conference; that Chi will accept leadership of Tuan but not that of Feng or Chang; that representatives of eight governors are assembling to decide upon course of action. [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360] Nov. 11 [12?] (142) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that Chang and Feng are in Tientsin conferring with Tuan and others; that Wu has sailed from Chefoo, destination unknown; that Sun will leave for the north November 13. Concern over Soviet influence in present Peking Government. [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360] Nov. 13 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Information that on November 12 a Chinese man-ofwar and four troop transports arrived at Woosung and were joined by other naval vessels and a transport; and that some of the vessels proceeded up the Yangtze. Rumor that Wu is on board one of the vessels. [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362]

Nov. 18 (448) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Reports that Chang, Feng, and followers have appealed by circular telegram to provinces to support Tuan as Provisional Chief Executive of the Chinese Republic. Telegram from the consul general at Hankow (text printed) reporting Wu’s arrival; his manifesto proclaiming the setting up of a Yangtze military government; and his invitation to Tuan to come to Wuchang to head military government. Sun’s arrival at Shanghai November 17 and his statement (text printed) expressing his usual attitude toward foreigners and concessions. [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362] Nov. 20 (451) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram, November 19, from the consul general at Hankow (text printed) reporting Wu’s departure for Chengchow and failure to carry out plan for military government. [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364] Nov. 21 (452) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Official information that Tuan will come to Peking within 5 days and that the Cabinet will hand over to him the powers of Premier and President. Chargé’s intention not to enter into formal relations with Tuan or his representatives pending Department’s instructions. [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364] Nov. 22 From the Consul General at Shanghai (tel.) Telegram, November 22, from the consul at Nanking (text printed) reporting Chi’s endorsement of Tuan while assisting Wu defensively. [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366] Nov. 24 (455) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Assumption of office by Tuan as Chief Executive of the Republic of China; indecision of the Cabinet [Pg. 398 includes portions of

whether to continue to function or turn over its powers to Tuan or to a new Cabinet. Arrival of Chang at Peking with about a thousand troops. Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366] Nov. 25 (456) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Foreign Minister’s note, November 24 (text printed) containing the official notice of Tuan’s assumption of office. Mandates published November promulgating the Provisional Government and appointing a Cabinet. The Chargé’s recommendation that he be instructed to associate himself with other Heads of Legations in paying respects to Tuan as head of the provisional de facto government. [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 367] Nov. 26 (295) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Authorization to act in association with other heads of missions, making it clear that action does not imply formal recognition. [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, and Doc. 369] Nov. 29 (459) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Chargé’s exchange of calls with Chang. Individual calls of diplomatic representatives upon Tuan. Comments on Cabinet appointments and Feng’s efforts to resign his commands. [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, and Doc. 369] Dec. (465) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Report on views expressed by Chang, during call on November 29, regarding Bolshevik activities in China. [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 370] Dec. (466) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Chang’s sudden departure from Peking, taking headquarters’ staff and bodyguard. [Pg. 405 includes portions of

Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372] Dec. (468) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Apprehension that Chang’s sudden departure from Peking, the ex-Emperor’s unexpected refuge, November 29, in the Japanese Legation, Feng’s presence in vicinity of Peking, and Sun’s imminent arrival, indicate that extreme Kuomintang and Soviet influence dominate Peking. British Minister’s suggestion of an informal meeting of Washington Conference powers. [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372] Dec. (300) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Approval of observation that Bolshevik activity in China is primarily question for domestic Chinese administration. [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 373] Dec. (473) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram, December 4, from the consul general at Hankow (text printed) reporting Wu’s flight from Loyang on December 2, his troops refusing support at Chengchow; and a popular feeling against Wu which will prevent him from recovering control of troops and recruiting new army. [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 375] Dec. 13 (480) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Mandate issued December 11 dismissing Chi from office as Military Governor of Kiangsu. Question whether Chi will vacate post or make armed resistance. (Footnote: Information that Chi retired to private life; but resumed military activities in January 1925.) [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 375] Dec. 22 (500) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram sent to the commander in chief of the Asiatic Fleet (text printed) agreeing to withdrawal of destroyers from North China waters. [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc.

and Doc. 377] MAINTENANCE OF A UNITED FRONT BY THE POWERS IN OPPOSITION TO THE THREATENED SEIZURE OF CUSTOMS AT CANTON BY SUN YAT-SEN Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Mar. 26 (280) From the British Ambassador View that it is no longer necessary to maintain a joint naval demonstration at Canton in consequence of Sun Yat-sen’s threat to seize customs, provided an arrangement can be made for its renewal in case of necessity. Inquiry whether the United States is in agreement with this view and would be prepared to cooperate in arranging for a renewal of the naval demonstration in case of necessity. [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 377] Mar. 31 To the British Ambassador Assertion that the United States, without committing itself to any definite engagement with respect to eventual action in regard to situation at Canton, is aware of no circumstances which would cause it to alter its previous attitude of cooperation in the event of a similar emergency occurring in the future. [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 379] Apr. 12 To the British Ambassador Information that the American Minister at Peking has reported that there is no real reason for continuing the naval demonstration and that he and his colleagues are of the opinion that at the time of the withdrawal of extra vessels, the consuls should make it known in private conversation that the ships will return if Sun indicates any intention to seize customs. [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 379] Apr. 25 (109) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram, April 24, from the consul general at Canton (text printed) expressing opinion that the American destroyer should be withdrawn. Telegram from the [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 379,

commander in chief of the Asiatic Fleet (text printed) concurring in this opinion and stating his intention to withdraw destroyer in near future. Doc. 380, and Doc. 381] Oct. 20 (397) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram, October 19, from the consul general at Canton (text printed) reporting rumor that Sun will attempt to seize the customs on the 20th and requesting instructions. Telegram, October 20, to the consul general at Canton and the commander in chief of the Asiatic Fleet (text printed), instructing them that American vessels should not take forcible measures to prevent seizure of customs until further instructed and unless British, French, and Japanese ships cooperate in the action. Request for instructions. [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381] Oct. 22 (243) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Department’s instructions to London, Paris, and Tokyo to ascertain the views of the respective Governments regarding maintenance of the integrity of the Canton customs (excerpt printed). Approval of telegrams dispatched to the consul general at Canton and the commander in chief of the Asiatic Fleet. [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, and Doc. 383] Oct. 22 (398) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Telegram, October 21, from the consul at Canton (text printed) reporting presence of American, British, and French vessels in port and transference of everything essential in the customhouse to Shameen, from which the commissioner could cany on even if Sun seized the customs building. [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, and Doc. 383] Oct. 25 (1006) From the British Ambassador Hope that the U. S. representative at Peking will be authorized to concert with the British representative in arranging for a renewal of the naval demonstration, in view of the new threat of the Canton Government to seize the customhouse and declare Canton a free port. [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385]

Oct. 25 (274) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Foreign Minister’s statement that Japan attaches great importance to maintenance of integrity of Canton customs but would be inclined to join in a naval demonstration only as a last resort; his belief that the consular corps at Canton should address a vigorous protest to the Canton Government and that the powers should take positive measures only if the protest is disregarded; his opinion that because of the changed situation at Peking, Sun will probably not carry out his threat to seize the customs. [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385] Oct. 26 (463) From the Chargé in France (tel.) Information that the French attitude regarding maintenance of integrity of Canton customs had in no way been modified; that the French Government was prepared to oppose seizure and considered instructions given admiral last December would apply automatically at any recurrence of the situation. [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 387] Nov. 8 To the British Ambassador Information from the British Foreign Office that Sun is threatening seizure only of the native Canton customs, and that naval authorities consider there is no need for naval action at present. [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 387] Nov. 12 (1092) From the British Ambassador Information that the British representatives at Paris, Rome, Tokyo, and Lisbon, have been instructed to inform the Governments that, as the Canton Government apparently means to seize only the native customs, it is considered that joint naval action would have no value, and that the British representative at Peking is of the opinion that the Canton Government will await developments in North China before interfering with customs. [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, and Doc. 389] RECOGNITION BY THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER POWERS OF THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT AS THE “DE FACTO” GOVERNMENT OF CHINA

Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Nov. (272) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Request for comments upon the French suggestion, to which Belgium has assented, that the powers withhold recognition of the new Chinese Government with a view to forcing it to give satisfactory assurances of its readiness to fulfill its treaty obligations to the powers. (Instructions to repeat to Tokyo.) 416 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, and Doc. 389] Nov. 11 (439) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Proposal, made at meeting of diplomatic body on November 5, by the French and Belgian Chargés, and concurred in by the Italian Minister, that chiefs of missions at their initial call upon the new Foreign Minister make reserves in respect of the new regime and that the powers obtain a guarantee from China to carry out its treaty obligations before recognizing the new President when elected. Statement of several Ministers, concurred in by U. S. Chargé, that they considered the present situation a Cabinet change and hence there was no need for raising the question of recognition. Chargé’s opinion that the proposal of the French and Belgian Chargés was primarily a bid for diplomatic body’s support in the gold franc case. 417 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 390] Nov. 11 (277) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Department’s desire to avoid any commitment as to status of the new regime at Peking, in view of the indeterminate situation; and preference that the Legation’s de facto relations with the regime be as informal and infrequent as compatible with protection of U. S. interests. 419 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393] Nov. 11 (291) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Information that, in reply to the French suggestion 419 [Pg.

concerning withholding recognition of new regime in China, the Japanese Foreign Minister expressed the opinion that the regime was legally constituted and therefore the question of recognition did not arise. includes portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393] Undated [Rec’d Nov. 11] From the French Embassy Suggestion that recognition of new regime in China be withheld with a view to forcing China to give satisfactory assurances of its readiness to fulfill its treaty obligations to the powers. 419 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393] Nov. 12 (279) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that on November the French Ambassador confirmed the French suggestion and that the Secretary, in reply, had expressed the opinion that it was not wise to lay down a program to cover eventualities and that it seemed necessary to await developments; and that the same opinion had been expressed to the Italian Ambassador. (Instructions to repeat to Tokyo.) 420 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 394] Nov. 13 (445) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that the Foreign Minister’s notice of his assumption of duties received the customary replies from the diplomatic body; that the Foreign Minister’s call was returned by all of them but they refrained from calling at the Foreign Office on the regular diplomatic day; that the diplomatic body generally considered the situation merely a Cabinet change; that the Acting Premier’s reception, however, was canceled because the diplomatic body decided not to attend. 421 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 395] Nov. 15 (294) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Aide-mémoire from the Japanese Foreign Office to the French Ambassador (text printed) acquiescing in the 422 [Pg. includes

French opinion regarding recognition of the new Government in China and in the importance of obtaining assurance of the fulfillment of international obligations. portions of Doc. and Doc. 396] Nov. 18 (479) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Foreign Office statement that the British reply to the French representations was in substance identical with the U. S. reply. 423 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 398] Nov. 24 (434) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Instructions to discuss with Foreign Minister the Secretary’s views on the Chinese situation as set forth in Department’s memorandum to the French Embassy which is to be repeated from Paris; also to explain that, in the Secretary’s judgment, there should be no foreign intervention, encouragement should be given any government likely to become stable, and the new regime should be influenced to observe treaty obligations. (Instructions to repeat to France for information.) 423 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 398] Nov. 25 To the French Embassy Disposition of the United States to associate itself with other treaty powers in adopting an attitude of reserve until a regime is constituted in China likely to be stable and to fulfill China’s treaty obligations. Suggestion that reciprocal assurances should be offered China that powers will put into action the provisions of Washington Conference resolution on extraterritoriality; and that France contribute toward amelioration of the situation by ratifying the two treaties concerning China concluded at the Washington Conference. 426 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 399] Dec. (502) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Information that the Foreign Minister is in absolute accord with the Secretary’s views on the Chinese 428 [Pg. includes

situation; that the Foreign Office intends to express similar views to the French in the near future; and that the British Minister at Peking has been instructed to urge upon the Chinese an early compromise with France on the gold franc controversy. portions of Doc. and Doc. 400] Dec. (314) From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.) Japanese statement of views on the Chinese situation prepared at the request of the British Ambassador (text printed). 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 401] Dec. (199) To the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Authorization to inform Foreign Minister orally of Department’s communications with the British and French Governments on the Chinese situation and to discuss the subject informally. (Instructions to repeat to Peking.) 430 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 402] Dec. (472) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Draft statement of representatives of the treaty powers (text printed) offering full support to the Provisional Government at Peking on understanding that the Government is legally constituted and intends to respect China’s treaty obligations; also, offering reciprocal assurances that their Governments will proceed with carrying out of the Washington treaties and resolutions. Recommendation that the statement receive immediate approval. Possibility of another coup d’état with the purpose of establishing a Soviet government in China. 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 403] Dec. 5 From the Netherland Minister Foreign Minister’s opinion that the proposed statement of the representatives of the treaty powers will be considered as proof of weakness and will lead to no desirable result. Request for the Secretary’s views. 433 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 404] Dec. (302) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Approval of proposed statement; and authorization to 434 [Pg.

sign if all colleagues sign. Instructions to notify Department if any of his colleagues fail to sign, in order that the Department may take up the subject with appropriate governments. includes portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406] Dec. 6 To the Netherland Minister Views on the Chinese situation. Hope that the Netherland Government will join in signing the proposed statement of the representatives of the treaty powers. 434 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406] Dec. (474) From the Chargé in China (tel.) British Minister’s authorization to sign the statement even without French concurrence. Chargé’s request for similar authorization. Urgency for taking action prior to any hostile declaration by Sun Yat-sen urging cancelation or revision of treaties. 436 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 407] Dec. (303) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that the representatives at Paris, Brussels, The Hague, Rome, and Lisbon are being informed of the proposed statement and the Department’s views and are being instructed to discuss the matter informally and orally with the various Foreign Ministers. 437 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 409] Dec. (440) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Instructions to send certain appropriate correspondence to missions at Brussels, The Hague, Lisbon, and Rome, and direct them to discuss the Chinese situation with the Foreign Ministers in the several countries, in the hope that they will instruct their representatives at Peking to join in signing the proposed statement. 437 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 409]

Dec. 8 From the Netherland Minister Information that the Netherland Minister at Peking has been authorized to sign the statement. 438 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 409, Doc. 410, and Doc. 411] Dec. (307) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Authorization to join the British and Japanese representatives and those of any of the other powers concerned, in case they are instructed to take like action, in sending the statement to the Chinese Government. (Instructions to repeat to Embassy at Tokyo.) 438 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 409, Doc. 410, and Doc. 411] Dec. (478) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Amendment of the statement and its signature by representatives of all the treaty powers except Portugal. Plan to deliver the statement on December 9 and release it to the press on December 10. 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 412] Dec. 10 From the French Ambassador Justification of refusal to ratify treaties concerning China signed at Washington or to carry out resolution relative to extraterritoriality, as long as China fails to meet its obligations to France regarding resumption of service of Boxer indemnity in gold. Desire that American influence be brought to bear upon China to meet its engagements. 440 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 413] Dec. 10 (309) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Approval of the Chargé’s action regarding amendment of the statement of December 9 and of its delivery to China. (Instructions to repeat to Tokyo.) 442 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 415]

Jan. (2696) From the Minister in China Foreign Minister’s note, December 23 (text printed) expressing appreciation of joint statement of December 9 and giving assurance that the Chinese Government will continue to respect its obligations. 442 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 415]

NEGOTIATIONS LEADING TO THE OCCUPATION OF THE RUSSIAN LEGATION AT PEKING BY THE NEWLY ACCREDITED SOVIET AMBASSADOR TO CHINA Date and Number Subject Page 1924 June 11 (170) From the Minister in China (tel.) Foreign Minister’s note, June 9, to the Netherland Minister as dean of the diplomatic corps (text printed) referring to the note of the diplomatic corps, January 11, 1921, by which custody of the former Russian Legation was entrusted to the dean of the diplomatic corps until the arrival at Peking of a representative of a recognized Russian Government; and requesting that the Legation premises be returned to the representative of the Soviet Government in China. Dean’s reply June 11, stating that a duly accredited representative of Russia should apply to the dean of the diplomatic corps for possession of the property. 443 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 416] June 30 (209) From the Minister in China (tel.) Foreign Minister’s note, June 27 (substance printed) expressing the hope that the dean will comply with his request for the return of the Russian Legation premises, as any other course would not only embarrass the Chinese Government but would also prejudice the right of foreign powers to establish Legations on Chinese territory free from any condition other than consent of Chinese Government. 444 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 417]

July (145) To the Minister in China (tel.) Feeling that the Russian Legation premises should be turned over to the Russian representative upon his request for possession; approval of stand of the diplomatic corps in refusing to transfer the property at the request of the Chinese authorities; and opinion that the Chinese Government can claim no voice in the disposition of the property beyond determining whom to recognize as representative of Russia in China. Instructions to inform the Foreign Office. 446 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419] July 12 (230) From the Minister in China (tel.) Dean’s note, July 12, to the Chinese Government expressing obligation not to return the Russian Legation premises except to a representative of the Russian Government who will give preliminary assurances of maintenance of arrangements constituting conventional statute of the diplomatic quarter; and requesting that the Ministers be informed of the name of the duly accredited Soviet representative and that he be asked to address them directly. Information that as yet neither Karakhan nor anyone else has presented credentials as Soviet Ambassador or Minister to China; that Karakhan’s credentials were for the special purpose of concluding an agreement. 446 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419] July 25 (258) From the Minister in China (tel.) Minister’s conversation, in his capacity as senior representative of protocol powers in absence of Netherland Minister, with Karakhan, the newly appointed Soviet Ambassador to China, who stated that his Government contemplated the abandonment in the near future of its rights and interests under the protocol but that he desired on entering the Legation Quarter to maintain good neighborly relations and to observe municipal regulations, agreed to submit a written record of his observations on the understanding that they were not to be regarded as a fulfillment of preliminary conditions but as a voluntary expression of his views, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 420]

and said he would make a formal demand of the powers for the return of the Legation premises. July 29 (175) To the Minister in China (tel.) Information that the United States would not feel justified in authorizing the Minister to associate himself with any effort to stipulate conditions precedent to the transfer of the Legation property to Karakhan; and that the necessities of case would be satisfactorily met if Karakhan’s written statement contains definite assurances concerning defense, taxation, and municipal regulations in Legation Quarter, not only in present circumstances but also in the event that the Soviet regime abandons its rights and interests under the protocol. 449 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 421] Aug. 1 (270) From the Minister in China (tel.) Receipt of Karakhan’s note requesting return of the Legation premises and his written statement of conversation with the U. S. Minister, which failed to mention defense of Legation Quarter. Request for approval of draft reply (text printed) conveying consent of protocol powers to the return of the Legation premises, but reserving full liberty of action in respect to the effect the Soviet renunciation of the protocol might have upon the protocol powers’ rights, privileges, etc. 450 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 422] Aug. 6 (183) To the Minister in China (tel.) Suggestion that the draft reply to Karakhan be amended to include a reservation that the note should not be construed as constituting recognition of the Soviet regime by the powers which have not recognized that regime; and that the reply be signed after the Minister’s departure from Peking by some other representative of the diplomatic corps, so that it might not be construed as U. S. recognition. 451 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 423] Aug. 9 (277) From the Minister in China (tel.) Recommendation that the Legation be authorized to omit the presentation to representatives of protocol 452 [Pg. includes

powers of Department’s suggested reservation, provided such reservation is not raised by any other power. Arrangements for the Italian Minister to sign the reply to Karakhan, since the U. S. Minister is departing from Peking on August 13. portions of Doc. and Doc. 424] Aug. 11 (191) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions, in case suggested reservation is not deemed expedient by the other powers, that reservation regarding recognition be made on behalf of the United States; desire also that the U. S. Minister’s title of “dean of the protocol powers” be used in the note when referring to the U. S. Minister’s conversation of July 24. 453 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 426] Aug. 18 (292) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that the note to Karakhan was delivered in its original form with such verbal changes as were made necessary by the absence of the U. S. Minister and its signature by the Japanese Minister; also that the Japanese Minister delivered a separate note to Karakhan containing the U. S. reservation. Reports that prior to his conversation with the U. S. Minister, Karakhan had exchanged notes with the Chinese Foreign Minister, giving up Russia’s extraterritorial rights. 453 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 426] Aug. 20 (296) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Karakhan’s note to the Japanese Minister, August 19 (text printed) refusing to accept his note of August 18 conveying the U. S. reservation and regretting that Japan accepted such a commission at a time when Japan and the Soviet Government were engaged in negotiations to restore normal relations. Statement issued by Bolshevik news agency (text printed) commenting on the affair in offensive language. Japanese Minister’s telegram to Japan for instructions whether to return the note to Karakhan. 454 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 427] Aug. 25 (303) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that Karakhan’s note of August 19 has not yet been returned; that Karakhan has not replied to the 457 [Pg. includes

note of August 18 offering to return the Legation premises; that the Russo-Japanese negotiations have made no advance. portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429] Aug. 26 (305) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Japanese Minister’s negotiations with Karakhan for the withdrawal of Karakhan’s note of August 19 and the substitution of another note of the same date omitting statements objectionable to the Japanese Government; probability that the new note will return the Japanese note of August 18 containing the U. S. reservation. Request for instructions. 457 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429] Aug. 26 (306) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Excerpt from Karakhan’s note, August 25, to the British Minister as dean of the diplomatic corps, acknowledging the offer to return the Legation premises and suggesting a modus vivendi between the Soviet Embassy and the other Legations in the diplomatic quarter. British Minister’s opinion that this reply is satisfactory. U. S. Minister’s opinion that the reply is unsatisfactory but is the best that can be hoped for. 458 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 430] Aug. 28 (204) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Advice that the Department perceives no objection to Karakhan’s note as the basis of concluding a modus vivendi; and believes it unwise to engage in further negotiations. 459 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432] Aug. 28 (205) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Instructions to receive a copy of Karakhan’s note of August 19 if Japanese Minister transmits it and to file it as unworthy of further notice. 459 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431,

and Doc. 432] Aug. 31 (316) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that the negotiations looking to the withdrawal of the note of August 19 by Karakhan failed; and the Japanese Minister addressed a note to Karakhan dated August 20 (text printed) declining to receive back his note of August 18 containing the U. S. reservation. 460 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 433] Sept. 3 (321) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Karakhan’s note, August 30, to the Japanese Minister (text printed) again refusing to accept his note of August 18 containing the U. S. reservation. Japanese Minister’s reply, September 2 (text printed) stating that the note and its enclosure have been transmitted to the Netherland Minister, the senior representative of the protocol powers. Japanese Minister’s decision to take no further action. 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 434] Sept. 8 (333) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Karakhan’s offer to write a note, to be dated August 26, supplementing his note of August 25 and confirming his statement that the Soviet Government considers itself a cosignatory power to the 1901 protocol. Delay in acceptance caused by the French Chargé’s desire to incorporate a restatement of the powers’ reservation of rights under protocol should the Soviet Government renounce its rights in the future. 462 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 436] Sept. 12 (340) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that Karakhan’s note of August 26 has been accepted and acknowledged; that Karakhan enters into possession of the Legation September 12 but will not occupy it for several weeks. 462 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 436]

EFFORTS TO OBTAIN UNANIMITY AMONG THE POWERS REGARDING THE PROPOSAL TO RAISE THE DIPLOMATIC RANK OF THEIR REPRESENTATIVES IN CHINA Date and Number Subject Page 1924 June 14 (163) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Advice that the Chinese Chargé has inquired regarding intentions of U. S. Government concerning the raising of its Peking Legation to an Embassy, in view of the fact that the Soviet Government is appointing an Ambassador to China. Instructions to make a discreet effort to learn the Government’s intentions in the matter. (Instructions to repeat to Paris. Sent also to Japan, with instructions to repeat to Peking for information.) [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 437] June 17 (155) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Foreign Minister’s statement that he had received no information from Peking with respect to the possibility that any of the principal powers would raise their Peking Legations to Embassies; that it would present obvious difficulties for Japan since the question would have to be presented to the Diet and next year’s budget had already been voted; that he would inform the U. S. Minister if any change in the status of the Peking Legation was contemplated by his Government. [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440] June 19 (308) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) French Government’s opposition to changing its Legation in China to an Embassy. [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440] July (299) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Foreign Office note requesting U. S. views on a draft reply to the Chinese Chargé’s inquiries (text printed) informing him that Great Britain sees no reason why [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 438,

the appointment of a Soviet Ambassador at Peking should occasion their considering any proposal to change the status of their representative at Peking. Request for instructions. Doc. 439, and Doc. 440] July (188) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Instructions to express the Secretary’s appreciation of the action of the Foreign Office in consulting him and to state that the Secretary shares the views of the British Government and proposes to inform the Chinese Chargé that there is no occasion for alteration of the diplomatic representation between the United States and China. (Instructions to repeat to Paris for information.) [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441] July (189) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Instructions to discuss with Foreign Office the situation which would be created by China’s receiving a Soviet Ambassador, his status within the diplomatic body and probable refusal to cooperate, since the Soviet regime has renounced treaty rights and concessions in China. (Instructions to repeat to Paris for information.) [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 442] July 10 Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State of a Conversation with the Chinese Chargé Under Secretary’s informal intimation that the U. S. Government did not feel that there was occasion for any alteration in the status of U. S. diplomatic representation at Peking. [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443] July 11 (184) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Statement received from the Foreign Minister (text printed) announcing Japan’s intention to exchange Ambassadors with China on or about April 1, 1925, and proposing that other powers, if so disposed, arrange to raise their Peking Legations simultaneously. Information that the British, French, and Italian Governments are also being informed. [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

July 12 (248) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Foreign Office note (excerpt printed) conveying the information that the British reply has been sent to the Chinese Government and the expectation that the United States will reply to the Chinese Government in a similar sense. [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445] July 12 (121) To the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Instructions to advise the Foreign Minister that the U. S. Government has indicated to China that it sees no occasion for any change in the status of its diplomatic representation; and to express the hope that, if the Japanese decision is open to reconsideration, the question be examined from the viewpoint of the interests of international solidarity in China. (Instructions to repeat to Peking for information.) [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447] July 16 (186) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Foreign Minister’s denial that he desired “to steal a march on the other powers”; his feeling that the United States and Great Britain acted without waiting to hear Japan’s opinion; his enumeration of reasons for raising rank of the mission; and his emphasis of the point that Japan had not yet replied to China, in spite of China’s reiterated representations, and had no intention of acting before receiving the replies of the powers to his communication of July 11. [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447] July 18 (126) To the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Instructions to explain to the Foreign Minister the Department’s understanding that Japan, as well as Great Britain and France, had no predilection for the Chinese proposal to raise the status of the Peking Legations and hence the Department felt it was acting with due consideration for the views of the other interested powers in refusing the Chinese proposal. [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448] July 22 (253) From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that Japan regards favorably the idea of raising the Peking Legation to an Embassy and the [Pg. 471 includes portions of

Italian Government is giving the matter careful consideration; also that Karakhan has been appointed Ambassador to China and will be received by the President in a few days. Doc. 448 and Doc. 449] July 22 (192) From the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Foreign Minister’s suggestion that the powers who have already notified China of their decision, say further to China that they do not believe the matter should be taken up so long as the present unsatisfactory conditions prevail in China; his intention to inform China that Japan could not allow her action to be influenced by that of Russia and was still studying the matter. [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451] July 26 (130) To the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Information that the Embassy at London has been instructed to discuss with the British Foreign Office the Japanese suggestion and has been informed that the Department is not averse to acting concurrently with Great Britain, France, and Japan in communicating to China an unreadiness to raise the status of the Peking Legations while disunion and disorder prevail in China. (Instructions to repeat to Peking.) [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451] July 31 Memorandum by the Acting Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State Italy’s decision not to raise its Legation at Peking to the rank of an Embassy for reasons of economy. [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453] Aug. (302) From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Information that Great Britain is suggesting that Japan join in the proposed communication to China and hopes that the United States will also make a similar suggestion to Japan. [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452,

and Doc. 453] Aug. (135) To the Chargé in Japan (tel.) Instructions to inform his British colleague that the Department is disposed not to press for further consideration, if Japan appears unwilling to act concurrently with United States, Great Britain, and France in the proposed communication to China. Authorization to consult with his British and French colleagues with a view to making representations to Japan urging the further postponement of the sending of an Ambassador to Peking. (Instructions to repeat to Peking. Sent also to Great Britain for information, with instructions to repeat to Paris.) [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454] Aug. 12 (293) To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.) Telegram, August 9, from Tokyo (text printed) reporting the Japanese decision to postpone making a definite reply to the Chinese proposal until the beginning of 1925, letting note of July 25 stand; and the Japanese intention to propose during December to the interested powers a reconsideration of the question. Uselessness of attempting to urge Japan to change its decision. Instructions to inform the Foreign Office. (Instructions to repeat to Paris.) [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455] Dec. 3 From the British Embassy Proposal that, with a view to the postponement of the execution of the Japanese decision to raise its Peking Legation to an Embassy, the United States join Great Britain in approaching Japan with the suggestion that, if the situation in China shows a definite improvement, the powers might use the proposal to raise the status of the Peking Legations as an inducement to persuade China to press on with reorganization and to afford effective protection to foreign interests. [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 456]

Dec. 17 To the British Embassy Belief that the present moment is somewhat premature to approach the Japanese Government regarding the British proposal, in view of the present indeterminate status of the matter and the unlikelihood that Japan will proceed further without consulting the interested powers. [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 457] RESERVATIONS BY THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER POWERS REGARDING DISPOSAL TO BE MADE OF THE CHINESE EASTERN RAILWAY UNDER THE SINO SOVIET AGREEMENT Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Feb. 28 (66) From the Minister in China (tel.) Progress of the Karakhan–Wang negotiations on the basis of a new formula that the establishment of principles for settlement of national differences should come first, then Chinese recognition of Soviet Government, and finally adjustment of difficulties between the two countries, the chief obstacle being Chinese Eastern Railway. [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 459] Mar. 11 [12?] (76) From the Minister in China (tel.) Cabinet’s approval, in substance, of Wang’s long report on his negotiations with Karakhan, submitted March 8. Preliminary nature of the Karakhan-Wang agreement which merely lays down general lines for final settlement after recognition. General lines agreed upon for settlement of problems concerning the Chinese Eastern Railway. [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 459] Mar. 13 (78) From the Minister in China (tel.) French Minister’s warning to the Chinese Foreign Minister, March 12, against endangering French rights and interests in the Russo-Asiatic Bank in respect of the Chinese Eastern Railway by recognition of the Soviet Government. Intimation received by U. S. Minister that the French Minister will approach him to [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 460]

sign, along with the Japanese Minister, a joint note to the Chinese Government for the protection of the Russo-Asiatic Bank. Request for instructions. Mar. 17 (81) From the Minister in China (tel.) Delay in the Cabinet’s adoption of the Karakhan-Wang agreement, probably due to personal rivalries in the Chinese Government. Time limit on negotiations set by Karakhan. [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462] Mar. 21 (87) From the Minister in China (tel.) Refusal of the Chinese Government to respect Karakhan’s time limit; press report of Karakhan’s letter, March 19, to Wang (excerpt printed) charging China with subserviency to imperialistic powers, recounting Soviet concessions to China, and refusing further negotiations until diplomatic relations have been established. [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462] Mar. 21 (88) From the Minister in China (tel.) Presidential mandate, March 20 (text printed) placing the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in full charge of the Sino-Russian negotiations. [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464] Mar. 24 (91) From the Minister in China (tel.) Publication of the Karakhan-Wang agreement; its provisions regarding the Chinese Eastern Railway. Cabinet’s circular letter stating that the only matters still in dispute concern Mongolia and the Russian church properties and immovable property. [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464] Undated [Rec’d Apr.2] From the French Embassy Evidence of the legal status of Russo-Asiatic Bank as legal successor of Russo-Chinese Bank and U. S. acknowledgment of the Russo-Asiatic Bank as [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc.

possessing the status of a stockholder of the Chinese Eastern Railway. Intention not to oppose the conclusion of a Sino-Russian agreement but to induce China to refuse to deal in the matter without having made a reservation of the rights of foreign stockholders and creditors of the railway. Citation of Washington Conference resolution XIII as having for its very object the protection of these rights. and Doc. 465] Apr. 26 (81) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions not to join representatives of France or other countries in protests to China against recent negotiations with Russia; but to send a separate note reminding China that her trusteeship under Washington Conference resolution XIII is an obligation not to be ignored or unilaterally invalidated by China in any negotiations with other parties regarding the Chinese Eastern Railway, and making it clear that the United States stands for the protection of all interests, including Russian, and is not endeavoring to prevent the conclusion of the Sino-Russian agreement. [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 466] May (2242) From the Minister in China Note sent to Foreign Minister, May 3 (text printed) making reservation of U. S. rights in reference to the Chinese Eastern Railway. [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 467] May 6 To the French Embassy View that the United States is not warranted in taking action expressly in behalf of the Russo-Asiatic Bank in the absence of any proof as to its legal identity with the original bank of the same name. Advice, however, that a note is being sent to the Chinese Government pointing out the inability of the United States to accept any settlement of the Chinese Eastern Railway question which does not afford adequate protection to foreign creditors and other interested parties, as [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 468]

contemplated by Washington Conference resolution XIII. May 14 (128) From the Minister in China (tel.) French Minister’s note, May 7, to the Chinese Foreign Minister, similar to the U. S. note of May 3; British Minister’s intention to express the same views orally. Publicity given the French and U. S. notes, due to Foreign Office leak. Karakhan’s public statement charging the United States and France with interference in Sino-Russian negotiations. [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 469] May 15 (129) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Distribution by the United Press of a message (text printed) reporting that the State Department admits interference in the Sino-Russian negotiations in behalf of U. S. interests in the Chinese Eastern Railway. Chinese insistence that interruption of negotiations was not due to the intervention of any foreign power. Request for authority to deny the allegations and to make public the U. S. note of May 3. Suggestion that the United Press be approached in regard to their handling of news. [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 470] May 15 (95) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Authorization to make public the U. S. note of May 3 and to issue a public statement that the note embodies the whole relationship of the United States to the matter of the Sino-Russian negotiations. Information that the action of its correspondents will be taken up with United Press. [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 471] June (156) From the Minister in China (tel.) Desire of Italian Minister to be informed of the American policy and attitude, in view of China’s recognition of Soviet Russia. Request for instructions. [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

June 12 (121) To the Minister in China (tel.) Information, for Italian Minister, that this Government’s position remains as expressed in the Department’s telegram no. 81 of April 26, pending results of the proposed Sino-Russian conference. Instructions to keep the Department informed of negotiations. [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473] June 13 (175) From the Minister in China (tel.) Japanese Minister’s note of June 7 to Chinese Government and to Karakhan (text printed) declaring that Japan’s rights and interests in regard to the Chinese Eastern Railway shall not in any way be affected by Sino-Russian agreement. [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 475] June 13 (176) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram, June 12, from the consul at Harbin (text printed) reporting plan, agreed upon with his British, French, and Japanese colleagues, to remove the seals placed July 31, 1923, on document cabinets of the land department of the Chinese Eastern Railway only when the present Russian officials are actually replaced by Soviet Russian appointees. Minister’s fear that if removal is deferred until new regime is established, the consuls’ action may be construed as tacit recognition. [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 475] June 17 (184) From the Minister in China (tel.) Foreign Minister’s note, June 16 (text printed) stating that the agreement between China and Russia in regard to the Chinese Eastern Railway deals with problems that concern the two parties alone and which it is indisputably within their rights to settle between themselves. Information that similar replies have been received by the French and Japanese Ministers. [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 476] June 17 (185) From the Minister in China (tel.) Decision of interested colleagues to approve proposal of the consuls at Harbin with understanding that, [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 476,

should occasion require, the seals would be ordered removed at once. Doc. 477, and Doc. 478] June 18 (2324) From the Minister in China Transmittal of a pamphlet containing Sino-Russian agreements, declarations, and exchange of notes, signed May 31, 1924. Agreements (texts printed) concerning the general principles for the settlement of questions between the Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and for the provisional management of the Chinese Eastern Railway. [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478] June 24 (199) From the Minister in China (tel.) Japanese Chargé’s note to the Chinese Foreign Minister (text printed) acknowledging the Chinese note of June 16 which refused to recognize the Japanese reservation regarding the Chinese Eastern Railway, and asserting that Japan deems it advisable, nevertheless, to invite China’s attention to the matter to avoid possible difficulties in the future. [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 480] June 26 (204) From the Minister in China (tel.) Press interview with Karakhan (text printed) who condemns attitude of the U. S. Secretary of State toward China and declares that China and Russia will not allow other countries to interfere in affairs of Chinese Eastern Railway. [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 480] June 30 From the Chinese Legation Explanation that the Chinese Government in recent agreements with the Soviet Government regarding the Chinese Eastern Railway does not contemplate that any legitimate claims of the other powers or their nationals shall be jeopardized. [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 481] July 11 To the Chinese Legation Renewal of reservation of rights with respect to the responsibility of the Chinese Government, as trustee for the Chinese Eastern Railway, as regards the [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc.

obligations toward that railway’s foreign bondholders, stockholders, and creditors. and Doc. 482] July (151) To the Minister in China (tel.) Note for Foreign Minister (text printed) renewing reservation of rights with respect to the responsibility of the Chinese Government, as trustee for the Chinese Eastern Railway, as regards the obligations toward that railway’s foreign bondholders, stockholders, and creditors. [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 483] July (156) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions to agree with his colleagues upon an early date for removal of seals on archives of railway by the consuls at Harbin, the situation no longer calling for their protection; suggestion that public announcement thereof be made. [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485] July (254) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram sent by the British, French, Japanese, and U. S. representatives to the consuls at Harbin (text printed) directing them to remove seals from cabinets containing documents of land department of railway. [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485] July (170) To the Minister in China (tel.) Authorization to take part in the proposed conference of representatives of powers participating in Washington Conference resolution XIII, with a view to recommending steps for the protection of foreign rights in the Chinese Eastern Railway, and to be guided by the views expressed in the Department’s telegram no. 151 of July 11. [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 487] July (268) From the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram sent by the four Ministers to the consuls at Harbin (text printed) accepting the consuls’ conclusion that the present time is not opportune for removal of [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc.

seals, urging, however, their removal at the earliest practicable date. and Doc. 487] July (266) From the Minister in China (tel.) Draft joint note to China (text printed) emphasizing the obligations which the Washington Conference resolutions impose upon the Chinese Government and calling special attention to the serious consequences should any change in the economic and legal status of the Chinese Eastern Railway impair the administrative integrity of China and the principle of equal opportunity. Information that Japan will probably not unite in the joint note. Request for instructions. [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 488] Aug. (184) To the Minister in China (tel.) Opinion that the draft joint note to China is not calculated to improve the situation; authorization, however, to join in the proposed note should there be unanimous agreement to dispatch it; suggested verbal change in draft. [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490] Sept. 27 (368) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Press confirmation of the conclusion of a Manchurian- Soviet agreement concerning the Chinese Eastern Railway similar to Sino-Russian agreement of May 31. Chinese Foreign Office protest to the Soviet Government, September 25. Telegram from the consul at Harbin (text printed) reporting rumor that under the agreement Russian officials of the railway will be replaced soon by Soviet appointees. [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490] Sept. 29 From the Consul at Harbin (tel.) Information that the consular seals have been removed from cabinets in land department of the Chinese Eastern Railway. [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493]

Oct. 3 From the Consul at Harbin (tel.) Arrest and imprisonment of General Manager Ostroumoff by the Chinese police. [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493] Oct. (377) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Receipt of text of the Manchurian-Soviet agreement; summary of its principal provisions. [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493] Oct. 8 From the Consul at Harbin (tel.) Details of the arrest and imprisonment of railway officials before they could legally turn over offices to Soviet successors. Opinion that the matter should be investigated by an international commission or that foreign consular officers should be present at trials. Suggestion that press correspondents be detailed to Harbin to report Bolshevik activities. [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 494] Oct. (382) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Decision of the diplomatic body that they could take no action in the matter of the arrest of railway officials. Informal representations to Chang by the U. S., British, French, and Japanese representatives. [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 495] Oct. (237) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Instructions to advise the consuls at Mukden and Harbin that no further action in the matter of arrests would be warranted. [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497,

and Doc. 498] Dec. (476) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Joint informal note to Chang expressing the hope that the prisoners will be brought to speedy trial and that Ostroumoff will be permitted to reside at his house in Harbin while awaiting trial. [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498] PROPOSAL BY THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT TO CONVENE A PRELIMINARY CUSTOMS CONFERENCE, AND THE REJECTION OF THE PROPOSAL BY THE POWERS Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Mar. 13 (77) From the Minister in China (tel.) China’s identic note, March 10, to the powers, expressing the hope that a preliminary conference may be held to make preparations for the Special Conference on Chinese Customs Tariff, which has been delayed by the failure of certain of the powers to ratify the Washington Conference treaties. Opinion that the object of this suggestion is to obtain some specific promise from the foreign powers relative to the imposition of surtax. [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498] Mar. 18 (55) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions not to indicate or commit in any way the position of the U. S. Government with respect to the proposal for a preliminary conference, pending further instructions. [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, and Doc. 500] Mar. 18 (83) From the Minister in China (tel.) Agreement of representatives of powers signatory to the Washington Conference treaties that the Chinese proposal was inspired by need for money and was [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 498,

contemplated preeminently to determine purposes of surtax; their identic telegram to their governments (text printed) recommending that they be authorized to examine China’s financial situation and purposes of surtax, upon condition that China submit plan for abolition of likin. Doc. 499, and Doc. 500] Mar. 19 (84) From the Minister in China (tel.) Opinion of diplomatic representatives that any plan the Chinese Government may present for the abolition of likin will have no practical results, as the Chinese Government is powerless to assert its will in the provinces. [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502] Mar. 20 (86) From the Minister in China (tel.) Minister’s maintenance of noncommittal attitude on proposal for preliminary conference; his private opinion that the proposal is impossible of acceptance. [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502] Mar. 22 (60) To the Minister in China (tel.) Information that the Embassy at London has been instructed to inquire concerning the British attitude toward the proposed preliminary conference and to explain that, in view of widespread disregard of treaty rights in the Chinese provinces and the growing attitude of irresponsibility on the part of the Peking Government, the United States questions whether it is not now inopportune or even dangerous to assume a responsive attitude toward Chinese proposal. [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 502 and Doc. 503] Mar. 31 (63) To the Minister in China (tel.) British and Japanese inclination to agree in principle with the Department’s views regarding the proposed preliminary conference. [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504,

and Doc. 505] Apr. 24 (80) To the Minister in China (tel.) Telegram from London (text printed) reporting the British decision to join with United States in a reply to China and the suggestion that the reply include a statement that the powers intend to confer concerning the best means of giving practical effect to the Washington agreements, since it would be impolitic to give a flat refusal to China’s proposal. Department’s concurrence in the British suggestion; and instructions for joint action. [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505] May (84) To the Minister in China (tel.) British Foreign Office instructions to the British Minister at Peking to act with the American Minister in regard to the reply to China’s request for a preliminary conference. [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507] May (123) From the Minister in China (tel.) Draft reply to China (text printed) stating that the signatory powers are unable to accept the suggestion for a preliminary conference but are alive to the importance of the situation and will confer as to the best means of giving effect to the Washington agreements. Request for instructions, in view of the difficulties anticipated in securing assent of certain powers to consultations contemplated in the draft reply. [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507] May (91) To the Minister in China (tel.) Proposed substitute for paragraph regarding consultations in the draft reply; view that replies should be made separately, though in identic language. [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508] June (163) From the Minister in China (tel.) British desire to omit paragraph regarding [Pg. 520 includes

consultations which was originally drafted in accordance with their instructions. Decision to address individual notes to China, since the Belgian, French, Italian, and Japanese representatives had already communicated their refusals orally to the Foreign Office. Note to Foreign Office (text printed). portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509] FURTHER POSTPONEMENT OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMISSION ON EXTRATERRITORIALITY IN CHINA Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Feb. (60) From the Minister in China (tel.) Foreign Minister’s request that the U. S. Government approach the powers signatory to resolution V of the Washington Conference, with a view to the dispatch of the Commission on Extraterritoriality to China in November next.

Number 1924 Mar. 11 (75) From the Minister in China (tel.) Foreign Office note, January 26, to the dean of the diplomatic corps, pressing for a reply to its note of October 26, 1922, asking for the rendition of the Mixed Court at Shanghai. Opinion of the diplomatic corps that, owing to the uncertainty of the date of convening of the Commission on Extraterritoriality, no strong reason remains for further postponing negotiations. Dean’s proposed reply to the Foreign Office, indicating readiness to negotiate but requiring certain guarantees and an assurance that China will enter into early negotiations for satisfactory settlement of other outstanding questions with respect to Shanghai. Request for instructions. 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 513] Mar. 18 (56) To the Minister in China (tel.) Inability to understand present willingness of the diplomatic corps to enter into negotiations for the rendition of the Mixed Court at Shanghai, in view of the fact that actual conditions in China confirm the 1923 position of the diplomatic corps that the Peking Government lacks sufficient control in the vicinity of Shanghai to fulfill any agreement for rendition of the court or settlement of other matters concerning Shanghai. Unwillingness to admit that the outlook for the meeting of the Commission on Extraterritoriality is dubious. Request for comments and for more information. 525 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 514] Mar. 22 (89) From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that the powerlessness of the Peking Government does not affect the Mixed Court, which functions in the International Settlement and through the municipal police; that present proposal does not necessarily imply rendition; that rendition and extraterritoriality are not associated in public mind. View that U. S. opposition to rendition of Mixed Court may prove embarrassing, as Great Britain, Japan, and 526 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 515]

Soviet Russia have adopted a conciliatory attitude toward China. Apr. (69) To the Minister in China (tel.) Authorization to join colleagues in negotiations for rendition of Mixed Court, subject to the understanding that negotiations are to be limited to the one question and that rendition is not conditional upon obtaining from the Chinese any benefits or concessions upon extraneous subjects. 527 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 516] May 23 (108) To the Minister in China (tel.) Chinese Minister’s informal inquiry concerning U. S. attitude with respect to making resumption of rendition negotiations conditional upon discussion of other extraneous questions at Shanghai, as inferred from the dean’s note of April 10. Secretary’s reply that the Department adheres to its position that the question of the Mixed Court should be kept free from extraneous matters. Instructions to inform his colleagues and the Foreign Office of the U. S. position. 528 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 517] May 30 (145) From the Minister in China (tel.) Chinese reply, May 9, to the dean of the diplomatic corps, expressing opinion that after rendition of Mixed Court the guarantees could be agreed to, and indicating the Government’s willingness to prepare for negotiations on other subjects. Concurrence with the dean’s opinion that guarantees should be given before rendition takes place. (Footnote: Information that an agreement for the rendition of the Shanghai Mixed Court was signed, December 31, 1926, after prolonged negotiation.) 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 518]

FAILURE OF EFFORTS TO SECURE FROM THE INTERESTED POWERS A GENERAL ACCEPTANCE OF THE ARMS EMBARGO RESOLUTION PROPOSED AT THE WASHINGTON CONFERENCE

Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Sept. 15 (896) From the Chargé in Portugal Foreign Office note, September 12, stating that the Portuguese Government approves of the terms of the embargo and the interpretative note and has instructed its representative at Peking to accord formal assent if there is unanimity of action by interested powers. [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 520] Oct. 24 (997) From the British Ambassador Request that proper authorities be informed of London Times report, October 17, that the French steamer Chantilly was diverted from her course to carry military airplanes and machine guns to Dairen. View that this act constitutes a grave breach of the spirit of the embargo agreement. Inquiry whether the United States will join Great Britain in strong representations to France. [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 520] Oct. 29 (1014) From the British Ambassador Inquiry whether U. S. Government would be disposed to make formal proposals to the various governments concerned for the adoption from January 1, 1925, of the Washington resolution and at least as much of the interpretative note as Great Britain is able to enforce, since Great Britain feels that the time is ripe for such action. [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 521] Nov. 11 To the British Ambassador Concurrence with British views that, if reports concerning the Chantilly are based upon fact, a serious contravention of the arms embargo agreement has occurred. Information that the Chargé at Paris has been instructed to confer with his British colleague. [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523] Nov. 14 (502) From the Chargé in France (tel.) Opinion, concurred in by British colleague, that the French have not broken the letter of the agreement and hence no purpose would be served by further [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 521,

representations. Suggestion that the situation be met by a general agreement embargoing shipment of airplanes of any kind to China until political conditions there clear up or by pointing out to France that airplane purchases are obviously for military reasons, as commercial aviation does not exist in China. Doc. 522, and Doc. 523] Nov. 17 (796) From the Chargé in Denmark Foreign Minister’s note, November 6 (text printed) stating that Denmark is disposed to adopt the Washington resolution without interpretation, but with the reservation that airplanes be excluded insofar as the regulations in force governing the prohibition of exportation in Denmark are concerned. [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 524] Nov. 20 (1127) From the British Ambassador Readiness to cooperate with the United States in approaching the French Government with a view to concluding a gentleman’s agreement, as suggested by the U. S. Chargé at Paris, prohibiting the export of all aircraft to China during the present revolutionary disturbances there. Suggestion that other governments, such as Japan and Italy, be included. [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 525] Nov. 20 (367) From the Chargé in the Netherlands Foreign Minister’s note, November 18 (text printed) conveying information that Netherland legislation does not permit an embargo to other countries of articles mentioned in the interpretative note and that the Netherland Government doubts whether the present moment is opportune for extending the scope of the Washington resolution. [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 526] Dec. (319) From the Chargé in Sweden Foreign Minister’s note, November 26 (text printed) stating that Sweden will not refuse to adhere to the Washington resolution and recommendation adopted February 9, 1923, by the diplomatic corps at Peking, on condition that all the interested powers do likewise, but that Sweden cannot acquiesce in the interpretative [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 527]

note as this would not be in accordance with Swedish law; and suggesting that the question under discussion be submitted to the conference to meet at Geneva during 1925. Dec. 10 (1205) From the British Ambassador Desire to know at an early date whether the United States will adopt the proposal for a gentleman’s agreement with France and Great Britain and whether it is willing to include other aircraft-producing powers, irrespective as to whether or not such powers are parties to the existing agreement. [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 528] Dec. 20 To the British Ambassador Willingness to approach France with the suggestion that the interested powers agree to restrain their citizens and subjects from exporting any kind of aircraft to China insofar as their respective laws and regulations permit. Request for British views on such a proposal. [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 529] Dec. 24 To the British Ambassador Doubt as to practical benefits which would be derived from attempting to secure the adoption of the Washington resolution and certain portions of the interpretative note until more complete unanimity can be had among the interested powers. [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 530] DECISION BY THE CONSORTIUM COUNCIL TO CONTINUE UNMODIFIED THE CONSORTIUM AGREEMENT OF OCTOBER 15,

be expedient at the meeting of the Council to discuss steps for its renewal; and enclosing a memorandum, prepared May 12, by Mr. Mayers, of the British group, and Mr. Nathan, chairman of the British and Chinese Corporation, Ltd. (text printed) containing certain proposals in modification of the Consortium. Agenda for the meeting of the Council to be held at London, July June 26 To the American Group Information that the Secretary approves of the continued application to the field of Chinese finance of the principles which the Consortium Agreement embodies and would welcome the making of arrangements to continue that policy unmodified; that to the Secretary the proposals contained in the memorandum prepared by Mr. Mayers and Mr. Nathan seem tantamount to abandoning the Consortium principles entirely. 548 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 532] July 29 From the American Group Minutes of a meeting of the Consortium Council at London, July (excerpt printed) containing recommendation that Consortium Agreement remain in force on and after October 15, 1925; decision to leave for further consideration the memorandum prepared by Mr. Mayers and Mr. Nathan; authorization of conversations looking toward the formation of a representative Chinese banking group to cooperate with the Consortium. 550 [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 533] JOINT RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS AUTHORIZING THE PRESIDENT AT HIS DISCRETION TO REMIT TO CHINA FURTHER PAYMENTS ON THE BOXER INDEMNITY Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. 18 To the Minister in China (tel.) Information that a resolution was introduced in [Pg.

(18) Congress December 6, 1923, in language identical with that of the resolution introduced in 1921, authorizing the President in his discretion to remit the balance of the Boxer indemnity, such remission to begin as from October 1, 1917. Request for views as to possible effect its passage might have upon the minds of the Chinese and of Americans in China and upon American interests in China. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 534] Jan. 21 (40) From the Minister in China (tel.) Reasons for recommending that for the present the matter of remitting the Boxer indemnity be left in statu quo and that American guardianship of the funds be continued unimpaired. [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 535] Apr. 22 (638) To the Minister in China Explanation of the Secretary’s action in supporting the resolution. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 536] June 14 To the Chinese Minister Transmission of joint declaration of Congress, approved May 21 (text printed) authorizing the President in his discretion to remit to China the balance of the Boxer indemnity, such remission to begin as from October 1, 1917, the intent of Congress being further to develop the educational and other cultural activities of China. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 537] June 14 From the Chinese Minister Expression of appreciation for remission of indemnity; purpose of the Chinese Government to devote the funds to educational purposes, especially scientific requirements of China, intrusting administration of the funds to a board composed of Americans and Chinese. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 538] June 14 From the Chinese Minister Message from the President of China to President [Pg.

Coolidge (text printed) expressing appreciation of generosity shown in the remission of the balance of the Boxer indemnity. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 539] Dec. 15 To President Coolidge Information that a Presidential mandate was issued September 17 creating a China Foundation for the Promotion of Education and Culture and appointing nine Chinese and five Americans as members of the Foundation and trustees of the funds to be realized from the remission of the balance of the Boxer indemnity. Draft resolution for the Board of Trustees of the Foundation (text printed) stating general purposes to which fund is to be devoted. Proposal that attention of Chinese Government be invited to claims of U. S. citizens against the Chinese Government. [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 540] CONCURRENCE BY THE UNITED STATES IN THE CONTENTION BY CERTAIN POWERS THAT THE BOXER INDEMNITY PAYMENTS SHOULD BE MADE IN GOLD CURRENCY Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. 25 (44) From the Minister in China (tel.) Draft note from the dean of the diplomatic corps to the Chinese Foreign Minister, concerning the execution by the Chinese Government of the Sino-Belgian understanding of February 5, 1918, respecting Boxer indemnity payments (excerpt printed). Request for instructions whether to support the Belgian Government. [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541] Jan. 31 (30) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions not to cooperate in any representations in connection with Boxer indemnity payment until the Department has been informed of full details, in view of the fact that the United States was not apprised of [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542,

the separate arrangements made by other protocol powers for the resumption of the payments. and Doc. 543] Feb. (51) From the Minister in China (tel.) Failure of Legation files to reveal any indication that the Department was informed of the Allied joint memorandum presented to the Chinese Government in 1917, providing for the individual arrangements for resumption of Boxer indemnity payments. Minister’s intention to decline to support the Belgian arrangement on the ground that the United States was not a signatory to the 1917 memorandum nor apprised of the 1918 Belgian arrangement. [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542, and Doc. 543] Feb. (52) From the Minister in China (tel.) Request for authorization to sign the diplomatic corps’ reply to the Chinese note of December 26, 1923, in which refusal to accept the views of the diplomatic body was based upon the assumption that the protocol fixes the gold equivalent of the indemnity in respective currencies, not in gold specie. Expectation that the Chinese Cabinet and Parliament will ask that the issue be arbitrated. [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 544] Feb. (32) To the Minister in China (tel.) Approval of Minister’s action in declining to support the Belgian arrangement. Authorization to sign the proposed reply of the diplomatic body to the Chinese Foreign Minister. [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547] Feb. 28 (65) From the Minister in China (tel.) Foreign Minister’s informal suggestion that if the gold franc case were arbitrated it might be referred to The Hague or League Court or to an individual, and his assumption that the United States would be one of the parties to the arbitration. [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547]

Feb. 29 (2108) From the Minister in China Note, February 11, from the dean of the diplomatic corps to the Chinese Foreign Minister (text printed) supporting conclusions drawn in notes of February 24 and November 3, 1923, and definitely affirming that China must pay the indemnity in gold, or its equivalent. [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547] Mar. (46) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions to inform the Foreign Minister, should occasion require, that the U. S. Government does not have any such direct interest in the gold franc controversy as would lead it to offer any suggestion for its settlement. Information that if the issue should be referred to the World Court while the U. S. relation to the Court continues as at present, the United States probably would not desire to be one of the parties to the arbitration. [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 547 and Doc. 548] CONTINUED SUPPORT BY THE UNITED STATES TO THE FEDERAL TELEGRAPH COMPANY IN EFFORTS TO OBTAIN EXECUTION OF ITS CONTRACT WITH THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. From the Minister in China (tel.) Chinese unofficial inquiry whether some compromise could be suggested by the Legation to induce the Japanese to abandon their diplomatic pressure in opposition to the Federal Telegraph Co.’s contract and in favor of the Mitsui Co., possibly by a joint operation of the Mitsui station at Peking. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 549] Jan. 24 (25) To the Minister in China (tel.) Opinion of Schwerin, president of the Federal Telegraph Co. of Delaware, that it would be impracticable to take over the Mitsui station at Peking. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 549,

Doc. 550, and Doc. 551] Jan. 29 (87) From the British Chargé Conclusion that Japan’s refusal to accept the experts’ recommendations signed at Washington has placed Great Britain under the necessity of maintaining the existing rights of the cable companies, pending the conclusion of an agreement based on the experts’ recommendations. Assurance that this action has been taken in no spirit of hostility to U. S. interests concerned, but as the only course to protect the existing rights of Eastern Extension Telegraph Co. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551] Feb. 16 To the British Chargé Statement that, while frankly disappointed by what appears to be the abrupt abandonment by Great Britain of its position, the Secretary is happy to note the British assurance that this action has been taken in no spirit of hostility to U. S. interests concerned and trusts that this means that Great Britain will not renew pressure upon the Chinese Government to prevent the carrying out of Federal Telegraph Co. contract. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 552] Apr. (67) To the Minister in China (tel.) Authorization to transmit to China the assurance of the Federal Telegraph Co. and of the Radio Corporation of America that they will fulfill their part of the contract; instructions to make plain, at the same time, that the Department assumes no responsibility in the matter. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 553] Apr. 18 From the President of the Radio Corporation of America Resolution of board of directors (text printed) to cancel contracts with China if the integrity of such contracts is questioned by the Department or if China claims to have been misinformed on the subject, charges to this effect having been brought by the director of the [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 554]

Federal Telegraph Co. of California and contracts having been assumed by the Federal Telegraph Co. of Delaware by arrangements with the Radio Corporation of America in good faith. Request that the corporation be advised on the subject. Apr. 26 To the President of the Radio Corporation of America Reassurances regarding the integrity of the contracts in question and statement that they were negotiated with cognizance of the Department and in consultation with the American Legation at Peking; exposition of the terms of the contract, which has not been the subject of any complaint by China. [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 555] May 15 (434) From the British Ambassador Denial that the British Government has abandoned its position. Explanation that since the experts’ recommendations have been obstructed by difference of view which concerns United States and Japan, the British Government feels justified in drawing the attention of both the United States and Japan to the fact that the cable companies have rights which, in the absence of a general agreement based on the recommendations, cannot be ignored. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 556] Aug. 21 To the President of the Radio Corporation of America Explanation, in view of the claim that the Washington authorities approved certain contract arrangements regarding remuneration, that it is not within the province of the Department to negotiate contracts between foreign governments and U. S. interests and that the Department’s activities in contracts between the Federal Telegraph Co. of California and the Chinese Government were in support of the principle of the open door in China and to assist U. S. interests in establishing a circuit of communication advantageous to relations between the United States and China. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 557] Nov. 29 (457) From the Chargé in China (tel.) Indications that negotiations will soon be reopened with [Pg.

a view to executing the contract; suggestion that a representative of the Federal Telegraph Co. with full powers should come to Peking. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 558] Dec. (308) To the Chargé in China (tel.) Information that the Federal Telegraph Co. contemplates sending an agent to China in the near future to conduct negotiations. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560] EXPLANATIONS OF POLICY BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE RESPECTING QUESTIONS OF TREATY RIGHTS RAISED BY AMERICANS IN CHINA Date and Number Subject Page 1923 Undated Report of the Annual Meeting of the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China, at

1924 Mar. 15 (600) To the Minister in China Regret that the report adopted at the annual meeting of the American Chambers of Commerce of China does not offer more definite and more helpful suggestions as to measures that might prove practical for the better safeguarding of American interests in China; and that publicity was given to the resolutions. Information concerning discussions with repretatives of foreign missions. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 561] Mar. 18 From the Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions Information that there exists among U. S. missionaries in China a growing spirit of opposition to extraterritorial conditions and to Government protection of missionaries thereunder. Request for a ruling with regard to the right of American citizens to waive such privileges, if they so desire. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 562] Apr. 1 To the Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions Opinion that American citizens are not entitled to waive extraterritorial rights, irrespective of the wishes of particular individuals who may be influenced by religious or other beliefs; and that the surrender of such rights by a portion of the U. S. community in China would seriously impair the whole treaty system for the protection of U. S. citizens in China. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 563] Apr. 3 From the Foreign Secretary of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions Expression of appreciation for the reply to his inquiry concerning the surrender by American missionaries of extraterritorial rights in China. Citation of Secretary Blaine’s ruling in a somewhat similar case. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 564]

PROTEST BY THE UNITED STATES AGAINST PARDON AND RESTORATION TO COMMAND OF THE CHINESE GENERAL HELD RESPONSIBLE FOR THE MURDER OF AN AMERICAN MISSIONARY

Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. From the Minister in China (tel.) Information that a Presidential mandate, issued December 27, 1923, authorizes the cancelation of the mandate ordering the trial and punishment of Chang Ching-yao for the murder of the Rev. William A. Reimert. Request for authority to lodge a strong protest against it as a violation of the assurance given in the Chinese Foreign Office note of October 7, 1920, and as a discourtesy to the United States.

Information that the mandate merely abolished the posts of commander in chief and vice commanders. Doc. 568, and Doc. 569]

CUBA PASSAGE OF AN AMNESTY BILL BY THE CUBAN CONGRESS Date and Number Subject Page 1924 June (730) From the Ambassador in Cuba Passage of an amnesty bill, May 26, 1924, by both Houses of Congress by large majority; Ambassador’s note to President Zayas, May 30, expressing his views on the subject, previous notes of protest having already been sent. (Footnote: Information that President Zayas signed the bill on June 5.)

CZECHOSLOVAKIA EXCHANGE OF NOTES BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CZECHOSLOVAKIA PROLONGING THE CUSTOMS AGREEMENT OF OCTOBER

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC THE ELECTION OF HORACIO VASQUEZ TO THE PRESIDENCY AND THE EVACUATION OF THE FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Published statement of General Vasquez and Señor Peynado, the two Presidential candidates, declaring that, if elected, they would maintain the Policia Nacional upon the same basis as it now exists. View that this is a definite guarantee that public order will be maintained after occupation is terminated. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 576] Jan. 17 From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Request for authorization to issue a brief statement in refutation of propaganda to the effect that the United States is supporting the candidacy of one or the other of the two Presidential candidates. (Footnote: Information that on January 21 the Commissioner was authorized to issue the statement.) [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 576] Feb. From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Peynado’s threat to resign as Coalition candidate for the Presidency. Efforts of the Coalition Party to reach an agreement with the Alliance Party for representation in the Senate and Congress in return for Coalition support of Alliance candidates as the sole national candidates for Presidency and Vice Presidency. Commissioner’s views. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 577] Feb. From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Widespread defections from the ranks of the Coalition [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 578]

Party caused by Peynado’s threatened resignation. Commissioner’s refusal to grant Peynado’s request that he exert his influence to force Vasquez to resign in favor of a candidate favorable to both parties or that he postpone the elections to enable the Coalition Party to raise additional campaign funds. Commissioner’s opinion that elements in Coalition Party will attempt to obstruct the election and will protest election results. Feb. 13 (10) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Failure of Peynado’s threatened resignation to bring about postponement of elections or cause the Alliance Party to enter into a political deal. Peynado’s advice to the national assembly of his party that he would continue as Presidential candidate. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580] Feb. 26 (15) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Electoral Commission’s adoption of the Commissioner’s proposal to grant an extension of 2 days for the completion of the electoral registers of three communes which had failed to complete their registers within the legal time limit. Promulgation of a decree embodying the decision. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580] Mar. 17 (17) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Election, March 15, of Vasquez and other Alliance candidates, giving the party a majority in both Houses of Congress and in municipal offices. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 581] Mar. 25 (23) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Recommendation, in view of advice that the present Military Governor, General Lee, is to be replaced before April 15 by General Cole, that the Navy [Pg. includes portions of Doc.

Department be requested not to make any change in the Military Government during the short period that remains before U. S. withdrawal. and Doc. 582] Mar. 27 (25) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Request for authorization to inform the President-elect that, should he visit the United States for reasons of health as he now proposes, he will be invited to come to Washington for a few days as the guest of the U. S. Government. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 584] Apr. (10) To the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Authorization to inform the President-elect that, should he desire to come to the United States and visit Washington, the President will be most happy to receive him. Advice that it is not the practice of the Federal Government to invite chiefs of states or presidents-elect to visit the United States as guests of the Government. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 584] Apr. (13) To the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Revocation of the order for relief of General Lee as Military Governor and decision to retain him until July 1 in the Dominican Republic. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 586] May 16 (30) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Satisfactory situation in the Dominican Republic with the appointment of a Cabinet composed of men of great ability, and possibility of early legislative action on the proposed reforms. Intention of the President-elect to visit the United States in June; his desire to reach an agreement with the Department of State on refunding of the foreign debt through flotation of a loan in the United States, and to discuss the possibility of a new commercial treaty. Commissioner’s request for [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 586]

permission to return to Washington without delay, in order to be there during visit of President-elect. May 25 (16) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Appointment of plenipotentiaries for negotiating the convention of ratification provided for in the Plan of Evacuation. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588] June 4 From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic, Temporarily in the United States Request that necessary instructions be sent the Minister in the Dominican Republic to sign the convention without delay, since the President-elect, as one of the plenipotentiaries, is not inclined to leave for his visit to the United States until the convention has been signed. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588] June 4 To the Secretary of the Navy Request that instructions be sent the Military Governor to expedite arrangements for evacuation immediately after inauguration of the Constitutional President. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 588, Doc. 589, and Doc. 590] June (12) To the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Welles to Vasquez: Request to be advised as to the date of his departure for the United States in order that appropriate arrangements may be made; suggestions as to the most desirable time for his visit and the importance of reaching an agreement at Washington on certain points. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 588, Doc. 589, and Doc. 590] June (16) To the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Authorization to meet the Dominican plenipotentiaries [Pg.

and sign the convention of ratification as contained in the Agreement of Evacuation of June 30, 1922, in the form published on September 23, 1922; information that full powers are being forwarded by mail. includes portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592] June 12 (1009) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic Transmittal of convention of ratification, signed June [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592] June 12 Convention between the United States of America and the Dominican Republic Providing for the validation by the Dominican Republic of certain orders, resolutions, regulations, and contracts promulgated by the Military Government. [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 593] July (30) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Electoral college’s election of Vasquez as President and Velasquez as Vice President. Setting of July 12 as the date of inauguration. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596] Sept. 18 (55) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Completion of provisions of the Plan of Evacuation and the withdrawal of the forces of occupation. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]

APPROVAL BY THE UNITED STATES OF THE ISSUE OF $2,500,000 OF TWO-YEAR NOTES BY THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Date and Number Subject Page 1923 Nov. 24 (909) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic Foreign Office note requesting U. S. approval for the issuance of bonds to the amount of $2,000,000 of the balance of the $10,000,000 loan authorized by

Feb. 27 (550) To the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Letter, February 4, from the Secretary of the Navy, calling attention to the Dominican deficit caused by alleged excessive expenditures of the Provisional Government and suggesting that some plan be developed to meet the situation. Desire to have the Commissioner’s comments before replying to the letter. [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600] Mar. 21 To the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Letter, March 8, from Mr. Denby, the former Secretary of the Navy, calling attention to the increasingly critical condition of Dominican finances and stating that an American financial adviser to the Dominican Government is imperatively needed. Request for views whether the Provisional President should be approached. [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601] Mar. 29 (26) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Facts relating to governmental receipts and expenditures for the year 1923, showing a balance instead of a deficit and proving that the Provisional Government has been eminently successful; opinion that the appointment of a financial adviser is neither necessary nor advisable. [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602] May 15 (15) To the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Suggestion that it would probably be advantageous to the Dominican Government to submit consideration of the $2,000,000 loan to Lee, Higginson & Co. before Blair, the member of the firm especially conversant with Dominican affairs, leaves for Europe at the end of May. [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603] May 17 (31) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Opinion that the Water, Light and Power case and the $2,000,000 bond issue could be agreed upon in advance of the installation of the Constitutional [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 603,

Government during Vasquez’s intended visit to Washington and that it would be desirable if Blair would postpone his departure for Europe until after the arrival in Washington of Vasquez. Doc. 604, and Doc. 605] July (28) To the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Welles to Vasquez: Expression of hope that authorization by Congress will be given before July 17 to conclude negotiations for the projected shortterm loan, and that the appointment of Ariza as Minister will be confirmed in order that he may act for his Government in the matter. [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605] July 16 (41) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Senate confirmation of the appointment of Ariza as Minister; other formalities; presentation to Congress of a bill authorizing short-term loan of $2,500,000. [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607] Aug. 8 From the Dominican Chargé Information that the Government has decided to contract a short-term loan of $2,500,000 to be secured by $3,300,000 of the Dominican 5½ percent bonds of 1922 not issued; that Congress has already approved the loan; and that negotiations for the loan have been entered into with Lee, Higginson & Co. Request to be informed whether this loan would meet with the approval of the U. S. Government. [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607] Aug. 15 To the Dominican Chargé Request for details of the proposed contract for the $2,500,000 loan. [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609] Aug. 16 From the Dominican Chargé Transmittal of draft of contract submitted by Lee, Higginson & Co. Inquiry whether the President of the United States would give his consent to this loan in accordance with provisions of 1907 convention and [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609]

would agree to let the $3,300,000 bonds given as security enjoy the assurances granted by Executive Order No. 735 to the $6,700,000 bonds issued in 1922. Sept. 9 From Lee, Higginson & Company Request for a written statement that assurances set forth in the two-year note and bond concerning cooperation of the U. S. Government in future collection of customs revenues and their application, can be made with the Secretary’s consent. [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610] Sept. 25 To the Dominican Minister Consent to issuance by the Dominican Government of proposed $2,500,000 two-year notes, according to contract and with assurances similar to those extended in connection with bonds issued in 1922 by Executive Order No. 735. [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611] Sept. 25 To Lee, Higginson & Company Authorization for inserting on proposed notes the statement (text printed) that they are issued with the consent of the United States and that the Government’s cooperation will be accorded in servicing the loan in accordance with the convention of 1907. [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612] Oct. 30 From Lee, Higginson & Company Transmission of the loan contract and agreement of fiscal agency between the Dominican Republic and Lee, Higginson & Co. (text printed). [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613]

CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, SIGNED ON DECEMBER 27, 1924, TO REPLACE THE CONVENTION OF FEBRUARY 8, 1907 Date and Number Subject Page

1924 Dec. Convention between the United States of America and the Dominican Republic To replace the convention of February 8, 1907, in order to provide for refunding of certain of the Dominican bond issues under terms more advantageous to the Republic. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614] EXCHANGE OF NOTES BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC ACCORDING MUTUAL UNCONDITIONAL MOST-FAVORED-NATION TREATMENT IN CUSTOMS MATTERS Date and Number Subject Page 1924 June 20 To President Coolidge Suggestion that the approaching visit to Washington of the President-elect of the Dominican Republic will offer a favorable opportunity for discussing the possibility of an exchange of notes between the United States and the Dominican Republic according mutual unconditional most-favored-nation customs treatment.

Number 1924 Jan. 26 To the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) View that proposed $2,000,000 bond issue should cover provision for issuance of bonds to the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Co. pursuant to the obligations of the Dominican Government under the contract of June 15, 1923. Intention of Hunt, the company’s representative, to recommend to his principals that they furnish sum to rehabilitate the property provided the Dominican Government shall put in escrow with the fiscal agent under the proposed loan issue, $951,000 par value of the bonds. Instructions to ascertain the intentions of the Dominican Government. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 618] Jan. 28 From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Government’s lack of preparation for the expert’s estimate of $324,000 as the cost of repairs for rehabilitation of the company’s plant, in view of Hunt’s insistence that the amount could never exceed $50,000 and in view of his letter to the Dominican Secretary of the Interior agreeing to induce his company to advance for this purpose an amount not to exceed $75,000. Government’s understanding that the entire amount for settlement in bonds, including estimated value of the plant, would be about $500,000. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620] Feb. From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) President’s opinion that the $2,000,000 loan should not be subordinated to the matter of bonds for the delivery of the Water, Light and Power Co.; intimation that all public works will have to be shut down, as the loan is not authorized; disposition to make arrangements with the company for a reasonable settlement in some other way. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620] Feb. To the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Information that Hunt’s letter does not appear to contain any limitation on the amount for repairs. Department’s disposition, in view of the Dominican Government’s [Pg. includes portions of

apparent disinclination to carry out its obligations under the contract of June 15, 1923, to recommend that the company accept $450,000 gold or its equivalent in bonds of 90 percent par value in full payment of the properties which shall thereupon be transferred to the Dominican Government in their present condition. Instructions to inquire whether the Government will agree to settlement on this basis. Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622] Feb. From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) President’s intimation that he would commence careful study of the expert’s report; that he could not definitely state what he would do in regard to issuing bonds for the value of the company’s property for $450,000; that the question of cost of repairs would have to be considered carefully. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622] Feb. From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic For Francis White: Refusal to concur in the Department’s conclusion that the Dominican Government is apparently disinclined to carry out its obligations under the contract of June 15, 1923. Suggestion that the company send Hunt to Santo Domingo immediately to negotiate directly with the Government; also that the proposed $2,000,000 loan be authorized at once without being made contingent on settlement of the controversy with the Water, Light and Power Co., as all public works will cease next April unless authorization is granted. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 623] Feb. 18 To the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Facts concerning negotiations tending to show that, while the company has lived up to its agreement scrupulously, the Dominican Government has apparently endeavored to find a technicality in the $60,000 provision for not living up to its agreement. Futility of sending Hunt to Santo Domingo again. Feeling that the two alternative propositions of the [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 624]

company offer a basis for a fair and equitable settlement. Intimation that U. S. approval of the proposed bond issue is dependent upon the Dominican Government’s acceptance of one of the company’s propositions. Feb. 23 (14) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic Commissioner’s defense of the Dominican Government’s position; criticism of the Department’s intention to force the Dominican Government to accept one of the two propositions offered by the company; recommendation that authorization be granted for the proposed bond issue. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 625] Mar. To the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Authorization for the $2,000,000 bond issue, provided $951,000 of the bonds are held in escrow by the fiscal agent of the Dominican Government pending an agreement between the Government and the Water, Light and Power Co. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627] Mar. To the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Further suggestions for the settlement of the controversy. Denial that it is the Department’s policy to force the Dominican Government to accept one of the company’s proposals. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627] Mar. 21 (19) From the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic President’s unwillingness to issue $2,000,000 of bonds under conditions of the Department’s authorization. Commissioner’s expectation that the Dominican Government will be in a position very shortly to make a [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 628]

counterproposal for the company’s properties in their present condition. Sept. 26 (56) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Congressional authorization for the purchase by the Government of the properties of the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Co. for $400,000, of which $100,000 is to be in cash and the remainder to be paid in 2 years. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630] Sept. 29 (37) To the Minister in the Dominican Republic (tel.) Signature, September 25, by Hunt and the Dominican Minister of the contract of sale of the properties of the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Co. to the Dominican Government. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630] Oct. 1 To the Dominican Minister Acknowledgment of note of September 25 transmitting a copy of the contract signed September 25 and requesting that the U. S. Government give its consent to the increase of the public debt of the Dominican Republic to the extent of $300,000, necessitated by the contract of sale. Authorization for the issuance of 2– year notes to the amount of $300,000. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 631] REJECTION OF CLAIM BY A BRITISH SUBJECT AGAINST THE UNITED STATES FOR INJURIES AT THE HANDS OF DOMINICAN BANDITS Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Apr. (290) From the British Ambassador Memorial prepared by the legal representatives of D. McPhail, a British subject, setting forth his claim for indemnity from the U. S. Government on account of personal injuries and financial losses suffered by him [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc.

in the Dominican Republic from an attack made upon him by bandits, September 27, 1921. and Doc. 633] July 7 To the British Chargé Assertion that McPhail’s alleged claim is against the Dominican Government; that he is not in a position to assert the claim diplomatically, since the legal remedies in that country have not been exhausted. Refutation of the implication that bandit activities did not exist prior to the time when U. S. troops entered the Republic, attention being called to work of U. S. Marines in stamping out banditry in that country. [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 633]

ECUADOR RESUMPTION OF INTEREST PAYMENTS BY ECUADOR ON THE BONDS OF THE GUAYAQUIL AND QUITO RAILWAY COMPANY Date and Number Subject Page 1924 June 13 (377) To the Minister in Ecuador Letter, April 17, from the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Co., stating that the Government of Ecuador has failed to live up to its contractual obligations and that the bondholders of the railway request the Government’s good offices in protecting their right to the full amount of the customs pledged to them. Instructions to report on disposition being made of revenues pledged to the bondholders and on views as to the desirability of making representations at the present time. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 635] Aug. 15 (373) From the Minister in Ecuador Reasons for believing the time inopportune for calling the Ecuadoran Government’s attention to its obligations as to interest and sinking fund due on the outstanding bonded indebtedness in connection with the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Co. Request for instructions authorizing him to make representations should it become advisable to do so later. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 635] Sept. 26 (396) To the Minister in Ecuador Acquiescence in the Minister’s view that the present is not a desirable time to make representations; instructions to report the facts, together with recommendations, if a situation arises which calls for action. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 637] Sept. 29 (394) From the Minister in Ecuador Vigorous representations made to the Minister of Hacienda regarding failure of Congress to make provision for payment of the bonded indebtedness of [Pg. includes portions of

the railway; means found by authorities for beginning interest payments, with arrangements for future regular funding of indebtedness. Doc. and Doc. 637] Nov. (402) To the Minister in Ecuador Commendation of Minister’s action in bringing about resumption of payments on the Guayaquil and Quito Railway bonds. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 638] Dec. 30 (449) From the Minister in Ecuador Transfer of funds to the London bank for resumption of interest payments on railway bonds by Ecuador; failure of the railway to make contribution according to contract, placing entire burden on Government. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 639] CLAIM OF THE MERCANTILE BANK OF THE AMERICAS AGAINST ECUADOR FOR THE DEBT OF THE CACAO GROWERS ASSOCIATION Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Aug. 30 (14) To the Minister in Ecuador (tel.) Information received from the Mercantile Bank of the Americas that an article in the budget bill presented to the Ecuadoran Congress authorizes the Executive to liquidate the Association of Agriculturists and that this is contrary to the President’s promises. Authorization to bring matter to the President’s attention. [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and Doc. 641] Sept. 16 (16) To the Minister in Ecuador (tel.) Instructions to disregard Department’s telegram no. 14, August 30, as the report received by the Mercantile Bank on the budget bill was misconstrued and the article in the bill actually provides for the denial of Ecuador’s obligation after December 31, 1925. Authorization to bring matter to the President’s [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and Doc. 641]

attention, suggesting that the bank favors last year’s bill which provides for the liquidation of the association and the extension of the 2-sucre tax until debts are paid. Sept. 22 (14) From the Minister in Ecuador (tel.) President’s assurance that the Mercantile Bank matter will be arranged satisfactorily; that he favors last year’s bill providing for liquidation of the association and continuation of the tax and is opposed to the budget article providing for denial of Ecuador’s obligation after December 31, 1925. [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643] Oct. (17) To the Minister in Ecuador (tel.) Information received from the Mercantile Bank that the President, despite his assurances, has definitely instructed his advisers not to have the bill passed extending the tax, as he fears the responsibility of obligating the Government. Instructions to remind the President of his assurances and to state that the Department expects he will not delay in having the matter arranged satisfactorily. [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643] Oct. (15) From the Minister in Ecuador (tel.) President’s written reply which absolutely ignores promises. Recommendation for immediate instructions calling for fulfillment of promises without evasion. [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645] Oct. 14 (18) To the Minister in Ecuador (tel.) Instructions to inform the President that the Department relies on the 1922 assurances and recent assurances and confidently expects that he will use his influence to have the bill passed extending the tax; also to point out the adverse effect upon Ecuador’s credit should Ecuador fail to provide for payment of its debts. [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645]

Nov. 26 (19) To the Minister in Ecuador (tel.) Instructions to endeavor to confirm reports that the Association of Agriculturists has made full payment on its debts to local banks and holders of vales and that article 4 of the law of centralization of revenues provides that fiscal officials collect all revenues not directly provided for in the budget. [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647] Nov. 29 (433) From the Minister in Ecuador Transmission of a copy of the law of centralization of revenues; opinion that the law is not applicable to the Association of Agriculturists, as the association is a private institution. Information that the 3–sucre tax is being collected and deposited for the benefit of the association as usual; that the budget as finally adopted makes no provision whatever regarding amount to be collected by this tax nor as to its disposal. [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647] Dec. (19) From the Minister in Ecuador (tel.) Report, based upon reliable information, that all debts to local banks and vale holders have been paid, except one vale in litigation. [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 647, Doc. 648, and Doc. 649] Dec. 18 (21) To the Minister in Ecuador (tel.) Note for the Ecuadoran Government (text printed) holding the Government responsible for discriminations against the Mercantile Bank in favor of Ecuadoran nationals, as evidenced by the payment by the Agricultural Association of all its debts to local banks and to all holders of vales except one in litigation; and insisting upon a prompt settlement of the matter of the debt to the bank. Information that the Ecuadoran Minister at Washington has also been informed. [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 647, Doc. 648, and Doc. 649]

EGYPT REFUSAL BY THE UNITED STATES TO ASSENT TO THE COLLECTION OF THE GAFFIR TAX FROM AMERICAN NATIONALS Date and Number Subject Page 1923 Nov. (415) From the Minister in Egypt Note on the Gaffir tax prepared by the Egyptian Ministry of Finance (text printed) maintaining that abolition of martial law has no effect upon the legality of the tax which continues to be due from all inhabitants of the territory.

June (499) From the Chargé in Egypt British refusal to consent to the collection of the tax from their nationals even in cities, until an equable system of collecting the tax is established outside the cities. Note to the Foreign Office (text printed) conveying U. S. Government’s conditional assent to the collection of the Gaffir tax.

EFFORTS BY THE UNITED STATES TO PROTECT THE INTERESTS OF AMERICAN ARCHEOLOGISTS IN EGYPT Date and Number Subject Page 1923 Jan. 15 From the President of the Metropolitan Museum of Art Resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees (text printed) instructing the director of the museum to end the work of the museum’s expedition in Egypt as soon as the Egyptian Government puts into effect the proposed law revoking the provisions of the 1912 law under which organizations excavating in Egypt received one-half of the objects found in their excavations. Request that action be taken in behalf of the Metropolitan and other art museums of the country. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 655] Jan. 29 To the Minister in Egypt Department’s correspondence with the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the American Federation of Art with regard to the modification of the 1912 law relating to the division of antiquities unearthed in Egypt by foreign excavators. Authorization to consult with his British, French, and Italian colleagues with a view to making joint representations. Instructions to refer the matter to the Department before making separate representations. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 656] Mar. (284) From the Minister in Egypt Written protest sent to the Egyptian Government, since the British High Commissioner had already filed a [Pg. includes

protest and the French Minister thought his Government would take the same action. portions of Doc. and Doc. 657] Mar. 29 From the Minister in Egypt (tel.) Official information that antiquities law now prevailing will continue for the season of 1923–24, permitting museums to continue their work. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 658] 1924 Feb. 23 (10) To the Minister in Egypt (tel.) Instructions to report whether the Egyptian Government has recently reached any decision which would affect the right of U. S. archeological institutions under the law of 1912, in view of recent inquiries from the Metropolitan Museum regarding further extension of their right to excavate and retain onehalf of their discoveries and the Department’s belief that the present time might not be opportune for such representations because of the reported difficulties between Howard Carter and the Egyptian Government with respect to the tomb of Tutankhamen. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 660] Feb. 25 (19) From the Minister in Egypt (tel.) Information that the Government has not reached a decision affecting the right of U. S. archeological institutions under the law of 1912; that the present is not an opportune time to make representations. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 660] May 20 From the Director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art Cablegram, May 17, from a member of the expedition in Egypt (text printed) reporting that the old law will not be changed but that permits will include the proposed change in division of discoveries. Resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees, May 19 (text printed) [Pg. includes portions of Doc.

declining to resume excavations under such conditions. Request for the Department’s continued support. and Doc. 661] May 27 (495) From the Minister in Egypt Aide-mémoire, April 22, to the Foreign Office (text printed) of representations with respect to proposed modification of the law of 1912. Failure of the Minister’s efforts to have the question remain exactly as

FINLAND EXTRADITION TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND FINLAND, SIGNED AUGUST 1, 1924 Date and Number Subject Page

FRANCE CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND FRANCE REGARDING RIGHTS IN SYRIA AND THE LEBANON, SIGNED APRIL 4, 1924 Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Jan. From the Ambassador in France (tel.) French opposition to inserting any mention of the extradition treaty of 1909 in the mandate convention. Ambassador’s belief that the French will not object to the mention of the consular convention of 1853. French inquiry about progress of the Palestine convention. [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 664] Jan. 12 (13) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Instructions to inform the Foreign Office that benefits of the extradition treaty will be unilateral unless the treaty is mentioned in the convention; that the Department is prepared to proceed to the signature of the convention omitting reference to extradition if the Foreign Office still prefers that procedure; that the Department plans to take up negotiations with Great Britain for the early conclusion of a convention concerning Palestine similar to the one regarding Syria and the Lebanon. [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666] Jan. 16 (20) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) French opposition to any mention in the convention of the extradition treaty or the consular convention; their suggestion that the matter of advantages desired by the United States be covered by an official French note. [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666] Jan. 21 (26) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Willingness to proceed to signature of the convention on understanding that the French will write a note confirming the understanding regarding most-favorednation treatment and agreeing to grant the other [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667]

advantages desired by the United States, with particular respect to consular rights and extradition. Instructions to cable draft of the French note for Department’s approval. Feb. (3908) From the Ambassador in France French draft note (text printed) giving assurances concerning most-favored-nation treatment, extradition, and consular rights. [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668] Feb. 28 (64) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Draft reply to the French assurances (text printed). Readiness to proceed to immediate signature of the convention, provided the French agree to certain suggested changes in their draft note. [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669] Mar. (105) From the Ambassador in France (tel.) Foreign Office acceptance of the suggested changes in their draft note; suggested omission from the U. S. draft note. [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670] Mar. 14 (85) To the Ambassador in France Concurrence in suggested omission from the U. S. draft note. Instructions to proceed to immediate signature of the convention and exchange of notes. [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 670, Doc. 671, and Doc. 672] Apr. 4 From the French President of the Council to the American Ambassador Assurances concerning most-favored-nation treatment, extradition, and consular rights in Syria and the Lebanon. [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 670, Doc. 671, and Doc. 672] Apr. (2675) From the American Ambassador to the French President of the Council [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 673]

U. S. appreciation of French assurances and readiness to proceed to the signature of the convention. Apr. 4 Convention between the United States of America and France Defining American rights in Syria and the Lebanon. [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 674] CONSENT OF THE UNITED STATES TO INCREASED DUTIES ON IMPORTS INTO SYRIA PENDING RATIFICATION OF THE SYRIAN MANDATE TREATY Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Mar. 20 From the Consul at Beirut (tel.) French High Commission’s request for the consent of the United States, pending conclusion of the mandate convention, to an increase in customs duty on alcohol of approximately 50 percent.

customs duties in general to 15 percent, with the exception of certain staple articles specified which will remain at 11 percent.

Date and Number Subject Page 1924 Feb. 26 (80) To the Minister in Albania Letter received from the Archaeological Institute of America protesting against the reported monopolistic concession for archeological exploration granted by the Albanian Government to France. Instructions to bring the matter to the attention of the Foreign Office and to state that the United States is opposed to the granting of such exclusive privileges.

DISCRIMINATION AGAINST AMERICAN SHIPPING BY FRENCH AUTHORITIES IN REFUSING TO RECOGNIZE CLASSIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF VESSELS BY THE AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING Date and Number Subject Page 1924 June (1000) To the Ambassador in France Letters, May 13 and 14, from the American Bureau of Shipping protesting in regard to French discrimination against American vessels classed by the bureau. Instructions to bring the matter to the attention of the Foreign Office and urge that the bureau be given recognition similar to that accorded certain other classification societies. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 688] July 24 (243) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Note for the Foreign Office (text printed) expressing the view that the American Bureau of Shipping is entitled to full recognition by the French authorities on an equal footing with Lloyd’s or any other foreign classification society, and the confidence that such recognition will be accorded the bureau. Instructions to reinforce the note with vigorous oral representations, advising the Foreign Office of the resolution adopted May 15 by the U. S. Shipping Board suggesting retaliatory measures. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 688] Aug. (254) To the Ambassador in France (tel.) Instructions to protest against further delay and urge early favorable action, in view of the urgency of the situation arising from the call of the President Adams of the Dollar Line at Marseilles; and to endeavor to ascertain the grounds on which the French Government requires inspection of Dollar Line vessels, which hold U. S. Government inspection certificates. [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 689] Aug. 23 (379) From the Chargé in France (tel.) Official information that, pending recognition of the American Bureau of Shipping by the French [Pg. includes portions of

Government, American vessels calling at French ports will not be interfered with. Doc. and Doc. 691] Aug. 26 383) From the Chargé in France (tel.) Foreign Office note stating that the formalities to which American vessels in French ports are subjected are made necessary by article 3 of the law of April 17, 1907, and not as a result of the nonrecognition of the American Bureau of Shipping; and suggesting that the formalities can be waived by an agreement recognizing the equivalence of French and American legislation on the subject. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 691]

General: Contents

Proposals for the adherence of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the Spitzbergen Treaty of February 9, 19201

The Secretary said that he did not care to comment on the matter at present; that it seemed to us that this question had been dealt with by Article X of the Spitzbergen Treaty and that this Government could not amend that Article without the consent of the Senate. The Secretary said that he would consider the question whether the suggestion of the French Government amounted to an amendment of the Article. 4 Not printed.

Netherlands. In a note dated April 14, the Dutch Foreign Minister states that Her Majesty’s Government is disposed to render its co-operation in order that the desire of the Norwegian Government may be met, but an agreement to that effect cannot be concluded until after the ratification of the Spitsbergen Treaty. Monsieur van Karnebeek has notified the French Government accordingly. Great Britain, Italy, Denmark, Sweden. The Governments of these countries have replied that they have no objection against inviting the Soviet Government to adhere to the Spitsbergen Treaty at the same time as the other non-signatory powers. Japan. The Japanese Government is the only one from which nothing has been heard as yet.5 The Norwegian Minister will be thankful to know whether the Government of the United States in consideration of the above information might be disposed to reconsider the question raised by the Norwegian Government. Mr. Bryn avails himself of this opportunity to renew to Mr. Hughes the assurances of his highest consideration. WASHINGTON , June 23, 1924.

The Secretary of State desires to make the following response: First. The Treaty relating to Spitzbergen signed February 9, 1920, could not be modified save by agreement of all the Powers signatory thereto: and such modification in the case of the United States would not be effective without the approval of the Senate. Second. As indicated in the Department’s communication to the Norwegian Legation of April 30, 1924, the question raised must be regarded as covered by Article X of the Treaty. The provisions of the first paragraph thereof seem to have been designed primarily to safeguard the rights of Russian nationals and companies during a defined interval and until the recognition by the High Contracting Parties of a Russian Government.

Third. Should it be the desire of the States which have accepted the Spitzbergen Treaty to invite the adherence thereto of Russia through the medium of the regime now functioning therein, which has not been recognized by the United States, the Government of the United States would not raise an objection, provided it were clearly understood that the absence of such an objection should not be construed by any party to the Treaty or by the régime functioning in Russia as constituting the recognition of that regime by the Government of the United States.

High Contracting Party on the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification. Done at Paris . . . . . 1924, in duplicate originals, one of which will be transmitted to the Government of His Majesty the King of Norway, and the other deposited in the Archives of the Government of the French Republic, by which Government an authenticated copy thereof will be delivered to each of the other High Contracting Parties signatory to the said Treaty of February 9, 1920, or an adherent thereto. 6 Copy handed to the French Chargé by the Under Secretary of State, July

Remonstrance by Great Britain against a proposed increase in gun elevation on American capital ships retained under the Washington naval treaty7

[10] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg)

It is clear that an increase in the elevation of turret guns of capital ships cannot be intended for the purpose of providing means of defence against air and submarine attack. As regards the question whether such increase in the elevation involves any “reconstruction”, the increase of the elevation of guns together with consequential alterations such as scrapping or replacement of existing firecontrol systems, etc., involves considerable “reconstruction” in the fullest sense of that term. It is, therefore, the view of His Majesty’s Government that an increase in the elevation of turret guns is not permissible under the terms of the treaty. There is, however, a larger aspect of the question, and it is on this that His Majesty’s Government desire to lay particular stress. One of the objects of the treaty, as expressed in the Preamble, is to reduce the burdens of competition in armament; and His Majesty’s Government cannot but feel that the inevitable result of the action proposed by the United States naval authorities will be to defeat this object to a considerable extent. The proposal is to increase the elevation of the turret guns of 13 capital ships. His Majesty’s Government are, of course, not aware of the exact amount of expenditure which this proposal would involve, but they note that the sum of $6,500,000 is proposed for that purpose, in addition presumably to any portion of the sum of $300,000 per ship per annum, regularly available for repairs without express congressional sanction, which may be employed. If, however, the proposal is carried! out, it can hardly be doubted that public opinion in the United Kingdom will demand a corresponding increase in the elevation of guns of the retained British capital ships, which will involve

In these circumstances His Majesty’s Government desire to make an earnest appeal to the Government of the United States not to impose upon the peoples of the countries concerned the burdens of the competition in armament, which will inevitably result from the execution of their present proposals. Those proposals are, in the opinion of His Majesty’s Government, inconsistent with the provisions of the treaty, but even if arguments can be found in support of the contrary interpretation, it cannot be doubted that the effect of carrying them out would be entirely incompatible with its intentions. His Majesty’s Government earnestly emphasize the psychological effect of such a departure as seems to be contemplated and the great disappointment it would cause to the people of all nations who regard the action of the United States Government at the Washington Conference as one of the most notable steps ever taken by any Government to establish conditions of world-peace. In order to avoid any possibility of misconception, His Majesty’s Government desire to repeat the assurance which has more than once been given to the United States Government that no alteration has been made in the elevation of the turret guns of any existing British capital ships since they were first placed in commission. His Majesty’s Government desire, therefore, to propose that the Government of the United States, the Japanese Government and His Majesty’s Government (the Governments of France and Italy are not directly concerned in view of the special provision of the Treaty allowing them to increase the calibre of the guns of their retained capital ships), should each undertake not to make, during the term of the Treaty, any increase in the elevation of the turret guns of their existing capital ships. In making this communication I am to explain that His Majesty’s Government intend to make a similar proposal to the Japanese Government, but have thought it well to lay their views before the Government of the United States without delay. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

Ramillies 24,300 Mississippi 24,000 Revenge 24,300 New Mexico 24,000 Queen Elizabeth 24,300 Pennsylvania 21,000 Warspite 24,300 Arizona 20,900 Valiant 24,300 Nevada 21,000 Barham 24,300 Oklahoma 21,000 Malaya 24,300 Texas 21,000 Reknown 23,800 New York 21,000 Repulse 23,800 Arkansas 24,350 Benbow 23,800 Wyoming 23,500 Emperor of India 23,800 Utah 21,600 Iron Duke 23,800 Florida 22,000 Marlborough 23,800 Tiger 23,800 4. From the above table it will be seen that the British capital-ship fleet enjoys a very marked superiority in the number of ships that may be brought into action at the moderate and decisive ranges between 21,000 and 24,000 yards. This superiority is shown in the following table: Range in yards No. of British ships in action No. of American ships in action 24,000 23,000 22,000 21,000 I do not need to point out to you the very grave import of these comparisons. 5. I have been criticized in British papers for using the British navy for purposes of comparison. Such action is obviously unavoidable. Naval strengths are always relative, not absolute. We are strong or weak by comparison only. The friendly treaty that we made with Great Britain and other powers recognized our right to a parity in capital-ship strengths with

Great Britain. We cannot determine if that parity is being attained or maintained unless definite comparisons are made. No criticism can justly lie against us or our motives if we strive towards a position definitely laid down in the treaty. 6. The table given in paragraph 4 above shows that at present there is no parity of the British and American fleets but rather a very great superiority of the British capital-ship fleet at vital and presumably decisive ranges. It is true that at ranges in excess of 25,000 yards advantage lies at present with American ships but the highest ranges are not decisive ranges. The consensus of present opinion is that decisive ranges in favorable weather are the very ranges where our inferiority is greatest, viz., between 20,000 and 25,000 yards. This fact makes the gun-elevation question one of commanding importance to the Navy. 7. Joined to the present British superiority of range of guns is a superiority in speed of their capital ships which enables the British fleet in comparison with our own to make full use of their superiority of range of guns. Nothing that we could do would bring our ships to an equality of speed with British ships so that should the unhappy event arise of the two fleets being engaged in battle under present conditions, the British fleet would by its superior speed be able to choose the range at which it would fight. Sound tactics would, of course, dictate the very ranges at which we are weakest, that is, the ranges between 20,000 and 25,000 yards. Illustration of the use of this advantage is to be had in the Battle of the Falkland Islands. Admiral Sturdee had under his command ships of speed superior to the speed of the German squadron under Von Spee. Admiral Sturdee deliberately chose to fight the German squadron at so great a range that the German fire was ineffective against the British ships. These sound tactics on Admiral Sturdee’s part enabled him to achieve victory with practically no injury to the personnel or ships under his command. I do not desire that the American Navy should ever be placed in a position at all corresponding to that of the German squadron at Falkland Islands. 8. I might elaborate farther upon the disadvantages under which our fleet suffers at present but will not do so. Such further information as you may desire on this subject will be gladly furnished.

9. The question of the legality of increasing the elevation of our turret guns

12. I hope that a resolution will be introduced in Congress authorizing the use of the appropriation made by the 67th Congress of $6,500,000 for increasing the elevation of the turret guns of 13 United States capital ships and I further hope that that resolution will receive the support of the State Department. I believe that our national interests require a navy second to no other and that no steps should ever be taken that will bind us either directly or by implication to any line of conduct that hampers development of such a Navy. EDWIN DENBY 9 For the fiscal year 1923. 10 Annual report was listed on first page of letter as an enclosure. 11 Not printed.

that, should any increase in the elevation of the turret guns have already been made in any capital ship, by any of the signatories of the Washington Naval Treaty, the other signatories should be informed. In this connection I would draw your attention to a statement which appeared in an editorial article in the Washington Post of July 31st in the following terms: “It is asserted that both Great Britain and Japan have elevated some of their big guns since the Treaty became effective; but this has been denied and the point is in doubt”. In view of the explicit assurance contained in the seventh paragraph of Mr. Chilton’s note, the latter part of the above quotation is a mis-statement of fact. Such statements by influential newspapers are all the more unfortunate in that they inspire other sections of the press with erroneous ideas. For instance, since the above article appeared in the Washington Post the St. Louis Star in its issue of August 4th has stated editorially in describing the Washington Conference and its results: “Britain accepted the limitations as to the great line battleships and in a way persuaded the United States and Japan to make the most sacrifices. She then proceeded to modernize her fleet, and when the United States and Japan announced a similar programme raised numerous technical objections.” In acquainting you with the above, I have the honour to emphasize once more the unfortunate and widespread results which the elevation of turret guns on the 13 capital ships above referred to would have upon the competition in armaments, and to express the hope that you will be so good as to communicate to me in due course an expression of the views of the United States Government. I have [etc.] ESME HOWARD

question it could readily be inferred that I did not believe that such changes would be in violation of the treaty. I have not replied to the British notes in opposition to a change in elevation as I thought that should Congress for economic reasons not think best to appropriate the funds for this purpose we might avoid joining an issue on this question under the treaty. I have explained the matter informally to the British Ambassador. It is probable that the question will be disposed of within a few weeks by the committees in Congress.13 This telegram is sent simply in order that you may be informed should Chamberlain take the question up with you. HUGHES 12 John W. Davis, Democratic candidate for President. 13 In view of the failure of Congress to provide for gun elevation (see

In subsequent communications from the British Ambassador at Washington it has been stated to be the view of His Majesty’s Government that an increase in the elevation of turret guns is not permissible under the terms of the Naval Treaty, with special reference to Chapter II, Part 3, Section I (d)

which prohibits, subject to certain exceptions expressly provided for, any reconstruction of retained capital ships or of aircraft carriers, except for the purpose of providing means of defense against air and submarine attack. As regards the question whether such increase in the elevation of turret guns involves any “reconstruction”, it is stated to be the view of the British Government that the increase of the elevation of guns, together with consequential alterations such as scrapping or replacement of existing fire control systems, et cetera, involves considerable “reconstruction” in the fullest sense of the term. The British Government lay particular emphasis upon what is described as a larger aspect of the question, that is to say that one of the objects of the Treaty is to reduce the burdens of competition in armament, and the British Government feel that action by the United States in the elevation of turret guns would tend to defeat this object to a considerable extent. In these circumstances the British Government make an earnest appeal that the Government of the United States should not impose upon the peoples of the countries concerned the burdens of competition in armament which are deemed to result from the execution of the proposal to elevate the turret guns on retained capital ships of the United States, it being considered that even if arguments can be found in support of the contrary interpretation of the Treaty, the effect of carrying out such proposals would be incompatible with its intentions. The assurance is repeated that no alteration has been made in the elevation of the turret guns of any existing British capital ships since they were first placed in commission. It was further proposed that the Government of the United States, the Japanese Government and the British Government (the Governments of France and Italy not being deemed to be directly concerned in view of the exceptions of the Treaty) should undertake not to make during the term of the Treaty any increase in the elevation of the turret guns of their existing capital ships. I have been informed by the Japanese Government that it was not the view of the Japanese Government that a change in the gun elevations, which did not require changes of the prohibited sort in the ships themselves, would be a violation of the Naval Treaty.15

I may add that, in view of the detailed description given by the Navy Department of the nature of the changes which would be necessary to elevate the turret guns on the capital ships retained by the United States, these changes appear to be of a minor sort and in my opinion would not constitute a reconstruction of the ships within the meaning which should be attributed to the provision of the Naval Treaty. I am of the opinion, however, that while such changes as would be contemplated in the case of American ships would not constitute a violation of the terms of the Treaty, they would tend to evoke the competition which it has been the policy of this Government to mitigate. It may also be stated that so far as the United States is concerned, the question appears to be of consequence only in relation to certain of the specified retained ships, and these ships under the replacement clauses of the Treaty are to be replaced, within ten or twelve years. CHARLES E. HUGHES

Cooperation of the United States with the League of Nations in the drafting of a convention for the control of the traffic in arms16

pass legislation limiting the manufacture of arms in this country in the interest of any arrangement like that of Saint Germain. It should be observed in the meantime that the Government of the United States is doing very little in furnishing other countries with arms. Power vested in the President gives him strict control over such traffic with other countries in this hemisphere. With the exception of one or two instances there is but a very small exportation of arms to countries in Europe. In 1922 the number of machine guns exported was 1,309, of which Sweden bought 749. With that exception, Great Britain and France have been the markets for the largest sales to Europe. The following statistics give the value of American sales of arms and ammunition to the territories which are indicated in the sixth

The above is for you to use discreetly in your discussions on this subject. [End paraphrase.] HUGHES

alterations would still have to be made. However, I consider it useless to telegraph it to the Department until the general attitude of the meeting towards its provisions is revealed.

[Paraphrase.] The indications are that the French members privately are opposed to any solution in which the questions of private manufacture of arms and the traffic in arms are not combined. Private information indicates the difficulty, and probably the impossibility, of obtaining consideration of any convention which will completely separate from the League of Nations the supervision of the control over the traffic in arms. [End paraphrase.] GREW

2. Weapons and munitions of war should only be sold to governments or bodies recognized as belligerents. 3. Whatever other steps may be taken for the control of the traffic in arms, full publicity should be secured for all international dealings. 4. Special regulations should apply to certain territory restricting or prohibiting altogether all traffic in arms.”

This resolution evoked the opposition of the French members, the Italian member and the chairman and a serious effort was made by them to prevent a vote from taking place on the resolution. The vote was postponed. The afternoon meeting was chiefly devoted to an inconclusive discussion of the duties which should devolve upon the subcommittee upon which I have been requested to sit. It will probably consider in detail the various drafts already laid before the commission after they have been [apparent omission] and freely discussed by the plenary commission tomorrow morning. [Paraphrase.] I have received private information that the lengthy parliamentary discussion of today and yesterday has taken place because of the fact that members of the Permanent Advisory Commission are attempting to bring about the dissolution of the Temporary Mixed Commission, not wishing to cede to it any privilege. Despite Cecil’s emphatic statement that the League of Nations should have the supervision of the traffic in arms, apparently his resolution is an effort to meet our views. The reason for the French opposition to this proposal appears to be that France either does not wish any convention at all for the traffic in arms to be adopted or else wants to have one convention cover both the traffic in arms and the private manufacture of arms. [End paraphrase.] GREW

could if necessary be ratified by all the producing countries, even if the United States should refuse to adhere to it.” The text of the draft convention is as follows: “The high contracting parties being desirous of establishing an international regime to control the traffic in arms, have agreed on the following provisions: Article 1. The present convention shall apply to three categories of material, arms and munitions, namely, Category 1. To war material, which term shall be understood for the purpose of this convention to include all arms, munitions, chemical products and other objects appearing in the list annexed to the present treaty. Modifications, in the form of a list, omissions from or interpretations of this list, may be made at any time at the request of a high contracting party and shall become binding on all the high contracting parties as soon as they have been ratified by two-thirds of them. Category 2. To sporting weapons and ammunition, which expression shall be understood, for the purposes of this convention, to mean all arms, ammunition and similar materials which do not appear in the annex referred to in the last paragraph, and which are recognized as such by the national sporting associations recommended for this purpose by at least half the governments of the high contracting parties. Category 3. To other arms, including, in particular, pocket firearms employed for personal defense, et cetera. Article 2. A central international office shall be established for the purpose of collecting and preserving documents of all sorts exchanged by the high contracting parties with regard to the trade

in and distribution of the arms and ammunition specified in the present convention. Each of the high contracting parties shall publish an annual report showing the imports and exports of arms of all kinds which have taken place through its customs offices, specifying the place of departure and destination and the quantities and natures of the material thus imported or exported. Each of the high contracting parties shall send this report in triplicate to central international office. FIRST CATEGORY, Article 3. The high contracting parties undertake not to permit the sale or export of material of the first category except to governments recognized by at least half of the high contracting parties. Article 4. Material of the first category shall be exported by virtue of a license issued to the exporter by the exporting high contracting party. If the exporting high contracting party is not the state in whose territory the material has been manufactured, the export license must contain all the data necessary in order to trace, for the purposes of this convention, the movements of the material in question from the time of its leaving the factory until it was acquired by the exporter. The export license must contain a certificate from the diplomatic or consular representatives of the purchasing government, granting the exporter official authorization to proceed with the export on behalf of the said government. Article 5. With a view to rendering more effective the supervision of the limitations placed on export and sale by article 3, the high contracting parties undertake to prohibit the import of material of the first category, with the exception of material acquired for the government of the high contracting party concerned. SECOND CATEGORY, Article 6. The high contracting parties undertake to prohibit the sale of material of the second category by any person

not furnished with a license issued by the proper authorities. The latter shall only issue such licenses to persons who can show that they belong to sporting associations recognized by the competent authorities of the high contracting parties concerned. Article 7. The high contracting parties undertake not to allow material of the second category to be exported except by persons holding a license issued by the competent authorities of the exporting high contracting parties. This license must include an authorization to import issued by the government which exercises sovereignty over the territory of destination. Article 8. Each high contracting party shall draw up authentic copies of the export licenses referred to in the two preceding articles with a view to the transmission of copies to the high contracting party which exercises sovereignty over the territory of destination and to all the governments, whether of high contracting parties or not, through whose territory the material would have to pass in transit. These copies must be despatched in sufficient time to enable the governments to supervise the transport of the material. THIRD CATEGORY, Article 9. The high contracting parties undertake to exercise supervision over the national and international traffic in arms of the third category and to take all necessary measures to prevent illicit stocks and traffic. Article 10. With the above object in view, the high contracting parties undertake: To provide for close cooperation among the respective national administrations and between these administrations and the international office referred to in article 2; To institute a system of registration and licenses which shall make it possible at any time to trace arms which are in the possession of individuals;

To communicate to each other and to the international office referred to in article 2 any information calculated to facilitate this control. Article 11. The high contracting parties undertake to apply to arms in the third category the regime laid down in articles 7 and 8 of the present convention in regard to arms of the second category. GENERAL PROVISIONS, Article 12. The high contracting parties undertake to assist each other mutually in bringing to light any infractions of the rules of this convention. They recognize in advance the jurisdiction of the Permanent Court of International Justice for all international investigation concerning negligence or connivance on the part of a government administration concerned with these matters. They further undertake to impose penalties of a uniform character on their nationals (individuals, associations or firms) who may be found guilty of [violating] the national laws passed in execution of the provisions of the present convention. These penalties shall be codified by common agreement between the national administrations, and the code shall appear as an annex to the present convention. Article 13. The present convention shall come into force when it has been ratified by 4 of the states mentioned in the Covenant of the League of Nations as permanent members of the Council and by 16 other states. The international office referred to in article [2] shall be organized by the Belgian Government as soon as the convention has been thus ratified. Article 14. The duration of the present convention shall be for 15 years. It shall remain in force for all states which have not notified the international office of their intention to denounce it 2 years before the expiration of the above period, unless, as a result of successive denunciations, the number of high contracting parties shall have been reduced to 10, including 2 of the nations entitled, under the Covenant, to be permanently represented on the Council.”

Grew

should not be given satisfaction. Cecil added that I had explained the great objections of the United States to the ratification of the Convention of Saint Germain, whereupon I remarked that I did not wish to leave the impression that these were the only objections of the United States. In the discussion on article 2 Cecil stated that to adopt an international bureau of control would be very difficult and unwise, particularly in that it would constitute a retrograde step in the principles of the League. In order to meet the views of the United States, however, he suggested the compromise that article 5 of the. Convention of Saint Germain, omitting paragraph 1 thereof, should be used in lieu of article 2 of the draft convention under discussion and that the article should be complemented by the statement that a copy of this report should be sent to the League of Nations only by states members of the League, and that states not members should merely publish such reports. The Italian member, Lebrun, and Branting indicated support of this suggestion. The French labor member, Jouhaux, implied opposition, however. In explanation Cecil stated that the germ of his proposal was that it should be obligatory for all states signifying [sic] the convention to make public statistics regarding the traffic in arms, and added that “the final control of the traffic in arms is not the League of Nations but public opinion.” The chairman stated that he believed the proposal of Cecil would satisfy the League as well as states not members of the League, and expressed the hope that the suggestion would be adopted. Jouhaux then stated that he regretted to see the apparent tendency of certain opportunist elements of opinion in the League which are willing to make any sacrifice of the prestige of the League to secure the cooperation of the United States. During the discussion of article 12 of the Magaz draft I furthermore took occasion to call the attention of the Commission to the fact that certain states were not members of the Permanent Court of International Justice. GREW

© Opening phrases apparently garbled.

It has been stated in press reports that you have indicated that this Government’s basic objection was to the proposal to vest administrative control in the League of Nations. This is incorrect. Although difficulties for this Government would arise through administration by the League of Nations, as the United States is not a member, the basic difficulties to which we called attention in our note regarding the Convention of Saint Germain would have existed had the League not been charged with its administration. Our basic objections were with respect to the freedom of parties to the convention to sell to each other and the prohibition against selling to others. After the extent and nature of control are decided upon, the question of administration is a subordinate one. We must reserve opinion as to whether any supervision satisfactory to the League authorities would be satisfactory to our Government until we see the actual plan. In the meantime, however, we do not want a mere question of administration given chief attention as if that were the difficulty in the way. It may well be that some form of administration acceptable to all could be found should the fundamental difficulties be removed. As the Commission is probably about to adjourn, I shall not try to discuss

of the subcommittee. When forwarding my complete written report I shall venture to include my recommendations on this point.

2. Regarding the traffic in arms. Foreign or interstate commerce is subject to the control of Congress. As a possible basis for cooperation with other powers the following points are suggested: (a) Through a license system the Federal Government could control arms traffic in foreign commerce. (b) Adequate publicity could be given. (c) This Government could make or allow sales only to governments or belligerents recognized by it. 3. The following are matters to be reserved: (a) There must be no restriction upon this Government in supplying its own wants. (b) The right of the United States Government in its discretion to sell or allow sales to other American governments whether such governments are parties to the convention or not must not be restricted. (c) The American Government cannot place itself under the supervision or direction of the League of Nations, of which it is not a member, in any manner. It should also be noted that this country has not given its adherence to the protocol of the Permanent Court of International Justice. (d) If the United States signed or adhered to a convention, legislation by Congress would be necessary to make it effective. For this reason this Government cannot finally commit itself without some reservation as to action by Congress or some assurance which will satisfy the President that Congress will pass the necessary legislation.

4. It is understood that in the above the word “arms” means arms and munitions of war, mere sporting or commercial munitions not being included. Make a full report on proceedings of the subcommittee. Telegraph at your discretion. HUGHES

manufacture in the various States of the Union. I replied that I should be glad to refer this question to my Government. If the Department considers it desirable to convey the requested information to the drafting committee through the legation at Berne it will be appreciated by the committee. Full written report with documents follows.30 HERRICK 30 Not printed.

Convention. Whereas for this and for other reasons it is desirable to amend such Convention; Whereas it is necessary to exercise a general supervision over the trade in arms and ammunition, with the object of securing the fullest possible publicity in regard to such trade, thereby drawing attention to the danger of the accumulation, in peace time, of stocks of munitions; Whereas it is necessary to institute a uniform procedure for the supervision over the trade in firearms and ammunition which are capable of both warlike and other uses; Whereas the existing treaties and conventions, and particularly the Brussels Act of July 2, 1890, regulating the traffic in arms and ammunition in certain regions, no longer meet present conditions, which require more elaborate provisions applicable to a wider area in Africa and the establishment of a corresponding regime in certain territories in Asia; Whereas a special supervision of the maritime zone adjacent to certain countries is necessary to ensure the efficacy of the measures adopted by the various Governments both as regards the importation of arms and ammunition into these countries and the export of such arms and ammunition from their own territory. Have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: (Here will follow the names of the Plenipotentiaries of the new H. C. P.) who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, Have agreed as follows:— ARTICLE 1 This Convention applies to the following arms and munitions: Category I. Arms and munitions of war, as follows: a) Ships of war of all kinds, including submarines and submersibles. b) Airships, aeroplanes and seaplanes for use in war. c) Tanks and armoured cars. d) Artillery of all kinds.

e) Apparatus for the discharge of all kinds of projectiles, and for the discharge of all kinds of bombs, torpedoes and depth charges. f) Flame throwers. g) Mines whether for land or water. h) Torpedoes and depth charges of all kinds. i) Bombs and grenades of all kinds. j) Machine guns and rifled smallbore breech-loading weapons of all kinds. k) Pistols and revolvers of all kinds. l) Ammunition of all kinds for use with any of the above. m) Explosives and propellants of all kinds for use in war. n) Component parts of any of the above including mountings. Category II. Fire arms and ammunition for purposes of sport or personal defence. In order to prevent the export and import of firearms and ammunition intended for warlike purposes though described and sold as articles of sport or personal defence and in order at the same time not to hamper unduly the legitimate trade in firearms and ammunition intended to be used only for sport and personal defence the H. C. P. hereby undertake that they will use their best endeavours to agree upon a uniform definition of 1) Military rifles, revolvers and pistols and the ammunition thereof. 2) Rifles, revolvers and pistols capable of use for both military and other purposes and the ammunition thereof.

3) Rifles, revolvers and pistols regarded as of no military value and the ammunition thereof. ARTICLE 2 The H. C. P. undertake not to export themselves and to prohibit the export of arms and munitions of war in Category 1 except on the conditions mentioned in Article 3. This prohibition of exportation shall apply to all such arms and ammunition whether complete or in parts. ARTICLE 3 Nevertheless, notwithstanding this prohibition, the H. C. P. reserve the right to grant in respect of arms and munitions of war whose use is not prohibited by international law licences for the export of arms and munitions of war in Category I, but such licences are only to be granted on the following conditions: 1. No licence is to be granted except for a direct supply to a Government recognised as such by the Government of the exporting territory. The Form in which this licence shall be given shall, so far as practicable, resemble that given as an annex to the present Convention. 2. The Government acquiring the consignments must act through a duly accredited representative, who shall produce his credentials. 3. Such representative must produce a written authority from his Government for the acquisition of each consignment, which authority must state that the consignment is acquired for the use of that Government and not for transfer and will be delivered to them and to no one else. 4. Each licence must contain a full description of the arms and munitions of war to which it relates, and the names of the

exporting and acquiring Governments, ports of embarkation and disembarkation, means of transport, route and destination. 5. A separate licence shall be required for each separate shipment which crosses the frontier of the exporting country whether by land, water or air. ARTICLE 4 Without prejudice to any obligations to which they may have subscribed under international conventions dealing with transit, the H. C. P. undertake to take such steps as they reasonably can to supervise and prohibit the transit of the arms and munitions of war in Category I which are not accompanied by a licence made out in the proper form, as laid down in Article 3. A copy of the licence shall be sent by the exporting State to the central international body referred to in Article 9 of the present Convention before the goods pass the frontier of the exporting country; a second copy shall be sent to the same international body by the importing country, if one of the H. C. P. within a month of the receipt of the consignment, mention being made of the heading under which the imported goods will appear in its imports statistics. ARTICLE 5 Firearms and ammunition in Category II may, if the exporting country so desires, be exported without licence except to the prohibited areas and zone mentioned in Article 10. Provided nevertheless that in the case of firearms and ammunition adapted both to warlike and also to other purposes, the H. C. P. hereby undertake to determine from the size, destination and other circumstances of each shipment for what uses it is intended and to decide in each case whether such shipment falls properly under Category II, or whether it ought to be considered to belong to Category I and in the latter case they undertake that it shall become subject to Articles 2 and 3 hereof. ARTICLE 6

The H. C. P. undertake in addition to prohibit the export both of arms and munitions of war in Category I and also of firearms and ammunition in Category II whether complete or in parts, to the areas and zone specified in Article 10. Nevertheless, notwithstanding this prohibition, the High Contracting Parties reserve the right to grant export licences on the understanding that such licences shall be issued only by the authorities of the exporting countries. Such authorities must satisfy themselves in advance that the arms or ammunition for which an export licence is requested are not intended for export to any destination or for disposal in any way contrary to the provisions of this Convention. ARTICLE 7 Shipments to be effected under contracts entered into before the coming into force of the present Convention shall be governed by its provisions. ARTICLE 8 The H. C. P. undertake to grant no export licences covering either Category I or Category II for delivery to any country which after having been placed under the tutelage of any Power, may endeavour to obtain from any other Power any of the arms or munitions of war in Category I or of the firearms or ammunition in Category II. ARTICLE 9 A Central International Body shall be established by the Council of the League of Nations for the purpose of collecting and preserving documents of all kinds exchanged by the H. C. P. with regard to the trade in and distribution of the arms and ammunition in Category I and Category II specified in the present Convention, as well as the texts of all laws orders and regulations made for the carrying out of the present Convention. Each of the H. C. P. shall publish an annual report showing the export licences which it may have granted in respect of arms and munitions in Category I or Category II together with the quantities and destination of the arms and munitions to which the export licences refer. A copy of this report shall be sent to the Central International Body.

Movements of arms and munitions made by a Power within territories placed under its sovereignty or authority, and for the use of its own military forces, will not be included in this report. ARTICLE 10 The H. C. P. undertake, each as far as the territory under its jurisdiction is concerned, to prohibit the importation of arms and munitions of war in Category I and of firearms and ammunition in Category II into the following territorial areas, and also to prevent their exportation to, importation and transportation in the maritime zone defined below: (Note: —The Commission is of opinion, in view of the new circumstances which have arisen since the Convention of St. Germain was drawn up, that the territories to be included in the restricted areas should form the subject of a fresh examination by the Council of the League of Nations). Special licences for the import of arms and ammunition in Category I or Category II into the areas defined above may be issued. In the African area they shall be subject to the regulations specified in Articles 11 and 12 or to any local regulations of a stricter nature which may be in force. In the other areas specified in the present Article, these licences shall be subject to similar regulations put into effect by the Governments exercising authority there.

ARTICLE[S] 11–25 Identical with Articles 7–21 of the Convention of St. Germain. (Note:—These Articles are referred to the P. A. C. for technical examination.) ARTICLE 26 The H. C. P. who exercise authority over territories within the prohibited areas and zone specified in Article 10 agree to take so far as each may be concerned, the measures required for the enforcement of the present Convention, and in particular for the prosecution and repression of offences

against the provisions contained therein. They shall communicate these measures to the Central International Body and shall inform it of the competent authorities referred to in the preceding Articles. Such of them as are members of the League of Nations shall at the same time transmit this information to the Secretary-General of the League. ARTICLE 27 The H. C. P. will use their best endeavours to secure the accession to the present Convention of other States whether members of the League of Nations or not. This accession shall be notified through the diplomatic Channel to the Government of the French Republic, and by it to all the signatory or adhering States. The accession will come into force from the date of such notification to the French Government. Any State may, with the consent of the H. C. P. notify its partial or conditional adherence to the provisions of the present Convention, provided that such conditions or partial adherence do not affect the effectiveness of the supervision of trade in arms and ammunition. ARTICLE 28 The H. C. P. agree that if any dispute whatever should arise between them relating to the application or interpretation of the present Convention which cannot be settled by negotiation, this dispute shall be submitted to the International Court of Justice, or alternatively to a Court of Arbitration. ARTICLE 29 All the provisions of former general international Conventions, relating to the matters dealt with in the present Convention, shall be considered as abrogated in so far as they are binding between the Powers which are Parties to the present Convention. The present Convention shall in no way affect the rights and obligations which may arise out of the provisions either of the Covenant of the League

of Nations or of the Treaties of Peace signed in 1919 and 1920 at Versailles, Neuilly, St. Germain and Trianon and the provisions of Agreements registered with the League of Nations and published by the League up to the date of the coming into force of the present Convention, so far as the Powers which are signatories of or benefit by the said Treaties or Agreements are concerned. ARTICLE 30 The Council of the League of Nations shall cause to be published an annual report on the trade in arms and munitions of war, the licences issued by the different Governments and the situation of the trade in arms. This report shall be submitted to the Assembly of the League of Nations. ARTICLE 31 The present Convention shall be ratified as soon as possible. Each Power will address its ratification to the French Government, who will inform all the other signatory Powers. ARTICLE 32 The present Convention shall come into force when ratified by twelve Powers among whom shall be all of the following:—Belgium, United States of America, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan and Russia. ARTICLE 33 The present Convention shall remain in force for ten years. Thereafter it can be denounced by any H. C. P. by giving two years notice to the Government of the French Republic, who will inform all the other signatory Powers. The H. C. P. agree that, at the conclusion of a period of five years, the present Convention shall, in the light of experience then gained, be subject to revision upon the request of . . . . . . . of the said H. C. P. 31 Not printed.

framing of the Convention. The reasons for this are obvious. The Department cannot undertake to state at this time whether a Convention along the lines now being considered by the T. M. C. would be likely to receive the requisite approval of the Senate or whether legislation to put such a Convention into effect could be obtained. Such being the case the Department does not desire that the impression should be created as a result of your participation in the discussions at Geneva that a convention of the character proposed would necessarily be presented to the Senate by this Government or legislation to give it effect would be requested. Whether this action will be taken will depend in large measure upon the character which the Convention assumes as finally drafted. After you have made this position clear to the Commission it is felt that it would be entirely appropriate, if inquiry is made of you as to the attitude of this Government, to point out to the T. M. C. the features of the Convention as indicated which might occasion difficulty in this country and thus render less probable the cooperation of the United States in this matter, a cooperation which this Government would be glad to be in a position to extend for the control of the improper traffic in arms in case a practical basis for such cooperation were presented; such a basis for example as is indicated in sub-headings (a), (b) and (c) under point 2 in the Department’s telegram of March 7. In indicating informally the Department’s position with respect to certain points of the Convention which may come under discussion, it is not desired that you should press your views upon the Commission further than to make clear the position of this ‘Government. It is the Department’s understanding that at its July meeting the T. M. C. of the League of Nations will devote its attention to the draft convention which was considered at Paris by the sub-committee and of which the revised text was submitted with the Legation’s despatch No. 1504 of May 12, 1924. In the instructions which follow the Department will therefore take this draft as a basis and submit certain comments which may be helpful to you during the discussion of the draft convention. PREAMBLE

It would appear unnecessary to refer in the Preamble to the Contention of St. Germain and to the fact that certain powers did not ratify this convention. It is the Department’s understanding that the convention was not ratified by Great Britain, France, Italy or Japan, in addition to the United States. It seems both unnecessary and ambiguous to state that certain powers were not able “to ratify” this convention. It is assumed that the sixth paragraph of the Preamble which relates to the barred zone will be subject to any modification necessary to bring it in line with the provisions of Article 10 of the Convention as finally determined, which is to define the zone. This article will be discussed in further detail below. ARTICLE 1 Category I (a) of Article 1, which defines the arms and munitions to which the convention is to be applicable includes vessels of war. This provision taken in conjunction with Article 3 might be interpreted as sanctioning the export under license of naval vessels and as a result a case might be presented where there would be a conflict with the provisions of Article 18 of the Treaty on the Limitation of Naval Armament, signed at Washington

the course of the discussions whether such is in fact the understanding of those who have drafted the convention. ARTICLE 3 In order that the provisions of Article 3 should in no way conflict with the provisions of treaties drawn up at the Washington Conference of 1921–1922 (Treaty on the Limitation of Naval Armament and Treaty Relating to The Use of Submarines and Noxious Gases in Warfare), the Commission might find it desirable to insert after the words “International Law” in the first sentence of paragraph one of Article 3 the following words “or treaties, or of which the disposal by gift, sale or any mode of transfer has not been restricted by treaty, licenses for the export,” etc., etc. This paragraph of Article 3 would then read in full as follows: “Nevertheless, notwithstanding this prohibition, the H. C. P. reserve the right to grant in respect of arms and munitions of war whose use is not prohibited by international law or treaties or of which the disposal by gift, sale or any mode of transfer has not been restricted by treaty, licenses for the export of arms and munitions of war in Category I, but such licenses are only to be granted on the following conditions:” In the following paragraph of Article 3 the Department considers it would be most desirable to add after “Government” the words “or belligerents” (see Department’s telegram of March 7th). It appears from page 8 of your predecessor’s report from Paris of March 2934 that the insertion of this word was considered at the Paris meeting but not accepted by the Commission. Mr. Grew indicated, however, that if there had been further opportunity for the consideration of the point the change might have been made. It is therefore possible that this question may again be raised at Geneva and in this case, if an opportunity is presented, you should not fail to indicate this Government’s view. The Department has noted in the minutes of the discussion of the T. M. C.

neutrality of the issuance by a government of licenses for the export of arms to belligerents. This question would arise in a particularly acute form in a situation where, as during the World War, shipments to only one group of belligerents were possible. The Department has also noted the statement of Lord Cecil “that he desired to allow sale in war time to belligerents without the violation of neutrality by the governments which granted the licenses.” To this end Lord Cecil proposed the insertion of the following provision after Article 3: “It is hereby declared that nothing in this article shall affect the rule of international law permitting the sale of munitions of war by the subject of a non-belligerent state to the Government of a belligerent state without breach of the neutrality of the nonbelligerent state and the grant of a license under this article for such a sale shall not be deemed to be a breach of neutrality.” Lord Cecil also proposed the following “Questions for Decision” to the legal section of the Secretariat: “(1) Would the grant of a license for export of arms to a belligerent be a breach of neutrality by the granting Power? “(2) If the answer to the first question is in the affirmative, would this result be best prevented: (i) By a declaration in the convention that such a breach of neutrality was not to occur, or (ii) By a suspension of the operation of the convention during the war?” The amendment suggested by Lord Robert Cecil would tend to meet the difficulty in so far as the parties to the Convention are concerned and would therefore be a desirable addition to Article 3.

The Department would be glad to have you report fully any discussion of this point, which it considers of particular importance, and one which should be given most careful consideration before any convention is concluded.

ARTICLE 4 The first paragraph of Article 4 refers to the control of the transit of arms and ammunition and contains a reservation with respect to “international conventions” to which the H. C. P.’s may have subscribed. In order that there should be no misunderstanding as to the international conventions to which this Article has reference, it might be desirable that such international treaties and conventions respecting transit should be listed in the annex to

under licenses and under the safeguards outlined in that article. Article 10 refers to “special licenses for the import of arms and ammunition in Category I or Category II” into the prohibited areas. The Department does not find these various references entirely clear and does not fully understand the regime which it is contemplated should be applied to the export and import of sporting arms in the case of the prohibited areas. In reporting on the meeting of the T. M. C. it would be helpful to receive further information on this point. In the consideration of Articles 1 and 8 the Department briefly referred to this government’s view that the legitimate trade in sporting arms should not be unduly restricted and that the principle of equality of opportunity should not be impaired in regulating such trade. ARTICLE 6 The statement in this article that licenses for export to the ‘barred’ zone “shall be issued only by the authorities of the exporting countries” is not understood as the Department had assumed from earlier provisions of the draft convention that such licenses were in all cases to be issued only by authorities of the exporting state. ARTICLE 7 This article appears to be retroactive in effect and as such might impair the obligation of contracts entered into in good faith by the nationals of the H. C. P. in the event that agreements for the shipments of arms by private agencies to private agencies abroad had been entered into. In such cases the requirement of export licenses might be considered. As now drawn the provision is too sweeping in character. ARTICLE 8 In this article. “The High Contracting Parties undertake to grant no export licenses covering either Category I or Category II for delivery to

any country which after having been placed under the tutelage of any Power, may endeavor to obtain from any other Power any of the arms or munitions of war in Category I or of the firearms or ammunition in Category II.” The effect of this article would apparently be to limit the trade in arms and ammunition with states under mandate or “tutelage” to the mandatory power or to the power exercising the so-called “tutelage.” The article is very similar to Article 4 of the St. Germain convention. In so far as this provision relates to the control of the export of arms and ammunition under Category II of which the export to private individuals without license, except with respect to certain defined areas, is to be permitted, the provision would appear to impair the freedom of economic opportunity and the equality of treatment as between the mandatory powers and other states. This equality of opportunity is guaranteed under the terms of the several mandates and should not be impaired by collateral agreements. In so far as the article relates to the export of arms and ammunition in Category I the provision already contemplated under article 3, in limiting the export of arms and ammunition to recognized governments (or belligerents) tends to meet the purpose of the present article (Article 8) while avoiding its objectionable features. For your personal and confidential guidance it may be added that in the view of this Department the provisions of Article 8 would be the subject of grave objection in this country. The primary purpose of the article appears to be to prevent the introduction of arms into certain areas and zones, including mandate regions, protectorates and territories occupied by backward peoples in which Great Britain, France, Italy and other countries are particularly interested. Such a provision might prevent this government from permitting the shipment of munitions of war to any oppressed peoples who might be endeavoring to free themselves from oppression, however worthy the cause or however desirable it might be that our market should be available to them. However remote the practical exigency may be, being ourselves a nation born of revolution this provision would, I believe, be open to serious objection and might, under given circumstances, prove to be unfortunate.

If such a provision had been in force at the time of the Cuban war of independence against Spain or for that matter at the time of the American Revolution it might have seriously affected the natural and proper development of large bodies of people. While it is recognized that conditions have very fundamentally changed since the events abovementioned, nevertheless the Department could not undertake to state that the present colonial situation is such that it should necessarily be continued indefinitely or that this Government should subscribe to a provision which would make it well nigh impossible for a change in the situation to be brought about should justice require. In this connection your attention is directed to the form of the Senate’s approval of the Brussels Convention of 1890 for the repression of the African Slave-trade which contains in articles 8 to 13 certain provisions which were introduced with modifications into the St. Germain Convention and also into the present draft. You will find the Senate Resolution mentioned above on page 1991 of Malloy, Volume 2. Paragraph 3 of the Resolution reads as follows: Resolved further, as a part of this act of ratification, That the United States of America, having neither possessions nor protectorates in Africa, hereby disclaims any intention, in ratifying this treaty, to indicate any interest whatsoever in the possessions or protectorates established or claimed on that Continent by the other powers, or any approval of the wisdom, expediency or lawfulness thereof, and does not join in any expressions in the said General Act which might be construed as such a declaration or acknowledgment; and, for this reason, that it is desirable that a copy of this resolution be inserted in the protocol to be drawn up at the time of the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty on the part of the United States.

ARTICLE 9 With respect to the provision in article 9 for the establishment of a Central International Body by the Council of the League of Nations, your attention is directed to Mr. Grew’s statement on page 10 in his report of March 29

from Paris39 to the sub-committee of the T. M. C. to the effect that while this government was already voluntarily and in a purely informal way furnishing the League of Nations with information and statistics on a variety of subjects neither he nor his government could undertake to indicate whether or not the Congress would bind itself to a treaty provision of this nature. The Department also desires to call your attention to its instruction to Mr. Grew, through the American Consul at Geneva, under date of February 7 with reference to the supervision of the League of Nations in the matter of arms traffic. Your attention is also directed to the statements in the Department’s instruction of March 7 … that “this government cannot place itself in any manner under the direction or supervision of the League of Nations, of which it is not a member.” While the Department does not desire that objection in matters of administration should be given undue prominence, the provision in Article 9 that the “Central International Body shall be established by the Council of the League of Nations” would increase the opposition in this country to American adherence to the convention—opposition which might be obviated on this point by providing that the Central International Body in question should be established by agreement among the High Contracting Parties ratifying or adhering to the convention. (In this connection see

It is difficult to submit detailed comments on Article 10, in view of the fact that the extent of the barred area is a matter for further examination. It may be suggested, however, that there are obvious objections to including in this area sovereign states. Under the licensing system outlined in earlier articles of the Convention it would appear that means had been provided to deal with the situation of sovereign states which it might otherwise be contemplated to place in the barred zone. If conditions requiring more drastic treatment should be presented in a certain area, the powers could agree, if occasion arose, to put a stop to all shipments to such an area by declining to issue licenses for export to this destination. As was indicated, however, in the Department’s instruction of March 7th, this Government will give proper consideration to any proposal as to limitations in the shipment of armament respecting Europe, Asia and Africa to which the other governments declare themselves willing to submit. But this Government would hardly be disposed to undertake to participate in the enforcement of regulations within the barred area or in the waters contiguous thereto. Its action would be limited to the restriction which might be possible under law upon the export of arms and ammunition from this country to such an area. With reference to the second paragraph of Article 10 it is not entirely clear to the Department in what respect “the special licenses” there mentioned differ, in so far as the exporting country is concerned, from the licenses referred to in Article 3. ARTICLES 11 TO 26

colonies, dependencies or which exercise mandates or supervision within the area. Article 26 is of a general character relating to the adoption of the measures for the enforcement of the preceding articles. Certain of the provisions contained in these articles are based on articles 8 to 13 of the General Act for the repression of the African Slave-trade signed

In a communication from the Navy Department of April 4, 1922,41 in reply to an inquiry from this Department for an expression of views with regard to certain features of the convention of St. Germain, the Secretary of the Navy in dealing particularly with the articles of that Convention which have been taken over into the present draft states: “The convention permits visit to certain classes of vessels in certain waters and provides that, the visit having been made, a definite obligation to bring in the vessel visited may follow. (See article 20). No other duty for vessels of the United States Navy is stated or implied in the convention. “There is one other naval aspect of the convention. It extends in time of peace and for a new purpose the right of visit to certain classes of vessels on certain parts of the high seas.” In commenting on this extension of the “right of visit” the Secretary of the Navy (writing in April 1922) expressed the view that it was undesirable. In view, however, of the treaties recently concluded by this Government with certain foreign powers for the prevention of the smuggling of intoxicating liquors, which permit the boarding of private vessels outside the limits of territorial waters for certain defined purposes, the Department does not consider that a provision along similar lines with respect to the

prevention of the smuggling of arms and ammunition would be objectionable. In this connection, however, you will note that the limit within which such boarding of private vessels is permitted under the liquor smuggling treaties is defined (i. e. one hour’s steaming distance from the shore in the British Treaty).42 Such a limitation does not appear to be provided with respect to the boarding of private vessels to search for arms and ammunition. It would appear desirable that some limit should be placed upon this privilege which might otherwise lend itself to abuse. ARTICLE 27 The last paragraph of this article, which provides that a state may, with the consent of the H. C. P., notify its partial or conditional adherence to the convention provided such partial adherence does “not affect the effectiveness of the supervision of trade in arms and ammunition,” is doubtless intended to be a helpful provision and it may be one which would tend to make it more likely that the convention could be given full consideration by this Government.

ARTICLE 29 The second paragraph of this article, which relates to the Allied Peace Treaties with the Central Powers, was apparently added to the draft subsequent to the sub-committee meeting at Paris, and the discussions which led up to its adoption have not been found in the Department’s files. However, in view of the concluding phrase of the second paragraph it is not considered that this provision affords any ground for objection. ARTICLE 30 With reference to Article 30 your attention is called to the comments given above with respect to Article 9. It is suggested that the International Body which might be set up under Article 9 could publish the annual report which under the present draft is proposed should be published under the direction of the Council of the League of Nations.

ARTICLE 32 This article relates to the coming into force of the convention when ratified by certain powers among which figure the United States and, as now drawn, would appear to be inconsistent with Article 27 as now proposed, which provides for adherence as well as ratification. CONTROL OF THE PRIVATE MANUFACTURE OF MUNITIONS AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR In addition to the draft convention relating to the traffic in arms and ammunition which has been discussed above, the Department has also given its attention to the report of the special committee appointed by the first sub-committee of the T. M. C. which met at Prague in April last. This report was transmitted with the Legation’s despatch No. 1508 of May 13, 1924.43 In connection with this report your attention is called to the Department’s instruction of February 7th last to Mr. Grew, through the American Consul at Geneva, and to point one of the Department’s instruction of March 7th … The latest figures available to the Department do not indicate that this country is in any sense taking the lead in the production of arms and ammunition. In fact the figures given in the enclosed pamphlets issued by the Census Bureau44 which contain comparative statements respecting the manufacture of arms and munitions in the United States for the period prior and subsequent to 1914, including the year 1921, indicate that in the number of establishments manufacturing arms, the number of persons employed in this trade and the value of the production, the United States in 1921 was substantially on the same basis as in 1909. It would be interesting if comparative figures of this character could also be obtained with respect to the important arms producing countries of Europe. Further, with respect to the production of arms it should be recalled that the situation of this country differs from that of certain of the powers represented on the T. M. C. in view of the fact that there are in the United States no important government munition factories. The United States is therefore dependent for its needs both in time of peace and in time of war largely upon private manufacturers.

In view of the fact that the recommendations of the Committee which met at Prague, and which it is understood are to be considered by the T. M. C, have not assumed definite form, the Department does not consider that it is feasible to send you further instructions on this phase of the subject at the present time. As has already been pointed out in previous instructions (See telegram of March 7th) manufacture or production is not per se commerce and Congress under the power to regulate interstate commerce cannot control mere manufacture or production within the states. The power of Congress could, however, be exerted, if Congress were so disposed, to control production of arms in the District of Columbia and in the territories and possessions of the United States. In a telegram from Paris of March 28 Mr. Grew reported that Lord Cecil had inquired whether there were any constitutional difficulties which would prevent federal legislation in the United States with a view to obtaining for publication statistical information respecting production by private manufacturers in the various states of the union. The Department has given careful consideration to this question and while it cannot undertake to speak with finality on the constitutional question involved it is of the opinion that federal legislation to secure such statistics would be constitutional. In fact in paragraph 32 of the Act of the 65th

year 1921, as well as a comparison with the figures of certain preceding years, are enclosed herewith in duplicate. You may, if you consider it desirable, file one copy with the T. M. C. The Department understands that the material for the publication of a similar pamphlet covering the year 1923 is now being collected and will be available in a comparatively short time. This information will also be sent you as soon as received by the Department. From informal inquiry of the Census Bureau, which prepares these reports, the Department understands that the Bureau sends representatives to the various munition plants in this country to collect the information desired. An effort is made to reach every establishment having an annual production value of $5,000 or more and in the opinion of the Census Bureau no establishment of any consequence has been overlooked. As stated in the publication of the Census Bureau it is believed that the inclusion of all establishments having an annual production of less than $5,000 would affect the figures in the enclosed pamphlet to the extent of less than onetenth of 1 percent. The report of the Census Bureau does not include government establishments. With respect to such establishments the Department has informally obtained the following information through the courtesy of the War Department. In 1914 the government owned and operated six plants and it has the same number of plants today. The production of military equipment in government owned and operated establishments is less than half of what it was in 1914. In 1914, for instance, the government employed approximately 7,500 people in its plants and today the Department understands the number employed is less than 4,000. Most of these persons, furthermore, are engaged in storage plants and not in the production of arms and ammunition as the only material manufactured by the Government today is a small quantity of small arms (rifles) and some experimental material for coast defense. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

1. Experience has shown the difficulty of making effective any control of the arms traffic as long as there is over-production. It does not appear that there is such over-production in the United States. 2. The United States has not contributed to any considerable extent in the traffic in arms with countries in Europe, Asia or Africa. Certain recent figures in this respect were included in Department’s telegram No. 9, February 2. Shipments from the United States to countries in this hemisphere and to countries where the United States enjoys extraterritorial rights can, as occasion requires and as has often been done, be placed under strict control at the points of shipment. The shipments which have been made recently to Mexico and Cuba have been in the interest of the maintenance of peace and order and the results amply justified these shipments. (See enclosed statements with respect to the shipment of arms to Mexico45 ). 3. A licensing system and proper publicity are steps with which this Government is in general accord and if a convention giving effect to these principles should be drawn up which did not involve the supervision or control of the League of Nations and if other provisions of an objectionable character should not be included, this Government would give such a convention most careful consideration. 4. As a possible addition to the principles already included in the convention it is suggested that you might be in a position to suggest informally the inclusion of a provision to the effect that the High Contracting Powers agree to withhold diplomatic or other support from their nationals in respect to any claim against a foreign government or national based on an arms shipment which shall not have been made under proper license where such license is required and further that the High Contracting Powers serve notice upon other governments that they will not entertain any claim presented by another government with respect to any arms

shipment which likewise shall not have been made under proper license. There is enclosed, for convenient reference in connection with this instruction, a copy of the draft convention45a in the form in which, the Department understands from the reports of the Legation at Berne, mentioned above, it is to be considered by the T. M. C. on July 7th. In case the Department’s understanding on this point is incorrect and if the draft which is to be considered by the T. M. C. differs in any material respects from that enclosed herewith the Department desires to be informed by telegraph. The Department desires you to summarize by telegraph the discussions of the T. M. C. and to submit a full written report with the text of the minutes of the various meetings with your comments thereon.

Subsequent to the preparation of the foregoing instructions the Department has received your despatch No. 20 of May 2746 enclosing the minutes of the meeting of the Permanent Advisory Commission for military, naval and air questions of the League of Nations which, together with the Naval Sub- Committee of this Commission, considered certain features of the draft convention for the control of the traffic in arms and ammunition as prepared by the T. M. C. and as enclosed herewith. The Department understands from these minutes that the Permanent Advisory Commission has suggested certain modifications in the draft convention particularly with respect to the categories of arms and ammunition with which the convention is to deal. From the minutes it appears that three categories have been suggested to replace the two categories of the draft of the T. M. C. and in addition the instruments of warfare listed under these categories differ slightly from those listed under the two categories of the earlier draft. The Department has particularly noted that the enumeration under Category I of the list prepared by the P. A. C. does not appear to include naval vessels. If the Department’s understanding on this point is correct and if the recommendations of the P. A. C. are adopted it might not be necessary for you to call the attention of the Commission to the possible effect of the

convention upon the Treaty for the Limitation of Naval Armament which was discussed above under Article 1. The Department has further noted recommendations of the P. A. C. with regard to Articles 11 to 26 which are taken from the St. Germain Convention. The proposed modifications in these articles do not appear to call for further comment at this time. Finally the Department has noted the suggestion of the British delegation on the P. A. C. “that, instead of a single arms traffic convention of a general nature being prepared, two separate conventions should be drawn up: one dealing with the general or world-wide traffic in arms, and the other, of more limited scope, dealing with the supply of arms to certain territories such as are dealt with in Article 6 of the St. Germain Convention.” (C. P.

32 Not printed. 32 Not printed.

Whereas the Convention of St. Germain signed by the H. C. P. therein mentioned has not entered into full force and effect, Whereas it is necessary to exercise a general supervision over the international trade in arms, munitions and implements of war, with the object of securing the fullest possible publicity in regard to such trade, Whereas the existing treaties and conventions, and particularly the Brussels Act of July 2nd, 1890 regulating the traffic in arms and munitions in certain regions, no longer meet present conditions, Whereas a special supervision of the maritime zone adjacent to certain countries is necessary to ensure the efficacy of the measures adopted by the various Governments both as regards the import of arms, ammunition and implements of war into those countries and their export from their own territory Have appointed: CHAPTER I.—Definition of the arms, munitions and implements of war the international trade of which is to be controlled ARTICLE 1 This Convention applies to the following arms, munitions and implements of war: Category I. 1. Arms and munitions, assembled or component parts, exclusively designed for land, sea or aerial war, whatever their mode of employment. (a)—All arms and ammunition which are or shall be comprised in the equipment of the armed forces of the different states, including: —Pistols and revolvers, automatic or self-loading, and developments of the same, designed for single-handed use or fired from the shoulder, of a calibre greater than 6.5 mm. and length of barrel greater than 10 cm. —rifles, muskets, carbines; —machine guns, interrupter gears, mountings for machine guns; —aerial gun sights; —infantry apparatus for the discharge of projectiles;

—flame throwers; —cannon, long or short, bomb throwers and mortars of all kinds and their carriages, mountings, recuperators, accessories for mounting and sighting apparatus; —apparatus for the discharge of all kinds of projectiles, bombs, torpedoes, depth charges, etc; —grenades, bombs, land mines, submarine mines fixed or floating torpedoes, depth charges; —projectiles of all kinds; —ammunition and appliances for the above arms and apparatus. —bayonets, swords and lances; —all arms and ammunition which, after having been employed in the service of the different States, are no longer part of their equipment but remain capable of being utilised for military purposes to the exclusion of any other utilisation. 2. Implements of war hereafter enumerated and component parts which are only capable of being utilised in the manufacture of the said material. Ships of all kinds designed exclusively for war, including submarines and submersibles; Airships, aeroplanes and seaplanes designed exclusively for war; Tanks; Armoured cars. Category II. Arms and munitions, assembled or component parts, capable of use both for military and other purposes (1) Firearms, designed or adapted for non-military purposes, that will fire cartridges that can be fired from firearms in Category I.

(2) All other rifles, or firearms, firing from the shoulder, of a calibre of 6 mm. or above, not included in Category I. (3) Ammunition for the arms enumerated above. (4) Gunpowder and explosives. Category III. Arms and munitions having no military value.

All the arms and munitions other than those defined in Categories I and II such as: —rifled weapons of a calibre of less than 6 mm. designed for firing from the shoulder; —revolvers and automatic pistols of a calibre of 6.5 mm. or less and length of barrel of 10 cm. or less; —smooth-bore shot guns; —double-barrelled shot-guns of which one barrel is rifled, the other smooth-bore; —single-shot pistols; —firearms firing rimfire ammunition; —muzzle loading firearms; —life-saving rockets; —guns for whaling or other fisheries; —signal and saluting guns; —humane cattle-killers of all sorts;

—ammunition for the above. NOTE.—The above three categories do not include arms the use of which is prohibited by International Law, since it is clearly understood that all traffic in these arms must be prohibited and that no licence can be issued for such traffic. CHAPTER II.—Export and transit of arms, munitions and implements of war ARTICLE 2 The H. C. P.’s, undertake not to export themselves, and to prohibit the export of arms, munitions and other implements of war enumerated in Category I, whether complete or in parts, except on the conditions hereinafter mentioned. ARTICLE 3 Notwithstanding this prohibition, the High Contracting Parties may grant in respect of arms, munitions and implements of war whose use is not prohibited by international law, licenses for the export of arms, munitions and implements of war enumerated in Category I, in the following conditions:— 1) Licenses are not to be granted except for a direct supply to a Government recognised as such by the Government of the exporting country. 2) The Government acquiring the consignment must act through a duly accredited representative. 3) Such representative must produce a written authority from the Government he represents for the acquisition of each consignment, which authority must state that the consignment is required for delivery to that Government for its own use. 4) The form in which this license shall be given shall, so far as practicable, be that given as an annex to the present Convention, (page …) Each license must contain a description sufficient for

the identification of the arms, munitions and implements of war to which it relates and the names of the exporter and the acquiring Government, ports, of embarkation and disembarkation, means of transport, intended route and destination. 5) A separate licence shall be required for each separate consignment which crosses the frontier of the exporting country, whether by land, water or air, and shall accompany each separate consignment. 6) A return of the licence granted shall be sent quarterly to the Central International Office referred to in Article 8 of the present Convention by the issuing Governments; importing Governments, when H. C. P.’s, shall also forward quarterly to the C. I. O. a return of the same licences enclosing particulars of the heading under which the imported goods will appear in their imports statistics. ARTICLE 4 Further, licences for the export to private individuals of component parts covered by Category I may be granted on the following conditions:— The said component parts must be exported direct to a recognised manufacturer of war material, duly authorised by his own Government, on a declaration from him to the effect that the said component parts are required by him. The Government which grants the licence and the Government of the importer’s country shall take all adequate precautions to ensure that the said component parts are sent direct to their destination. The licences granted in the terms of the present Article shall, so far as practicable, be drafted according to the form annexed to the present Convention, and shall conform to the provisions of the present Convention, and particularly to those of Article 8. ARTICLE 5

Without prejudice to any obligations to which they may have sub scribed under international conventions dealing with transit, the H. C. P., when they have reason to believe that any consignment of arms, munitions or implements of war in transit through their territory does not conform to the provisions of the present Convention, undertake to investigate the circumstances and if necessary to prohibit the transit.

ARTICLE 6 Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 7, arms and munitions in Category II and III may, if the exporter’s country so desires, be exported without licence. Provided, nevertheless, that in the case of arms and munitions of Category II the H. C. P.’s hereby undertake to determine from the size, destination and other circumstances of each consignment whether these arms and munitions are intended for war purposes. If such is the case, the H. C. P.’s undertake that the shipments shall become subject to Articles

in and the distribution of arms, munitions and implements of war, as well as the text of all laws, orders and regulations made for the carrying out of the present Convention. Each of the H. C. P.’s shall publish an annual return of the export licences which each may have granted in respect of arms, munitions and implements of war in pursuance of the present Convention, mentioning the quantities and destination of the arms, munitions and implements of war to which the export licences refer. A copy of this return shall be sent to the Central International Office. The H. C. P.’s further undertake to forward to the Central International Office all information which they will be in a position to provide relating to consignments under contracts entered into before the coming into force of the present Convention.

CHAPTER III.—Import of Arms, Munitions and Implements of War, Prohibited Zones ARTICLE 9 The H. C. P. undertake, each as far as the territory under its jurisdiction is concerned, to prohibit the importation of arms, munitions and implements of war into the following territorial zones, and also to prevent their exportation to, importation and transportation in the territorial zones as well as in the maritime zones defined below. Special licences for the import of arms, munitions and implements of war into the zones defined above may be issued. In the African zone they shall be subject to the regulations specified in Article[s] 10 and 11 or to any local regulations of a stricter nature which may be in force. In the other zones specified in the present Article, these licences shall be subject to similar regulations put into effect by the Governments exercising authority there. CHAPTER IV.—Supervision on Land ARTICLE 10

Arms, ammunition and implements of war exported under licence into the prohibited zones shall be admitted only at ports, or other places of entry, designated for this purpose by the authorities of the State, Colony, Protectorate or territory under mandate concerned. Such arms, ammunition and implements of war must be deposited by the importer at his own risk and expense in a public warehouse under the exclusive custody and permanent control of the Authority and of its agents, of whom one at least must be a civil official or a military or naval officer. No arms or ammunition shall be deposited or withdrawn without the previous authorisation of the administration of the State, Colony, Protectorate or territory under mandate, unless the arms, ammunition and implements of war to be deposited or withdrawn are intended for the forces of the Government or the defence of the national territory. The withdrawal of arms, ammunition or implements of war deposited in those warehouses shall be authorised only in the following cases:— 1. For despatch to places designated by the Government where the inhabitants are allowed to possess arms, under the control and responsibility of the local Authorities, for the purpose of defence against robbers or rebels. 2. For despatch to places designated by the Government as warehouses and placed under the supervision and responsibility of the local Authorities. 3. For individuals who can show that they require them for their legitimate personal use. ARTICLE 11 In the prohibited zones specified in Article 9, trade in arms, munitions and implements of war shall be placed under the control of officials of the Government and shall be subject to the following regulations: 1. No person may keep a warehouse for arms, munitions or implements of war without a licence.

2. Any person licenced to keep a warehouse for arms, munitions or implements of war must reserve for that special purpose enclosed premises having only one entry, provided with two locks, one of which can be opened only by the officers of the Government. The person in charge of a warehouse shall be responsible for all arms, munitions or implements of war deposited therein and must account for them on demand. For this purpose all deposits or withdrawals shall be entered in a special register, numbered and initialled. Each entry shall be supported by references to the official documents authorising such deposits or withdrawals. 3. No transport of arms, munitions or implements of war shall take place without a special licence. 4. No withdrawal from a private warehouse shall take place except under licence issued by the local Authority on an application stating the purpose for which the arms or ammunition are required, and supported by a licence to carry arms or by a special permit for the purchase of ammunition. Every arm shall be registered and stamped, the Authority in charge of the control shall enter on the licence to carry arms the mark stamped on the weapon. 5. No one shall without authority transfer to another person either by gift or for any consideration any weapon or ammunition which he is licenced to possess. ARTICLE 12 In the prohibited zones specified in Article 9 the manufacture and assembling of arms, munitions or implements of war, shall be prohibited, except at arsenals established by the local Government or, in the case of countries placed under tutelage, at arsenals established by the local Government, under the control of the Mandatory Power, for the defence of its territory or for the maintenance of public order.

No arms shall be repaired except at arsenals or establishments licensed by the local Government for this purpose. No such licence shall be granted without guarantees for the observance of the rules of the present Convention. ARTICLE 13 Within the prohibited zones specified in Article 9, a State which is compelled to utilise the territory of a contiguous State for the importation of arms or ammunition, whether complete or in parts, or of material or of articles intended for armament, shall be authorised on request to have them transported across the territory of such State. It shall, however, when making any such request, furnish guarantees that the said articles are required for the needs of its own Government, and will at no time be sold, transferred or delivered for private use nor used in any way contrary to the interests of the High Contracting Parties. Any violation of these conditions shall be formally established in the following manner:— (a) If the importing State is a Sovereign independent Power, the proof of the violation shall be advanced by one or more of the Representatives accredited to it of contiguous States among the High Contracting Parties; After the Representatives of the other contiguous States have, if necessary, been informed, a joint enquiry into the facts by all these Representatives will be opened, and if need be, the importing State will be called upon to furnish explanations. If the gravity of the case should so require, and if the explanations of the importing State are considered unsatisfactory, the Representatives will jointly notify the importing State that all transit licences in its favour are suspended and that all future requests will be refused until it shall have furnished new and satisfactory guarantees. The forms and conditions of the guarantees provided by the present Article shall be agreed upon previously by the Representatives of the contiguous States among the High Contracting Parties. These Representatives shall communicate to each other, as and when issued, the transit licences granted by the competent authorities.

(b) If the importing State has been placed under the mandatory system established by the League of Nations, the proof of the violation shall be furnished by one of the High Contracting Parties or on its own initiative by the Mandatory Power. The latter shall then notify or demand, as the case may be, the suspension and future refusal of all transit licences. In cases where a violation has been duly proved, no further transit licence shall be granted to the offending State without the previous consent of the Council of the League of Nations. If any proceedings on the part of the importing State or its disturbed condition should threaten the public order of one of the contiguous State signatories of the present Convention, the importation in transit of arms, ammunition, material and articles intended for armament shall be refused to the importing State by all the contiguous States until order has been restored. CHAPTER V.—Maritime Supervision ARTICLE 14 Subject to any contrary provisions in existing special agreements, or in future agreements, provided that in all cases such agreements otherwise comply with the provisions of the present Convention the Sovereign State or Mandatory Power shall carry out the supervision and police measures within Territorial waters in the prohibited zones specified in Article 9. ARTICLE 15 Within the prohibited zones specified in Article 9, no native vessel of less than 500 tons (net tonnage) shall be allowed to ship, discharge or tranship arms, munitions or implements of war. A ship shall be deemed to be native if she is either owned by a native, or fitted out, or commanded by a native, or if more than half of the crew are natives of the countries included in the prohibited zones specified in Article This provision does not apply to lighters or barges, nor to vessels which are engaged exclusively in the coasting trade between different ports of the

same state, colony, protectorate or territory under Mandate, where warehouses are situated. All cargoes of arms, munitions or implements of war shipped on the vessels specified in the preceding paragraph must obtain a special licence from the territorial authority, and all arms, munitions and implements of war so shipped shall be subject to the provisions of the present Convention. This licence shall contain all details necessary to establish the nature and quantity of the items of the shipment, the vessel on which the shipment is to be loaded, the name of the ultimate consignee and the ports of loading and discharge. It shall also be specified thereon that the licence has been issued in conformity with the regulations of the present Convention. The provisions of this Article do not apply (a) to arms, munitions and implements of war conveyed on behalf of a Government either under that Government’s authorisation or accompanied by a duly qualified official. (b) to arms and munitions in the possession of persons provided with a licence to carry arms, provided such arms are for the personal use of the bearer and are accurately described on his licence. ARTICLE 16 To prevent all illicit conveyance of arms, munitions and implements of war within the prohibited zones defined in Article 9, native vessels of less than 500 tons, net tonnage, (a) if not exclusively engaged in the coasting trade between different ports of the same State, colony, protectorate or territory under Mandate or (b) if not engaged in carrying on behalf of a Government as permitted by Article 15, paragraph (a), and proceeding to or from any point within the said zones, —must carry a manifest of their cargo or similar document specifying the quantities and nature of the goods on board, their origin and destination.

The provisions as to the above-mentioned document shall not apply to vessels only partially decked having a maximum crew of ten men and exclusively employed in fishing within territorial waters. ARTICLE 17 Authority to fly the flag of one of the H. C. P. within the prohibited zones defined in Article 9, shall not be granted to native vessels of under 500 tons, net tonnage as defined in Article 15 unless they satisfy all the three following conditions: (1) The owners must be nationals of the Power whose flag they claim to fly or a company duly registered under the laws of that Power. (2) They must furnish proof that they possess real estate in the district of the authority to which their application is addressed or must supply a solvent security as a guarantee for any fines to which they may become liable. (3) Such owners as well as the captain of the vessel must furnish proof that they enjoy a good reputation, and especially that they have never been convicted of illicit conveyance of the articles referred to in the present Convention.

The authorisation must be renewed every year. It shall contain the indications necessary to identify the vessel, the name, tonnage type of rigging, principal dimensions, registered number and signal letters. It shall bear the date on which it was granted and the status of the official who granted it. The initial letters of the port of registration of the native vessel followed by the vessel’s registration number in the serial port numbers must be incised and painted in white on black ground on both quarters of each vessel. The same marks may be painted in Black on the sails.

The net tonnage of the native vessel shall also, if practicable, be incised and painted in a conspicuous position inside the hull. ARTICLE 18 The High Contracting Parties agree to apply the following rules in the maritime zone specified in Article 9. (1) When a warship belonging to one of the H. C. P. encounters outside territorial waters a supposed native vessel of less than 500 tons burden (net tonnage) (a) Flying the flag of one of the H. C. P. (b) Flying the flag of a recognised nation. (c) Flying no flag. and the Commander of the warship has good reason to believe that the supposed native vessel (d) is flying a flag without being entitled to do so (e) is not lawfully entitled to fly the flag of any recognized nation (f) is illicitly conveying arms or ammunition he may proceed, subject to the conditions indicated in the paragraphs below to verify the nationality of the vessel by examining the document authorising the flying of the flag, if this document exists, and also the manifest referred to in Article 16. Any vessel which presents the appearance of a native build or rig may be presumed to be a native vessel. (2) With this object, a boat commanded by a commissioned officer in uniform, may be sent to visit the suspected vessel, after she had been hailed to give notice of such intention. The officer sent on board the vessel shall act with all possible consideration and moderation: before leaving the

vessel the officer shall draw up a process-verbal in the form and language in use in his own country. This proces-verbal shall state the facts of the case and shall be dated and signed by the officer.

Should there be on board the warship no commissioned officer, other than the commanding officer, the above-prescribed operations may be carried out by the warrant, petty or non-commissioned officer at the discretion of the commanding officer. The captain or master of the vessel visited, as well as the witnesses, shall be invited to sign the proces-verbal, and shall have the right to add to it any explanations which they may consider expedient.

(4) The procedure laid down in Para. 3 may be followed if after the verification of the flag and in spite of the manifest being in order the Commander of the Warship continues to suspect the native vessel of engaging in the illicit conveyance of arms, munitions, or implements of war. (5) In the cases referred to in para. 1 (c) of this Article, if it is ascertained as a result of the visit made on board the native vessel that whereas it flew no flag, it was also not entitled to fly the flag of a recognized State, the native vessel, shall, unless the innocent nature of her cargo can be established to the satisfaction of the Commanding Officer of the warship, be conducted to the nearest point in the zone where there is a competent authority of the Power to which the warship which effected the capture belonged, and shall be handed over to such authority.

If it is established that the vessel was engaged in the illicit conveyance of arms, munitions and implements of war, the vessel and all cargo carried in addition to the arms, munitions and implements of war shall be seized by such authority and disposed of according to its own laws—the destruction of the illicit cargo of arms, munitions and implements of war may be ordered according to the same laws. ARTICLE 19 The authority before whom the suspected vessel has been brought shall institute a full enquiry in accordance with the laws of his country in the presence of an officer of the detaining warship. If, however, owing to the duties upon which the warship is engaged it is not practicable for an officer of this warship to attend this enquiry, an affidavit sworn by the commanding officer of the warship shall be accepted by the authority holding the enquiry in place of the verbal evidence of an officer of the warship. If it is proved at this enquiry that the flag has been illegally flown but that the vessel is entitled to fly the flag of a recognised State she shall, if that

State is one of the H. C. P. be handed over to the nearest authority of that State and in all other cases shall be disposed of by agreement between the State responsible for her detention and the State whose flag she is entitled to fly, and pendingsuch agreement shall remain in the custody of the authorities of the nationality of the detaining warship. If it is established that the use of the flag by the detained vessel was correct, but that the vessel was engaged in the illicit conveyance of arms, munitions or implements of war, those responsible shall be brought before the courts of the State under whose flag the vessel sailed. The vessel herself and her cargo shall remain in charge of the authority directing the enquiry. The illicit cargo of arms, munitions or implements of war may be destroyed in accordance with the laws and regulations drawn up for the purpose. ARTICLE 20 The H. C. P. agree to communicate to the Central International Office,

The H. C. P. will take the necessary measures to ensure that their territorial authorities or their consuls shall send to the Central International Office certified copies of all authorisations granted under this Convention to fly their flag as soon as such authorisation shall have been granted, as well as notice of withdrawal of any such authorisation. They also undertake to communicate it to the said Office copies of the licences provided for under Article 15. ARTICLE 22

The commanding officer of a warship who may have detained a vessel flying a foreign flag shall in all cases make a report thereon to his Government, stating the grounds on which he acted. An extract from this report, together with a copy of the process-verbal drawn up by the Officer, warrant officer, petty or non-commissioned officer sent on board the vessel detained shall be sent as soon as possible, to the Central International Office and at the same time to the Government whose flag the detained vessel was flying. ARTICLE 23 If the authority entrusted with the enquiry decides that the detention and diversion of the vessel or the measures imposed upon her were irregular, he shall fix the amount of the compensation due. If the capturing officer or the authorities to whom he is subject, do not accept the decision or contest the amount of the compensation awarded, the dispute shall be submitted to a Court of Arbitration consisting of one arbitrator appointed by the Government whose flag the vessel was flying, one appointed by the Government of the capturing officer, and an umpire chosen by the two arbitrators thus appointed. The two arbitrators shall be chosen, as far as possible, from among the diplomatic, consular or judicial officers of the H. C. P. These appointments must be made with the least possible delay, and natives in the pay of the H. C. P. shall in no case be appointed. Any compensation awarded shall be paid to the person concerned within six months at most from the date of the award. The decision shall be communicated to the Central International Office. CHAPTER VI.—General Provisions ARTICLE 24 The H. C. P. who exercise authority over territories within the prohibited areas and zones specified in Article 9, agree to take, so far as each may be concerned, the measures required for the enforcement of the present Convention, and in particular for the prosecution and repression of offences against the provisions contained therein and to appoint the necessary territorial and consular officers or special representatives competent for this purpose.

They shall communicate these measures to the Central International Body and shall inform them of the competent authorities referred to in the preceding Article. ARTICLE 25

of Nations or of the Treaties of Peace signed in 1919 and 1920 at Versailles, Neuilly, St. Germain and Trianon or the Treaty limiting naval armaments signed at Washington on February 6th, 1922, and the provisions of Agreements registered with the League of Nations and published by the League up to the date of the coming into force of the present Convention, so far as the Powers which are signatories of or benefit by the said Treaties or Agreements are concerned. ARTICLE 28 The Council of the League of Nations shall cause to be published an annual report on the operation of the present Convention. This report shall be presented to the Assembly of the League of Nations. ARTICLE 29 The present Convention of which the French and English texts shall both be authentic, is subject to ratification. It shall bear today’s date and shall be open for signature by the Powers until . . . . . . (date). Each Power shall address its ratification to the French Government, which shall at once notify the deposit of ratification to each of the other signatory Powers. The instruments of ratification shall then remain deposited in the archives of the French Government. ARTICLE 30 The H. C. P. will use their best endeavours to secure the accession to the present Convention of the other States, whether Members of the League or not. On and after . . . . . . (date) the present Convention may be acceded to by any Power. Accession shall be effected by an instrument communicated to the French Government, which shall at once notify such deposit to all Powers which are signatories of or accede to the Convention.

The instruments of accession shall remain deposited in the archives of the French Government. ARTICLE 31 Disputes between the parties relating to the interpretation or application of this Convention shall, if they cannot be settled by direct negotiation, be referred for decision to the Permanent Court of International Justice. In case either or both of the Parties to such a dispute should not be parties to the protocol of signature of the Permanent Court of International Justice, the dispute shall be referred, at the choice of the Parties, either to the Permanent Court of International Justice or to a court of arbitration.

ARTICLE 32 The present Convention will not come into force until it has been ratified by 12 Powers, among whom shall be the following: Belgium, the United States of America, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan and Russia. The date of its coming into force shall be the . . . . . day after the receipt by the French Government of the 12th ratification. Thereafter, the present Convention will take effect in the case of each Party . . . . days after the receipt of its ratification or accession. ARTICLE 33 The present Convention may be denounced by any Party thereto after the expiration of ten years from the date when it came into force in respect of that Party. Denunciation shall be effected by notification in writing addressed to the French Government which shall forthwith transmit copies of such notification to the other Parties, informing them of the date on which it was received. A denunciation shall take effect two years after the date on which the notification thereof was received by the French Government, and shall operate only in respect of the notifying State.

ARTICLE 34 The H. C. P. agree that, at the conclusion of a period of 5 years, the present Convention shall, in the light of the experience then gained, be subject to revision upon the request of a third of the said H. C. P. [Annex] LICENCE TO EXPORT ARMS, MUNITIONS AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR (Name and Address of Exporter) is hereby authorised to export the following Arms and Munitions of War. (Here will follow a full description of the Arms and Munitions, their number, weight and other necessary data, including the heading under which the exported goods will appear in the export statistics of the exporting country). To (Name of Importing Government) The above Arms and Munitions of War will be sent by (Here state whether by sea, rail or air), by the proposed following route or routes. (Here give Port or Station of Embarkation and Disembarkation, Route and Destination, including last Port or Station of consignment).

(Name and address of Purchasing Agent of the Importing Government). (Signature of Proper Authority of Government of Exporting country).

Commission in preparing the draft convention or conventions.’ Following upon an invitation extended by the Acting President of the Council your Government was good enough to delegate its representative in Berne to attend the meeting of the Temporary Mixed Commission in order to receive information with regard to the proposals made respecting this draft convention. The Temporary Mixed Commission in its report expressed their appreciation of the valuable assistance afforded to them by Mr. Grew and later by Mr. Gibson in the carrying out of the task entrusted to it by the Assembly and the Council. Special stress is laid in this report on the study given by the commission to the views of the Government of the United States with reference to the Convention of St. Germain and to the means by which, in the draft prepared by it, such views might be so far as possible met. The draft convention prepared by the Temporary Mixed Commission together with the report at present under consideration by the Council will in due time be discussed at the Assembly with a view to considering whether the draft convention affords a sufficient basis to convoke an international conference for the purpose of adopting such a convention as has been contemplated. In view of the fact that the position of the United States in this matter has been considered as an important factor by the Assembly, the Council and its expert commissions, the members of the Council feel that the fullest opportunity should be afforded to your Government to follow every step in the development of this question and therefore that it would be of the greatest importance for the success of the work that a representative of the Government of the United States should be present during the meetings of the third committee of the coming Assembly which is to discuss the matter, and that his presence would be very highly appreciated by the third committee. To this end, therefore, I am directed by the acting President of the Council to state that the members of the Council are in agreement

that the presence of a representative of the United States Government at the time of the meetings of the third committee of the Assembly would be of great value, and to extend to the Government of the United States, an invitation in this sense. I have the honor to enclose herewith for your information two copies of the report of the Temporary Mixed Commission to which reference is made above.” My reply to Drummond dated today is as follows: “I beg leave to acknowledge the receipt of your note of August 18th and to inform you that I did not fail to transmit immediately to the Secretary of State the communication from the Council of the League of Nations inviting my Government to have a representative present at the meetings of the third committee of the forthcoming Assembly which is to discuss the question of the control of the traffic in arms. I am now in receipt of a reply from the Secretary of State48 desiring me to express, on behalf of my Government, its cordial appreciation of the courtesy shown by the Council in extending this invitation. The Government of the United States has been happy to be represented at the meetings of the Temporary Mixed Commission and of its sub-committee. Its views have been fully explained on those occasions, and it is felt that they could not be usefully amplified by having a representative present at the meeting of the third committee. It is observed from the invitation that the third committee will discuss this matter with a view to considering whether the draft convention affords a sufficient basis to convoke an international conference for the purpose of adopting such a convention as has been contemplated.

The Government of the United States, as is well known, is in cordial sympathy with efforts of supervisory power [suitably?] to restrict traffic in arms and ammunition of war, and it will be glad to cooperate in the formulation of any plan which would warrant the belief that necessary legislation could be obtained to give it effect. To this end the United States would be disposed to give favorable consideration to an invitation to participate in an appropriate international conference of powers for the purpose of negotiating and concluding such a convention.” GIBSON 48 Not printed.

The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) GENEVA, October 9, 1924. MY DEAR GIBSON: I am enclosing, herewith, an official letter to the Government of the United States, with reference to the proposed International Conference for the purpose of concluding a convention on the control of the international trade in arms and munitions. The despatch of this letter is, of course, in execution of the general instructions of the Council, and you will, I am sure, understand that the Council did not overlook the fact that your Government has already, through your letter to me of August 29th, declared that it would be disposed to give favorable consideration to an invitation to participate in an appropriate international conference for this purpose. As you will see, the suggestion now made is that the Conference should be held in April or May, 1925, and I hope to hear from you, in due course, that the proposed date is acceptable to Washington. Believe me [etc.] ERIC DRUMMOND

[Subenclosure] The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the Secretary of State GENEVA [, October 7, 1924]. SIR: At its meeting held on September 30th, the Council adopted the following Resolution:— “On the proposal of the Assembly the Council decides to authorise the Secretary-General to submit to the Governments of

the States Members and non-Members of the League of Nations the draft Convention relating to the Control of the International Trade in Arms, Munitions and Implements of War drawn up by the Temporary Mixed Commission, and to request these Governments to inform him, before the Council meets in December, whether they are prepared to take part in a Conference to be convened in April or May, 1925, for the purpose of discussing the draft Convention. “The Secretary-General will communicate to the various Governments the report of the Temporary Mixed Commission, the minutes of that Commission and the Minutes of the Permanent Advisory Commission relating to the discussion of Article 9, together with the minutes of the present meeting of the Council, in order that the representatives of the Governments on the International Conference may have the requisite information to enable them to come to a decision on the problems raised on this question during the present meeting.” In execution of this decision I have the honour to enclose herewith the draft Convention on the control of the International Trade in Arms, Munitions and Implements of War which was drawn up by the Temporary Mixed

The report of the Temporary Mixed Commission contains that part of the Minutes of the Commission which relates to Article 9 (Document A.16.1924.IX. Annex V). Further information relating to the preparations for the Conference will be forwarded to you as soon as possible. I have [etc.] ERIC DRUMMOND 49 Not printed.

In this connection it should be noted that of the H. C. P. specifically mentioned in Article 32, the United States is the only nation that does not maintain government arsenals for the supply of its own war time needs, and in consequence the provisions of the convention as regards trade may place the United States in an extremely disadvantageous position in so far as the acquisition of items included in Category I are concerned, at a time when such procurement through normal trade channels may be vitally necessary for national defense, or for the preservation of our national sovereignty. While the United States maintains six so-called manufacturing arsenals, these plants are in reality little more than experimental laboratories, and in consequence the war time needs of our government must be supplied by private manufacture. The present state of our private manufacture is such that at the beginning of an emergency a portion of the raw materials and component parts of our munitions needs must be obtained from abroad through normal trade channels, in order to provide for the necessary expansion of our private munitions industry. It should further be noted that our present small private munitions plants are partially dependent for their peace time existence on foreign trade, namely, on exports to other nations. A limitation of these exports would inevitably result in the restriction of this industry in the United States and consequently in an alarming situation as regards the procurement of munitions in the event of a national emergency.

government owned manufacturing arsenals. If we should be solely dependent upon newly constructed munitions plants in event of national emergency, it would require from twelve to twenty-four months before the rate of production would approximate our war time requirements. The other great powers mentioned in Article 32 are in a totally different situation. They maintain comparatively large military forces, they possess large war reserves of materiel, and have large government owned or subsidized munitions plants. In event of an emergency, involving hostile action against this country, their situation in this regard alone is so infinitely superior to ours that we could not hope for even successful defensive operations, without the aid of our now existing private munitions industry.

Any acquiescence by the United States at this time in an international agreement to limit in any manner whatsoever the private or other manufacture of munitions, would in effect perpetuate the present disproportion existing between the munitions producing industry here and abroad, and this is a condition to which the War Department cannot in conscience subscribe. Any international agreement which would produce a universal proportional reduction or limitation, if based on present conditions, would quite naturally affect the United States more adversely than any other great power, since the United States, as stated above, has already so drastically cut down its defensive means. To reduce these or to limit them still further, by direct or by indirect action, would produce a situation in which I should be very loath to assume any responsibility for the national safety. When the other great powers mentioned in Article 32 of the draft convention have given proof of their sincerity of purpose by reducing their armed forces, reserves of munitions, and munitions production capacity to the approximate level of that of the United States, the War Department would enthusiastically support any effort to solve on a universal and permanent basis, the problem of the limitation of the manufacture, storage, and traffic in arms, munitions, and implements of war. Until such action on the part of the other great powers mentioned is assured, it appears advisable, from the sole viewpoint of national defense, for the United States

to reserve to itself full freedom of action as regards the control of the traffic in arms. In view of the terms of the draft convention of July 16, 1924, I am constrained to reiterate the views expressed in my letter of September 26, 1923,54 on the matter of private manufacture of arms and munitions and the international control of the arms traffic. Sincerely yours, JOHN W. WEEKS 53 Not printed.

Unfavorable views of the United States upon a draft treaty of mutual assistance submitted by the League of Nations [33] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) Washington, June 16, 1924.

and competitive outlays in providing facilities and munitions of war. The desire and purpose of this Government were fully manifested when the great military and naval Powers were invited by the President of the United States to send representatives to meet in conference at Washington in 1921, for the purpose of considering the limitation of armament. While that conference resulted in the conclusion of an important naval Treaty between the United States of America, the British Empire, France, Italy and Japan for the limitation of capital fighting ships, it was found to be impossible to obtain an agreement for the limitation of the tonnage of auxiliary naval craft or to make any progress in the direction of limitation of land forces. The Government of the United States, having reduced its own armament, continues to cherish the hope that the desired result in the case of other Powers may be achieved, and it notes with keen and sympathetic interest every endeavor to that end. In this spirit the draft Treaty submitted has been carefully considered. It appears from the preamble of the Treaty that it has been formulated with the desire “of establishing the general lines of a scheme of mutual assistance with a view to facilitate the application of Articles 10 and 16 of the Covenant of the League of Nations, and of a reduction or limitation of national armaments in accordance with Article 8 of the Covenant ‘to the lowest point consistent with national safety and the enforcement by common action of international obligations.’” The following provisions of the draft Treaty may be especially noted: ARTICLE 2 “The High Contracting Parties, jointly and severally, undertake to furnish assistance, in accordance with the provisions of the Present Treaty, to any one of their number should the latter be the object of a war of aggression, provided that it has conformed to the provisions of the present Treaty regarding the reduction or limitation of armaments. ARTICLE 3

In the event of one of the High Contracting Parties being of opinion that the armaments of any other High Contracting Party are in excess of the limits fixed for the latter High Contracting Party under the provisions of the present Treaty, or in the event of it having cause to apprehend an outbreak of hostilities, either on account of the aggressive policy or preparations of any State party or not to the present Treaty, it may inform the Secretary-General of the League of Nations that it is threatened with aggression, and the Secretary-General shall forthwith summon the Council. The Council, if it is of opinion that there is reasonable ground for thinking that a menace of aggression has arisen, may take all necessary measures to remove such menace, and in particular, if the Council thinks right, those indicated in sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the second paragraph of Article 5 of the present Treaty. The High Contracting Parties which have been denounced and those which have stated themselves to be the object of a threat of aggression shall be considered as especially interested and shall therefore be invited to send representatives to the Council in

The High Contracting Parties engaged in hostilities shall be regarded as especially interested, and shall therefore be invited to send representatives to the Council (within the terms of Articles 4, 13 and 17 of the Covenant), the vote of their representative not being reckoned when calculating unanimity; the same shall apply to States signatory to any partial agreements involved on behalf of either of the two belligerents, unless the remaining Members of the Council shall decide otherwise. ARTICLE 5 The High Contracting Parties undertake to furnish one another mutually with assistance in the case referred to in Article 2 of the Treaty in the form determined by the Council of the League of Nations as the most effective, and to take all appropriate measures without delay in the order of urgency demanded by the circumstances. In particular, the Council may: (a) decide to apply immediately to the aggressor State the economic sanctions contemplated by Article 16 of the Covenant, the Members of the League not signatory to the present Treaty not being, however, bound by this decision, except in the case where the State attacked is entitled to avail itself of the Articles of the Covenant; (b) invoke by name the High Contracting Parties whose assistance it requires. No High Contracting Party situated in a continent other than that in which operations will take place shall, in principle, be required to co-operate in military, naval or air operations; (c) determine the forces which each State furnishing assistance shall place at its disposal; (d) prescribe all necessary measures for securing priority for the communications and transport

connected with the operations; (e) prepare a plan for financial co-operation among the High Contracting Parties with a view to providing for the State attacked and for the States furnishing assistance the funds which they require for the operations; (f) appoint the Higher Command and establish the object and nature of his duty. The representatives of States recognised as aggressors under the provisions of Article 4 of the Treaty shall not take part in the deliberations of the Council specified in this Article. The High Contracting Parties who are required by the Council to furnish assistance, in accordance with sub-paragraph (b), shall, on the other hand, be considered as especially interested, and, as such, shall be invited to send representatives, unless they are already represented, to the deliberations specified in sub-paras (c), (d), (e) Without attempting an analysis of these provisions, or of other provisions of the draft Treaty, it is quite apparent that its fundamental principle is to provide guarantees of mutual assistance and to establish the competency of the Council of the League of Nations with respect to the decisions contemplated, and, in view of the constitutional organization of this Government and of the fact that the United States is not a member of the League of Nations, this Government would find it impossible to give its adherence. The Government of the United States has not failed to note that under Article 17 of the draft Treaty “Any State may, with the consent of the Council of the League, notify its conditional or partial adherence to the provisions of this Treaty, provided always that such State has reduced or is prepared to reduce its armaments in conformity with the provisions of this Treaty”, but it would not serve a useful purpose to consider the question of a conditional or partial adherence on the part of the Government of the

United States when the conditions imposed would of necessity be of such a character as to deprive adherence of any substantial effect. WASHINGTON, June 16, 1924. 63 Not printed. 64 For text of signed treaty, see Monthly Summary of the League of Nations,

Acceptance by the United States of certificates of identity issued by the League of Nations to Russian and Armenian refugees in lieu of passports [34] The Russian Financial Attaché (Ughet) to the Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State (Poole)

Hoping that you will appreciate the reasons for my letter and will find it possible to fulfill my request, I remain [etc.] S. UGHET

65 Not printed.

D.C. Poort

apply, with only minor modifications, to the proposed certificate for Armenian refugees. In response to a communication enquiring whether, in the event of an intergovernmental conference being convened to consider the present question, it would be willing to send a representative, the Turkish Government has stated that there is no reason for it to take part in any arrangements concerning Armenian refugees as there are no such refugees from other countries in Turkey. Dr. Nansen has prepared, and at his request I forward to you for consideration by your Government, a plan for the introduction, by agreement between interested governments, of an identity certificate for Armenian refugees.67 The plan contains similar rules to those laid down in the Geneva Arrangement relating to Russian refugees and the certificate is substantially identical with the certificate now employed for the latter. The only modification made is the insertion on the certificate of a space authorising its use for the purpose of returning to the country issuing it and the inclusion in the plan of a recommendation that such authorisation should be given if possible. This modification, which in no way binds the hands of any government which may participate in the plan, is made because Dr. Nansen’s experience has convinced him of the great importance of facilitating, as far as possible, free movement by refugees. It has been found that if the refugee certificate authorises return to the issuing country, the economic position of the holder is improved by the facilities which he thus obtains for visiting temporarily other countries, which may offer him opportunities for employment or business, and his ultimate emigration to another country is in fact encouraged. It is thought that it would be very advantageous if governments felt themselves able to agree in principle to grant the right of return when issuing the refugee certificate. Dr. Nansen has not, however, ventured to make the certificate available for return in all cases. The plan has been framed in a form which makes it possible for it to be brought into operation, without the convening of a special conference,

through notification to me of the desire of individual governments to accede to it. If this method of solving the problem is found feasible, a saving of time and expense would be effected; and, in view of the practical identity of the present proposal with the Arrangement for Russian refugees made at Geneva, which was drawn up in careful consultation by a Conference of government representatives, and which has already secured the adhesion of so many States, it is thought possible that the governments interested will not consider a discussion necessary. Should, however, the interested governments consider that the present matter requires discussion, no difficulty is anticipated in convening a meeting of representatives for this purpose. Dr. Nansen desires me to emphasise that the object in view is solely to secure the provision to Armenian refugees of an identity certificate, and not in any way to prejudice any question as to their national status. The Arrangement of Geneva relating to Russian refugees and the certificate issuable under that Arrangement was circulated in Document C. L. 79. 1922. I have the honour to ask whether your Government would consider the present communication and the enclosed plan by Dr. Nansen and communicate to me, for Dr. Nansen’s information, at an early date its decision as to whether it is disposed to adopt the plan submitted, without the convening of a special meeting or whether it thinks it necessary that such a meeting should be held. I have [etc.] ERIC DRUMMOND 66 Not printed. 67 Plan not printed.

The American Government is not in a position to issue travel documents to aliens. It does not require certificates of identity of aliens sojourning within its territory or of those desiring to depart therefrom. For entry into the United States alien immigrants are required to present an immigration visa issued by the appropriate American Consul. The American Consuls will accept from aliens unable to present passports in connection with their applications for immigration visas appropriate documents of identity in lieu of passports. The Nansen certificates issued to Russian refugees have been considered to fall within the category of documents in lieu of passports. Similarly, non immigrant aliens are granted passport visas upon personal affidavits or other documents in lieu of passports when they are unable to present passports. Aliens resident in the United States who desire to depart temporarily, may obtain from the Commissioner General of Immigration, Washington, D. C, permits to return valid for six months, capable of further extension in the discretion of the Commissioner General of Immigration. WASHINGTON, August 5, 1924.

The Secretary-General of the League of Nations has the honour to acknowledge with thanks the communication of the Acting Secretary of State of the United States of America, dated August 5th, 1924, relative to the identity certificates for refugees prepared by Dr. Nansen, High Commissioner for Refugees. Dr. Nansen, to whom this communication has been transmitted, desires to record his high appreciation of the recognition by the Government of the United States of the Identity Certificate for Russian Refugees and ventures to assume that as the Identity Certificate for the Armenian Refugees is to all intents and purposes an analogous document, the Government of the United States of America will find it possible to afford recognition to that document also. GENEVA, September 12, 1924. 68 Not printed. 68 Not printed.

American participation in the International Conference for Control of the Traffic in Habit-Forming Drugs69

[43] The Secretary of State to the American Representative on the Preparatory Committee (Neville) Washington, February 21, 1924.

the amounts of morphine, heroin, or cocaine and their respective salts to be manufactured; of the limitation of the amounts of raw opium and the coca leaf to be imported for that purpose and for other medicinal and scientific purposes; and of the limitation of the production of raw opium and the coca leaf for export to the amount required for such medicinal and scientific purposes: requests the Council, as a means of giving effect to the principles submitted by the representatives of the United States of America,74 and to the policy which the League, on the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, has adopted, to invite the governments concerned to send representatives with plenipotentiary powers to a conference for this purpose, to be held, if possible, immediately after the conference mentioned in Resolution 5. The Assembly also suggests, for the consideration of the Council, the advisability of enlarging this conference so as to include within its scope all countries which are members of the League or parties to the Convention of 1912, with a view to securing their adhesion to the principles that may be embodied in any agreement reached. The Council, at its meeting on September 29th, considered these two resolutions, and adopted the following resolution, which decides the place where the Conference is to be held and fixes the provisional date: The Council of the League of Nations, while reserving until its December session the final fixing of the conferences provided for by the Assembly in connection with the traffic in opium and other dangerous drugs, decides, provisionally, that the first conference of countries having possessions where the smoking of opium is still continued should be convoked at Geneva in July 1924, the second conference to follow immediately afterwards. The Secretary General has the honor to request the Government of the Netherlands to bring this information to the notice of the Governments of the United States of America, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, and Mexico, with a view to enabling them to make such preliminary arrangements as they may deem advisable to obtain the data which they may wish to place at the disposal of the conference.

The question as to whether the conference should be enlarged so as to include within its scope all countries which are members of the League or parties to the Convention of 1912 will be considered at the coming meeting of the Council in December next. I have [etc.] ERIC DRUMMOND

League or Parties to the Convention of 1912 would result in a correspondingly wider acceptance of the principles embodied in any agreement reached. It therefore instructs the Secretary- General to invite to this Conference all Members of the League and Parties to the Convention of 1912” I accordingly have the honour, on behalf of the Council, to invite your Government to be represented at the Second Conference, which will take place on the 3rd Monday in November 1924, by a delegate, or delegates, having plenipotentiary powers.

I have the honour further, to inform you that at its meeting on December 13th, the Council decided that a preparatory Committee should be set up to prepare a draft programme for the Conference in question. This Committee is to be nominated by the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium, and will consist of six members, including one representative of the United States and the two European Assessors on the Advisory Committee. The Council further resolved as follows:— “The Council feeling that the success of the Conference depends on the cooperation of the Governments, instructs the Secretary- General to invite the Governments to make proposals for the carrying out of Assembly Resolution VI; such proposals to be considered by the preparatory Committee.” This Resolution was adopted by the Council in the earnest hope that the Governments, by their cooperation, would make it possible to bring about the suppression of the abuse of Opium and other dangerous drugs. I accordingly have the honour, on behalf of the Council, to invite the Government of the United States of America to forward to the Secretariat any relevant proposals it may be disposed to make for the consideration of the preparatory Committee, which is being entrusted with the preliminary work of the Conference.

I have [etc.] ERIC DRUMMOND

2 Not printed.

trans-shipment and bonding practices of the nations concerned. In view of the questions of hygiene which may arise, the Department is requesting the Public Health Service to authorize the Surgeon in charge at Paris to proceed to Geneva in case of necessity. CHARLES E. HUGHES [Enclosure] Suggestions of the United States To Be Presented to the Preparatory Committee The Resolution calling the Narcotics Conference reads as follows: “The Assembly, having noted with satisfaction that in accordance with the hope expressed in the fourth resolution adopted by the Assembly in 1922, the Advisory Committee has reported that the information now available makes it possible for the Governments concerned to examine with a view to the conclusion of an agreement, the question of the limitation of the amounts of morphine, heroin or cocaine and their respective salts to be manufactured; of the limitation of the amounts of raw opium and the coca leaf to be imported for that purpose and for other medicinal and scientific purposes, and of the limitation of the production of raw opium and the coca leaf for export to the amount required for such medicinal and scientific purposes. “Requests the Council, as a means of giving effect to the principles submitted by the representatives of the United States of America and the policy which the League, on the recommendation of the Advisory Committee has adopted, to invite the Governments concerned to send representatives with plenipotentiary powers to a Conference for this purpose, to be held, if possible, immediately after the Conference mentioned. “The Assembly also suggests for the consideration of the Council, the advisability of enlarging this Conference so as to include

within its scope all countries which are Members of the League, or Parties to the Convention of 1912, with a view to securing their adhesion to the principles that may be embodied in any agreement arrived at.” It is assumed that all suggestions for the practical application thereof should be in accordance with its terms. The Government of the United States believes that the following suggestions should be considered, but does not commit itself thereby to a definite plan, reserving the right to add to, alter or propose other suggestions in the light of proposals from other Powers.

A. PRODUCTION 1. The cultivation of the opium poppy and the coca leaf plant to be reduced to the amount required for the production of opium and coca leaves sufficient for medicinal and scientific requirements only, as determined by proper authority. As a preliminary measure no increase of poppy or coca leaf plant to be permitted, and those nations in whose territory these articles are not produced to prevent their introduction. 2. No encouragement to be given to poppy or coca leaf cultivators by the State. 3. The acceptance of the principle that no state should rely upon the revenue from the control of opium and the coca leaf for purposes of operating the Government, beyond the expenses incident to controlling the narcotics traffic. 4. Consideration of difficulties arising out of treaty obligations which prevent certain states from raising increased revenues from Customs taxes as a substitute for the tax on opium or coca leaf and their derivatives.

opium and coca leaf with suitable exceptions for small quantities in medicines. 2. Countries with well developed chemical and pharmaceutical facilities to prohibit the importation of narcotic drugs, derivatives of opium and the coca leaf, permitting only raw opium and the coca leaves to be imported, except small quantities for scientific purposes. 3. The export of manufactured drugs preparations or derivatives of opium or the coca leaf to be permitted only to nations which are party to The Hague Opium Convention and which have adequate systems of domestic control, except that medicines in small quantities may be exported. D. ADMINISTRATION 1. A consideration of the administrative features of the Convention with a view to prescribing definite powers for a permanent central organization. 2. Annual Reports to be submitted by all Powers party to the Convention. The reports should show the amount of opium and coca leaves produced, imported, exported or used for local consumption; the amounts of derivatives or preparations made therefrom, imported, exported or used for local consumption, and should cover the same periods of time. 3. Illegal possession of opium coca leaf or their preparations or derivatives to be a penal offense. E. GENERAL PROVISIONS 1. The foregoing provisions to be applied to all drugs which might, after generally recognized scientific investigations give rise to similar abuses and result in the same injurious effects. MANAGEMENT OF CONFERENCE

1. Day for hearing petitions and suggestions. 2. Order of business. 3. Place of Conference. 78 Edwin L. Neville, consular officer, representative on Advisory Board to U. S. Federal Narcotics Control Board, 1922.

H UGHES

sympathetically this fundamental point, with a view to accepting the principle.”82 HUGHES 82 An undated telegram from the High Commissioner, received Oct. 24, 8:37 a.m., informed the Department that the Turkish Under Secretary of State for Agriculture had been appointed delegate to the Conference (file

sympathetically this fundamental point, with a view to accepting the principle.” HUGHES 83 The telegram is printed in full in vol. II, p. 586.

be involved and the former are therefore prepared to consider a compromise on the following lines. While reserving their right to scrutinise permits in special cases, His Majesty’s Government might be disposed to agree to accept such permits as a matter of usual routine up to a yearly maximum to be decided upon by mutual agreement, if necessary with the approval of the League of Nations. This procedure would be an extension of the “Direct Sales Agreements” which the Government of India already make with other countries and which His Majesty’s Government have endeavoured to negotiate with Japan, their efforts in this direction having failed owing to the refusal of the Japanese Government to furnish information regarding the opium and morphia industry in Formosa, In bringing this suggestion to the notice of the Japanese Government, His Majesty’s representative at Tokio has been instructed to emphasize that, if the plan in question should be , His Majesty’s Government would require full information such matters. Government feel that the present opium conference at Geneva , however, be held up for such negotiations, and the attention of the Japanese Government is being drawn to the deplorable impression that will be created if the latter wreck the said conference on such a question, when their record in regard to the control of drugs remains open to certain criticisms. In communicating to you the substance of the instructions which have been despatched to His Majesty’s representative at Tokio, I am directed to express the hope that the United States Government will be disposed to support both at Tokio and at Geneva the attitude of His Majesty’s Government in regard to this question, as Mr. Secretary Chamberlain feels that American public opinion could justly criticise His Majesty’s Government were they to contract out of their responsibilities in the manner desired by the Imperial Japanese Government. I have [etc.] (For the Ambassador) H. G. CHILTON

In reply it affords me pleasure to inform Your Excellency that the pertinent portion of your note has been telegraphed to the Chairman of the American Delegation at Geneva and to the American Ambassador at Tokyo with the information that since the United States produces no raw opium or coca leaves, the question of exportation for which import certificates may have been issued by other governments does not directly concern this country except as it might involve reexportation in American territory. It has also been pointed out by the Department that under the construction of existing law hitherto adopted and embodied in regulations the reexportation of crude opium from the United States has not been permitted by the Federal Narcotics Control Board. It was further stated that since this Government has always taken a leading part in the international control of narcotics, it is greatly concerned with the success of the Geneva Conference and would view with deep regret any controversy which might arise there threatening the success of the Conference and nullifying the efforts of this and other participating governments towards negotiating an agreement which effectively regulate the traffic in narcotic drugs. The hope pressed that the Japanese and British Governments would the question which now threatens to impair the success of the ence and it was suggested that a solution might be found through negotiation between the two governments rather than through an attempt to settle the controversy in the Conference itself. The American Ambassador at Tokyo was instructed to take early occasion to

intimate the viewpoint set forth above to the Japanese Foreign Minister and to advise the British Ambassador at Tokyo of his action. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

ARTICLE 1 The Contracting Powers Parties shall enact effective laws or regulations for the control of the production and distribution of raw opium unless laws or regulations on the subject are already in existence and coca leaves so that there will be no surplus available for purposes not strictly medical or scientific* The foregoing provision shall not operate to prevent the production for exportation, or exportation, of raw opium for the purpose of making prepared opium into those territories where the use of prepared opium is still temporarily permitted under Chapter II of this Convention, so long as such exportation is in conformity with the provisions of this Convention.

ARTICLE 2 being had to the differences in their commercial condi- Contracting Powers Parties shall limit the number of towns, or other localities through which the export or import of raw and coca leaves shall be permitted. Article 2–A The Contracting Parties shall require that a separate import license must be obtained for each importation of raw opium or coca leaves. The license may allow the importation of the amount for which the license is given in one or more consignments within a period to be specified in the license. ARTICLE 3 The Contracting Powers shall take measures: (a) To prevent the export of raw opium to countries which shall have prohibited its entry, and (b) To control the export of raw opium to countries which restrict its import, unless regulations on the subject are already in existence. The Contracting Parties shall require that a separate export license must be obtained for each exportation of raw opium or coca leaves. The Contracting Party before issuing such license shall require an import certificate issued by the authorities having jurisdiction over the territory into which the importation is made and certifying that the importation is approved, to be presented by the person applying for the license.

The license may allow the exportation of the amounts for which the license is given in one or more consignments within a period to be specified in the license. Unless a copy of the export license accompanies the consignment, the authorities issuing the export license shall send a copy to the authorities

having jurisdiction over the territory into which the importation is made. The authorities having jurisdiction over the territory into which the importation is made, when the importation has been effected, shall return the export license with an endorsement to that effect to the Contracting Party issuing such export license. In the case of an application to export a consignment to any place: for the purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse in that the production of a special certificate from the authorities jurisdiction over that place, certifying that they have introduction of the consignment for the said purpose, cepted by the Contracting Party permitting the export in import certificate provided for above. ARTICLE 4 The Contracting Powers Parties shall make regulations requiring that every package containing raw opium or coca leaves intended for export shall be marked in such a way as to indicate its contents, provided that the consignment exceeds 5 kilograms. ARTICLE 5 The Contracting Powers shall not allow the import and export of raw opium except by duly authorized persons. CHAPTER II—PREPARED OPIUM Definition. By “prepared opium” is understood: The product of raw opium, obtained, by a series of special operations, especially by dissolving, boiling, roasting, and fermentation, designed to transform it into an extract suitable for consumption. Prepared opium includes dross and all other residues remaining when opium has been smoked. ARTICLE 6

The Contracting Powers Parties shall take measures for the gradual and effective suppression of the manufacture of, internal trade in, and the use of, prepared opium.

ARTICLE 7 The Contracting Powers Parties shall prohibit the import and export of prepared opium; these Powers, however, which not ready to prohibit immediately the export of prepared opium shall prohibit it as soon as possible. ARTICLE 8 The Each Contracting Powers Party which are not as yet ready to prohibit immediately the export of prepared opium: (a) Shall restrict the number of towns, ports, or other localities through which prepared opium may fee exported; (b) Shall prohibit the export of prepared opium to countries which now forbid, or which may hereafter forbid, the import thereof; (c) Shall, in the meanwhile, prohibit the consignment of prepared opium to a country which desires to restrict its entrance, unless the exporter complies with the regulations of the importing country; (d) Shall take measures to ensure that every package exported, containing prepared opium bears a special mark indicating the nature of its contents; (e) Shall not permit the export of prepared opium except by specially authorized persons. in whose territory the use of prepared opium is now temporarily permitted agrees to reduce its imports of raw opium for the purpose of making prepared opium by 10 percent of its present importation each year for a

period of 10 years beginning with the date of ratification of this Convention by it, and further agrees not to supplement the reduction by domestically produced opium; and further agrees that at the end of such period of 10 years it will prohibit the importation of raw opium for the purpose of making prepared opium. By “present importation” is understood the importation during the 12 months immediately preceding the date the Contracting Party ratifies this Convention* CHAPTER III—MEDICINAL OPIUM, MORPHINE, COCAINE, ETC. Definitions.—By “medicinal opium” is understood: Raw opium which has been heated to 60° Centigrade and contains not less than 10 per cent, of morphine, whether or not it be powdered or granulated or mixed with indifferent materials.

By “morphine” is understood:

The Contracting Powers Parties shall enact pharmacy effective laws or regulations to limit exclusively to medical and legitimate scientific purposes the manufacture, sale, and use of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts and derivatives , unless laws or regulations on the subject are already in existence. They shall cooperate with one another to prevent the use of these drugs for any other purpose. Article 9–A The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws or regulations prohibiting the manufacture and distribution of heroin* ARTICLE 10 The Contracting Powers Parties shall use their best endeavours to control, or to cause to be controlled,90 all persons manufacturing, importing, selling, distributing, and or exporting morphine, cocaine, and or their respective salts or derivatives, as well as the buildings in which these persons carry on such industry or trade. With this object, the Contracting Parties shall use their best endeavours to adopt, or cause to be adopted, the following measures, unless regulations on the subject are already in existence: (a) To Confine the manufacture of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts and derivatives to those establishments and premises alone which have been licensed for the purpose, or to obtain information respecting the establishments and premises in which these drugs are manufactured and to keep a register of them; (b) To Require that all persons engaged in the manufacture, import, sale, distribution, or export of morphine, cocaine, and or their respective salts or derivatives shall be furnished with obtain a license or permit to engage in these operations, or shall make to the competent authorities an official declaration that they are so engaged;

(c) To Require that such persons shall enter in their books the quantities manufactured, imports, sales, and all other distribution, and exports of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts and derivatives. This rule shall not necessarily apply to medical prescriptions and to sales by duly authorized chemists. ARTICLE 11 The Contracting Powers Parties shall take measures to prohibit, as regards their internal trade, the delivery of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts and derivatives to any unauthorized persons, unless regulations on the subject are already in existence. ARTICLE 12 Due regard being had to the differences in their conditions, the Contracting Powers shall use their best endeavours to restrict to authorized persons the import of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts. The Contracting Parties shall require that a separate import license must be obtained for each importation of morphine, cocaine, or their respective salts or derivatives. The license may allow the importation of the amount for which the license is given in one or more consignments within a period to be specified in the license. ARTICLE 13 The Contracting Powers shall use their best endeavours to adopt, or cause to be adopted, measures to ensure that morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts shall not be exported from their countries, possessions, colonics, and leased territory to the countries, possessions, colonies, and leased territories of the other Contracting Powers except when consigned to persons furnished with the licenses or permits provided for by the laws or regulations of the importing country. With this object each government may communicate from time to time to the governments of the exporting countries lists of the persons to whom licenses or permits for the imports of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts have been granted.

The Contracting Parties shall require that a separate export license must be obtained for each exportation of morphine, cocaine, or their respective salts or derivatives. The Contracting Party before issuing such license shall require an import certificate issued by the authorities hawing jurisdiction over the territory into which the importation is made and certifying that the importation is approved, to be presented by the person applying for the license. The license may allow the exportation of the amounts for which the license is given in one or more consignments within a period to be specified in the license. Unless a copy of the export license accompanies the consignment, the authorities issuing the export license shall send a copy to the authorities having jurisdiction over the territory into which the importation is made. The authorities having jurisdiction over the territory into which the importation is made, when the importation has been effected, shall return the export license with an endorsement to that effect to the Contracting Party issuing such export license. In the case of an application to export a consignment to any place for the purpose of being placed in a bonded warehouse in that place, the production of a special certificate from the authorities having jurisdiction over that place, certifying that they have approved the introduction of the consignment for the said purpose, may be accepted by the Contracting Party permitting the export in place of the import certificate provided for above. ARTICLE 14 The Contracting Powers Parties shall apply the laws and regulations, respecting the manufacture, import, sale, distribution, delivery, or export of morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts and their derivatives; (a) To medicinal opium;

(b) To all preparations (officinal and non-officinal, including the so-called anti-opium remedies) containing more than 0.2 per cent. of morphine, or more than 0.1 per cent. of cocaine, morphine, cocaine, or their salts or derivatives; (c) To heroin, its salts and preparations containing more than 0.1 per cent of heroin; (d) To all new derivatives of morphine, of or cocaine, or of their respective salts, and to every other alkaloid of opium or coca leaves, and to any habit-forming drug which may be shown by scientific research, generally recognized, to be liable to similar abuse and productive of like ill-effects.

CHAPTER IV CHAPTER V ARTICLE 20 The Contracting Powers Parties shall examine the possibility of enacting enact laws or regulations making it a penal offense to be in illegal possession of raw opium, prepared opium, morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts, unless laws or regulations on the subject are already in existence. any of the substances to which this Convention applies. Article 20–A The Contracting Parties shall furnish annually to the Central Board hereinafter constituted, not later than April 1st, for the calendar year beginning January 1st following, in respect of raw opium; coca leaves; morphine, its salts, derivatives, and preparations containing morphine; and cocaine, its salts, derivatives, and preparations containing cocaine, estimates of: (1) Their import requirements for medical and scientific purposes, whether for domestic consumption, manufacture, or commerce; (2) Their total production and requirements: (a) For all purposes, (1) For domestic consumption for all purposes, (2) For domestic consumption for medical and scientific purposes, (3) For export for all purposes,

(4) For export for medical and scientific purposes. Article 20–B The Contracting Parties undertake to prohibit the importation into their territory of any of the substances mentioned in Article 20–A in excess of the quantities specified in the estimates furnished in pursuance of Article 20–A (1) or fixed by the Central Board in pursuance of Article 20–E. The foregoing provision shall not operate to prevent the importation of raw opium for the purpose of making prepared opium into those territories where the use of prepared opium is still temporarily permitted under Chapter II of this Convention, so long as such importation is in conformity with the provisions of this Convention.

Article 20–C A permanent Central Board shall be constituted consisting of one representative each from-------, --------, --------, --------, -------, --------, ------ The Board shall fix its headquarters, shall determine its procedure, and shall meet at least once annually beginning the first Monday in May. The decision of all questions coming before the Board shall be by a majority vote of those present, but two-thirds of the Board shall be necessary to Constitute a quorum. The Board may appoint an Executive Committee of not more than five persons who shall perform such of the Board’s duties as it may delegate to the Committee. The members of the Executive Committee need not be members of the Board. The expenses of the members of the Board shall be defrayed by the Parties they represent. The expenses of the Executive Committee and its clerical staff shall be divided among the Contracting Parties in proportion to their total imports and exports of raw opium and coca leaves.

Article 20–D The Contracting Parties, in addition to the estimates called for in Article 20–A, agree to send to the Central Board: (1) In respect of each of the substances mentioned in Article 20– A: (a) Within three months after the end of each quarter statistics of their imports, specifying their source, and of their exports and re-exports, specifying their destination, during that quarter; (b) If possible, within three months after the end of each half year the wholesale stocks, whether in Government or in private hands, at the end of that half year; (2) In respect of morphine and cocaine and their salts and derivatives, within three months after the end of each half year, the statistics of their manufacture during that half-year; (3) In respect of raw opium and coca leaves, within three months after the end of each year, the total quantity produced and consumed during that year. The Central Board shall communicate periodically to all the parties to this Convention the situation as regards the quantity and destination of all exports and re-exports of the substances mentioned in Article 20–A, calling to their particular attention the fact that, in the case of any territory, the imports have already reached the amounts to which such territory is entitled under this Convention. Article 20–E If any Contracting Party furnishes no estimate of its import requirements in pursuance of Article 20–A or furnishes an estimate which appears to the Central Board upon investigation undertaken on its own motion or on complaint of any of the Contracting Parties, to be greatly in excess of its

reasonable requirements, the Board shall immediately ascertain the amount of the reasonable requirements of that Contracting Party for the calendar year beginning January first following, after taking into account its population, climatic and hygienic conditions and all other factors which appear to the Board to be relevant as well as any other special circumstances which such Contracting Party may be at liberty to submit to the Board. The Board shall notify to all Contracting Parties its conclusion as to the amount so ascertained by it. The Board shall recommend that each Contracting Party other than that Contracting Party the extent of whose import requirements has been ascertained by the Board, shall prohibit the exportation from their respective territories to the territory of that Contracting Party, amounts of substances specified in Article 20–A which, taken in conjunction with other exports thereto, will exceed the amount ascertained as aforesaid by the Board to be the reasonable annual import requirements of such Party. Due consideration shall be given to the recommendation of the Board. Article 20–F Each Contracting Party shall make it a penal offense for any person within its jurisdiction to procure or assist the commission, in any place outside its jurisdiction, of any offense against the laws in force in such place for controlling or regulating the manufacture, sale, delivery, distribution, use, possession, export, or import of any of the substances covered by this Convention. Article 20–G Each Contracting Party shall forbid the conveyance in any vessel sailing under its flag of any consignment of the substances covered by this Convention, (1) Unless an export license has been issued in respect of such consignment in accordance with the provisions of this convention and the consignment is accompanied by an official copy of such license;

(2) To any destination other than the destination mentioned in the license. Article 20–H For the purpose of ensuring the full application and enforcement of the provisions of this Convention in Free Ports and Free Zones, the Contracting Parties undertake to apply in Free Ports and Free Zones situated within their territories the same laws and regulations, and to exercise the same supervision and control in respect of the substances covered by this Convention as in other parts of their territories. Article 20–I The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws and regulations to prohibit the transportation through their territory from a place outside thereof to another plaice outside thereof, of any of the substances covered by this Convention unless such Contracting Party is advised of the contents and the destination of the consignment. Article 20–J The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws and regulations to prohibit the transshipment within their territories of a consignment of any of the substances covered by this Convention unless such consignment is accompanied by an official copy of the export license issued by the authorities having jurisdiction over the territory from which exported or by an official copy of the import certificate issued by the authorities having jurisdiction over the territory to which destined. The Contracting Parties shall also enact effective laws and regulations to prohibit in the territory of transshipment the diversion of, or attempt to divert, a consignment of any of the substances covered by this Convention to any destination other than that named in the official copy of the export license or import certificate, unless an export license is first obtained from the authorities of the territory where the transshipment occurs. Article 20–K

The Contracting Parties shall enact effective laws and regulations to prohibit a consignment of any of the substances covered by this Convention which is landed in their territory and placed in a bonded warehouse from being withdrawn from such warehouse for export, unless an import certificate issued by the authorities having jurisdiction over the territory to which the consignment is destined, certifying that the importation is approved, is presented to the authorities having jurisdiction over the bonded warehouse. A special certificate shall be issued by the Contracting Parties in respect of each consignment so withdrawn and shall take the place of the export license for the purpose of the preceding provisions of this Convention. Article 20–L In the case of a geographical area the Government of which is not a party to this Convention the Contracting Parties undertake to allow the export to such geographical area of any of the substances covered by this Convention only in such amounts as may be fixed by the Central Board as being reasonably required for the medical and scientific needs of such area. The Central Board shall communicate periodically to all the Parties to this Convention the amount fixed in respect of each geographical area and the situation as regards the exports and re-exports thereto. ARTICLE 20–M The present Convention shall come into force three months after the date mentioned in the notification by the Government of the Netherlands, referred to in the last paragraph of the preceding Article. This Convention shall come into force between the Contracting Parties who have ratified it as soon as it has been ratified by four of the Contracting Parties. 89 Printed from International Control of the Traffic in Habit-Forming Narcotic Drugs, Fourth International Conference, Geneva, Switzerland, November, 1924.

Deletions from International Opium Convention of 1912 indicated by canceled type; amendments printed in italics. * See the report of the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs, Fifth Session, Appendix page. [Footnote in the original. Report not printed.] * See speech of the Right Rev. Charles H. Brent on “The opium problem in the Philippine Islands.” (Hearings of the Congress of the United States, p. 91, accompanying this document.) [Footnote in the original.] * (See Hearings of the Congress of the United States accompanying this document.) [Footnote in the original.] 90 No explanation is given for the deletion of these words which obscures the meaning of the paragraph. * The nations having representatives shall be selected by this Conference. [Footnote in the original.]

matter not specified on the agenda and the decision taken on this point will have a bearing on the second American proposal above referred to. If the American delegates bring forward their second proposal the course of the proceedings at the Conference will probably be as follows: The Netherlands Delegation will refuse to take part in the discussion and some of the other Powers with Far Eastern territories, if not all, will do the same. The British Delegate will take the line that the matter is outside the scope of the Conference and that it was considered by the first Conference (on the control of opium smoking in the Far East) which reached an agreement as to the further measures to be taken. The position in British territories was then fully set out and, apart from the question as to the competence of the Conference, no useful purpose will be served by re-opening the matter. The British Delegate will then propose that the Council of the League of Nations should be invited to appoint a small impartial Commission with an American Chairman to visit the territories concerned of all nationalities as well as any other countries, such as China, that may be necessary in order to investigate and report on all relevant facts as affecting further measures of repression. In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government this Commission should include no nationals of Powers possessing Far Eastern territories. His Majesty’s Government feel that the adoption of this proposal would disarm criticism in the United States, where British administrative difficulties in the Far East are naturally not widely known, and would also convince public opinion generally that His Majesty’s Government neither shirk impartial investigation nor desire to take up an obstructive attitude. In the circumstances His Majesty’s Government hope that the above proposal will be acceptable to the United States Government and that they will be disposed to instruct the American Delegation at Geneva to co-operate with the British

Delegate when he puts it forward, with a view to its being carried into effect.” The Department proposes to reply to the British that in view of the conditions set forth in the preamble of the House Joint Resolution approved May 15, 1924, authorizing an appropriation for the participation of this Government in the International Narcotics Conference, and in view of the further fact that the representatives of the United States are not authorized to sign any agreement which does not fulfill the conditions Decessary for the suppression of the habit-forming narcotic drug traffic, as set forth in the preamble of the Joint Resolution in question, it finds itself unable to acquiesce in the suggestions made by the British Government as set forth in the Aide Mémoire. The Department may further suggest to the British that since all the other participating Governments in the Geneva Conference are likewise interested in the questions at issue, it would perhaps be better to have the questions determined by the Conference itself. The Department is hopeful that no issues will arise at Geneva which will jeopardize the success of the Conference and with that in mind it suggests that you may find it advisable not to rigidly adhere to a fixed term of 10 years within which the importation of raw opium for the purpose of making prepared opium should be discontinued. The Department feels that some flexibility in this period of time might afford an avenue through which a compromise might be reached if the differences foreseen by the British Government, as set forth in its Aide Mémoire, should arise. The Department desires your comment on the Aide Mémoire and the proposed reply. HUGHES

31 Not printed.

Conference. More than this, they insisted that they had been instructed by their Governments on this point and that they were not prepared to repudiate a convention which they had just completed and which, they stated, they had authority to sign. I brought up the question in plenary session on the 12th, and it was obvious that the parties to the agreement reached at the First Conference were in a hopeless minority, and that they would lose if a vote were taken as to the competence of the Conference to consider the question of prepared opium. Discussion was adjourned to yesterday, when a proposal was laid before the Conference by the President to adjourn until the 12th of January, when the American proposal would be the first item on the program. In the meantime, when the First Conference agreement was ready for signature the British and French representatives announced that they were not in a position to sign the document, which they have never attempted to justify in public. I am inclined to believe that the agreement will be disavowed and the principles outlined in our own suggestions in regard to Chapter II will be accepted if we insist sufficiently upon our point of view. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the attitude of the South American states represented at the Conference has been consistently friendly, and that they have supported us in every public meeting at which any issue or principle has been at stake. I feel it would be desirable to acknowledge our appreciation through appropriate channels. I have [etc.] STEPHEN G. PORTER 92 Not printed. 93 Enclosures not printed. The copy of the agreement transmitted was the same as the text signed at Geneva, Feb. 11, 1925, by the British Empire (with India), China, France, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Siam; League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. LI, p. 337.

1. A vital part of our program—the limitation of production to medicinal and scientific needs—seems unlikely to be embodied in the convention. However, if inserted in convention little if any useful purpose would be served, as producing countries which are disinclined to assume any further obligations to restrict production have indicated they will record nullifying reservations. Persia has at every opportunity made it clear that production cannot for economic reasons be limited except upon the unique conditions:

over exports is maintained. The result of any effort under present conditions to strike at the source of the evil—production of raw material—I regard as negligible. 2. It is proposed that a central board shall be established consisting of seven members to be appointed by representatives of the United States, Germany, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan and those nations having nonpermanent seats on the Council of the League of Nations from a list upon which each of the signatory parties to the convention may place one name. While not in final form the following provision seems not unlikely to be adopted. “The Council shall in consultation with the board make the necessary arrangements for the organization and working of the board with the object of assuring the full technical independence of the board in carrying out their duties under the present convention while providing for the control of the staff in administrative matters by the Secretary General. The Council shall also in consultation with the governments of any contracting parties who are not members of the League take the necessary measures to allocate the expenses of the board among the contracting parties. The board shall, subject to the approval of the Council, appoint their secretary and staff”.

The British delegation is urging the acceptance of the following amendment against which no objections have been raised except our own. “The Secretary General shall appoint the secretary and staff of the board on the nomination of the board and subject to the approval of the Council”. To the board are to be sent statistics of production, manufacture, consumption, import and export of substances covered by convention. The board shall have the right in case the information at its disposal leads it to

conclude that excessive quantities are accumulating in any country to ask for explanations and in the case of no explanations or an unsatisfactory explanation to call the attention of the governments and the Council of the League to the matter and to recommend that no further exports be made to the country in question until the board reports that it is satisfied with the situation [in?] the country concerned and any exporting country has the right to appeal to the Council of the League against any decision of the board. A government not prepared to act on the recommendation shall notify the board; the board may publish a report on the matter and communicate it to the Council which shall forward it to the governments. Any decision by the board with respect to complaints shall be by an absolute majority. The right of making representations to the board is to be given to any signatory power. The board has been granted certain limited powers to make regulations principally regarding the furnishing of information but it has been impossible to obtain consent that the board be granted power” to make sufficient regulations to carry out its duties, it being generally believed that such authority should be exercised jointly by board and Council of the League. The board is so closely connected with the organization of the League of Nations as to make it practically subservient to the Council of the League, as [a?] result which if it will not defeat ratification certainly will provoke a bitter fight in the Senate. In striving to preserve the full independence of the board I have been repeatedly advised that unless the board tied up with the League the object for which the board was created could not be accomplished. Any further attempt to preserve the independence of the board seems futile. 3. There is no prospect of obtaining a control [of] opium and cocaleaf derivatives extensive as that provided by our own legislation. No agreement can be obtained which would immediately include as dangerous drugs any derivative of opium other than those specified in the Hague Conference although coca leaves and ecgonine and possibly Indian hemp may be added. Some additional restrictions are to be placed upon the sale of heroin but no agreement to prevent manufacture is possible. Machinery for the determination of dangerous drugs under article 14 is proposed.

4. After repeated conferences with the representatives of the interested governments I do not believe that there is any prospect of obtaining more definite assurances regarding the suppression of prepared opium than are contained in the Hague Convention. The British, French and Dutch proposals are in substance that 15 years after the producing countries limit production and prevent smuggling they will abolish the traffic. The time when period shall begin to run is to be determined by Council whose decision shall be final. While acknowledging their obligations under the Hague Convention they insist that owing to increased production and smuggling they are powerless to take any further measures than those contemplated by agreement concluded by first conference. The well known disinclination of producing countries to limit production [and?] their seeming inability to stop smuggling do not strengthen the belief that the governments interested in prepared opium are seriously considering suppressing the traffic. On the contrary the acceptance of the proposals offered would in my judgment weaken chapter 2 of the Hague Convention, a result which must be avoided, as the main protection we have against leakage from the ordinary traffic in hundreds of tons of raw and prepared opium is the right to demand suppression of traffic in prepared opium under article 6 of this chapter. It should be mentioned that the central board while entitled to receive statistics regarding prepared opium would be expressly [denied?] the right to question them in any way or to file or receive any complaint against countries engaged in the traffic until the board has found that illicit international transactions are taking place on an appreciable scale. I fear that it would be extremely unwise for any action to be taken which would postpone the date for the suppression of this traffic and which could be regarded as placing it upon a more secure foundation. 5. While statistical information to be given the board represents decided improvement over present situation, this information and the import [and?] export certificate which it is proposed to make of general application can be obtained otherwise than by treaty. Under all circumstances I am reluctantly forced to the conclusion that it would be inadvisable for the delegation to continue to participate in the

conference. Perhaps I have been remiss in not making the recommendation sooner but despite repeated adjournments to which I reluctantly consented I have held on in the hope that some way might be found out of the difficulties encountered. The political aspect of the proposed agreement, the small gain to be hoped for over the control of the traffic and the terms of the resolution of Congress under which the delegation proceeded to Geneva, prompt me respectfully to suggest that the delegation be instructed to withdraw. I am aware of the seriousness of the steps suggested but I am forced to the conclusion in the light of all the circumstances that perhaps greater stride[s] in the control of the traffic may be hoped for if the United States in accordance with its traditional policy did not through the present agreement associate itself with the League but reserving entirely its freedom of action should stand ever ready to assert its rights under the Hague Convention and if necessary to demand [that?] the obligations there undertaken be promptly and completely performed. It is of the utmost importance that I receive word by Tuesday noon, Geneva time, as to the course to be followed, as a most important meeting of the conference is scheduled for that day. If you concur I would suggest that owing to faulty news service here an announcement of the reason for withdrawal should be made public in Washington immediately following a telegraphic communication from the delegation advising that withdrawal had actually taken place. TUCK 94 Telegram in four sections.

public statement likely to have reactions upon our relations with other governments and therefore requiring to be drawn up in a way to avoid all unnecessary occasion for irritation. You will please telegraph to the Department as soon as possible the text of your statement. HUGHES

drug traffic as set forth in the preamble. Despite more than 2 months of discussion and repeated adjournments it now clearly appears that the purpose for which the conference was called cannot be accomplished. The reports of the various committees of the conference plainly indicate that there is no likelihood under present conditions that the production of raw opium and coca leaves will be restricted to the medicinal and scientific needs of the world. In fact the nature of the reservations made show[s] that no appreciable reduction in raw opium may be expected. It was hoped that if the nations in whose territories the use of smoking opium is temporarily permitted would, in pursuance of the obligation undertaken under chapter 2 of the Hague Convention, adopt measures restricting the importation of raw opium for the manufacture of smoking opium or would agree to suppress the traffic within a definite period, such action would materially reduce the market for raw opium and an extensive limitation of production would inevitably follow. Unfortunately however these nations with the exception of Japan are not prepared to reduce the consumption of smoking opium. Unless the producing nations agree to reduce production and prevent smuggling from their territories, and then only in the event of an adequate guarantee being given that the obligations undertaken by the producing nations would be effectively and promptly fulfilled, no restriction of the production of raw opium under such conditions can be expected. In the matter of manufactured drugs and the control of transportation an improvement over the Hague Convention is noticeable. There is however no likelihood of obtaining a complete control of all opium and coca-leaf derivatives irrespective of the measure of control provided. For manufactured drugs it is believed that by reason of the very small bulk, the ease of transportation with minimum risk of detection, and the large financial gains

to be obtained from their illicit handling such drugs and their derivatives can only be effectively controlled if the production of the raw opium and coca leaves from which they are obtained is strictly limited to medical and scientific purposes. This the conference is unable to accomplish. In the circumstances the delegation of the United States in pursuance of instructions received from its Government has no alternative under terms of the joint resolution authorizing participation in the conference other than to withdraw, as it could not sign the agreement which it is proposed to conclude. We desire to make it clear that withdrawal from the present conference does not mean that the United States will cease its efforts through international cooperation for the suppression of the illicit traffic in opium and other dangerous drugs. The United States recognizes that the world-wide traffic in habit-forming drugs can be suppressed only by international cooperation but believes that for the present at least greater strides in the control of the traffic may be hoped for if it should continue to work towards this end upon the basis of the Hague Convention of 1912”. PORTER

Refusal by the United States to join other creditor nations in forming an international commission to liquidate relief loans made to certain European states [66] The French Chargé (Laboulaye) to the Secretary of State

[70] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State Washington , May 3, 1924.

the Government of the Republic deems it more and more indispensable, if a practical solution is to be reached, to create a centralizing organ which would coordinate the steps taken toward the settlement of the claims flowing from the relief credits. Among these several institutions now in existence capable of performing the task above referred to, the financial committee of the League of Nations would appear, in my Government’s opinion, to be particularly well fitted for its successful accomplishment. It would, however, have no objection to offer to having such an organization as the Control Committee of the Austrian Loan, for instance, charged with the same duties, but it may be remarked in this connection that in order to perform its duties with greater judgment it would be advisable for such a committee to have among its members the largest possible number of representatives of the borrowing as well as the lending states. The question as to who will assume the comparatively simple part of the contemplated intermediary is besides of minor importance. So the French Government is ready to concur in any other suggestion which would make it possible to apply the principle laid down in 1921 by the International Conference on Relief Credits. In making the foregoing suggestions known to Your Excellency I should be much obliged to you if you would kindly let me know as soon as you can the views of the Government of the United States on this question. Be pleased to accept [etc.] ANDRÉ DE LABOUIAYE 96 File translation revised.

international agency be created to deal with questions arising out of these relief credits and that the United States participate in such an agency. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES 98 Not printed.

governments of their countries, and have always regarded themselves as entirely independent experts. It appears essential that where decisions with regard to government advances have to be taken, the deciding body must be strictly representative of the governments concerned. His Majesty’s Government have therefore suggested that the best course would be for a Relief Credits Committee to be formed, which might meet in London, to whom all applications by debtor governments with regard to their liabilities under the Relief Credits should be referred. The committee would consist of the representatives of the credit-giving governments and would be furnished by those governments with full particulars of the present position of such credits. It would probably be sufficient for the committee to meet occasionally, and it might possibly be formed in the main from representatives already in London. The Committee (after settling its procedure) would naturally be chiefly concerned with the arrangements to be made with the debtor countries in view of the maturity of a considerable portion of the original bonds on the 1st of January, 1925. All proposals received by any creditor Government as regards the relief credits would, of course, be referred to the committee, who would be in a position to undertake oral discussions with representatives of each debtor country. The Committee could also consider whether there would be any advantage in appointing a Trustee as suggested in 1921, though there would seem to be little need for this proposal at this stage. While His Majesty’s Government suggest that the Committee should consist primarily of the European credit-giving countries, they would naturally welcome the presence of an American representative and, inasmuch as they are aware that, under the United States laws, only the Debt Funding Commission can deal with American Credits, I am instructed to express the hope that, in the event of the United States Government being willing to share in the work of the Committee, a representative of the Debt Funding Commission might be delegated to attend the meetings of the Committee in London. I should be glad to receive in due course an

expression of the views of the United States Government in regard to this matter for communication to my Government. I have the honour to add that His Majesty’s representatives at Christiania and the Hague have been instructed to bring these proposals to the notice of the Norwegian and Netherlands Governments. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON [Enclosure] Memorandum on Relief Credits The Relief Credits grew out of the Relief Missions organised in 1919 under the Supreme Economic Council, the successor to the short-lived Supreme Council of Supply and Relief. These two bodies had been the result of negotiations for the formation of some allied organization for the prevention of starvation and disorder in Central, Eastern and Southern Europe. The principal contributors to the Relief thus administered were the United States, Great Britain, (with Canada and Newfoundland) France and Italy. By the end of 1919 it had become evident that in order to cope with the economic needs of Eastern and Southern Europe it was urgently necessary to substitute for “Relief” some comprehensive form of credits in order to remedy the situation in those regions. “To continue to provide food without at the same time providing raw materials on which to re-establish industry would merely be to aggravate the problem of Europe”. It seemed improbable that any group of American, French, Italian or British bankers, would make a long-term contract with governments whose political existence and whose assets and liabilities were from day to day of doubtful duration. There was therefore little likelihood of credits being provided on a scale and on terms likely to be effective unless the allied and associated governments and also the neutral governments intervened with some scheme to minimise the political risk preventing the introduction of private foreign capital into such countries.

Negotiations with this in view accordingly took place with the result that the International Committee for Relief Credits was set up in Paris in April 1920. It consisted of representatives of Argentine, Belgium, Canada, (unofficial), Denmark, France, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States, (unofficial). The object of the committee was to administer, in consultation with the representatives of the debtor countries, the relief and reconstruction credits which had been granted by the governments of some of the above-mentioned creditor countries and to arrange for new credits. Each lending country reserved complete liberty as to the country to which its credits should be extended but agreed to accept a common form of bond as security. In the case of Austria-Hungary these bonds were accorded priority over reparation payments, this having been a condition as to participation made by several neutral governments. This committee sat until the winter of 1921, when it was dissolved. It had during that time arranged for credits for Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Servia, Roumania, Baltic States, Armenia and Austria. The United States of America advanced the largest sum—approximately £63,000,000, the United Kingdom coming next with £17,000,000, followed by Italy and France with £4¾ millions and £3½ millions respectively. After them the two most substantial creditors are Holland and Norway. These sums do not include the relief advances made prior to the beginning of 1920.

I have noted the suggestion of your Government that the committee should consist primarily of the European credit-giving countries, but that they would welcome the presence of an American representative, and that in the event that the Government of the United States were willing to share in the work of the committee, a representative of the World War Foreign Debt Commission might be delegated to attend the meetings of the committee. This suggestion has been transmitted to the Chairman of the World War Foreign Debt Commission and upon the receipt of a reply from him, I shall take pleasure in communicating with you further on this subject. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

touch with its work.” The Department feels that it is highly important that this Government be kept closely and fully informed of the proceedings of the proposed committee. The United States is a large creditor on account of the relief loans in question and is entitled to as favorable treatment, both as to payment of interest and of principal, as any other creditor government. In several instances, however, debtor governments have made payments to other creditor governments on account of these relief loans without making corresponding payments to the United States. When attention has been called to this discrimination the reply has been made that the omission was an oversight, or that the amounts due to the United States were so much greater than those due to other governments that it was impossible for the debtor governments to pay them under existing conditions. The Department does not desire that the activities of the proposed committee should in any way result in prejudicing the position of the United States. The Department will advise you promptly of any further information received on this subject from the British Government, and in the meantime you are requested to telegraph any significant developments in connection with the proposed committee which may come to your notice in London. CHARLES E. HUGHES 1 All the documents listed, except the French Ambassador’s note of Nov. 30, 1923, are printed supra.

Negotiations on behalf of the World War Foreign Debt Commission for the settlement of debts owed the United States by foreign governments3

the United States would not be disposed to raise any objection to the ratification of the proposed agreement with Germany.” [Paraphrase.] The following is for your information: In view of the provision that Lithuania’s obligations shall be entitled to security of and shall be charge upon any payments or property received from Germany or from its allies by way of reparation or cession equally with all other notes which represent similar advances to Lithuania since the Armistice by other Allied and Associated Powers, the Treasury thinks that the suggested ratification of the trade agreement with Germany seems to release the security definitely provided for these obligations. In view, moreover, of the theory advanced informally by Mr. Narushkevich that payments were to be made the United States only from reparations received by Lithuania, a theory which has not, as far as the Department is aware, been discarded by Lithuania, although it is wholly inacceptable to the Government of the United States, it is obvious that should the Lithuanian Government adopt this view as its position the ratification of the proposed agreement with Germany would preclude the possibility of recovery by the United States upon obligation in question. The release of this security, furthermore, by the United States seems all the more inappropriate if any payments have been made to the British Government on obligations similar to those held by this Government unless it is understood definitely that Lithuania’s indebtedness to the United States be refunded at once.

it is planned that a Greek loan be floated in the American market. The outstanding questions are: (1) The exchange of notes in regard to most-favored-nation treatment.11

Department desires you to broach this whole matter promptly to the Hellenic Government through informal conversations, unless you feel that the present moment is not favorable, with the object of effecting an early

settlement of the three questions listed above. To the extent that you deem wise under the circumstances you may make use of the foregoing in your conversations, refraining, however, from referring to the Guaranty Trust Company by name. You are to telegraph Department should situation arise in which a written communication to the Hellenic Government appears to be desirable in your opinion, or if further instructions are needed. HUGHES 7 Letter from Guaranty Trust Co. not printed. For other correspondence concerning the Greek Refugee Loan, see vol. II, pp. 282 ff.

14 Latter not printed.

Agreement between the United States and Austria and Hungary for the establishment of a claims commission, signed November 26, 1924 [83] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn) Washington, February 1, 1924.

[87] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

[93] The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

It is deemed desirable to have any agreement which provides means for determining the obligations of Austria and Hungary under the treaties establishing friendly relations between the United States and those countries, signed by representatives of both Austria and Hungary as well as the United States, for the reason that many claims of American citizens which have been filed and which are in prospect arose out of acts of the former Austro-Hungarian Government for which, as successors to the Austro-Hungarian Government and by applicable treaty provisions, Austria and Hungary assumed responsibility. Both Austria and Hungary are, therefore, interested in any agreement which provides means of determining their respective obligations under the treaties to the United States and its nationals. The Government of the United States considers that the purposes of the agreement could be accomplished with greater expedition and with less expense if provision were made for a single commissioner instead of two commissioners and an umpire for which provision was made in the agreement with Germany. Such a commissioner would perform the judicial functions of an arbitrator in behalf of the several litigants.

At the time the agreement between the United States and Germany was signed, the German Chancellor addressed to the American Ambassador at Berlin, a note requesting that the President of the United States designate a suitable American to act as umpire.19 The two governments selected the Honorable William E. Day, formerly an Associate Justice of the United States, as umpire and upon his retirement, the Honorable Edwin B. Parker was selected in the same manner to serve as umpire. The Government of the United States understands that the manner in which Judge Parker has performed the duties of umpire is a source of satisfaction to the Government of Germany no less than to the Government of the United States. It has occurred to me, therefore, that possibly the Government of Austria and the Government of Hungary might agree to the selection of Judge Parker as sole commissioner or arbitrator to determine the obligations of Austria and of Hungary to the United States and its nationals under the treaties establishing friendly relations and under the proposed agreement.

You will please communicate with the Foreign Office in the sense of the foregoing, expressing the hope that the plan proposed by the Government of the United States for the determination of the obligations of the Governments of Austria and of Hungary under the treaties establishing friendly relations will commend itself to the Austrian Government. It is desired that you endeavor to obtain a reply from the Austrian Government as promptly as possible, and that you advise the Department by telegraph of developments. It is desired to have the agreement concluded at an early date in order that the appropriation to carry out the provisions of the agreement may be obtained before the adjournment of Congress. It is the view of the Department that the agreement should be signed in Washington where the representatives of the three Governments can be conveniently assembled. Similar instructions have been sent to the Legation at Budapest.20 For the Secretary of State: WILLIAM PHILLIPS

3. Proposed convention does not invest single commissioner with all the jurisdiction conferred upon mixed arbitral tribunal by section 6 of part 10 of St. Germain Treaty (see especially article 256, subsection b). Government desires to avoid expense of two tribunals operating possibly on diverging legal principles, and therefore suggests investing single commissioner with absolute and exclusive competency to exercise all jurisdiction contemplated by the peace treaty. I am asked to ascertain whether these suggestions are acceptable. I infer that understanding here is that Hungarian Government has not subscribed to any specific text. Certainly the two Governments are in an advantageous position and since tripartite agreement is proposed, Austrian Foreign Office is preparing to hand to the resident Hungarian Minister a memorandum embodying substance of its views as above outlined. WASHBURN 21 Not printed.

Hucues

exchange of ratifications the Hungarian Government proposes that article 6 be changed to provide for ratification and exchange of ratifications and that the agreement be effective from say 15 days after or, at the earliest, from the date of exchange of ratifications. Copy to European Information Center. BRENTANO

reservations made in the note to be delivered by Austrian Government when agreement is signed. HUGHES

Legation Vienna reports Austrian Government is instructing Austrian Chargé d’Affaires at Washington to sign agreement as submitted by Department, but to make reservations in note delivered on signing agreement. Department replied stating it was deemed undesirable to have reservations made. Inasmuch as Austrian Government has instructed Chargé dAffaires here to take matter up with Department, and since views of Austrian and Hungarian Governments have now been ascertained, Department believes conclusion of agreement satisfactory to all parties would be expedited if Hungarian Government would instruct its Minister here to discuss matter with Department. You may answer Minister for Foreign Affairs as above. HUGHES

Treaty Series No. 730 [Document 94] Agreement between the United States of America and Austria and Hungary, Signed at Washington, November 26, 192426 The United States of America and the Republic of Austria, hereafter described as Austria, and the Kingdom of Hungary, hereafter described as Hungary, being desirous of determining the amounts to be paid by Austria and by Hungary in satisfaction of their obligations under the treaties concluded by the United States with Austria on August 24, 1921, and with Hungary on August 29, 1921, which secure to the United States and its nationals rights specified under a Joint Resolution of the Congress of the United States of July 2, 1921, including rights under the Treaties of St. Germain-en-Laye and Trianon, respectively, have resolved to submit the questions for decision to a commissioner and have appointed as their plenipotentiaries to sign an agreement for that purpose: The President of the United States of America, Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America, The President of the Federal Republic of Austria, Mr. Edgar L. G. Prochnik, Chargé d’Affaires of Austria in Washington, and The Governor of Hungary, Count László Széchényi, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Hungary to the United States, Who, having communicated their full powers, found to be in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The three governments shall agree upon the selection of a Commissioner who shall pass upon all claims for losses, damages or injuries suffered by the United States or its nationals embraced within the terms of the Treaty of August 24, 1921, between the United States and Austria and/or the Treaty of August 29, 1921, between the United States and Hungary, and/or the

Treaties of St. Germain-en-Laye and/or Trianon, and shall determine the amounts to be paid to the United States by Austria and by Hungary in satisfaction of all such claims (excluding those falling within paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of Annex I to Section I of Part VIII of both the Treaty of St. Germain-en-Laye and the Treaty of Trianon) and including the following categories:

end each of the Governments may appoint a secretary, and these secretaries shall act together as joint secretaries and shall be subject to the direction of the Commissioner. ARTICLE IV The three Governments may designate agents and counsel who may present oral or written arguments to the Commissioner under such conditions as he may prescribe. The Commissioner shall receive and consider all written statements or documents which may be presented to him, in accordance with rules which he may prescribe, by or on behalf of the respective Governments in support of or in answer to any claim. The Governments of Austria and Hungary shall be notified of all claims filed with the Commissioner and shall be given such period of time as the Commissioner shall by rule determine in which to answer any claim filed. The decisions of the Commissioner shall be accepted as final and binding upon the three Governments.

ARTICLE V Each Government shall pay its own expenses, including the compensation of the secretary appointed by it and that of its agent and counsel. All other expenses which by their nature are a charge on the three Governments, including the compensation of the Commissioner and such employees as he may appoint to assist him in the performance of his duties, shall be borne one-half by the Government of the United States and one-half by the Governments of Austria and Hungary in equal moieties. ARTICLE VI This agreement shall be ratified in accordance with the constitutional forms of the contracting parties and shall come into force on the date of the

exchange of ratifications. IN FAITH WHEREOF, the above named plenipotentiaries have signed the present agreement and have hereunto affixed their seals. Done in triplicate at the City of Washington this twenty-sixth day of November, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] EDGAR PROCHNIK [SEAL] LÁSZLÓ SZÉCHÉNYI [SEAL]

Interest of the United States in the disposition of the proposed liberation bonds of the Austro-Hungarian succession states [95] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

Austro-Hungarian reparation payments and credited on Austro-Hungarian account. 5th. Finance Service intimates view that United States probably not interested in delivery or division of present bonds in view of nonratification of peace treaties and nonparticipation in Spa Agreement. Furthermore it does not appear that United States ratified liberation bond agreement of September 10, 1919. 6th. Am sending this advance outline of situation so that you may decide upon appropriate attitude of United States and instruct me whether I should take any action or make any reserves when the subject of transmitting the repartition problem to the powers is discussed in the Reparation Commission. Inasmuch as we probably will, and have had no participation in these bonds [it] seems immaterial to what body bonds are delivered. Present suggestion is Reparation Commission. Logan. HERRICK 27 William M. Malloy, Treaties, Conventions, etc., between the United States of America and Other Powers, 1910–1923 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1923), vol. III, p. 3299. 28 Ibid., p. 3303; the amended agreement was held open for signature until

This construction is in words “similar” and “exacted”. The liberation bonds are not cash payments and are made by Allied countries instead of former enemy powers; and they are made as part of cost of liberation of certain territory to them. It is true that there is canceled on the reparation claim against Austria and on the German C bonds an amount equivalent to the bonds, but I do not think that this cancelation constitutes a payment of reparations by a country from whom a reparation payment may be exacted as required by Army Costs Agreement. 4. If we have any claim to cash which may flow ultimately from these bonds, there would be probability that we may have claim against the bonds by and by, for they are a mode of payment which does not fall within the excluded classes; i. e., deliveries in kind, British Recovery Act,34 etc., which are not applicable to the Army Costs Agreement. Claim could only be based on cancelation of C bonds provided for in annex to Finance Ministers’ Agreement of March 11, 1922. I shall not put forward any such claim, however, for reasons above stated, unless I am instructed to contrary. Logan. HERRICK 33a Telegram in two sections.

Conventions for the prevention of liquor smuggling into the United States35

Great Britain, January 23, 1924 [98] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg) to the Secretary of State

Treaty Series No. 685 [Document 99] Convention between the United States of America and Great Britain, Signed at Washington, January 23, 192437 The President of the United States of America; And His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India; Being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages; Have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose; And have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India: The Right Honorable Sir Auckland Campbell Geddes, G. C. M. G., K. C. B., His Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the United States of America; Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties declare that it is their firm intention to uphold the principle that 3 marine miles extending from the coastline outwards and measured from low-water mark constitute the proper limits of territorial waters.

ARTICLE II (1) His Britannic Majesty agrees that he will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the British flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be instituted. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws. (3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised. ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or

possessions on board British vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions. ARTICLE IV Any claim by a British vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties. Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to the Claims Commission established under the provisions of the Agreement for the Settlement of Outstanding Pecuniary Claims signed at Washington the 18th August, 1910, but the claim shall not, before submission to the tribunal, require to be included in a schedule of claims confirmed in the manner therein provided. ARTICLE V This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall remain in force for a period of one year from the date of the exchange of ratifications. Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of the High Contracting Parties may give notice, of its desire to propose modifications in the terms of the Treaty. If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse.

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty shall lapse. ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Treaty not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Britannic Majesty; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals. DONE at the city of Washington this twenty-third day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] A. C. GEDDES

ratifications exchanged at Washington, May 22, 1924; proclaimed by the President, May 22, 1924.

Germany, May 19, 1924 [100] The German Ambassador (Wiedfeldt) to the Secretary of State Washington, April 28, 1924.

of the Senate thereof, and by the President of the German Empire in accordance with the requirements of the German Constitution”. I have the honor to attach hereto a text of the proposed draft incorporating the changes above noted.42 Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES 40 Counselor of the German Embassy. 41 Not printed; the suggested changes, all of which were accepted by the Department, were indicated in the draft submitted with the German Ambassador’s note of Apr. 28, supra. 42 See signed convention, infra.

Treaty Series No. 694 [Document 102] Convention between the United States of America and Germany, Signed at Washington, May 19, 192443 The President of the United States of America and the President of the German Empire being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America, Mr. Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America; and The President of the German Empire, Dr. Otto Wiedfeldt, German Ambassador to the United States of America; Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties declare that it is their firm intention to uphold the principle that 3 marine miles extending from the coastline outwards and measured from low-water mark constitute the proper limits of territorial waters. ARTICLE II (1) The President of the German Empire agrees that Germany will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the German flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions, in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of

ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws. (3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised. ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or possessions on board German vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV Any claim by a German vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties. Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard

Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desireto propose

modifications in the terms of the Treaty. If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse. If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on, automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty shall lapse. ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Treaty not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the President of the German Empire in accordance with the requirements of the German Constitution; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals. Done at the city of Washington, this nineteenth day of May in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] DR. OTTO WIEDFELDT

43 In English and German; German text not printed. Ratification advised by

Sweden, May 22, 1924 [103] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Sweden (Bliss) Washington, January 3, 1924.

[108] Convention between the United States of America and Sweden, Signed at Washington, May 22, 1924 Done at the city of Washington this twenty-second day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. Treaty Series No. 698

the American Embassy at Paris.47 The Department has suggested certain modifications in the counter-draft which are now under consideration by the British Government. Negotiations for a treaty have also been started with the Netherlands Government and a communication commenting upon the American draft for the proposed treaty has been received from the Foreign Office of the Netherlands Government.48 CHARLES E. HUGHES

limit for the purpose of suppressing liquor smuggling operations. I replied that according to the treaty we were then discussing with England, Swedish vessels would obtain the privilege of carrying liquor as sealed stores within the territorial waters of the United States and cargoes of liquors, not destined for disembarkation within the confines of the United States. I also pointed out that a somewhat similar provision for extending the limits of jurisdiction over territorial waters was contained in the treaty between Sweden and Mexico, whereby it was provided, for the purpose of enforcement of customs regulations, that the territorial waters of the two contracting parties would be extended to a distance of about ten miles. A fortnight ago Baron von Würtemberg told me that he had received a copy of the American-English treaty, which was being examined by his colleagues, and that he hoped to have something to say to me shortly. Yesterday, at the weekly diplomatic reception, he said that he had examined that treaty with much interest and that Sweden would be quite disposed to enter into negotiations with the United States looking to the conclusion of a treaty of that nature. He expressed the desire that whatever agreement might be reached for extending the territorial waters beyond the three mile limit would be a reciprocal arrangement. I told the Minister that I could make no rejoinder to that request other than to say that I would acquaint my Government with the desire that he expressed, for my inquiry to him having been of an informal nature, I could not enter into a discussion of the subject with him. I have [etc.] ROBERT WOODS BLISS

Treaty Series No. 698 [Document 108] Convention between the United States of America and Sweden, Signed at Washington, May 22, 192450 The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of Sweden being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America, Mr. Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; His Majesty the King of Sweden, Mr. V. Assarsson, Counselor of His Legation at Washington; Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims, without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of their territorial jurisdiction. ARTICLE II (1) His Majesty agrees that he will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the Swedish flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such

enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws. (3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised. ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or possessions on board Swedish vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions. ARTICLE IV

Any claim by a Swedish vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties. Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty shall lapse. ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Treaty not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty the King of Sweden; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. In Witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate in the English and Swedish languages and have thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-second day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] V ASSARSSON 50 In English and Swedish; Swedish text not printed. Ratification advised by

Norway, May 24, 1924 [109] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the Norwegian Minister (Bryn), March 20, 1924 March 20, 1924

[114] The Secretary of State to the Norwegian Minister (Bryn) Washington, May 23, 1924.

suggests that after the words “in duplicate” in Article VI there be incorporated the words “in the English and Norwegian languages”. [ WASHINGTON ,] May 14, 1924.

Treaty Series No. 689 [Document 115] Convention between the United States of America and Norway, Signed at Washington, May 24, 192454 The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of Norway being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America, Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; His Majesty the King of Norway, Helmer H. Bryn, His Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the United States of America; Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims, without prejudice by reason of this agreement with respect to the extent of their territorial jurisdiction. ARTICLE II (1) His Majesty agrees that he will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the Norwegian flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or

possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws. (3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised.

ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or possessions on board Norwegian vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV Any claim by a Norwegian vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties. Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard

If such, modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse. If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty shall lapse. ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Treaty not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty the King of Norway; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate in the English and Norwegian languages and have thereunto affixed their seals. Done at the city of Washington this twenty-fourth day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] HELMER H. BRYN

54 In English and Norwegian; Norwegian text not printed. Ratification

Denmark, May 29, 1924 [116] The Danish Chargé (Helmer-Petersen) to the Secretary of State Washington, May 26, 1924.

ready for verification by the American Minister in Copenhagen on Wednesday next. I have [etc.] HELMER-PETERSEN 55 Not printed.

You have been good enough to enclose a draft of the Danish text of the proposed treaty. With reference to your full powers to sign the treaty, I have to inform you that the American Minister at Copenhagen has telegraphed the Department that he has inspected the same. Permit me to suggest the hour of ten forty-five A.M. on Thursday, May 29th, as an appropriate one for the signature of the treaty, if agreeable to yourself. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

Treaty Series No. 693 [Document 118] Convention between the United States of America and Denmark, Signed at Washington, May 29, 192456 The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between the United States and Denmark in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America, Mr. Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland, Mr. Kai Helmer- Petersen, His Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires at Washington, Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims, without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of their territorial jurisdiction. ARTICLE II (1) His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland agrees that he will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the Danish flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United

States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws. (3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised. ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or possessions on board Danish vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions. ARTICLE IV

Any claim by a Danish vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties.

Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse. If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty shall lapse. ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Treaty not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty the King of Denmark and Iceland; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate in the English and Danish languages and have thereunto affixed their seals. Done at the city of Washington this twenty-ninth day of May one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] HELMER-PETERSEN

56 In English and Danish; Danish text not printed. Ratification advised by

Italy, June 3, 1924 [119] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the Italian Ambassador (Caetani), March 20, 1924 March 20, 1924

Treaties Series No. 702 [Document 120] Convention between the United States of America and Italy, Signed at Washington, June 3, 192458 The President of the United States of America and His Majesty the King of Italy being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America, Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; His Majesty the King of Italy, Signor Augusto Rosso, Counselor of His Embassy at Washington; Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims, without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of their territorial jurisdiction. ARTICLE II (1) The Italian Government agrees that it will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the Italian flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such

enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws. (3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised. ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or possessions on board Italian vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions. ARTICLE IV

Any claim by an Italian vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties. Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard

If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty shall lapse. ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Treaty not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by His Majesty the King of Italy; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate, in the English and Italian languages, and have thereunto affixed their seals.

Done at the city of Washington this third day of June in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] AUGUSTO ROSSO 58 In English and Italian; Italian text not printed. Ratification advised by the

Great Britain in respect of Canada, June 6, 1924 [121] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard) Washington, June 4, 1924.

Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES 59 Not printed.

Treaty Series No. 718 [Document 122] Convention between the United States of America and Great Britain in Respect of Canada, Signed at Washington, June 6, 192461 The United States of America and His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, in respect of the Dominion of Canada, being desirous of suppressing smuggling operations along the boundary between the United States of America and the Dominion of Canada, and of assisting in the arrest and prosecution of persons violating the narcotic laws of either Government, and of providing as to the omission of penalties and forfeitures in respect to the carriage of alcoholic liquors through Alaska into the Yukon territory, have agreed to conclude a Convention to give effect to these purposes and have named as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and His Britannic Majesty, in respect of the Dominion of Canada: The Honorable Ernest Lapointe, K. C, a member of His Majesty’s Privy Council for Canada and Minister of Justice in the Government of that Dominion; Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers, which were found to be in due and proper form, have agreed upon the following articles: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties agree that the appropriate officers of the Governments of the United States of America and of Canada respectively shall be required to furnish upon request to duly authorized officers of the other Government, information concerning clearances of vessels or the transportation of cargoes, shipments or loads of articles across the

international boundary when the importation of the cargo carried or of articles transported by land is subject to the payment of duties; also to furnish information respecting clearances of vessels to any ports when there is ground to suspect that the owners or persons in possession of the cargo intend to smuggle it into the territory of the United States or of Canada.

ARTICLE II The High Contracting Parties agree that clearance from the United States or from Canada shall be denied to any vessel carrying cargo consisting of articles the importation of which into the territory of the United States or of Canada, as the case may be, is prohibited, when it is evident from the tonnage, size and general character of the vessel, or the length of the voyage and the perils or conditions of navigation attendant upon it, that the vessel will be unable to carry its cargo to the destination proposed in the application for clearance. ARTICLE III Each of the High Contracting Parties agrees with the other that property of all kinds in its possession which, having been stolen and brought into the territory of the United States or of Canada, is seized by its customs authorities shall, when the owners are nationals of the other country, be returned to such owners, subject to satisfactory proof of such ownership and the absence of any collusion, and subject moreover to payment of the expenses of the seizure and detention and to the abandonment of any claims by the owners against the customs, or the customs officers, warehousemen or agents, for compensation or damages for the seizure, detention, warehousing or keeping of the property. ARTICLE IV The High Contracting Parties reciprocally agree to exchange information concerning the names and activities of all persons known or suspected to be engaged in violations of the narcotic laws of the United States or of Canada respectively.

ARTICLE V It is agreed that the customs and other administrative officials of the respective Governments of the United States and of Canada shall upon request be directed to attend as witnesses and to produce such available records and files or certified copies thereof as may be considered essential to the trial of civil or criminal cases, and as may be produced compatibly with the public interest. The cost of transcripts of records, depositions, certificates and letters rogatory in civil or criminal cases, and the cost of first-class transportation both ways, maintenance and other proper expenses involved in the attendance of such witnesses shall be paid by the nation requesting their attendance at the time of their discharge by the court from further attendance at such trial. Letters rogatory and commissions shall be executed with all possible despatch and copies of official records or documents shall be certified promptly by the appropriate officials in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the respective countries. ARTICLE VI The following offenses are added to the list of offenses numbered 1 to 3 in Article I of the Treaty concluded between the United States and Great Britain on May 18, 1908,62 with reference to reciprocal rights for the United States and Canada in the matters of conveyance of prisoners and wrecking and salvage, that is to say: 4. Offenses against the narcotic laws of the respective Governments. ARTICLE VII No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attached to alcoholic liquors or to vessels, vehicles or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors when they are in transit under guard by Canadian authorities through the territorial waters of the United States to Skagway, Alaska, and thence by the shortest route, via the White Pass and Yukon Railway, upwards of twenty miles to Canadian territory, and such transit shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of alcoholic liquors through the Panama Canal or on the Panama Railroad,

provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel or vehicle on which they are carried remains within the United States, its territories or possessions, and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions. ARTICLE VIII This Convention shall be ratified, and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. The Convention shall come into effect at the expiration of ten days from the date of the exchange of ratifications, and it shall remain in force for one year. If upon the expiration of one year after the Convention shall have been in force no notice is given by either party of a desire to terminate the same, it shall continue in force until thirty days after either party shall have given notice to the other of a desire to terminate the Convention.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals. DONE at the city of Washington this sixth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] ERNEST LAPOINTE

Panama, June 6, 1924 [123] The Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs, Department of State (White) to the Secretary of State Washington, May 28, 1924. [124] Convention between the United States of America and Panama, Signed at Washington, June 6, 1924 Done at the city of Washington, this sixth day of June in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. Treaty Series No. 707 [125] The Secretary of State to the Panaman Minister (Alfaro) Washington, June 6, 1924.

[Document 123] The Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs, Department of State (White) to the Secretary of State WASHINGTON, May 28, 1924. DEAR MR. SECRETARY: The Panaman Minister has just telephoned to say that he had received instructions from his Government to sign the liquor treaty as given to him the other day (I gave him an exact copy of the German treaty, mutatis mutandis). His Government desired, however, to have reference made to the special conditions existing between the Canal Zone and Panama and the question of the three mile limit. Certain waters three miles from the Canal Zone limits are Panaman territorial waters, and he suggests an exchange of notes at the time of the signing of the treaty making reservations on this point. He would also like to have it stated in the exchange of notes that the article which we have agreed upon on the subject of the carriage of liquors, under seal and certificate by the Panaman authorities from the terminal ports of the Canal to the cities of Panama and Colon and from those cities to other ports in the Republic, for inclusion in the treaty to take the place of the Taft Agreement63 will in no manner be prejudiced by the signing of this special liquor treaty. Mr. Baker is drafting the proposed exchange of notes. WHITE 63 For correspondence on inconclusive negotiations for a convention to replace the Taft Agreement, see vol. II, pp. 521 ff.

Treaty Series No. 707 [Document 124] Convention between the United States of America and Panama, Signed at Washington, June 6, 192464 The President of the United States of America and the President of the Republic of Panama being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America, Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America, and The President of Panama, Ricardo J. Alfaro, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Panama in Washington, Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties declare that it is their firm intention to uphold the principle that three marine miles extending from the coast line outwards and measured from low-water mark constitute the proper limits of territorial waters. ARTICLE II (1) The President of Panama agrees that Panama will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the Panaman flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions, in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have

imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such enquiries and examinations show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws. (3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense, and shall not be exercised in waters adjacent to territorial waters of the Canal Zone. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised. ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or possessions on board Panaman vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV Any claim by a Panaman vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties. Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse. If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty shall lapse. ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Treaty not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof and by the President of Panama in accordance with the requirements of the Panaman Constitution; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate and have thereunto affixed their seals. Done at the city of Washington, this sixth day of June in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] R. J. ALFARO

64 In English and Spanish; Spanish text not printed. Ratification advised by

France, June 30, 1924 [127] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the French Ambassador (Jusserand), June 21, 1924 June 21, 1924

Treaty Series No. 755 [Document 128] Convention between the United States of America and France, Signed at Washington, June 30, 192466 The President of the United States of America and the President of the French Republic being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: Mr. Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and The President of the French Republic: Mr. J. J. Jusserand, Ambassador of the French Republic to the United States; Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties respectively retain their rights and claims, without prejudice by reason of this agreement, with respect to the extent of their territorial jurisdiction.

ARTICLE II (1) The President of the French Republic agrees that France will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the French flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring

to import or have imported alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be effected. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws. (3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised. ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or possessions on board French vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV Any claim by a French vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties. Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to an umpire selected by the two Governments; should they fail to agree on the choice of that umpire, it shall be referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard being had for Articles

Three months before the expiration of the said period of one year, either of the High Contracting Parties may give notice of its desire to propose modifications in the terms of the Treaty. If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse. If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above three months before its expiration modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty shall lapse. ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Treaty not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by the President of the French Republic in accordance with the constitutional laws of France; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate in the English and French languages and have thereunto affixed their seals. Done at the city of Washington this thirtieth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.

[SEAL] CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] JUSSERAND 66 In English and French; French text not printed. Ratification advised by

The Netherlands, August 21, 1924 [129] The Netherlands Minister (De Graeff) to the Secretary of State Washington , June 12, 1924.

In case the United States Government should not be able to agree with this modification, it seems at any rate desirable to add a clause to this article, stipulating that the rights conferred by it can never he exercised at a distance greater than 12 geographical miles from the coast of the United States, its territories or possessions. 3. It seems further desirable to make an exception on the stipulation in Article 3 prohibiting the unloading of liquor within the United States, in so far that unloading for transhipment in another Netherland vessel may be possible. The addition to the end of the article 3 of the words: “unloading for transhipment in another Netherland vessel is allowed” is therefore proposed. It be moreover well understood that by “seastores” not only the liquor destined for the use of the crew and the passengers is meant but also the provisions for medical purposes. 4. The Royal Government agrees with the provisions of the first part of the Article 4, ruling that claims for compensation will be referred to the joint consideration of two persons nominated for the purpose and that in case no joint report can be agreed upon, these claims shall be submitted to the Permanent Court of Arbitration. The arrangement however prescribed in the second part of this article seems hardly to be acceptable. The latter part of this article is evidently taken from the “special agreement for the submitting to arbitration of pecuniary claims outstanding between Great Britain and the

shall bear its own expenses and half of the expenses of the tribunal”. So the stipulation shall be in harmony with the tenor of the article 57 of the

Wasuincron , June 12, 1924,

67 . ° ~~ foreign Relations 1911, p. 266.

are arranged between the United States and our country in a different way as between the United States and other countries. Furthermore, in sub 6° of the said note I suggested an exchange of notes regarding the substitution of the Permanent Court of Arbitration by the Permanent Court of International Justice in case the United States should adhere to the Protocol of the latter Court. In your note no special mention has been made of this suggestion, which seems to my Government a logical consequence of the notes I had the pleasure to exchange with you on the occasion of the renewal of the Arbitration treaty between the United States and The Netherlands. Being desirous to bring the negotiations about the treaty in question to a conclusion, the Royal Government, although reluctantly, has decided to abandon further discussion on the modifications proposed sub 4° and 5° of my note of June 12, 1924, but feels obliged to emphasize once more the great importances She attaches to the suggested exchange of notes and to express the hope that the United States Government as yet could be found willing to accede to this proposal. In order to make clear the intentions of the Royal Government I take the liberty to enclose herewith a draft of the note that eventually I could sign simultaneously with the signature of the Convention.71 In expectation of your answer, I beg to inform you that I am in possession of a formal authorization to sign on behalf of the Royal Government a treaty in conformity with the draft which you handed to me on March 22, 1924, provided that in the penultimate paragraph the words “in the English and Dutch languages” are inserted between the words “in duplicate” and “and”. The Dutch text of the drafted convention has been mailed to me but has not yet reached me. Accept [etc.] DE GRAEFF

While offering you my anticipated thanks I avail myself [etc.] DE GRAEFF

Treaty Series No. 712 [Document 135] Convention between the United States of America and the Netherlands, Signed at Washington, August 21, 192473 The President of the United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands being desirous of avoiding any difficulties which might arise between them in connection with the laws in force in the United States on the subject of alcoholic beverages have decided to conclude a Convention for that purpose, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America: Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States; and Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands: Jonkheer Dr. A. C. D. de Graeff, Her Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the United States of America; Who, having communicated their full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE I The High Contracting Parties declare that it is their firm intention to uphold the principle that 3 marine miles extending from the coastline outwards and measured from low-water mark constitute the proper limits of territorial waters. ARTICLE II (1) Her Majesty agrees that she will raise no objection to the boarding of private vessels under the Netherlands flag outside the limits of territorial waters by the authorities of the United States, its territories or possessions in order that enquiries may be addressed to those on board and an examination be made of the ship’s papers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the vessel or those on board are endeavoring to import or have imported

alcoholic beverages into the United States, its territories or possessions in violation of the laws there in force. When such enquiries and examination show a reasonable ground for suspicion, a search of the vessel may be initiated. (2) If there is reasonable cause for belief that the vessel has committed or is committing or attempting to commit an offense against the laws of the United States, its territories or possessions prohibiting the importation of alcoholic beverages, the vessel may be seized and taken into a port of the United States, its territories or possessions for adjudication in accordance with such laws. (3) The rights conferred by this article shall not be exercised at a greater distance from the coast of the United States its territories or possessions than can be traversed in one hour by the vessel suspected of endeavoring to commit the offense. In cases, however, in which the liquor is intended to be conveyed to the United States its territories or possessions by a vessel other than the one boarded and searched, it shall be the speed of such other vessel and not the speed of the vessel boarded, which shall determine the distance from the coast at which the right under this article can be exercised. ARTICLE III No penalty or forfeiture under the laws of the United States shall be applicable or attach to alcoholic liquors or to vessels or persons by reason of the carriage of such liquors, when such liquors are listed as sea stores or cargo destined for a port foreign to the United States, its territories or possessions on board Netherlands vessels voyaging to or from ports of the United States, or its territories or possessions or passing through the territorial waters thereof, and such carriage shall be as now provided by law with respect to the transit of such liquors through the Panama Canal, provided that such liquors shall be kept under seal continuously while the vessel on which they are carried remains within said territorial waters and that no part of such liquors shall at any time or place be unladen within the United States, its territories or possessions.

ARTICLE IV Any claim by a Netherlands vessel for compensation on the grounds that it has suffered loss or injury through the improper or unreasonable exercise of the rights conferred by Article II of this Treaty or on the ground that it has not been given the benefit of Article III shall be referred for the joint consideration of two persons, one of whom shall be nominated by each of the High Contracting Parties. Effect shall be given to the recommendations contained in any such joint report. If no joint report can be agreed upon, the claim shall be referred to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague described in the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague, October 18, 1907. The arbitral tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Article 87 (Chapter IV) and with Article 59 (Chapter III) of the said Convention. The proceedings shall be regulated by so much of Chapter IV of the said Convention and of Chapter III thereof (special regard

If such modifications have not been agreed upon before the expiration of the term of one year mentioned above, the Treaty shall lapse. If no notice is given on either side of the desire to propose modifications, the Treaty shall remain in force for another year, and so on automatically, but subject always in respect of each such period of a year to the right on either side to propose as provided above, three months before its expiration, modifications in the Treaty, and to the provision that if such modifications are not agreed upon before the close of the period of one year, the Treaty shall lapse.

ARTICLE VI In the event that either of the High Contracting Parties shall be prevented either by judicial decision or legislative action from giving full effect to the provisions of the present Treaty the said Treaty shall automatically lapse, and, on such lapse or whenever this Treaty shall cease to be in force, each High Contracting Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had this Treaty not been concluded. The present Convention shall be duly ratified by the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and by Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands; and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington as soon as possible. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Convention in duplicate in the English and Dutch languages and have thereunto affixed their seals. Done at the city of Washington this twenty-first day of August, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four. CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] DE GRAEFF [SEAL]

73 In English and Dutch; Dutch text not printed. Ratification advised by the

I shall be glad to have you confirm this understanding on behalf of your Government. Accept [etc.] DE GRAEFF

Accept [etc. ]

Cartes E. Hucues

Representations by Salvador, Cuba, Rumania, Norway, and Italy regarding proposed legislation to restrict immigration into the United States [138] The Salvadoran Chargé (Castro) to the Secretary of State Washington, January 4, 1924.

[142] The Secretary of State to the Rumanian Chargé (Nano) Washington , February 19, 1924.

press, Jan. 2, 1924; it advocated application of the quota arrangement to Canada, Mexico, and South and Central America.

indifferent to any Government interested in assisting the world to recover from the consequences of the world war. [ WASHINGTON ,] February 2, 1924.

It is hardly necessary for me to say that I am in favor of suitable restrictions upon immigration. The questions which especially concern the Department of State in relation to the international effects of the proposed measure are these: (1) the question of treaty obligations; (2) the provision excluding Japanese; (3) the establishment of the quotas upon the basis of the Census of 1890. First. Treaties.—According to the terms of the proposed measure “immigrant” is defined (Sec. 3) as “any alien departing from any place outside the United States destined for the United States, except (1) a government official, his family, attendants, servants, and employees, (2) an alien visiting the United States as a tourist or temporarily for business or pleasure, (3) an alien in continuous transit through the United States, (4) an alien lawfully admitted to the United States who later goes in transit from one part of the United States to another through foreign contiguous territory, and (5) a bona fide alien seaman serving as such on a vessel arriving at a port of the United States and seeking to enter temporarily the United States solely in the pursuit of his calling as a seaman.” The result is that under this definition of “immigrant” all aliens are subject to the restrictions of the proposed measure unless they fall within the stated exceptions. The question at once arises whether there would be aliens, not falling within these exceptions who would be entitled to be admitted under our treaties. Article I of the Treaty between the United States and Japan, concluded in 1911,80 provides: “The citizens or subjects of each of the High Contracting Parties shall have liberty to enter, travel and reside in the territories of the other to carry on trade, wholesale and retail, to own or lease and occupy houses, manufactories, warehouses and shops, to employ agents of their choice, to lease land for residential and commercial purposes, and generally to do anything incident to or necessary for trade upon the same terms as native citizens or subjects, submitting themselves to the laws and regulations there established.”

There appears to be no such exception in the proposed measure as that contained in subdivision (5) of paragraph (a) of Section 2 of the quota act of 1921,81 and hence the proposed restrictions would apply to Japan not simply in relation to laborers or other classes falling outside of our treaty but with respect to those who come directly within the provisions of our treaty as above set forth.

Reference may also be made to our treaties with Great Britain of 1815, with

immigrant under the provisions of sub-divisions (b), (d) or (g) of

It is apparent that Section 12, sub-division (b) taken in connection with Sections 3 and 4 of the proposed measure, operates to exclude Japanese. This is inconsistent with the provision of the Treaty of 1911 abovementioned, and, with respect to those denned as immigrants who do not come within the treaty, it establishes a statutory exclusion. So far as the latter class is concerned, the question presented is one of policy. There can be no question that such a statutory exclusion will be deeply resented by the Japanese people. It would be idle to insist that the provision is not aimed at the Japanese, for the proposed measure (Sec. 25) continues in force the existing legislation regulating Chinese immigration and the Barred Zone provisions of our immigration laws which prohibit immigration from certain other portions of Asia. The practical effect of Section 12 (b) is to single out Japanese immigrants for exclusion. The Japanese are a sensitive people and unquestionably would regard such a legislative enactment as fixing a stigma upon them. I regret to be compelled to say that I believe such legislative action would largely undo the work of the Washington Conference on Limitation of Armament, which so greatly improved our relations with Japan. The manifestation of American interest

and generosity in providing relief to the sufferers from the recent earthquake disaster in Japan would not avail to diminish the resentment which would follow the enactment of such a measure, as this enactment would be regarded as an insult not to be palliated by any act of charity. It is useless to argue whether or not such a feeling would be justified; it is quite sufficient to say that it would exist. It has already been manifested in the discussions in Japan with respect to the pendency of this measure and no amount of argument can avail to remove it. The question is thus presented whether it is worth while thus to affront a friendly nation with whom we have established most cordial relations and what gain there would be from such action. Permit me to suggest that the legislation would seem to be quite unnecessary even for the purpose for which it is devised. It is to be noted that if the provision of subdivision (b) of Section 12 were eliminated, and the quota provided in Section 10 of the proposed measure were to be applied to Japan, there would be a total of only 246 Japanese immigrants entitled to enter under the quota as thus determined. That is to say, this would be the number equal to two per cent, of the number of residents in the United States as determined by the Census of 1890 plus 200. There would remain, of course, the non-quota immigrants, but if it could possibly be regarded that the provisions of Section 4 would unduly enlarge the number admitted, these provisions could be modified without involving a statutory discrimination aimed at the Japanese. We now have an understanding with the Japanese Government whereby Japan undertakes to prevent the immigration of laborers from Japan to the United States except the parents, wives and children of those already resident here. Furthermore, the Japanese Government, incidentally to this undertaking, now regulates immigration to territory contiguous to the United States with the object of preventing the departure from Japan of persons who are likely to obtain surreptitious entry into this country. If the provision of Section 12 (b) were to be deleted and the provision in regard to certificates for immigrants to this country were to become applicable to Japan, we should with the present understanding with the Japanese Government be in a position to obtain active cooperation by the Japanese authorities in the granting of passport and immigration certificates. We could in addition be assured that the Japanese Government would give its assistance in scrutinizing and regulating immigration from Japan to

American territory contiguous to the United States. It is believed that such an arrangement involving a double control over the Japanese quota of less than 250 a year would accomplish a much more effective regulation of unassimilable and undesirable classes of Japanese immigrants than it would be practicable for us, with our long land frontier lines on both North and South to accomplish by attempting to establish a general bar against Japanese subjects to the loss of cooperation with the Japanese Government in controlling the movement of their I people to the United States and adjacent territories. I am unable to perceive that the exclusion provision is necessary and I must strongly urge upon you the advisability, in the interest of our international relations, of eliminating it. The Japanese Government has already brought the matter to the attention of the Department of State and there is the deepest interest in the attitude of Congress with respect to this subject. Third.—There remains the question of the adoption of the Census of 1890 as the basis of quota restriction. This has evoked representations from European countries, and especially from Italy, which regards the choice of such a basis as a discrimination against her. On December 31, 1923 I communicated to you a memorandum presented to the Department of State by the Italian Ambassador82 and, as I have no doubt that your committee will examine these representations attentively, I shall not attempt to add any further recital of facts. In appropriately providing for a restriction of immigration, the importance of which I fully recognize, I hope that it will be possible to find some basis which will be proof against the charge of discrimination.

In addition to the questions considered above, permit me to direct your attention to the following: Section 4 (c) of the proposed measure does not appear to provide for immigrants from British Honduras and British, French and Dutch Guiana as they would seem not to be “countries of Central or South America” within the meaning of the bill (See sec. 11 (a)). It is also not clear from the provisions of Section 4 (c) that it would provide for Haiti,

the Dominican Republic, the British, French and Dutch islands of the West Indies, St. Pierre and Miquelon, and Greenland. It is also to be noted that Section 4 (c) applies only to residents of the countries named and makes no provision for persons born in these countries, and citizens of them, but residing abroad. In view of the fact that under Section 11 (a), for the purposes of the Act, nationality is to be determined by country of birth, it would appear that such persons would still be referred to the country of birth and yet could not come in as nonquota immigrants. This would apparently make necessary the establishing of quotas to cover such classes, but it is not clear that this is the intention of the measure, or, on the other hand, that there is any reason why such persons should not be able to come in as “non-quota immigrants” as well as those who are described in Section 4 (c). I therefore suggest that you consider amending Section 4 (c) to read as follows: “(c) An immigrant who was born in or has resided continuously for at least 10 years immediately preceding the time of his application for admission to the United States in the Dominion of Canada, Newfoundland, the Republics of Mexico, Cuba, and Haiti, the Dominican Republic, countries of Central America and of South America, colonies and dependencies of European countries in Central America, South America, the West Indies, or other islands adjacent to the American continents, and his wife, and his unmarried children under 18 years of age, if accompanying or following to join him.” I desire to invite your attention to the fact that under the provisions of Section 6 (f) the only copy of the application for an immigration certificate is attached to the immigration certificate, and would therefore be delivered to the alien with the immigration certificate and surrendered to the immigration officer at the port of arrival in the United States. This would leave the Government without a copy of the application and without any record of the facts upon which the immigration certificate was issued. It would seem that difficulties might arise on account of lost certificates or that copies of the applications might be desired for use in prosecutions where false statements were made, or where the certificate was altered

while in the immigrant’s possession. I therefore believe that it would be desirable to provide that a copy of the application for an immigration certificate should be kept on file in the Consular Office. Section 8 (e) provides that if the Commissioner General finds the fact stated in the petition to be true and the immigrant is entitled to admission as a nonquota immigrant, he shall, through the Secretary of State, authorize the Consular Officer to issue an immigration certificate. I consider it important that Consular Officers shall continue to be under the direction and control of the Department of State and I assume that it is not the intention to divert this control which is important in order that there may be retained for such Officers the recognition which they should receive from the foreign governments concerned. I suggest the advisability, in order to avoid any possible question, of amending Section 8 (e) by striking out the words “he shall, through the Secretary of State, authorize the Consular Officer with whom the application for the immigration certificate has been filed to issue the immigration certificate” and by inserting in lieu thereof the following: “he shall inform the Secretary of State of his decision and the Secretary of State shall then authorize the Consular Officer with whom the application for the immigration certificate has been filed to issue the immigration certificate.” With regard to Section 11 (a), I may state that some question has arisen under the present Quota Act whether the words “treating as separate countries the colonies or dependencies for which separate enumeration was made in the United States census” were sufficient to authorize the granting of a separate quota to Australia, which is a self-governing dominion under the British Empire. In order that this doubt may be removed, I suggest that in line 17, page 14, after the word “countries”, the words “the selfgoverning dominions,” be inserted. With respect to Section 11 (a) (1) which provides that the nationality of a minor child accompanied by its alien parent not born in the United States shall be determined by the country of birth of such parent, if such parent is entitled to an immigration certificate, I may observe that in case the minor child is accompanied by both parents it is not clear whether the nationality

of the minor child shall be determined by the place of birth of the father or of the mother. I suggest that the following provision be added: “If the minor child is accompanied by both parents its nationality shall be determined by the country of birth of the father.” With respect to Section 11 (a) (2), I desire to invite attention to the fact that apparently this Section creates a class of immigration certificates that are not to be counted as quota certificates and are also not issued as non-quota certificates. The issuance of such certificates may cause difficulties in the regulation of the number of immigration certificates to be issued by Consular Officers. I believe that a more definite provision on this subject should be included in the Act. Section 11 (b) incorporates provisions contained in the present Quota Act. In administering these provisions certain difficulties have arisen which, I believe, it would be advisable to remedy in the proposed legislation, as follows: Section 11 (b) (1) refers to changes in political boundaries in foreign countries occurring subsequent to 1890 and resulting in the creation of new countries, the governments of which are recognized by the United States. This provision does not deal with the establishment of a new selfgoverning dominion within the British Empire since 1890. Under the provisions of the present law consideration was given to the matter of establishing a separate quota for the Irish Free State which is a new selfgoverning dominion. It appeared, however, that such a separate quota was not warranted by the terms of the law. For administrative reasons it would be helpful if separate quotas could be given the self-governing dominions. Reference is made in this connection to the fact that the census of 1890 does not contain a separate enumeration for New Zealand or the Union of South Africa. It is therefore believed that the following amendment should be added after the word “States” in line 18, page 15, the words “or in the establishment of self-governing dominions”. I may also observe that questions have arisen under the provisions of the present law, which are incorporated in Section 11 (b) (2) concerning the establishment of quotas covering the territories which had been transferred by the government exercising sovereignty therein in 1910 but where formal recognition of a new sovereign had not been extended by the Government

of the United States. Cases of this character have arisen with respect to Palestine, Syria, Fiume, and other territories involved in settlements arising out of the World War. I believe that this situation could be dealt with by

With respect to Section 24, which provides that the Commissioner General shall prescribe rules and regulations for the enforcement of the provisions of the Act, so far as its administration by Consular Officers is concerned, subject to the approval of the Secretary of State, I desire to refer to my comments with respect to Section 8 (e). For the reasons there stated, I am of the opinion that the rules and regulations, so far as they relate to Consular Officers should be prescribed by the Secretary of State upon the recommendation of the Commissioner General. I remain [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES 79 Not printed.

necessary national measure to safeguard public order and with the regulations relating to passports. If American consular certificates should be issued before the prospective immigrant has obtained an indispensable Italian passport this would doubtlessly lead towards encouraging and facilitating the exit of certain individuals to the departure of whom the Italian authorities may oppose themselves for reasons of public order or on account of unfulfilled military service. 3) The issuance of numbered certificates or visa certificates may be an efficient means for maintaining the number of emigrants within the quota limits and of reducing the number of rejections of immigrants from the United States. In accordance to the sovereign rights of every state to regulate the admittance of aliens within its territory, the United States government has doubtlessly the faculty to subordinate the admittance of an immigrant to certain requisites and formalities. But the exertion of such right must not come into contrast with the Italian Government’s exclusive right of jurisdiction over its own subjects in Italy.

Therefore the American consuls in the fulfilment of their customary functions should not broaden these out with reference to the certificates into an extraordinary investigation that would become a jurisdictional act exceeding the recognized consular functions. The proper selection of immigrants as desired by the United States can only be efficiently accomplished by a friendly cooperation between the United States consular officers and the Italian Authorities, due regard being taken toward the legitimate requirements and the unquestionable prerogative of one and the other country. The Italian Commissariat of Emigration has constantly given proof of its willingness in such direction. 4) The Johnson bill contemplates the admittance, extra quota, of children, wives and parents of American citizens, but the Reed bill only grants them a

preference in obtaining the visa certificates. There seems to be every good reason to believe that the free admittance into the United States should be a privilege accruing to the family of every citizen through his constitutional right to cohabitate with his wife and children and to be unhampered in the enjoyment of family life. 5) The provision of laying the burden of proof on the alien in case of refusal of admittance or of deportation from the United States, contained in both the Reed and the Johnson bills, is in contradiction to the recognized procedure of law the world over; in the original Reed bill N. 2576 it was applicable to all individuals but in the amended bill the word “individual” has been substituted by the word “alien” thereby refusing to aliens an equitable safeguard granted to any citizen. It should also be considered that in accordance to Section 2 (e) of the Reed bill the visa certificate is to be surrendered by the immigrant to the immigration officer at the port of entry so that he finds himself deprived of the most important document with which to prove that he has been lawfully admitted into the United States. The Italian Government sincerely hopes that the preceding remarks may be taken into serious consideration by the United States Government with the aim of suggesting such forms in the drafting of the immigration law and regulations as will harmonize the rightful interests and the friendly feelings of their respective countries.84 WASHINGTON , April 5, 1924.

Arrangements with foreign governments for a flight around the world by United States Army airplanes [148] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Denmark (Prince)

[182] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Japan (Caffery)

811.2300/–: Telegram [Document 148] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Denmark (Prince)

90 Not printed.

Seattle, Washington 770 miles Amoy, China miles Prince Rupert, British Columbia 650 miles Hongkong miles Haipong, French Indo- China miles Sitka, Alaska 300 miles Tourane, French Indo- China miles Cordova, Alaska 475 miles Saigon, French Indo- China miles Seward, Alaska 135 miles Bangkok, Siam miles Chignik, Alaska 450 miles Rangoon, Burma miles Akutan or Dutch Harbor, Unalaska

Aleppo, Syria 480 miles Angmagsalik, Greenland miles Konia, Turkey 285 miles Avigtut, Greenland miles San Stefano, Turkey91 300 miles Rigolet, Labrador (Indian Harbor) miles Belgrade, Yugoslavia 525 miles Vienna, Austria 340 miles Mingan, Quebec miles Strassbourg, France 400 miles Quebec, Quebec miles Paris, France 250 miles Montreal, Quebec miles London, England 225 miles Keyport, New Jersey miles Hull, England 155 miles Washington, D. C. miles Kirkwall, Orkney Islands 370 miles The Chief of the Air Service is desirous of sending Lieutenant Clayton Bissell over the proposed route of the projected flight through British Columbia from Victoria to Prince Rupert as soon after January 1, 1924 as the weather will permit, the purpose of his trip being to make all necessary arrangements in connection with the flight relative to supplies, transportation facilities, et cetera. I should greatly appreciate it if you would be so good as to inform me whether or not Lieutenant Bissell’s trip would be agreeable to the Dominion Authorities. Accept [etc.] For the Secretary of State: WILLIAM PHILLIPS 90a Telegram no. 385, infra.

91 On Dec. 29 the Legations in Bulgaria and Yugoslavia and the High Commissioner at Constantinople were informed that the itinerary had been changed to “San Stefano to Bucharest to Belgrade.”

Thorshavn (Faroe Islands); Greenland to Rigolet to Mingan, to Quebec, to Montreal, to Keyport, New Jersey. Tentative itinerary of entire flight is being forwarded to you by mail.93 HUGHES 92 The same telegram, mutatis mutandis and with appropriate changes of itinerary in point 5 of the note to be addressed to the Foreign Offices, was

24 Not printed.

Thus far Japanese military authorities have been unwilling to consent to Nutt’s proceeding to Kuriles as they say Japanese air service officials will look after all details regarding fueling, landings, etc., as well as provide accommodation on destroyers for American flight officers arriving in aeroplanes. In view of consistent and insistent reference of Japanese War Office to fact that there is no open port in Kuriles, it is my opinion that they would regard suggestion that Nutt proceed there on United States destroyer with disapproval and suspicion. I understand informal British request for similar privileges already refused. WOODS

Woons = Not printed.

Representations by the United States against the exclusion of American Mormon missionaries from certain European countries [189] Senator Reed Smoot to the Secretary of State Washington, March 24, 1921.

[193] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Wright)

[199] The Minister in Sweden (Morris) to the Secretary of State

Do not hesitate to call upon me at any time for any information touching this question. Sincerely yours, REED SMOOT 27 Senator from Utah and Apostle in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints.

In relation to this matter I would say that I have done everything possible to have the Swedish Government postpone action pointing out to them, as set forth in your telegram, the desirability of a thorough investigation before any drastic action should take place. In connection with this the Foreign Minister stated that the question was not a new one and that the Government had gone into this question very thoroughly and had come to their decision regarding same in Crown Council which was unanimous and therefore were averse to our request that no drastic action be taken until the matter could be fully investigated. I have also spoken several times and had a conference with the leaders of the American Mormons in Sweden and they assure me they feel and they are satisfied that the Legation is doing everything possible regarding the matter. MORRIS 31 Original in Department file is numbered 13; not printed. 32 Neither printed.

received a reply (a copy and translation of which is also enclosed herewith)38 in which it is stated that the Norwegian Government has issued no general instructions to its diplomatic and consular officers to refuse visas to Mormon missionaries, but that the Department of Justice maintains that questions of this character must be submitted to the Central Passport Bureau for its decision and that that Bureau will very likely refuse all or the majority of such requests. I have [etc.] A. G. SCHMEDEMAN 38 Not printed. 38 Not printed.

You may, however, inform the Political Department, unofficially, that polygamy is forbidden not only by the laws of the United States but as well

by the Mormon Church, and that this Government hopes that the Swiss authorities will accord to Mormon missionaries the same privileges that are granted to missionaries of other faiths. For the Secretary of State: WILLIAM PHILLIPS 40 Neither printed.

The Department of Justice and Police has now taken favorable action on my note, reversing its previous decision, when the question was submitted through the Norwegian Legation at Washington. I have [etc.] LAURITS S. SWENSON 43 Not printed.

in its attitude towards the representatives of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Since my arrival here, however, no concrete case has arisen to give an opportunity for me to make representations to the Foreign Office in this matter until the one which is the subject of this report to the Department. In handing to Baron Marcks von Wurtemberg my note of December 17th, 1923,45 regarding the case of Mr. Wright, I went into the subject as fully as the information on file at the Legation would permit. I mentioned, in the course of our conversation, that the restrictions in Norway, somewhat similar to those in Sweden, had recently been removed. Last evening I dined with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and after dinner he referred to this matter of the Mormon missionaries. He said that it presented considerable difficulty to his Government, as the information which it has regarding the Mormon Church was not favorable. He spoke of a report to the Swedish Government which had been made some years ago, promising to send me a copy, which I shall forward to the Department as soon as possible. I learned that the Minister has instructed the Swedish Legation at Washington and the Swedish Consulate at San Francisco to make new investigation of the activities and standing of the Mormon Church. In view of this instruction, the Minister said it would be some time before he could make an answer to the note which I sent to him on December 17th last. Should the Department see no objection, I beg that the information contained in this despatch be brought to the attention of Senator Smoot, in order that he may be acquainted with the present situation regarding the entrance of Mormon missionaries into Sweden and, also, that he may inform the competent authorities of the Mormon Church of the investigation which is to be made by the Swedish diplomatic and consular officers in order that they may facilitate such investigation if the proper opportunity presents itself. In this respect, it is my opinion that it would not be advisable for the Mormon Church to repeat the invitation that an investigation be made nor

to offer to pay the expenses of an investigator of the Swedish Government, as its previous offer of this nature was rejected in terms which do not

contrary to law or morality, they will be granted the same privileges and protection as are accorded to other aliens and will not be discriminated against merely because of their religion. However, should the Swiss authorities insist upon enforcing the laws of Switzerland bearing upon the stay of Mormon missionaries in that country, the Department considers that you would not be warranted in intervening in behalf of any American citizens who may be affected by such laws unless in enforcing the regulations governing the departure of such missionaries from Swiss territory, American citizens should be subjected to harsh or arbitrary treatment. A copy of this instruction has been sent to the Legation at Berne for its information. For the Secretary of State: JOSEPH C. GREW 46 Not printed.

In the past it has been the practice of the Legation to deal with each case as it arose, to endeavor to secure the statement of the reasons for the action taken by the cantonal authorities and frequently to secure an extension of the time limit fixed by the local authorities. It has recently become increasingly evident, however, that the cantonal authorities, notably those of the canton of Zurich, where most of the Mormon missionaries reside, have adopted a definite policy of eliminating them gradually from the canton through a refusal to renew their residence permits. Several of the missionaries have recently been informed that their present permits will not be renewed and that they will be expected to leave the canton of Zurich before the end of the year. I am further informed that a number of other missionaries expect such notification in due course. In view of this the Department may wish to consider the entire question and to give the Legation and consular officers in Switzerland some general instructions to govern their action in dealing with this case.

It would be very helpful to me to have the Department’s instructions on the following points: 1. Whether the Department is disposed to take exception to the Swiss contention that those provisions of the Constitution bearing upon religious liberty concern Swiss citizens only and cannot be invoked by the missionaries as specifically covering their proselytizing. If it is desired that I take exception to the Swiss position I should like a statement of the Department’s views for my guidance. 2. Whether the Department is disposed to contest the Swiss contention that Article III of the Convention of Friendship, Commerce and Extradition gives full warrant for refusing residence permits to American citizens whose presence is considered undesirable by the Swiss authorities; if so on what grounds.

3. What action the Department desires me to take on behalf of these missionaries. If it is desired that I support the contention of these missionaries that they should be allowed to remain indefinitely I should like a statement of the arguments to be advanced on their behalf. In deciding this question the Department will doubtless wish to bear in mind the possibility that serious pressure on behalf of these people may compromise the ability of the Legation to support the interests of other Americans who are in need of its assistance. Pending receipt of the Department’s instructions, I shall continue to deal with each case individually, to seek an explanation of the reasons for refusing to renew residence permits and where such action by me appears warranted, to request that suitable extensions be granted. In submitting the foregoing I venture to point out that action in some of the cases now pending is contemplated not later than October 31st. I should be glad, therefore, if I might be given full telegraphic instructions as soon as possible. I have [etc.] HUGH GIBSON

Grew

at their disposal to bring about a modification of the cantonal decisions. The memorandum adds that, in view of the foregoing, the missionaries in this country have never been disturbed in any way on account of their personal religious convictions. The refusal of certain cantons to prolong the residence permits of the missionaries in question has, on the contrary, been especially necessitated by their proselytizing methods which have caused trouble and disturbances in many Swiss families, disturbances which in turn have led to general complaints. In view of these frequent unfortunate experiences, the memorandum declares that there is nothing surprising in the action of the cantonal authorities. In discussing this matter with the appropriate official of the Political Department, the Legation was clearly informed that the portion of this memorandum which concerns the measures taken by the cantonal authorities, alone relates to the missionaries the prolongation of whose residence permits has at this time been refused—and in no way applies to Mormon missionaries as a class. He went on to say that there were a large number of missionaries residing in Switzerland whose activities had caused no criticism whatsoever and so long as no complaints were generally directed against these remaining missionaries they would be allowed to reside undisturbed in Switzerland. It would not appear that the Legation has grounds for making further representations to the Federal authorities on behalf of the missionaries whose prolongation of residence permits has been refused in view of the nature of the foregoing memorandum. It has been definitely stated that the cantonal authorities are supreme in matters of this sort; that their decisions are without appeal; that their action in these cases under reference has in no way been influenced by their religious beliefs, and that their decisions in each case to refuse the prolongation of residence permits were solely based on the fact that complaints had been generally directed against these particular missionaries for having caused disturbances in various families. In emphasizing this portion of the memorandum, the official of the Political Department with whom this matter was discussed made the following observation: He said that only a few days ago a member of the National Council had come to his office with the request that representations be made to this Legation with a view to securing for him permission to remain

in the United States on his proposed visit for a longer period than is provided for by the immigration act with respect to the residence in America of non immigrants. The official in question told the deputy that, as the question of the residence of foreigners in the United States was purely a matter of national sovereignty, he must decline to make the representations requested. The fact that it has not been possible to extend the residence permits of the missionaries in question has been communicated to them and I understand that their departure from Switzerland has taken place in accordance with the limit of time placed upon their residence. I have [etc.] HUGH GIBSON 49 Not printed. 49 Not printed.

While this Government does not contest the right of the authorities of East Prussia to request an American citizen to leave the territory under their jurisdiction in case he proves himself a cause of serious disturbance, it is considered, however, that he should be given an opportunity to defend himself respecting charges brought against him and that a failure of the authorities to accord him a hearing constitutes an arbitrary exercise of the right of expulsion. This Government considers, moreover, that the reasons given by the local authorities for refusing to allow Mr. James to defend himself against the charges, namely that he could not have disproved them and that the witnesses produced by him would not be willing to testify against him, are not convincing and, in fact, are contradictory. If the report of this case as received by the East Prussian authorities is correct, they might, it would seem, have been able to obtain the testimony of witnesses to substantiate the charges and refute the defense set up by Mr. James and his supporters. In bringing the foregoing considerations to the attention of the German Foreign Office, you will advise it that it is not sought to obtain a reversal of the decision in this case since it appears that Mr. James does not desire to return to East Prussia but that this Government has no doubt that the German Government will readily agree that the expulsion of American citizens without an opportunity to defend themselves against charges brought against them constitutes an arbitrary procedure. You will further advise the Foreign Office that this Government confidently hopes that the necessary steps will be taken by the German Government to insure American citizens in the future an opportunity to defend themselves before an impartial authority against charges which, if established, would warrant their expulsion from German territory under the appropriate German laws. You are requested to transmit to the Consulate General at Berlin and the Consulate at Koenigsberg for their information copies of this instruction, which are enclosed. JOSEPH C. GREW

20 Not printed.

Statements by the Secretary of State that the question of Philippine independence is exclusively a domestic problem of the United States [215] The Chairman of the Committee on Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives (Fairfield) to the Secretary of State Washington, March 25, 1924.

Sanitary convention between the United States and other American Republics, signed November 14, 1924 [219] Convention between the United States of America and Other American Republics, Signed at Habana, November 14, 1924 Habana, November 14, 1924 Treaty Series No. 714

Treaty Series No. 714 [Document 219] Convention between the United States of America and Other American Republics, Signed at Habana, November 14, 192454 Habana, November 14, 1924 The Presidents of Argentine, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Salvador, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela, being desirous of entering into a sanitary convention for the purpose of better promoting and protecting the public health of their respective nations, and particularly to the end that effective cooperative international measures may be applied for the prevention of the international spread of the communicable infections of human beings and to facilitate international commerce and communication, have appointed as their plenipotentiaries, to-wit: The Republic of Argentine: Dr. Gregorio Araoz Alfaro. Dr. Joaquín Llambías. The United States of Brazil: Dr. Nascimento Gurgel. Dr. Raúl Almeida Magalhaes. The Republic of Chile: Dr. Carlos Graf. The Republic of Colombia:

Dr. R. Gutierrez Lee. The Republic of Costa Rica: Dr. José Varela Zequeira. The Republic of Cuba: Dr. Mario G. Lebredo. Dr. José A. López del Valle. Dr. Hugo Roberts. Dr. Diego Tamayo. Dr. Francisco M. Fernández. Dr. Domingo F. Ramos. The Republic of El Salvador: Dr. Leopoldo Paz. The United States of America: Dr. Hugh S. Cumming. Dr. Richard Creel. Mr. P. D. Cronin. Dr. Francis D. Patterson. The Republic of Guatemala: Dr. José de Cubas y Serrate. The Republic of Haiti:

Dr. Charles Mathon. The Republic of Honduras: Dr. Arístides Agramonte. The Republic of Mexico: Dr. Alfonso Pruneda. The Republic of Panama: Dr. Jaime de la Guardia. The Republic of Paraguay: Dr. Andrés Gubetich. The Republic of Peru: Dr. Carlos E. Paz Soldán. The Dominican Republic: Dr. R. Pérez Cabral. The Republic of Uruguay: Dr. Justo F. González. The United States of Venezuela: Dr. Enrique Tejera. Dr. Antonio Smith. Who, having exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed to adopt, ad referendum, the following

PAN AMERICAN SANITARY CODE CHAPTER I.—OBJECTS OF THE CODE AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED THEREIN ARTICLE 1. The objects of this code are: (a) The prevention of the international spread of communicable infections of human beings. (b) The promotion of cooperative measures for the prevention of the introduction and spread of disease into and from the territories of the signatory Goverments [sic]. (c) The standardization of the collection of morbidity and mortality statistics by the signatory Governments. (d) The stimulation of the mutual interchange of information which may be of value in improving the public health, and combating the diseases of man. (e) The standardization of the measures employed at places of entry, for the prevention of the introduction and spread of the communicable diseases of man, so that greater protection against them shall be achieved and unnecessary hindrance to international commerce and communication eliminated. ART. 2. Definitions. As herein used, the following words and phrases shall be taken in the sense hereinbelow indicated, except as a different meaning for the word or phrase in question may be given in a particular article, or is plainly to be collected from the context or connection where the term is used.

Aircraft.—Any vehicle which is capable of transporting persons or things through the air, including aeroplanes, seaplanes, gliders, helocopters, air ships ballons and captive ballons [sic].

Area.—A well determined portion of territory. Disinfection.—The act of rendering free from the causal agencies of disease. Fumigation.—A standard process by which the organisms of disease or their potential carriers are exposed to a gas in lethal concentrations. Index, Aedes Aegypti.—The percentage ratio determined after examination between the number of houses in a given area and the number in which larvae or mosquitoes of the Aedes aegypti are found, in a fixed period of time. Inspection.—The act of examining persons, buildings, areas, or things which may be capable of harboring, transmitting or transporting the infectious agents of disease, or of propagating or favoring the propagation of such agents. Also the act of studying and observing measures put in force for the suppression or prevention of disease. Incubation, Period of.—For plague, cholera and yellow fever, each 6 days, for smallpox, 14 days, and for typhus fever 12 days. Isolation.—The separation of human beings or animals from other human beings or animals in such manner as to prevent the interchange of disease. Plague.—Bubonic, septicemic, pneumonic or rodent plague. Port.—Any place or area where a vessel or aircraft may seek harbor, discharge or receive passengers, crew, cargo or supplies. Rodents.—Rats, domestic and wild, and other rodents. CHAPTER II SECTION 1. NOTIFICATION AND SUBSEQUENT COMMUNICATIONS TO OTHER COUNTRIES ART. 3. Each of the signatory Governments agrees to transmit to each of the other signatory Governments and to the Pan-American Sanitary Bureau, at

intervals of not more than two weeks, a statement containing information as to the state of its public health, particularly that of its ports. The followings [sic] diseases are obligatorily reportable: Plague, cholera, yellow fever, smallpox, typhus, epidemic cerebropinal [sic] meningitis, acute epidemic poliomyelitis, epidemic lethargic encephalitis, influenza or epidemic la grippe, typhoid and paratyphoid fevers, and such other diseases as the Pan American Sanitary Bureau may, by resolution, add to the above list.

ART. 4. Each signatory Government agrees to notify ‘adjacent countries and the Pan American Sanitary Bureau immediately by the most rapid available means of communication, of the appearance in its territory of an authentic or officially suspected case or cases of plague, cholera, yellow fever, small pox, typhus or any other dangerous contagion liable to be spread through the intermediary agency of international commerce. ART. 5. This notification is to be accompanied, or very promptly followed, by the following additional information: 1. The area where the disease has appeared. 2. The date of its appearance, its origin, and its form. 3. The probable source or country from which introduced and manner of introduction. 4. The number of confirmed cases, and number of deaths. 5. The number of suspected cases and deaths. 6. In addition, for plague, the existence among rodents of plague, or of an unusual mortality among rodents; for yellow fever, the Aedes aegypti index of the locality. 7. The measures which have been applied for the prevention of the spread of the disease, and its eradication.

port of departure or place located in the infected area. The said publication is to be communicated at once to the accredited diplomatic or consular representatives of the infected country, and to the Pan American Sanitary Bureau. The signatory Government [sic] also obligate themselves to make known in the same manner the revocation of these measures, or of modifications thereof that may be made. ART. 11. In order that an area may be considered to be no longer infected, it must be officialy [sic] established: 1. That there has neither been a death nor a new case as regards plague or cholera for ten days; and as regards yellow fever for twenty days, either since the isolation, or since the death or recovery of the last patient. 2. That all means for the eradication of the disease have been applied and, in the case of plague, that effective measures against rats have been continuously carried out, and that the disease has not been discovered among them within six months; in the case of yellow fever, that Aedes aegypti index of the infected area has been maintained at an average of not more than 2 per cent for the 30-day period immediately preceding, and that no portion of the infected area has had an index in excess of 5 per cent for the same period of time. SECTION 3. MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY STATISTICS ART. 12. The international classification of the causes of death is adopted as the Pan American Classification of the Causes of Death, and shall be used by the signatory nations in the interchange of mortality and morbidity reports. ART. 13. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau is hereby authorized and directed to re-publish from time to time the Pan American Classification of the Causes of Death.

ART. 14. Each of the signatory Governments agrees to put in operation at the earliest practicable date a system for the collection and tabulation of vital statistics which shall include: 1. A central statistical office presided over by a competent official. 2. The establishment of regional statistical offices. 3. The enactment of laws, decrees or regulations requiring the prompt reporting of births, deaths and communicable diseases, by health officers, physicians, midwives and hospitals, and providing penalities [sic] for failure to make such reports. ART. 15. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall prepare and publish standard forms for the reporting of deaths and cases of communicable disease, and all other vital statistics. CHAPTER III.—SANITARY DOCUMENTS SECTION 1. BILLS OF HEALTH ART. 16. The master of any vessel or aircraft which proceeds to a port of any of the signatory Governments, is required to obtain at the port of departure and ports of call, a bill of health, in duplicate, issued in accordance with the information set forth in the appendix and adopted as the standard bill of health. ART. 17. The bill of health will be accompanied by a list of the passengers, and stowaways if any, which shall indicate the port where they embarked and the port to which they are destined, and a list of the crew. ART. 18. Consuls and other officials signing or countersigning bills of health should keep themselves accurately informed with respect to the sanitary conditions of their ports, and the manner in which this code is obeyed by vessels and their passengers and crews while therein. They should have accurate knowledge of local mortality and morbidity, and of sanitary conditions which may affect vessels in port. To this end, they shall be

furnished with information they request pertaining to sanitary records, harbors and vessels. ART. 19. The signatory Governments may assign medical or sanitary officers as public health attaches to embassies or legations, and as representatives to international conferences. ART. 20. If at the port of departure there be no consul or consular agent of the country of destination, the bill of health may be issued by the consul or consular agent of a friendly Government authorized to issue, such bill of health. ART. 21. The bill of health should be issued not to exceed forty eight hours before the departure of the ship to which it is issued. The sanitary visa should not be given more than twenty-four hours before departure.

ART. 22. Any erasure or alteration of a bill of health shall invalidate the document, unless such alteration or erasure shall be made by competent authority, and notation thereof appropriately made. ART. 23. A clean bill of health is one which shows the complete absence in the port of departure of cholera, yellow fever, plague, typhus fever, or of other pestilential disease in severe epidemic form, liable to be transported by international commerce. Provided, that the presence only of bona fide imported cases of such disease, when properly isolated, shall not compel the issuance of a foul bill of health, but notation of the presence of such cases will be made under the heading of “Remarks” on the Bill of health. ART. 24. A foul bill of health is one which shows the presence of nonimported cases of any of the diseases referred to in Art. 23. ART. 25. Specific bill of health are [sic] not required of vessels which, by reason of accident, storm or other emergency condition, including wireless change of itinerary, are obliged to put into ports other than their original destinations but such vessels shall be required to exhibit such bills of health as they possess.

ART. 26. It shall be the duty of the Pan American Sanitary Bureau to publish appropriate information which may be distributed by port health officers, for the purpose of instructing owners, agents and master [sic] of vessels as to the methods which should be put in force by them for the prevention of the international spread of disease. SECTION 2. OTHER SANITARY DOCUMENTS ART. 27. Every vessel carrying a medical officer will maintain a sanitary log which will be kept by him, and he will record therein daily: the sanitary condition of the vessel, and its passengers and crew; a record showing the names of passengers and crew which have been vaccinated by him; name, age, nationality, home address, occupation and nature of illness or injury of all passengers and crew treated during the voyage; the source and sanitary quality of the drinking water of the vessel, the place where taken on board, and the method in use on board for its purification; sanitary conditions, observed in ports visited during the voyage; the measures taken to prevent the ingress and egress of rodents to and from the vessel; the measures which have been taken to protect the passengers and crew against mosquitoes, other insects, and vermin. The sanitary log will be signed by the master and medical officer of the vessel, and will be exhibited upon the request of any sanitary or consular officer. In the absence of a medical officer, the master shall record the above information in the log of the vessel, in so far as possible.

ART. 28. Equal or similar forms for Quarantine Declarations, Certificate of Fumigation, and Certificate of Vaccination, set forth in the appendix, are hereby adopted as standard forms. CHAPTER IV.—CLASSIFICATION OF PORTS ART. 29. An infected port is one in which any of the following diseases exist, namely, plague, cholera, yellow fever, or other pestilential disease in severe epidemic form.

ART. 30 A suspected port, is a port in which, or in the areas contiguous thereto, a non imported case or cases of any of the disesases [sic] referred to in Art. 23, have occurred within sixty days, or which has not taken adequate measures to protect itself against such diseases, but which is not known to be an infected port. ART. 31. A clean port, Class A, is one in which the following conditions are fulfilled: 1. The absence of non-imported cases of any of the diseases referred to in Art. 23, in the port itself and in the areas contiguous thereto. 2. (a) The presence of a qualified and adequate health staff. (b) Adequate means of fumigation. (c) Adequate personnel and material for the capture or destruction of rodents. (d) An adequate bacteriological and pathological laboratory; (e) A safe water supply. (f) Adequate means for the collection of mortality and morbidity data; (g) Adequate facilities for the isolation of suspects and the treatment of infectious diseases. (h) Signatory Governments shall register in the Pan-American Sanitary Bureau those places that comply with these conditions. ART. 32. A clean port, Class B, is one in which the conditions described in

ART. 34. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall prepare and publish, at intervals, a tabulation of the most commonly used ports of the Western Hemisphere, giving information as to sanitary conditions.

CHAPTER V.—CLASSIFICATION OF VESSELS ART. 35. A clean vessel is one coming from a clean port, Class A or B, which has had no case of plague, cholera, yellow fever, small pox or typhus aboard during the voyage, and which has complied with the requirements of this code. ART. 36. An infected or suspected vessels [sic] is: 1. One which has had on board during the voyage a case or cases of any of the diseases mentioned in Art. 35. 2. One which is from an infected or suspected port. 3. One which is from a port where plague or yellow fever exists. 4. Any vessel on which there has been mortality among rats. 5. A vessel which has violated any of the provisions of this code. Provided that the sanitary authorities should give due consideration in applying sanitary measures to a vessel that has not docked. ART. 37. Any master or owner of any vessel, or any person violating any provisions of this Code or violating any rule or regulation made in accordance with this Code, relating to the inspection of vessels, the entry or departure from any quarantine station, grounds or anchorages, or trespass thereon, or to the prevention of the introduction of contagious or infectious disease into any of the signatory countries, or any master, owner, or agent of a vessel making a false statement relative to the sanitary condition of a vessel, or its contents, or as to the health of any passenger, or person thereon, or who interferes with a quarantine or health officer in the proper discharge of his duty, or fails or refuses to present bills of health, or other

sanitary document, or pertinent information to a quarantine or health officer, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of such laws, rules or regulations, as may be or may have been enacted, or promulgated, in accordance with the provisions of this Code, by the Government of the country within whose jurisdiction the offense is committed. CHAPTER VI.—THE TREATMENT OF VESSELS ART. 38. Clean vessels will be granted pratique by the port health authority upon acceptable evidence that they properly fulfill the requirements of Art. ART. 39. Suspected vessels will be subjected to necessary sanitary measures to determine their actual condition. ART. 40. Vessels infected with any of the diseases referred to in Art. 23 shall be subjected to such sanitary measures as will prevent the continuance thereon, and the spread therefrom, of any of said diseases to other vessels or ports. The disinfection of cargo, stores and personal effects shall be limited to the destruction of the vectors of disease which may be contained therein, provided that things which have been freshly soiled with human excretions capable of transmitting disease, shall always be disinfected. Vessels on which there is undue prevalence of rats, mosquitoes, lice, or any other potential vector of communicable disease, may be disinfected irrespective of the classification of the vessel. ART. 41. Vessels infected with plague shall be subjected to the following treatment. 1. The vessel shall be held for observation and necessary treatment. 2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate treatment in isolation. 3. The vessel shall be simultaneously fumigated throughout for the destruction of rats. In order to render fumigation more effective, cargo may be wholly or partially discharged prior to

such fumigation, but care will be taken to discharge no cargo which might harbor rats,* except for fumigation. 4. All rats recovered after fumigation should be examined bacteriologically. 5. Healthy contacts, excepts [sic] those actually exposed to cases of pneumonic plague, will not be detained in quarantine. 6. The vessel will not be granted pratique until it is reasonably certain that it is free from rats and vermin. ART. 42. Vessels infected with cholera shall be subjected to the following treatment. 1. The vessels shall be held for observation and necessary treatment. 2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate treament [sic] in isolation. 3. All persons on board shall be subjected to bacteriological examination, and shall not be admitted to entry until demonstrated free from cholera vibrios. 4. Appropriate disinfection shall be performed. ART. 43. Vessels infected with yellow fever shall be subjected to the following treatment. 1. The vessel shall be held for observation and necessary treatment. 2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate treatment in isolation from Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. 3. All persons on board non immune to yellow fever shall be placed under observation to complete six days from the last possible exposure to Aedes aegypti mosquitoes.

4. The vessel shall be freed from Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. ART. 44. Vessels infected with small pox shall be subjected to the following treatment. 1. The vessels shall be held for observation and necessary treatment. 2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate treatment in isolation. 3. All persons on board shall be vaccinated. As an option the passenger may elect to undergo isolaton [sic] to complete fourteen days from the last possible exposure to the disease. 4. All living quarters of the vessels shall be rendered mechanically clean, and used clothing and bedding of the patient desinfected [sic]. ART. 45. Vessels infected with typhus shall be subjected to the following treatment. 1. The vessel shall be held for observation and necessary treatment. 2. The sick, if any, shall be removed and placed under appropriate treatment in isolation from lice. 3. All persons on board and their personal effects shall be deloused. 4. All persons on board who have been exposed to the infection shall be placed under observation to complete twelve days from the last possible exposure to the infection. 5. The vessel shall be deloused. ART. 46. The time of detention of vessels for inspection or treatment shall be the least consistent with public safety and scientific knowledge. It is the

duty of port health officers to facilitate the speedy movement of vessels to the utmost compatible with the foregoing. ART. 47. The power and authority of quarantine will not be utilized for financial gain, and no charges for quarantine services will exceed actual cost plus a reasonable surcharge for administrative expenses and fluctuations in the market prices of materials used. CHAPTER VII.—FUMIGATION STANDARDS ART. 48. Sulphur dioxide, hydrocyanic acid and cyanogen chloride gas mixture shall be considered as standard fumigants when used in accordance with the table set forth in the appendix, as regards hours of exposure and of quantities of fumigants per 1,000 cubic feet. ART. 49. Fumigation of ships to be most effective should be performed periodically and preferable [sic] at six months intervals, and should include the entire vessel and its lifeboats. The vessels should be free of cargo.

ART. 50. Before the liberation of hydrogen cyanide or cyanogen chloride, all personnel of the vessel will be removed, and care will be observed that all compartments are rendered as nearly gas tight as possible. CHAPTER VIII.—MEDICAL OFFICERS OF VESSELS ART. 51. In order to better protect the health of travelers by sea, to aid in the prevention of the international spread of disease and to facilitate the movement of international commerce and communication, the signatory Governments are authorized in their discretion to license physicians employed on vessels. ART. 52. It is recommended that license not issue unless the applicant therefor is a graduate in medicine from a duly chartered and recognized school of medicine, is the holder of an unrepealed license to practice medicine, and has successfully passed an examination as to his moral and mental fitness to be the surgeon or medical officer of a vessel. Said

examination shall be set by the directing head of the national health service, and shall require of the applicant a competent knowledge of medicine and surgery. Said directing head of the national health service may issue a license to an applicant who successfully passes the examination, and may revoke said license upon conviction of malpractice, unprofessional conduct, offenses involving moral turpitude or infraction of any of the sanitary laws or regulations of any of the signatory Governments based upon the provisions of this code. ART. 53. When duly licensed as aforesaid, said surgeons or medical officers of vessels may be utilized in aid of inspection as defined in this code. CHAPTER IX.—THE PAN AMERICAN SANITARY BUREAU Functions and Duties ART. 54. The organization, functions and duties of the Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall include those heretofore determined for the International Sanitary Bureau by the various International Sanitary and other Conferences of American Republics, and such additional administrative functions and duties as may be hereafter determined by Pan American Sanitary Conferences. ART. 55. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall be the central coordinating sanitary agency of the various member Republics of the Pan American Union, and the general collection and distribution center of sanitary information to and from said Republic. For this purpose it shall, from time to time, designate representatives to visit and confer with the sanitary authorities of the various signatory Governments on public health matters, and such representatives shall be given all available sanitary information in the countries visited by them in the course of their official visits and conferences. ART. 56. In addition, the Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall perform the following specific functions: To supply to the sanitary authorities of the signatory Governments through its publications, or in other appropriate manner, all available information relative to the actual status of the communicable diseases of man, new invasions of such diseases, the sanitary

measures undertaken, and the progress effected in the control or eradication of such diseases; new methods for combating disease; morbidity and mortality statistics; public health organization and administration; progress in any of the branches of preventive medicine, and other pertinent information relative to sanitation and public health in any of its phases, including a bibliography of books and periodicals on public hygiene. In order to more efficiently discharge its functions, it may undertake cooperative epidemiological and other studies; may employ at headquarters and elsewhere, experts for this purpose; may stimulate and facilitate scientific researches and the practical application of the results therefrom; and may accept gifts, benefactions and bequest [sic], which shall be accounted for in the manner now provided for the maintenance funds of the Bureau. ART. 57. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau shall advise and consult with the sanitary authorities of the various signatory Governments relative to public health problems, and the manner of interpreting and applying the provisions of this Code. ART. 58. Officials of the National Health Services may be designated as representatives, ex-officio, of the Pan American Sanitary Bureau, in addition to their regular duties, and when so designated they may be empowered to acts [sic] as sanitary representatives of one or more of the signatory Governments when properly designated and accredited to so serve. ART. 59. Upon request of the sanitary authorities of any of the signatory Governments, the Pan American Sanitary Bureau is authorized to take the necessary preparatory steps to bring about an exchange of professors, medical and health officers, experts or advisers in public health of any of the sanitary sciences, for the purpose of mutual aid and advancement in the protection of the public health of the signatory Governments. ART. 60. For the purpose of discharging the functions and duties imposed upon the Pan American Sanitary Bureau, a fund of not less than $50,000 shall be collected by the Pan American Union, apportioned among the

signatory Governments on the same basis as are the expenses of the Pan American Union.

CHAPTER X.—AIRCRAFT ART. 61. The provisons [sic] of this Convention shall apply to aircraft, and the signatory Governments agree to designate landing places for aircraft which shall have the same status as quarantine anchorages. CHAPTER XI.—SANITARY CONVENTION OF WASHINGTON

By the Republic of Argentine: GREGORIO ARAOZ ALFARO JOAQUIN LLAMBIAS By the United States of Brazil: NASCIMENTO GURGEL RAUL ALMEIDA MAGALHAES By the Republic of Chile: CARLOS GRAF By the Republic of Colombia: R. GUTIERREZ LEE By the Republic of Costa Rica: JOSE VARELA ZEQUEIRA By the Republic of Cuba: MARIO G. LEBREDO JOSE A. LOPEZ DEL VALLE HUGO ROBERTS DIEGO TAMAYO FRANCISCO M. FERNANDEZ DOMINGO F. RAMOS By the Republic of El Salvador: LEOPOLDO PAZ By the United States of America: HUGH S. CUMMING RICHARD CREEL P. D. CRONIN By the Republic of Guatemala: JOSE DE CUBAS Y SERRATE By the Republic of Haiti: CHARLES MATHON By the Republic of Honduras: ARISTIDES AGRAMONTE By the Republic of Mexico: ALFONSO PRUNEDA By the Republic of Panama: JAIME DE LA GUARDIA By the Republic of Paraguay:

ANDRES GUBETICH By the Republic of Peru: CARLOS E. PAZ SOLDAN By the Dominican Republic: R. PEREZ CABRAL By the Republic of Uruguay: JUSTO F. GONZALEZ By the United States of Venezuela: ENRIQUE TEJERA ANTONIO SMITH

[An appendix to the convention, containing forms of certificates and other documents, and an annex are not printed here; but may be found in Treaty Series No. 714 published by the Department of State in 1925.] 54 In English and Spanish; Spanish text not printed. Ratification advised by

Boundary disputes

Contents

Bolivia and Paraguay [220] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Paraguay (Southworth) Washington, July 25, 1924.

ARTICLE 2. If before the arbitration is commenced any intervening circumstance should permit a new direct negotiation between the parties, they may request the mediation of the designated arbiter in the negotiations which would be initiated in Washington by the respective representatives duly empowered for this purpose. ARTICLE 3. The present agreement confirms the abrogation of all boundary treaties formerly concluded. Until the arbitral award is made the status quo of the Agreement of January 12, 190760 now in force by virtue of the extensions stipulated in the later protocols, shall alone continue in force. ARTICLE 4. A special protocol will establish the remaining conditions and formalities tending to facilitate the early and effective execution of the arbitration agreement. ASUNCIÓN, August 20, 1924. 57 Temporarily at Asunción. 58 File translation revised.

sold them their lands, had personally demonstrated on the map that these lands were not only not in Bolivian territory, but were between Parallels 59 and 60 of West Longitude. Dr. Peña touched on historical aspects of this case, declaring—as Dr. Manuel Gondra, ex-President and Foreign Minister has also recently assured me—that since about 1911 it has been the Paraguayan desire to have this question arbitrated by the United States. The language of the Ayala-Mujía protocol of April 5, 1913, providing for the present status-quo, bears this out to some extent in its use of precisely the same verbiage, “arbitraje de derecho”, employed in the present draft agreement. The President of Argentina had at that time declined to serve as arbiter. Dr. Peña then referred to the representations telegraphed by the Department in December, 191462 at the time that a Paraguayan military incursion into the Chaco was reported; and stated that proofs of its non-existence were immediately furnished to President Wilson. Paraguay could not but desire American intervention in this problem, he continued, in view of the happy settlement by President Hayes of the territorial dispute with Argentina also involving a portion of the Chaco.63 Negotiations with Bolivia will continue for the present in La Paz the Minister stated; adding that what his government contemplates after signing such an agreement as that drafted, is, first, direct conversations between representatives of Bolivia and Paraguay in Washington, “with the friendly aid of President Coolidge”; and later, in case no decision is reached in this way, the consummation of the proposed “arbitration of right”, with the President as umpire. I am informed that since Manuel Gondra has declined the appointment as Minister to the United States on account of his health, this will probably go to ex-President Eusebio Ayala; who will accordingly be the Paraguayan negotiator if the proposed agreement with Bolivia is reached. In this regard I note from the President of Bolivia’s reply to Minister Guggiari’s recent speech on presenting his credentials, furnished me by Minister Cottrell, that Señor Saavedra declared his government was

“disposed to open immediate negotiations” on the boundary question; and referred also to the possibility of arbitration. Public interest in Paraguay in this question has steadily grown, especially since it has become known that the United States may be asked to arbitrate. The Colorado (opposition) party has attempted to capitalize the situation by some extravagant nationalistic propaganda; a sample of which is transmitted herewith in the form of a handbill64 urging attendance at a demonstration of “Colorado Youth” in favor of radical action against Bolivia, held in a public square of this city on August 24th. This demonstration, however, passed off without disorder; and President Ayala considered it politic to appear on a balcony of the Palace on the approach of the demonstrants, and address them with the assurance that measures would be taken to preserve the Fatherland intact. On the whole the calm and considered attitude that the government has taken in this regard toward the rabid element has been admirable. I have [etc.] WILLIAM B. SOUTHWORTH 61 Not printed.

position, which would reduce Paraguayan claims to be arbitrated to territory which has long been in the full military and economic control of the latter. I have [etc.] W. ROSWELL BARKER

Colombia and Panama68

Washington, May 8, 1924.

would be pleased to receive the duly accredited agent whom the Republic of Panama would despatch to negotiate and conclude with the Government of Colombia a boundary convention and a treaty of peace and friendship and to adjust all questions of pecuniary liability as between the two countries, in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents. He added that the Government of Colombia would also be pleased to accredit a Minister to the Republic of Panama. Thereupon, the Secretary of State, addressing the Panaman Minister, expressed the hope that the Panaman Government was ready to enter into diplomatic relations with the Government of Colombia and inquired whether his Government would be inclined, with a view to instituting official relations between the two Republics, to accredit a diplomatic agent to the Republic of Colombia, for the purposes mentioned, and to receive the Minister whom the Republic of Colombia might accredit. Doctor Alfaro replied that he was authorized by his Government to express its gratification at the recognition of Panama by Colombia as an independent nation and added that his Government would despatch a duly accredited agent to negotiate and conclude with the Government of Colombia a boundary convention and a treaty of peace and friendship and to adjust all questions of pecuniary liability as between the two countries, in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents. He added that his Government would be pleased to receive the Minister accredited by the Government of Colombia. The Secretary of State then stated that he desired to avail himself of that opportunity to offer to serve as a medium for the request of the agrément of the Ministers who should be accredited by the Republics of Colombia and Panama, respectively, if Messrs. Olaya and Alfaro had instructions on the subject. The Panaman Minister stated that he was authorized by his Government to inquire, in case the Minister of Colombia should have been instructed to answer, whether Mr. Nicolas Victoria J. would be persona grata to the Colombian Government.

The Colombian Minister replied that he was authorized by his Government to accept as persona grata anyone whose name should have been suggested by the Government of Panama, and he added that he was authorized by his Government, in reciprocation, to inquire whether Doctor José Maria González Valencia would be persona grata to the Government of Panama. The Panaman Minister replied that he was authorized by his Government to accept as persona grata anyone whose name should have been suggested by the Government of Colombia. The Secretary of State then expressed his appreciation of the good-will and friendly attitude thus shown by the Governments of Colombia and Panama towards each other, and his gratification that the sister Republics were to establish regular diplomatic relations and undertake formally to adjust their relations in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents. It was, he said, his understanding that both Governments earnestly desired the establishment of regular diplomatic relations as soon as possible and to that end it might be agreeable to both Governments to set a date for the appointment of Mr. Victoria J. as Panaman Minister to Colombia and Doctor Gonzalez Valencia as Colombian Minister to Panama. If so, he would suggest May 15, 1924, as a suitable date, it being mutually agreed that both representatives shall thereupon proceed forthwith to their respective posts. The Panaman and Colombian Ministers both replied that they were authorized by their respective Governments to state that Messrs. Victoria J. and Gonzalez Valencia would be appointed respectively as Panaman Minister to Colombia and Colombian Minister to Panama on May 15, 1924, and that they would thereupon proceed forthwith to their posts.

This procès verbal of the meeting, drawn up in triplicate in English and Spanish, was signed by the Secretary of State and the Ministers of Colombia and Panama. One copy will be retained by the Secretary of State, who will send of the remaining two copies, one each to the Ministers of Colombia and Panama respectively.

Cares E. Hycues R. J . Araro

Enrique Orava

signed this day will carry instructions to sign as soon as it may be agreeable to the Government of Colombia a special boundary convention establishing the boundary as expressed in this note. I avail myself [etc.] R. J. ALFARO

It affords me great pleasure to transmit to you the two documents above mentioned embodying the agreement of the Government of Panama on the boundary between the Republics of Colombia and Panama as well as the latter Government’s engagement to despatch a duly accredited agent to negotiate and conclude with the Government of Colombia a treaty of peace and friendship with a view to bring about the establishment of regular diplomatic relations between the two countries and the adjustment of all questions of pecuniary liability. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

Colombia and Peru72

[241] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with

It may be opportune to add that though I have had several conversations with the Colombian Minister, I have taken pains to avoid giving the Peruvian Government any impression that there has been cooperation between us. I limited my actions to that inspired by the disinterested friendship of my Government for both countries and its desire to see the adjudication of this Continent’s long-standing controversies. I have [etc.] MILES POINDEXTER

Samuer. H. P ILES = Not printed.

further informal action with disfavor. For that reason, the Department considers that suggestions such as that made by you to the President of Colombia should in the future be avoided. CHARLES E. HUGHES

did not contemplate the cession of this territory by Perú to Colombia, by treaty stipulation, but did suppose that the controversy would be submitted to an arbitral or juridical decision by some impartial tribunal. In support of this last statement, the memorandum called attention to the fact that in the agreement between Perú and Brazil, in regard to this point, the language used was “ganar la causa”, which, the Brazilian Minister of Foreign Affairs argues, necessarily implied a cause to be tried before an arbitral or juridical tribunal. The Brazilian Minister further stated, in the memorandum, that Brazil was induced to make this agreement because of the implicit confidence which it had that any impartial arbitral or juridical tribunal to which the case might be submitted would necessarily decide in favor of Perú, because of the incontrovertible merits and justice of the latter’s claim to the territory in question;—the memorandum proceeding to state that it was never conceived by Brazil that Peru would voluntarily cede its jurisdiction over territory which was occupied by Peruvian citizens, and over which its actual jurisdiction was daily enforced without interruption or interference. The memorandum then calls attention to the substantial interest which Brazil has in the question as to whether Perú or Colombia shall exercise sovereign jurisdiction over this strip of territory lying contiguous to her boundary line, and that while Brazil is entirely willing, and has agreed, that Peru should exercise sovereign jurisdiction over this territory, Brazil would be compelled to protest against the transfer of it to Colombia. Second. The memorandum of the Brazilian Minister pointed out that the treaty between Colombia and Perú, which has just been submitted to the Peruvian Congress for ratification, would, by its distribution of territory, give Colombia access, to the main, navigable stream of the Amazon River; and proceeds to state that this is a vital point with Brazil,—and that Brazil would strenuously oppose the acquisition by a third sovereignty of territory bordering upon this great river, whose banks were now controlled exclusively by Brazil and Perú. The memorandum expressed surprise that the treaty had been submitted to the Peruvian Congress for ratification. Doctor Salomón stated to me that, aside from the memorandum, the Peruvian Minister in Rio had been informed by the Brazilian Minister for

Foreign Relations that the Government of the latter country had learned through its secret service that, if the pending treaty should be ratified before the approaching Centenary of the Battle of Ayacucho, Colombia would send a distinguished Mission to the Centenary; but that, on the contrary, if the treaty should not be ratified, Colombia would send no Mission. Vis-à-vis to this, the Brazilian Minister stated that, while Brazil expected to send a Mission to do honor to Peru in the Centenary of the Battle of Ayacucho; that in case the treaty referred to above, which concerns its interests so vitally, should be ratified by the Peruvian Congress, Brazil would be compelled to refrain from sending such a Mission. I judged from the tone and manner of Dr. Salomón in stating this latter circumstance that he regarded it as of the utmost importance and concern. The Peruvian Foreign Minister stated to me, in quite a lengthy conversation on the subject, that he himself had never approved of the terms of the treaty aforesaid, although he had signed it. Upon my questioning he stated that he had signed it because of its approval by President Leguía. He stated that Perú, by the unfortunate circumstances in which it had been involved, in order to bring an end to controversies with its neighbors and restore harmonious relations I with them, had been compelled to cede to Bolivia and Brazil large areas of land to which it had a clear right; that it had agreed to an arbitration with Ecuador of the dispute involving great areas of territory to which the Minister believed the title of Perú was indisputable; and that, for the same reason, Peru had formulated, signed, and submitted for ratification, to the Peruvian Congress, the pending treaty with Colombia. He stated, however, that if the ratification of this treaty, which had for its object the gaining of the friendship of Colombia, and the establishment of harmonious relations with that country, should have the result of alienating Brazil and “making an enemy while gaining a friend”, it would be of no profit to Peru. Throughout the conversation of the Foreign Minister I gained the impression that the protest of Brazil had been so pointed, and that either the hope of gaining favor with Brazil by refraining from the ratification of the treaty in question, or the fear of creating the enmity of that country by its ratification, had made such a lively impression upon the Peruvian Government that the latter would bring no pressure to bear upon Congress to secure favorable action. Doctor Salomon stated to me that he showed me the memorandum and gave me the information which I have related above under the direction of President Leguía, which I am apprehensive tends to indicate that the latter also

regards both the circumstance and manner of the opposition and protest of Brazil as an insuperable obstacle to the ratification of the treaty. In forming this impression I have in mind also the significant intimations and inquiries of President Leguía on the subject of the opposition of Brazil to the ratification of the treaty, which I took occasion to report to the Department

purpose of its development and communication, to such a continental stream as the Amazon. I suggested to the Minister that Peru had profited a great deal in prestige, as well as in economic stability, by the concessions which it had made in the settlement of its boundary disputes with Bolivia and Brazil, and in the prospective adjustment by arbitration, if necessary, of a similar dispute with Ecuador; and the immense benefit that would accrue to the country by the settlement of its dispute with Colombia,—a dispute which would undoubtedly be reopened in an intensified form if the treaty should be rejected. From all I can learn, especially through conversations with the Minister of Colombia in Peru, the rejection of the treaty by the Peruvian Congress, or the failure of that body to ratify it, would cause very intense, hostile feeling in the former country. I have [etc.] MILES POINDEXTER 76 Not printed. 78 Not printed.

[Document 236] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the Colombian Minister (Olaya), November 26, 1924 November 26, 1924 The Minister left a confidential memorandum dated November twentysixth81 with respect to the Boundary Treaty signed in March, 1922, between Colombia and Peru and the action which had been taken by Brazil in relation thereto. The Minister explained the memorandum by saying that if the Government of Brazil would withdraw its memorandum in opposition to the ratification of the Treaty between Colombia and Peru he was authorized to say that the Colombian Government would be glad to take up the questions that might exist with Brazil in order to find an immediate solution. The Secretary said that he was already conversant to some extent with the matter but that he would like to study the memorandum left with him by the Minister of Colombia and such data as he had at hand and he would then have an interview in two or three days with the Minister and would see whether some method of solution could be suggested. The Secretary said that while this Government did not wish to intrude into controversies to which it was not a party it was always glad, at the request of the parties concerned, to use its friendly offices to promote an amicable settlement. 81 Not printed.

correspondence from United States Consular officials to the Department of State, published in Foreign Relations for 1913. Aside from the international and humanitarian aspects involved, there are also considerations of an economical character. Any foreign capital destined to the exploitation of the Caquetá and Putumayo regions naturally meets with protests from Peru, if the concession is granted by Colombia, and from the latter if the concession is granted by Peru. Foreign capital already invested, or that is about to be invested, in the exploitation of that territory can only find safe and stable conditions through a Treaty exactly fixing the boundary limit of each country and recognizing the properties there established, or to be established, in good faith. This is provided by the Treaty of Colombia and Peru in Article IX which reads as follows: “Artículo 9°—Las Altas Partes Contratantes se obligan a mantener y respetar todas las concesiones de terrenos de que estuvieren en posesión antes de la fecha del presente Tratado los nacionales de a otra y, en general, todos los derechos adquiridos por nacionales y extranjeros, conforme a las legislaciones respectivas, sobre las tierras que por efecto de la determinación de fronteras constante en el Artículo Primero del presente Tratado, quedan reconocidas como pertenecientes, respectivamente, a Colombia y al Perú”. All these considerations serve to set forth the great and exceptional value, in benefit of the entire Continent, which would result from the friendly cooperation of the Government of the United States on behalf of a treaty which would not only definitely fix the limits of this line between Colombia and Peru, but would also open the way for a prompt fixation of the boundary line between Colombia and Brazil in the section left undetermined in the Boundary Treaty of 1907. The Government of Colombia, in a spirit of conciliation and of sincere good will, is ready to collaborate to this end. WASHINGTON , November 28, 1924. 81 Not printed.

[Document 238] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with the Colombian Minister (Olaya), December 4, 1924 December 4, 1924 Mr. Hughes stated that he had examined the memorandum which had been handed to him by the Colombian Minister on November 26, 1924,83 and the supplementary memorandum of November 28, 1924, and that he had given careful attention to the matters presented therein; that he would be glad to see an amicable solution of this boundary problem and that while the United States Government did not desire to intervene in the matter he was disposed to offer such friendly advice as might tend to expedite a settlement of the question. Mr. Hughes said that he had noted from Doctor Olaya’s memoranda and from other available information on the subject that the pending treaty between Peru and Colombia, signed in 1922, provided for the cession by Peru to Colombia of certain territory to the west of the line agreed upon by Peru and Brazil in their Treaty of 1851 as the boundary between the two countries. Mr. Hughes suggested that it might be a practicable solution of the present difficulty if Colombia should agree to recognize the line specified in the Treaty of 1851 between Peru and Brazil as the boundary between Colombia and Brazil, in the event that the latter should withdraw its objections to the Peruvian-Colombian Treaty of 1922 and the latter Treaty should be ratified by Peru. Mr. Hughes added that he was prompted to make this suggestion in view of the fact that he understood that line had already been accepted by the Executive branch of the Colombian Government in the unratified treaty signed with Brazil at Bogotá July 25, 1853. In conclusion Mr. Hughes stated that he would be pleased to communicate this proposal informally to the Government of Brazil, should he be advised

that it would be acceptable to the Colombian Government.

83 Not printed.

[Document 240] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with

[Document 241] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation with

Ecuador and Peru [242] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State

“4th. Regardless of what is established in the preceding clauses, the two Governments, through their respective Ministers shall try to anticipate the settlement of the controversy. “Signed in duplicate, in Quito, June 21st of the year 1924. Signed N. Clemente Ponce90 and E. Castro Oyanguren.”91 Details by mail.92 BADING 89 Neither printed. 90 Ecuadoran Minister for Foreign Affairs. 91 Peruvian Minister in Ecuador.

Albania:

Contents

Maintenance by the United States of unofficial relations with the revolutionary government in Albania [244] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State

811.111 Rustem, Avni: Telegram [Document 244] The Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State TIRANA, May 4, 1924—noon. [Received 11:25 p.m.]

recognition but I shall keep up friendly though informal relations with the leaders. GRANT-SMITH

U. Grant Soiru

Postponement of negotiations for a treaty between the United States and Albania [265] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Grant-Smith) Washington, March 25, 1924.

treatment. Furthermore, the Albanian Government is ready to show all kinds of facilities to the installation of American capital in Albania, as well as to accord concessions to American concerns”. The Department is aware of the difficulties which have been encountered in our efforts to insure most-favored-nation treatment for American corporations in Albania in spite of the fact that certain ones were invited by the Albanian Government to submit offers for the development of the petroleum resources of the country. On several occasions the representatives of those corporations have been on the point of withdrawing from the field but on each occasion the Albanian Government has urged them to remain.

The terms of the notes above referred to, reinforced by the declarations made by the United States on March 2, 1923,13 in support of the principle of the “open door”, and accepted by the Albanian Government without demur, would seem to afford the United States a sufficient basis for carrying on the relations between the two countries until a more propitious moment should arrive. In order that the Government of Albania might have no shadow of excuse on account of frequent changes of Ministry, lack of organization, inexperience or otherwise, for not giving due weight to the claims of the United States in their negotiation of treaties with the other Powers, I ventured to address a note to the Minister for Foreign Affairs under date of April 17, 1924, (a copy of which is herewith enclosed) wherein was quoted that portion of his predecessor’s note of June 25, 1922, relative to most-favored-nation treatment.14 I took this precaution after the present incumbent, Ilias Bey Vrioni, had expressed to me the opinion that “no one” had a right to see the text of a treaty until it had been ratified by the legislative body. The enclosed copy of the Albano-Italian Treaty of Commerce and Navigation,15 with accompanying protocol and supplementary declarations

was given me privately by my Italian Colleague. The Italian aim at economic penetration is clearly shown, especially in Articles 6 (establishment of bonded warehouses), 9 (right of Italian companies to operate in Albania), 10 (monopolies), 13 (equal rights for imports, exports, transit or warehousing goods, transportation in national bottoms), 14 (rights of captains and boats or barges to navigate interior waters), 16 (use of interior means of communication, ports, etc.), 17 (coastal shipping), 18 The Yugoslav Government is opposed to the treaty on this account and may cause serious opposition to be raised against its ratification by the Constituent Assembly or subsequent legislative body. The British, it is said, object especially to the provision covering monopolies and have succeeded in focussing public attention on Article 10. The Italians, however, have countered by expressing a willingness to fix the interpretation of that article by an exchange of notes. My Italian colleague desired me to support him with regard to Article 10 on the ground that it was in consonance with the demands put forward by the American, Italian, and French Governments on

[a?] more stable government which would be more favorable for negotiations suggested. The Italian treaty and those concluded with Turkey are still unratified and there would seem no prospect of their being acted on at the earliest before the coming winter. I have [etc.] U. GRANT-SMITH [Enclosure] The American Minister (Grant-Smith) to the Albanian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Vrioni) TIRANA, April 17, 1924. No. 62 EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to transmit herewith, for the information of your Excellency’s Government, a copy, with translation into Albanian of a letter addressed to me by Mr. E. S. Sheffield, the representative of the Standard Oil Company of New York.16 After carrying on negotiations, on behalf of his company, with the Ministry of Public Works over a period of several months, he finally, under date of February 25, 1923, deposited with that Ministry signed proposals for a concession for the development of the petroleum resources of certain areas in Albania. It is with some surprise that I learn that these proposals have been held at the Ministry of Public Works since that date without having been brought before the Council of Ministers for consideration with a view to their being submitted, in the regular course, to the legislative body for final action. It can be readily understood, in consequence, that the representative of the Standard Oil Company of New York should have gained the impression of a “lack of any serious intention on the part of the Albanian Government as regards the business in question”. Such delay whether due to administrative neglect or to other causes, has operated to the serious detriment of the company above mentioned and would also be in contravention of the rights

and treatment formally guaranteed to American citizens and companies by the Government of Albania. In bringing the foregoing to the attention of your Excellency I have the honor to request that the necessary remedial steps may be taken without further delay and avail myself [etc.] U. GRANT-SMITH 12 Not printed.

Bolivia:

Contents

Disinclination of the Secretary of State to offer the good offices requested by Bolivia for modification of the Bolivian-Chilean treaty of 1904 [267] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs, Department of State (White) [Washington,] May 5, 1924.

United States and it felt sure that the other side would also; that if this desire existed in Chile it would be very easy for the Chilean Government to inform us thereof or it could be made evident in the correspondence comprising the negotiations between Bolivia and Chile and that until this Government was informed by both parties it could not take the action requested. The Secretary added that in the Tacna-Arica case this Government had taken no action until it had been assured that both parties to the dispute would welcome the assistance of the United States. The Minister stated that in the Tacna-Arica case he had seen, as he was then Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bolivia, in the interchange of telegrams between Chile and Perú that the negotiations fell through and that the United States had inquired of both Governments whether an invitation to come to Washington to carry on the negotiations would be acceptable and that both parties had agreed.3 There was evidence he said in the direct exchange of telegrams between the Chilean and Peruvian Foreign Offices that such a meeting would be acceptable to both parties; that what Bolivia now wants is the United States to inquire of Bolivia and Chile whether an invitation from the United States for those Governments to send representatives to Washington to discuss the matter would be agreeable. The Secretary replied that in the Tacna-Arica case the inquiry as to whether an invitation would be acceptable had been sent only after this Government had been informally advised by both parties that such action on the part of the United States would be agreeable to the two parties to the dispute. The Secretary added that even after the Peruvian and Chilean delegates had arrived in Washington the United States took no part in bringing about agreements or arrangements between them except when asked to use its good offices by both parties. The Minister then inquired whether this statement by the Secretary was to be taken as a definite statement of policy of the United States for all time, in other words could he take it that the United States would never enter into a discussion between two Latin American countries or in his country’s case between Bolivia and any of its neighbors unless requested to do so by both parties. The Secretary replied that he was not formulating any rules of law nor could he of course prescribe what action his successors in office might adopt nor could he discuss any suppositional or hypothetical questions; that

this Government dealt with each question as it came up as wisdom and friendship would seem to dictate and that it could not permit the discussion to take the phase of binding the United States to any definite policy in the future in cases which had not arisen. The Minister said that he understood the Secretary’s point of view; that in this case if the United States would not take action his Government had misinterpreted the addresses of the Secretary and President Coolidge which had expressed a desire to be helpful to Latin American countries. The Secretary replied that of course this Government as President Coolidge had stated desired to be helpful in any way it properly could but that it could not take action without the request of both parties. Referring back to the question of policy the Minister stated that he was talking purely and simply of the matter connected with his note which dealt with the ardent desire of Bolivia to have an outlet to the sea. Bolivia was now moved with a great feeling in this regard, the question had been taken up in the League of Nations and then directly with Chile and now with the United States and he wanted to know whether the determination of the United States not to take part in this discussion meant that the United States as far as this question was concerned would in its future developments refuse to take any part whatsoever. The Secretary replied that he would not bind this Government’s action for the future; that the case before him was the note of the Bolivian Minister dealing with the situation that actually exists; that in the case as it now is the United States has not been requested by Chile to intervene in the matter and he very much regretted that this Government could not at this time intervene as requested by Bolivia. The Secretary could not foresee what the situation might be in the future or what later developments might occur and he therefore would do nothing now which might hamper the action of this Government in dealing in the future with a case which might arise, that in the actual case the United States could not meet the Bolivian Minister’s desires. As the Minister was leaving the Secretary expressed his regret to him that he was unable to comply with his wishes in the matter. WHITE

1 Not printed.

Boundary dispute with Paraguay. (See under General.)

Expression of concern by the Department of State at Brazil’s naval building program [268] The Chargé in Brazil (Crosby) to the Secretary of State

- Not printed.

The Department’s feeling about this matter is so strong that it would rather recall the Naval Mission than assume the responsibility for the naval program that the Mission has proposed. Explain the Department’s position to Admiral Vogelgesang and request him to take the first opportunity to revise the naval program on the principle of no new construction or replacement of tonnage in any category that will be greater than the maximum which exists at present in any one of the three states, Argentina, Brazil, or Chile. Ambassador Morgan has been made fully aware of the Department’s position in the matter, and immediately upon the Ambassador’s return to Rio de Janeiro he will discuss it with Admiral Vogelgesang. HUGHES

Bulgaria: Contents Extradition treaty between the United States and Bulgaria,

Extradition treaty between the United States and Bulgaria, signed March 19, 1924 [275] Treaty between the United States of America and Bulgaria, Signed at Sofia, March 19, 1924 Done in duplicate at Sophia this nineteenth day of March nineteen hundred and twenty-four. Treaty Series No. 687

Treaty Series No. 687 [Document 275] Treaty between the United States of America and Bulgaria, Signed at Sofia, March 19, 19241 The United States of America and Bulgaria desiring to promote the cause of justice, have resolved to conclude a treaty for the extradition of fugitives from justice between the two countries and have appointed for that purpose the following Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America, Charles S. Wilson, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to Bulgaria, and His Majesty, the Bang of the Bulgarians, Christo Kalfoff, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship of Bulgaria, Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon and concluded the following articles: ARTICLE I It is agreed that the Government of the United States and the Government of Bulgaria shall, upon requisition duly made as herein provided, deliver up to justice any person, who may be charged with, or may have been convicted of, any of the crimes specified in Article II of the present Treaty committed within the jurisdiction of one of the High Contracting Parties, and who shall seek an asylum or shall be found within the territories of the other; provided that such surrender shall take place only upon such evidence of criminality, as according to the laws of the place where the fugitive or person so charged shall be found, would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial if the crime or offense had been there committed.

ARTICLE II Persons shall be delivered up according to the provisions of the present Treaty, who shall have been charged with or convicted of any of the following crimes: 1. Murder, comprehending the crimes designated by the terms parricide, assassination, manslaughter when voluntary, poisoning or infanticide. 2. The attempt to commit murder. 3. Rape, abortion, carnal knowledge of children under the age of twelve years. 4. Abduction or detention of women or girls for immoral purposes. 5. Bigamy. 6. Arson. 7. Wilful and unlawful destruction or obstruction of railroads, which endangers human life. 8. Crimes committed at sea: (a) Piracy, as commonly known and defined by the law of nations, or by statute; (b) Wrongfully sinking or destroying a vessel at sea or attempting to do so; (c) Mutiny or conspiracy by two or more members of the crew or other persons on board of a vessel on the high seas, for the purpose of rebelling against the authority of the Captain or Commander of such vessel,

or by fraud or violence taking possession of such vessel. (d) Assault on board ship upon the high seas with intent to do bodily harm. 9. Burglary, defined to be the act of breaking into and entering the house of another in the night time with intent to commit a felony therein. 10. The act of breaking into and entering the offices of the Government and public authorities, or the offices of banks, banking houses, savings banks, trust companies, insurance and other companies, or other buildings not dwellings with intent to commit a felony therein. 11. Robbery, defined to be the act of feloniously and forcibly taking from the person of another goods or money by violence or by putting him in fear. 12. Forgery or the utterance of forged papers. 13. The forgery or falsification of the official acts of the Government or public authority, including Courts of Justice, or the uttering or fraudulent use of any of the same. 14. The fabrication of counterfeit money, whether coin or paper, counterfeit titles or coupons of public debt, created by National, State, Provincial, Territorial, Local or Municipal Governments, bank notes or other instruments of public credit, counterfeit seals, stamps, dies and marks of State or public administrations, and the utterance, circulation or fraudulent use of the above mentioned objects. 15. Embezzlement or criminal malversation committed within the jurisdiction of one or the other party by public officers or depositaries, where the amount embezzled exceeds one hundred dollars or Bulgarian equivalent.

16. Embezzlement by any person or persons hired, salaried or employed, to the detriment of their employers or principals, when the crime or offense is punishable by imprisonment or other corporal punishment, by the laws of both countries, and where the amount embezzled exceeds one hundred dollars or Bulgarian equivalent. 17. Kidnapping of minors or adults, defined to be the abduction or detention of a person or persons, in order to exact money from them, their families or any other person or persons, or for any other unlawful end. 18. Larceny, defined to be the theft of effects, personal property, or money, of the value of twenty-five dollars or more, or Bulgarian equivalent. 19. Obtaining money, valuable securities or other property, by false pretences or receiving any money, valuable securities or other property knowing the same to have been unlawfully obtained, where the amount of money or the value of the property so obtained or received exceeds one hundred dollars or Bulgarian equivalent. 20. Perjury or subornation of perjury. 21. Fraud or breach of trust by a bailee, banker, agent, factor, trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, director or officer of any company or corporation, or by any one in any fiduciary position, where the amount of money or the value of the property misappropriated exceeds one hundred dollars or Bulgarian equivalent. 22. Crimes and offenses against the laws of both countries for the suppression of slavery and slave trading. 23. Wilful desertion or wilful non-support of minor or dependent children.

24. Extradition shall also take place for participation in any of the crimes before mentioned as an accessory before or after the fact; provided such participation be punishable by imprisonment by the laws of both the High Contracting Parties.

ARTICLE III The provisions of the present Treaty shall not import a claim of extradition for any crime or offense of a political character, nor for acts connected with such crimes or offenses; and no person surrendered by or to either of the High Contracting Parties in virtue of this Treaty shall be tried or punished for a political crime or offense. When the offense charged comprises the act either of murder or assassination or of poisoning, either consummated or attempted, the fact that the offense was committed or attempted against the life of the Sovereign or Head of a foreign State or against the life of any member of his family, shall not be deemed sufficient to sustain that such crime or offense was of a political character; or was an act connected with crimes or offenses of a political character. ARTICLE IV No person shall be tried for any crime or offense other than that for which he was surrendered. ARTICLE V A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered under the provisions hereof, when, from lapse of time or other lawful cause, according to the laws of the place within the jurisdiction of which the crime was committed, the criminal is exempt from prosecution or punishment for the offense for which the surrender is asked. ARTICLE VI If a fugitive criminal whose surrender may be claimed pursuant to the stipulations hereof, be actually under prosecution, out on bail or in custody,

for a crime or offense committed in the country where he has sought asylum, or shall have been convicted thereof, his extradition may be deferred until such proceedings be determined, and until he shall have been set at liberty in due course of law. ARTICLE VII If a fugitive criminal claimed by one of the parties hereto, shall be also claimed by one or more powers pursuant to treaty provisions, on account of crimes committed within their jurisdiction, such criminal shall be delivered to that State whose demand is first received.

ARTICLE VIII Under the stipulations of this Treaty, neither of the High Contracting Parties shall be bound to deliver up its own citizens. ARTICLE IX The expense of arrest, detention, examination and transportation of the accused shall be paid by the Government which has preferred the demand for extradition. ARTICLE X Everything found in the possession of the fugitive criminal at the time of his arrest, whether being the proceeds of the crime or offense, or which may be material as evidence in making proof of the crime, shall so far as practicable, according to the laws of either of the High Contracting Parties, be delivered up with his person at the time of surrender. Nevertheless, the rights of a third party with regard to the articles referred to, shall be duly respected. ARTICLE XI The stipulations of the present Treaty shall be applicable to all territory wherever situated, belonging to either of the High Contracting Parties or in

the occupancy and under the control of either of them, during such occupancy or control. Requisitions for the surrender of fugitives from justice shall be made by the respective diplomatic agents of the High Contracting Parties. In the event of the absence of such agent from the country or its seat of Government, or where extradition is sought from territory included in the preceding paragraphs, other than the United States or Bulgaria, requisitions may be made by superior consular officers. It shall be competent for such diplomatic or superior consular officers to ask and obtain a mandate or preliminary warrant of arrest for the person whose surrender is sought, whereupon the judges and magistrates of the two Governments shall respectively have power and authority, upon complaint made under oath, to issue a warrant for the apprehension of the person charged, in order that he or she may be brought before such judge or magistrate, that the evidence of criminality may be heard and considered and if, on such hearing, the evidence be deemed sufficient to sustain the charge, it shall be the duty of the examining judge or magistrate to certify it to the proper executive authority, that a warrant may issue for the surrender of the fugitive.

In case of urgency, the application for arrest and detention may be addressed directly to the competent magistrate in conformity to the statutes in force. The person provisionally arrested shall be released, unless within three months from the date of arrest in Bulgaria, or from the date of commitment in the United States, the formal requisition for surrender with the documentary proofs hereinafter prescribed be made as aforesaid by the diplomatic agent of the demanding Government or, in his absence, by a consular officer thereof. If the fugitive criminal shall have been convicted of the crime for which his surrender is asked, a copy of the sentence of the court before which such conviction took place, duly authenticated, shall be produced. If, however, the fugitive is merely charged with crime, a duly authenticated copy of the warrant of arrest in the country where the crime was committed, and of the

depositions upon which such warrant may have been issued, shall be produced, with such other evidence or proof as may be deemed competent in the case. ARTICLE XII In every case of a request made by either of the High Contracting Parties for the arrest, detention or extradition of fugitive criminals, the appropriate legal officers of the country where the proceedings of extradition are had, shall assist the officers of the Government demanding the extradition before the respective judges and magistrates, by every legal means within their power; and no claim whatever for compensation for any of the services so rendered shall be made against the Government demanding the extradition; provided, however, that any officer or officers of the surrendering Government so giving assistance, who shall, in the usual course of their duty, receive no salary or compensation other than specific fees for services performed, shall be entitled to receive from the Government demanding the extradition the customary fees for the acts or services performed by them, in the same manner and to the same amount as though such acts or services had been performed in ordinary criminal proceedings under the laws of the country of which they are officers. ARTICLE XIII The present Treaty shall be ratified by the High Contracting Parties in accordance with their respective constitutional methods and shall take effect on the date of the exchange of ratifications which shall take place at Sophia, as soon as possible.

ARTICLE XIV The present Treaty shall remain in force for a period of ten years, and in case neither of the High Contracting Parties shall have given notice one year before the expiration of that period of its intention to terminate the Treaty, it shall continue in force until the expiration of one year from the

date on which such notice of termination shall be given by either of the High Contracting Parties. In witness whereof the above-named Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Treaty and have hereunto affixed their seals. Done in duplicate at Sophia this nineteenth day of March nineteen hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES S. WILSON [SEAL] CHR. KALFOFF 1 In English and Bulgarian; Bulgarian text not printed. Ratification advised

Canada:

Contents

Ratification of the fisheries convention signed on March 2, 1923, between the United States and Great Britain1 1 For previous correspondence concerning the convention, see Foreign Relations 1923, vol. I, p. 467. [276] The Under Secretary of State (Phillips) to the Canadian Deputy Minister of Marine and Fisheries (Johnston) Washington, January 10, 1924.

Washington, February 26, 1924.

Washington, May 28, 1924.

Senator Lodge said to me personally that he would be willing to endeavor to obtain the advice and consent of the Senate to the ratification of the convention without a reservation if he could first have an assurance from the Premier of Canada that the Canadian Government would construe and enforce the Act as the Deputy Minister of Justice stated in his letter to you it should in his opinion be construed. I cannot but believe, however, that as a permanent measure it would be more satisfactory to this Government if the Act of Parliament were amended so that the ambiguity which arises out of Section 9 would be removed. If I may be permitted to make a specific suggestion I should say that this might be accomplished by eliminating Section 9. As favorable action on the Convention by the Senate seems to depend on an adjustment with reference to Section 9 of the Canadian Act, I should be appreciative of any action which you could take either in the direction of obtaining an expression of the views of the Premier or of putting the matter in course to obtain an amendment of the Act at the next session of Parliament. I should also be grateful for any information which you could furnish me as to progress in either direction. WILLIAM PHILLIPS

Yours very truly,

A. J OHNSTON

+ Not printed.

Renewed consideration of a joint project for the improvement of the St. Lawrence Waterway9 9 For previous correspondence concerning the St. Lawrence Waterway, see Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, pp. 677 ff. [287] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton) Washington, November 17, 1923.

[291] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard) Washington, April 28, 1924.

The Dominion Government point out that the report of the International Joint Commission recommended that, before any work was carried out, the Joint Engineering Board, whose proposals it generally approved, should be enlarged, and that once so enlarged the said Board should further consider the technical aspects of the problems in detail and decide upon the plan which should be adopted. While the Government of Canada desire to give further consideration to the suggestions put forward in your note of May 17th, 1922, they are of opinion that the proposal made by the International Joint Commission should be acted upon without further delay. The Dominion Government are

accordingly prepared to appoint additional engineers to enlarge the Joint Engineering Board with a view to the Board undertaking the preparation of a final report covering the engineering features of the whole project, including its cost. The Government of Canada intend, further, to form a committee which will, in consultation with the Canadian members of the Joint Engineering Board, enquire fully from a national standpoint into the wide questions involved, and they hope shortly to be in a position to take further action on the proposals made by the United States Government. Meanwhile the Government of Canada would be glad to learn the views of the United States Government in regard to the number of additional engineers who should be appointed by each Government to the Joint Engineering Board. The Dominion Government are also ready to nominate one or more technical officers to discuss with similar United States officers the form which the instructions to the enlarged Joint Engineering Board should take, and the time within which the Board should be directed to report. In expressing the hope of the Government of Canada that the above proposals will be agreeable to the United States Government, I have the honour to inform you that Lord Byng of Vimy would be grateful if arrangements could be made by telegraph for their publication simultaneously in Washington and Ottawa. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

St. Lawrence River for navigation and the development of its water power may be carried forward as speedily as possible. This Government is glad to give its assent to the suggestion that the Joint Engineering Board should be enlarged and, in response to the request of the Canadian Government for its view as to the number of additional engineers which should be appointed, suggests that two engineers be added to the Board by each Government, the membership of the Board thus being increased to six, three of whom would be representatives of the United States and three would be representatives of Canada. In connection with this enlargement of the Board it may be noted that the first of the recommendations made by the International Joint Commission was that the Governments of the United States and Canada enter into an arrangement by way of treaty for a scheme of improvement of the St. Lawrence River between Montreal and Lake Ontario. It would appear that the Commission did not contemplate that negotiations for a treaty should be postponed until after a report should be made by an enlarged board of engineers but that negotiations should forthwith be opened, that the proposed works between Montreal and Lake Ontario should “be based upon the report of the Engineering Board” accompanying the report of the Commission, and that the Governments should have the benefit of the advice of an enlarged Board of Engineers before a “final decision” should be reached. This Government would propose that the instructions to the enlarged Engineering Board should be prepared in joint conference by the two advisory committees which the Governments of Canada and the United States intend to establish, as indicated in your note and this reply, and that the two committees should accordingly be empowered to meet in joint conference for the purpose of formulating such instructions. However, the instructions would be given to the Board of Engineers by the Governments and the report of the engineers would be made to the Governments. As it appears that the report of the Board of Engineers of June 24, 1921, while of a preliminary character, as contemplated in their instructions, nevertheless presented a general plan believed to be practicable in its main features, this Government would desire to have included in the first instructions to the enlarged Board the two fundamental questions whether

the scheme for the improvement of the St. Lawrence Waterway which the Board presented in its report of June 24, 1921, is practicable and whether the estimates of costs made by it require revision. The time within which the Board should make its report should, as was suggested by the Canadian Government, be determined in advance and stated in the instructions. It is believed that the fundamental questions can be reported upon within a short time. If the suggestion that the instructions to the Joint Engineering Board be prepared by the two advisory committees in joint conference be acceptable to the Canadian Government the appointment of technical officers especially for this purpose as proposed by the Canadian Government would not be necessary. This Government further suggests that the two committees be empowered to meet from time to time in joint session in order to prepare supplemental instructions for the Board of Engineers as occasion may require, and to consider and develop the broader aspects of the whole matter so that each committee may be as helpful to the other as possible. This Government is hopeful that the foregoing proposals will be acceptable to the Government of Canada and I should be pleased if arrangements can be made by telegraph for publishing them simultaneously at Washington and Ottawa. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

the note which Mr. Chilton had the honour to address to you on January 30th last, and they desire me to express the hope that the Government of the United States will concur in this view. Immediately upon being advised to that effect the Government of Canada will be ready to appoint a technical officer for the purpose named, and in the event of the Government of the United States considering the appointment of more than one such officer to be desirable, they would have no objection to making an additional appointment. The Government of Canada are entirely agreeable to the inclusion in the first instructions to the enlarged Joint Engineering Board of the two fundamental questions referred to in your note under reply, namely, whether the scheme for the improvement of the St. Lawrence Waterway which the Engineering Board submitted in their report of June 24th, 1921, is practicable and whether the estimates of the costs put forward by the Board require revision. On their part, the Dominion Government would suggest that amongst other matters, the Board should be directed to enquire into the extent to which the water levels in the River at and below Montreal, as well as the River and lake levels generally may be affected. The Dominion Government desire me to suggest that, subject to the concurrence of the United States Government, this correspondence may be released on the night of Friday the 14th instant for publication simultaneously in Washington and in Ottawa on the morning of Saturday the 15th instant, and in these circumstances, I have the honour to request that I may be favoured with the views of the United States Government on this matter as soon as possible. I have [etc.] ESME HOWARD

technical officers be appointed by each Government for the purpose of formulating the terms in which the matters to be inquired into by the Board shall be defined. The United States will be represented on the Joint Engineering Board by Colonel Edgar Jadwin, Colonel William Kelly, and Lieutenant Colonel George B. Pillsbury, Corps of Engineers, United States Army. Colonel Jadwin and Lieutenant Colonel Pillsbury will also act as technical officers for the United States to formulate in collaboration with the technical officers to be designated by the Canadian Government the instructions which will be given to the engineers. This Government is also pleased to note the acceptance by the Government of Canada of the proposal of this Government that there shall be included in the first instructions to the Joint Engineering Board the two fundamental questions, whether the scheme for the improvement of the St. Lawrence River waterway which the Engineering Board submitted in its report of June 24, 1921, is practicable and whether the estimates of the costs of the project made by the Board require revision, and to agree to the suggestion made by the Dominion Government that amongst other matters the enlarged Board shall be directed to inquire into the extent to which the water levels in the St. Lawrence River at and below Montreal, as well as the river and lake levels generally, will be affected by the execution of the project. It will, of course, be understood that the instructions drafted by the technical officers will be subject to review and approval by the appropriate officials of the respective Governments before they would be given to the Board of Engineers by the Governments in conformity with the remark made on that point in my note of February 27, 1924. In connection with such review and approval, the instructions drafted by the technical officers will be submitted by the officers for the United States to the National Committee for this Government. This Government would be pleased to be informed at the early convenience of the Canadian Government of the names of the technical officers appointed by that Government in order that the officers for the two Governments may make arrangements with as little delay as possible to collaborate in the drafting of the instructions for the joint engineering

Board. This Government would also be pleased to be informed in due course of the names of the Canadian members of the Joint Engineering Board.12 Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES 12 For further details, see Report of Joint Board of Engineers on St. Lawrence Waterway Project (Ottawa: F. A. Acland, printer to the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, 1927).

Protests by the Canadian Government against further diversion of the waters of the Great Lakes [292] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State Washington, December 29, 1923.

H. G. CHILTON 13 Not printed; see Correspondence Relating to Diversion of the Waters of the Great Lakes by the Sanitary District of Chicago, from March 27, 1912, to October 17, 1927 (Ottawa: F. A. Acland, printer to the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, 1928), p. 21.

of water for power purposes both in the international stretches where compensation may be determined and in the international stretches below Cornwall in the Province of Quebec. In that regard, Lord Byng of Vimy desires me to point out that the limit of 10,000 cubic feet of water per second, as contemplated by the proposed legislation, is about 1.500 cubic [feet] per second more than is being diverted at present, and His Excellency considers it possible that the proposed legislation may mean that 10,000 cubic feet per second is allowed for diversion and power at Lockport, while additional water power will doubtless be required for lockages.

In view of the above, I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Canada are unalterably opposed to the proposed diversion of water from the Great Lakes watershed to that of the Mississippi, to the great detriment of navigation from Sault Ste. Marie to tidewater. The diversion that has already taken place at Chicago has lowered the waters of the Great Lakes to an extent that is now common knowledge. This affects harbours upon which many million dollars have been expended in deepening operations. It also affects the locksills of the Sault Ste. Marie Canals, the Welland Canal and the St. Lawrence Canals and, further, this diversion of water has a most injurious effect upon the ocean shipping channel between Montreal and the sea, where the Government of the Dominion have spent many more millions of dollars in dredging operations. How great have been the injuries sustained by navigation interests may be seen from the fact that every inch of navigable water means an additional 60 to 80 tons of carrying capacity. The waters of the Great Lakes are the heritage of both the people of the United States and the people of Canada, and the Dominion Government are of opinion that it is quite obvious that these waters should be conserved for the interests of both peoples. The Government of Canada, therefore, sincerely hope that the Government of the United States will not only not permit any further diversion of water from Lake Michigan, but will intimate to, and if necessary insist upon, the Sanitary District of Chicago adopting some more scientific method of sewage disposal than is foreshadowed at present.

I have the honour to request that I may in due course be furnished with an expression of the views of the United States Government upon the contents of this note, for communication to His Excellency the Governor-General of Canada. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

convenience both to myself and to the Government of Canada to learn whether the time has yet been fixed for the hearings of the Committee, which you foreshadowed in your note of the 18th ultimo,15 and if so whether Mr. Stewart16 will be at liberty to attend them. I have [etc.] ESME HOWARD 14 Not printed. 15 Not printed. 16 W. J. Stewart, chief hydrographer of the Canadian Government.

15 Not printed.

It is for these reasons, therefore, while unwilling to prefer any request or take any steps which might add to the existing embarrassment, the Dominion Government feel that they must once again direct the attention of the United States Government to the serious situation, which has developed, and in doing so express the (hope that it may be possible now to obtain an expression of the views of the United States Government on the points raised in my note of March 21st. The Government of Canada feel that it would be most advantageous for them to obtain a statement from the competent United States authorities which will definitely define the position as it now stands, and they trust that such a statement will be of a reassuring character as to probable future developments. In bringing these facts to your notice, I venture to hope that I may receive an expression of the views of the United States Government at your earliest convenience for communication to the Dominion Government.

In this connection I would add that the Dominion Government propose to publish forthwith the note No. 256 which I addressed to you on March 21st. I have [etc.] (For the Ambassador) HERBERT W. BROOKS17 17 Secretary of Embassy.

I have also sent him a copy of your note of June 13, 1924. In my note of April 2, 1924, I informed you that the Committee would be glad to have Mr. W. J. Stewart, Chief Hydrographer of the Canadian Government attend the hearings. The bills were still before the Committee on the adjournment of the session of Congress on June 7, 1924. I regret that the formulation of a comprehensive statement of the views of this Government concerning the diversion of water from Lake Michigan will have to be deferred for a time because certain of the questions involved are under consideration by Congress and the Supreme Court both of which are at the present time in recess. This Government is prepared, however, to include consideration of the diversions of water from Lake Michigan among the questions to be referred by the United States and Canada to the Joint Board of Engineers appointed for the further investigation of the proposed Saint Lawrence Waterway,18 as will be fully explained in my note in regard to the instructions to be given to the engineers. It would be understood, of course, that the submission of this question to the Joint Board of Engineers would be without prejudice to the rights of this Government with reference to the diversion of water from Lake Michigan or the position which it may take concerning questions that may arise because of such diversions. In connection with the statement made in your note under acknowledgment that it is the purpose of the Canadian Government to publish forthwith your

Chile: Contents Resignation of President Alessandri and the exercise of informal relations between the United States Embassy and the new administration at Santiago (Documents 299-306)

Resignation of President Alessandri and the exercise of informal relations between the United States Embassy and the new administration at Santiago [299] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

recognized as legal and General Altamirano as constitutionally selected. I believe most and possibly all members of the diplomatic corps hold this view. It is practically certain, however, that the present Congress will be done away with. … It cannot be constitutionally dissolved but the junta will certainly ask its members to resign and if necessary dissolve it by force. Please instruct me concerning the recognition of the new Government. COLLIER

China:

Contents

Civil war in Northern China resulting in the overthrow of President Tsao Kun and the establishment of a provisional government1 1 For previous correspondence concerning political affairs in China, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 503 ff. [307] The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State

[363] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

Morning press reports to effect Nanking-Shanghai railroad service interrupted and that fighting had commenced between General Chi and General Ho Feng-lin’s troops. Not confirmed. BELL

Substance telegraphed Admiral Washington who has sent three destroyers to Shanghai to arrive this morning pursuant to Cunningham’s telegram of

10 years. We are still negotiating. No authority is recognized. The time comes when there must be action. Kiangsu has always recognized itself as being a part of the Republic of China and loyal to it. General Lu considers Chekiang independent of the Republic of China. The fact that the most important commercial city in China, Shanghai, is a buffer between Kiangsu and Chekiang makes for danger to the whole country. Shanghai is historically, traditionally, and geographically a city of Kiangsu. By a political accident the control of Shanghai has become vested in so-called independent officials of Chekiang. This has led to grave political difficulties as every Chinese and foreigner knows. According to the peace agreement (of that year) Chekiang should have disarmed rebel troops of Fukien. These rebel troops are now being used to attack Kiangsu. General Lu has broken the peace agreement by these activities. Anyone who has studied my career will realize I am not impetuous. I would not take this step unless I had the authority to do so and the consent of my colleagues. This effort is designed only to establish what is right, namely, the inclusion politically of Shanghai in Kiangsu, as Shanghai is geographically a part of Kiangsu. My colleagues in the Government and in the neighboring provinces desire that I should take this step, and I have their hearty support and cooperation. Y our newspaper may assure the people of Shanghai that my troops will be orderly. I love peace. I am ready to make peace but China must be unified and if it is necessary to unify China by war then there must be war.”

4. I have it from reliable source that Peking Government has raised $3,000,000 within last few days partly from railroads; $1,000,000 given to General Feng Yu-hsiang, disposition of rest unknown.

In order to avoid any possible misunderstanding please elucidate Department’s position with regard to use of naval force on Whangpoo. Your telegram and this reply repeated to Admiral Washington, for his information. BELL

at Ihsing on west side of Taihu. Kiangsu being reenforced by small number of inferior troops from Shantung and Honan. Respective strengths of opposing forces estimated at 60,000. Fighting so far only skirmishes and confined to vicinity of Shanghai. 3. Captain Baldwin is being sent by military attaché to Mukden to observe and report situation which according to 330, September 8, 11 a.m., appears to be assuming more threatening aspect. 4. Far Eastern Times September 3rd contained an alleged letter to President Tsao from Minister for Foreign Affairs Chang,5 dated August 30th, sharply critical in tone of Peking administration arraigning Tsao Kun government for lack of thought for people and further impairment of China’s present international position if Government goes to war for selfish motives and advising President to stop troops’ movements directed against Chekiang and threatening armed intervention unless advice taken. Replying to my telegram regarding authenticity of above letter, consul at Mukden reported on September 4th that commissioner of foreign affairs at Mukden stated that letter similar to one published but without threat of armed intervention was sent to President Tsao by Marshal Chang. 5. Apparently in connection with a recent movement reported from time to time in the press that certain radical Chinese wish to proclaim September 7th as a day of national humiliation since Boxer protocol signed on that date,6 printed handbills headed “To Foreigners” [were distributed?] yesterday in the Legation Quarter and vicinity north of Chienmen warning foreign diplomats and citizens that Chinese can no longer tolerate further acts of violence and insults by our Governments and threatening our lives if we do not give up predatory treaties which strangle China and protocol of 1901. I do not attach any great importance to this occurrence but send it for what it may be worth as straw in the wind.

In order to save time and relieve Legation in present understaffed condition I have directed consular officers at Shanghai and Nanking to telegraph direct to Department information concerning Kiangsu- Chekiang situation which they might deem essential Department should know, telegraphing only to the Legation other information in that regard which necessary for me to know but not essential for the Department. BELL 5 Apparently refers to commissioner for foreign affairs in Chang Tso-lin’s government at Mukden.

arrangements for care are being made. Chairman Municipal Council states he has no fears as to safety of foreign lives and property. CUNNINGHAM

attacking Shanghai, will not be permitted to enter the Whangpu River. In view of the above circumstances I fear that the naval authorities of the Powers represented in the Whangpu waters may be subjecting themselves to the charge of favoring one side as against the other in the present factional disturbance, and that the naval authorities, in the absence of any imminent danger or threat to foreign life and property, were not warranted in forbidding the mere entrance of Chinese naval vessels into the Whangpu as distinguished from any activity which might threaten such life and property.” HUGHES 8 Not printed.

they regret that they are unable to express any opinion on the scheme outlined in the Wai Chiao Pu’s memorandum for the neutralization of certain areas of Shanghai and Woosung, as the realization of any such project must obviously be left to the contending parties to settle by agreement among themselves. The five representatives earnestly hope that an arrangement for the neutralization of the area surrounding Shanghai and the Whangpoo River including its mouth at Woosung may be reached but they must again impress upon the Chinese Government that failing such agreement between the combatants they must maintain the declaration made in their memorandum of September 7th that their respective Governments cannot possibly allow a naval engagement to take place in the Whangpoo River and its approaches and that they reserve to themselves the right to take steps even of a forcible nature to prevent such hostilities or any interference with foreign shipping between the port of Shanghai and the open sea.” BELL

Other Presidential mandates, also dated September 17th, announce appointment Wu Pei-fu as commander in chief of the forces for the suppression of the rebellion and Wang Cheng-pin, vice commander in chief; Peng Shou-hsin, second army; and Feng Yu-hsiang, third army; Tu Hsikwei, commander in chief of the naval forces; and Wen Shu-teh, vice commander in chief. Appointments of many lesser military officials also published. BELL

protection to lives and property of foreigners they trust that no air attacks will be made endangering the lives of their nationals. However should foreign lives be lost or property destroyed as a result of aeroplane attack on Peking or any treaty port they would feel obliged to hold the authority who ordered the attack strictly responsible therefor.” BELL

I sent word to the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs that we were unable to consent to Lu’s [Tu’s] vessel[s] entering Whangpoo as requested. BELL 10 Not printed.

of all offices and similarly countersigned. Fourth mandate appoints Wu Peifu director general of development of Kokonor. Countersigned by Premier and Minister of Agriculture and Commerce. Premier W. W. Yen has privately informed me this evening that he knew nothing of the coup d’état before it occurred and that he and entire Cabinet have submitted their resignations. Also that two plans are now under discussion, first, involving temporarily government by commission as

“ SMLLIUC HE

‘+ [dpparent omission] repeated to Tokyo.

Maver Not printed.

3. C. T. Wang told me October 31, noon, Chang Tso-lin’s troops had Lutai near Tangku and that Yangtsun was invested by Feng Yu-hsiang’s forces. 4. Hsu En-yuan yesterday stated to Chinese secretary that due to confused situation it was uncertain when Tuan Chi-jui would come to Peking. 5. Attitude of provincial leaders toward Feng Yu-hsiang still generally noncommittal. Military Governor Shangtung has declared he will try to prevent reinforcements reaching Wu Pei-fu from south and is apparently so acting. The public does not feel optimistic in regard to Feng’s plan for national conference of heterogeneous political leaders to determine future of the country and the possibility exists that another long period of provincial discord has been initiated. MAYER 15 Text printed from corrected copy received Nov. 3. 16 Not printed.

Number 4. Jenkins telegraphs Sun leaving Canton November 6th, for Shanghai. Number 5. International train from Tientsin arrived November 5,

Please advise Consul immediately that the Department could not approve such intervention in Chinese internal affairs. Repeat to Tokyo as Department’s No. 180. GREW 18 Telegram not printed.

4. Belief by credible persons that above action Bolshevik inspired, working through Kuomintang for purpose finally eliminating monarchical restoration and further inciting anti-imperialist feeling and so anti-foreign feeling. I am reliably informed that C. T. Wang; has seen Karakhan20 daily for past week or two. … 5. Repeated to Tokyo. MAYER

Mhaver

2. On November 5, following received from U. S. S. Pope: “Action contemplated by naval forces at Tsingtau if Wu enters harbor. Naval forces consist of Japanese and American. Wang Hun-chung, an Anfu sympathizer, will not allow Wu’s troops to land without disarmament. The consular body in which the Japanese and American Navies concur consider only way to protect the foreigners is to prevent landing. To this end should he enter he will be required to anchor in the outer harbor and negotiate with Wang on a Japanese cruiser in the presence of commanding officer U. S. S. Pope. Wang stated that he would allow them all provisions and coal they may desire.” 3. Upon receipt of which I sent following to American consul Tsingtau: “November 5, 4 p.m. Wireless message from U. S. S. Pope outlines certain plans initiated by consular body for protection of foreigners Tsingtau in connection with possible landing Wu’s troops. Having in mind American policy noninterference in Chinese internal affairs I desire you should telegraph at once full particulars and reasons prompting your action.” 4. Admiral Washington informed me last night that consular body Chefoo was informed by Chinese authorities that Wu with three Chinese war

vessels under Rear Admiral Wen and five transports carrying 10,000 troops en route Chefoo to force landing and that he was withdrawing U. S. S. Stewart and U. S. S. Pillsbury from Tientsin for service Chefoo. 5. I telegraphed American consul Chefoo as follows: “November 6, 11 p.m. Following is substance of telegram from Department for instruction American consul Tsingtau repeated for your guidance: ‘When Department informed American consul Tsingtau had agreed with Japanese and British colleagues to advise Wu not to land in the event of his arrival at Tsingtau, Department instructed me to advise consul there immediately that Department could not approve such intervention in Chinese internal affairs.’” Following received from American consul Tsingtau:

authorities of the withdrawal of my sanction of the arrangements outlined in my telegram November 7, 3 a.m. Japanese consul general now finds that his Government disapproves arrangement.” MAYER

[Paraphrase]

22 Not printed. 22 Not printed.

commanders of the provincial armies and navies; (5) all state affairs shall be administered by a council presided over by a president and a vice president to be elected by the high commanders from among themselves; (6) high commanders unable to attend the council meeting may appoint representatives; (7) the military government shall consist of five ministries, namely: foreign affairs, finance, home affairs, war and communication; (8) the military government shall be dissolved when the constitution becomes operative again; (9) necessary alterations in the articles may be made by the council; (10) the above articles shall become operative upon the day of promulgation. The above was signed, sealed and presented to the president on the 17th instant by 20 high military officials of the provinces concerned. The commissioners inform me that Tuan was invited to come to Wuchang to head the military government. Though the commissioner is a strong partisan of Wu, I believe this information is reliable.” 3. As yet impossible to estimate effect of the announcement. Tuan Chi-jui has consistently said he would not assume leadership without complete approval of provincial leaders. Therefore this action by Yangtze tuchuns may prevent assumption of power by Tuan leaving situation at Tientsin in the air with a choice by Chang between returning to Manchuria or taking control himself at Peking. Reports from well-informed sources have indicated a certain impatience on Chang’s part because of Tuan’s hesitation in coming to Peking and taking charge of affairs. 4. Under date of November 15th American consul general Tientsin reports conversation with Marshal Chang and one of his close advisers of which following is brief summary of impressions gained by Gauss from conversations: Tuan and Chang dissatisfied with attitude C. T. Wang and Huang Fu and

with their Soviet-Japanese exchanges. Their early eliminations from political scene probable. Chang intends more or less to disregard Sun Yat-sen as well as Feng Yu-hsiang. Chang believes there must be a rectification of Yangtze Valley situation by force, if necessary, in order to eliminate Marshal Ch’i, Sun Chuan-fang and Hsiao Yao-nan. Tuan Chi-jui would lend his influence toward peaceful handling of Yangtze situation, avoiding further resort to arms, if possible. Gauss further states Marshal Chang remarked he would come to Peking in few days; that Chang extremely cordial and invited Gauss to accompany him Peking. This Gauss declined with proper expressions of regret, in which decision I, of course, concurred. 5. Sun Yat-sen arrived Shanghai November 17th but not known if and when he will come north. On landing, Sun is reported by American consul general Shanghai to have made following typical statement: “Understand my arrival causing some agitation. Would like to say to the foreigners Shanghai is China and the Chinese are the hosts, the foreigners guests. We shall have to take drastic measures if this is not realized. The Chinese are determined that the concessions must be returned.” 6. Repeated to Tokyo. MAYER

ARTICLE 1. The Provisional Government of the Republic of China shall have a Chief Executive who shall have supreme control of civil and military affairs and shall be commander in chief of the Army and Navy. ARTICLE 2. The Chief Executive shall act as the representative of the Republic of China in international affairs. ARTICLE 3. The Provisional Government shall have Ministers of State to assist the Chief Executive in attending to [apparent omission] of the President state [sic]. All mandates of the Provisional Government as well as documents relating to state matters shall be countersigned by the Ministers of State. ARTICLE 4. The Chief Executive shall empower Ministers of State to control the following Ministries: Foreign Affairs, Interior, Finance, War, Navy, Justice, Education, Commerce and Agriculture and Communications. ARTICLE 5. The Chief Executive shall summon the Ministers of State to hold Cabinet meetings. ARTICLE 6. This system of government shall go into effect from the date of promulgation but will be declared null and void when the formal government is established. The Institution of the Provisional Government of the Republic of China at this time has for its object the reorganization of government on new lines and the initiation of a general change with the cooperation of the people. The task is of great magnitude and questions of every [omission] are awaiting joint solution by all concerned. All former Executive and judicial laws and orders shall continue in effect except insofar as they may be incompatible with the organization of the Provisional Government or may have been canceled by official orders.

The Government has now been established and I, the Chief Executive, have entered upon the performance of my weighty duty to the full extent of my ability. All the multifarious functions of the Government await attention and all civil and military officials in Peking and the provinces shall continue to administer their posts as in the past, lending their united assistance in meeting the difficulties of the times.” Mandate November 24th appoints following Cabinet: Foreign Affairs, Tang Shao-yi; Interior, Kung Hsin-chan; Finance, Li Shihhao; War, Wu Kuanghsin; Navy, Lin Chien-chang; Justice, Chang Shih-chao; Education, Wang Chiu-lihg; Agriculture and Commerce, Yang Shu-chan; Communications, Yeh Kung-cho. 3. Referring to third paragraph my 452, at meeting of heads of Legations this afternoon senior minister stated Tuan Chi-jui had approached him to ask if foreign representatives would be willing to call upon him in day or two to pay personal respects individually and without ceremony. 4. It was unanimous opinion of chiefs of mission that Tuan Chijui is the de facto government and for this reason the senior minister was authorized to reply to Tuan Chi-jui that the heads of Legations would call individually on him in day or two to pay him personal respects as head of the provisional de facto government, and that the senior minister should make it entirely clear that such action would in no way imply formal de jure recognition. 5. I made reservation that, while I personally agreed with proposed procedure, I could not associate myself therewith until I had received instructions to that effect from my Government. 6. It was the sense of the meeting that question of de jure recognition was not pending at this time owing to the fact that the present de facto authorities in their mandates and in conversation with senior minister stressed the provisional character of the present regime and since the question of de jure recognition if and when it arose was a matter for the respective Governments to decide.

7. Tuan Chi-jui is in my opinion and generally so considered I believe the one man in China in whom there is any hope at present of uniting the different factions and leaders in an effort to bring order and stable government out of the present situation. For this reason I believe that the Provisional Government he has set up should be given some measure of support by the foreign powers and that the procedure proposed in today’s meeting of heads of Legations as outlined above is well suited to this purpose. It commits us to nothing but a recognition of the fact that there is a de facto government under the leadership of Tuan Chi-jui. I strongly recommend that I be instructed immediately by telegraph to associate myself with other heads of Legations and to pay my respects to Tuan as set forth above. 8. It was likewise the sense of today’s meeting that the recognition of Tuan Chi-jui as the de facto authority would permit the respective Legations to reply in the usual form to the anticipated note from new Minister for Foreign Affairs announcing his assumption of office. He would be merely an officer in the de facto government. I shall also adopt this procedure unless otherwise directed by the Department. MAYER

explained his present position as merely a temporary means of bridging over an interval and stated that while not desirous of returning to political life after his withdrawal therefrom in 1920 he had thought it his duty to sacrifice himself in order to unify the country. I took care to make it clear to an officer of the Wai Chiao Pu that my action in calling upon Marshal Tuan was in no sense to be interpreted as implying de jure recognition. I was informed that this was well understood. Admiral Tsai Ting-kan informed me most emphatically and in a manner which compels my belief in the sincerity of his statement that Marshal Tuan was much opposed to Soviet activities. 4. I submit following comment on the Cabinet supplementing China Tear Book: An official of the Foreign Office informed me that it is practically certain Tang Shao-yi will not take up post of Minister for Foreign Affairs and that W. W. Yen is probable next appointee. Following Ministers are of Anfu Party: Finance, Interior, War. Minister of the Navy has been associated with Lu Yunghsiang and has Anfu affiliations. Appointment of Minister of Education seems designed to please Tang Chi-yao, Military Governor of Yunnan. Minister of Justice is reported to have been closely associated with Tuan lately and to have assisted in drafting his political announcements. Minister of Agriculture represents Kuomintang and Minister of Communications old Communications clique. Latter is privately considered representative of Chang Tso-lin but Chang denied any desire for representation in the Cabinet. Ministers Interior, War, Justice and Communications have assumed office. 5. Feng Yu-hsiang has for the past few days apparently been trying to resign from the command of his troops and his other official duties. Mandate issued by Tuan November 27th while announcing this desire on Feng’s part, urges him in laudatory terms to retain his various posts. Difficult to know whether this is a question of face and whether Tuan and Chang Tso-lin really desire Feng to resign or whether Tuan and Chang are somewhat apprehensive of situation which would be created by resignation

and Feng’s consequent release from his responsibilities as commander of his troops. … 6. Repeated to Tokyo. MAYER

question of Bolshevism. If this were not done he did not know what his own policy would be, but he would take a definite stand if the foreign representatives did. He said that under no circumstances could he associate himself with Sun and his Bolshevik policy. [End paraphrase.] 3. In order to feel Chang out I observed that the problem of dangerous Bolshevik activities in China appeared to me one of Chinese internal administration and to be dealt with by the Chinese Government. Chang replied that he did not consider it such since the danger was an international one and of world-wide extent. I inquired whether Chang thought that there would be any immediate dangerous developments. He expressed belief that coming of Doctor Sun would make question one of immediate urgency; that necessary to wait and see position Tuan would take in the matter but primarily necessary that foreign Ministers should adopt definite policy. American policy of nonintervention in Chinese affairs appreciated but Bolshevik question one with which foreign nations should concern themselves. 4. Chang then discussed Sun Yat-sen’s announcements in regard to “unjust treaties” and observed that he thought western nations on considerations of justice would soon modify treaties when proper time came; that however a proper course must be followed in securing revision and inadmissible [inadvisable?] to make demand for abrogation “unjust treaties” in sudden manner. Agitation fomented by Doctor Sun was dangerous. 5. Chang spoke in similar vein regarding Bolshevik menace to the Netherlands Minister and I believe likewise to the British Minister and possibly others of the diplomatic body. 6. Although difficult to know reason or reasons why Chang should have spoken so openly, extensively, and hostilely respecting Bolshevik activities in China, following seems a reasonable deduction. As intimated in paragraph 3 of my 442

the Bolsheviks through the radical wing of the Kuomintang Party headed by Sun Yat-sen, C. T. Wang, Huang Fu and the like might make demand for immediate revision or cancelation a popular rallying cry; that Chang realizes that he, Tuan and other conservative leaders in China would not be able to oppose such a popular movement and might even have to join with it; that the Soviets through their local followers and sympathizers might thus control Chinese Government isolating Chang in Manchuria and seriously jeopardizing his position there. That Chang desires the foreign powers to take some action which will permit conservative Chinese leaders to work with them and prevent Bolshevik influence from predominating in China. Repeated to Tokyo. MAYER

decided to be in Tientsin to meet Sun Yat-sen to see if he could associate himself with Sun. This is not likely. 3. Out of all the welter of rumors and the few facts, straws in the wind, such as Chang Tso-lin’s sudden departure, the ex- Emperor’s unexpectedly seeking refuge in Diplomatic Quarter, Feng Yu-hsiang’s continuing to remain at or near Peking, although having stated he wishes to go abroad, and Sun Yat-sen’s imminent arrival, a grave apprehension arises that extreme Kuomintang and Soviet influence may dominate Peking. Except by good fortune and unless the foreign powers are able to devise some defensive action in the circumstances, the chances seem to be that the radical wing of the Kuomintang Party and the Soviets are to have their day in Peking. Tuan Chi-jui’s continuance in power seems dependent upon his ability to control allegiance of the various discordant factions. The mere fact, of course, of Chang’s withdrawal to Tientsin does not necessarily spell his abandonment of Tuan, since if Chang desires to oppose Sun Yatsen and the Red element in China he can do so very effectively from Tientsin as a base. However, as I observed, the outlook is far from bright. 4. Feeling, I believe, even more pessimistic than I do in the above regard, the British Minister called upon me yesterday to suggest an informal meeting of the representatives of the Washington Conference powers for the purpose of discussing and exploring into the question of the advisability of recommending to our respective Governments the immediate joint issuance of a statement. This statement would inform the Chinese authorities and people of the continued desire of these powers, as evidenced at Washington Conference, to make [take?] up with China, at the very earliest moment that she puts her house in order, the question of treaty revision, and that these powers to this [end?] would support in every proper way any government in China which would show a capacity for undertaking the task of restoring law and order in the country. At the same time the statement should definitely disclose the decision of the powers concerned not to

recognize or have truck with any administration which might be set up in Peking by those Peking leaders in China who in the present as in the past have been and are seeking to incite the Chinese people against the friendly attitude [of the] powers. 5. I readily agreed to attend any such informal conference of representatives of Washington Conference powers which is scheduled for morning of 4th. Some such action as suggested by the British Minister might be effective in opposition to extreme nationalist and Bolshevik trend of events in China, although a double-edged weapon with both good and bad potentialities. 6. After my conversation with Chang Tso-lin, reported in my 465, December 1, 4 p.m., Chinese secretary had a long conversation with General Wang, chief of the Manchurian military foreign, affairs department, who appears very close to Chang and who was present both when Chang called on me and my return visit to him. To Peck’s inquiry regarding exactly what assistance Chang considered foreign powers could be to the conservative element in China at the present time to help them oppose the Soviets, Wang stated that Marshal Chang had in mind an announcement by the foreign powers of their sympathetic willingness to discuss treaty revision just as soon as a government was established in China capable of giving effect to any international arrangements which would result from such a discussion. Marshal Chang feared that Sun and his Red adherents prompted by Karakhan would raise louder and louder the rallying cry of “down with the unjust treaties” which being a national issue the conservative leaders in China would not be able to oppose. An announcement by the powers as suggested above by Marshal Chang would [,he] believed, cut under this Bolshevik propaganda and enable him and other conservatives to make common cause with the foreign powers against Soviet influence in China. I venture to invite

Mhaver

Maintenance of a united front by the powers in opposition to the threatened seizure of customs at Canton by Sun Yat-sen29 29 For previous correspondence regarding the threatened seizure of customs at Canton, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 551 ff. [377] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State Washington, March 26, 1924.

before authorizing participation in another joint action in protection of the Canton customs. 3. Jenkins’ recent reports would indicate that the Sun government is completely under domination of Soviet agents. If this is so an initial success at Canton in defying the treaty powers’ contention regarding the customs would dangerously assist Soviet agents in their endeavor to incite Chinese to repudiation of all treaties. I assume that seizure of customs at Canton would leave Chang Tsolin to seize Majichurian customs which he has

Japanese ships cooperate in action. Keep me informed by telegraph regarding all foreign war vessels at or near Canton.” 7. I request the Department’s early instructions. BELL 31 Not printed. 33 Not printed. 33 Not printed.

While exchanges of views on this subject were proceeding, this Government was informed by its representative in London that the British Foreign Office had learned that Sun Yat-sen was threatening the seizure only of the “native” Canton Customs and that accordingly the British Minister at Peking and the naval authorities considered there was no need for naval action at the present time. Accept [etc.]

Cuartes E. Hucues

Recognition by the United States and other powers of the Provisional Government as the de facto government of China [389] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)

[393] The French Embassy to the Department of State undated

Premier is not authorized by the constitution except when Parliament; is adjourned which is not the case now. However, the constitution does clearly provide that when the offices of the President and Vice President are vacant the Cabinet shall perform the duties of Presidential office. It may be borne in mind that there has not been a strictly constitutional government in China for years. 4. If point of view accepted that there is only Cabinet change and constitution’ observed in the main then question of recognition not now involved and so no opportunity to withhold same with a view to forcing Chinese Government to give satisfactory assurances of readiness to fulfill obligations to powers. 5. However, it may be that events will take a decidedly unconstitutional turn when the French proposition would apply, either through not recognizing a new government or withdrawal of recognition from present Government. I consider either course of very doubtful expediency unless other factors are introduced which might demand a different decision. 6. If it is a fact, as French Chargé d’Affaires stated at diplomatic body meeting, Central Government is only sustained by recognition of the powers, it would seem necessarily to follow that withdrawal of recognition would result in break-up of Government into several separate entities each composed of a group of provinces—a definite disintegration of the Central Government’s authority and hence liability each entity would most likely deny obligation for past debts and not afford a very safe or promising prospect for future business or negotiation. … MAYER 40 See section entitled “Concurrence by the United States in the contention by certain powers that the Boxer Indemnity payments should be made in

them unless it gives effective assurance that the treaty obligations of China will be carried out. The French Government would be glad if the American Government would kindly take the suggestion under advisement and, if the suggestion should gain its approval, send appropriate instructions to the Minister of the United States at Peking.

The Italian Ambassador on the same date stated that his Government, before replying to the French note, would like to know the views of the American Government on the French suggestion. The reply made to him was of the same tenor as that to the French Ambassador.

to the Wai Chiao Pu. I assured secretary that no personal affront was intended the Acting Premier and that the United States had no feeling of special affinity or antipathy to any political faction in China, being entirely neutral. The reception, I understand, has been canceled. 4. I have only visited the Minister for Foreign Affairs the one time and intended to have as little to do with the present administration as possible compatible with the protection of our interests. I note Department’s instructions in the above regard and will carry them out. MAYER

3. With respect to points (a) and (b), it is my belief that the Chinese Government is now passing through a phase which is abnormal and

temporary. I hope that a more substantial regime will soon be established. I think it is vital until then that the powers do not interfere, actually or apparently, with the working out of the internal forces of China, either by assisting any group or by efforts for mediation which would tend to give an appearance of stability before the situation has actually reached an equilibrium. However, as soon as a central governing body giving a reasonable hope of permanent authority shall have been produced, I think it would be the part of wisdom for the powers to formally recognize it and encourage it with the hope of helping it as far as may be possible to reestablish unity of political control throughout China. 4. With respect to point (c), the growing disposition of the Chinese to evade their treaty responsibilities causes me deep concern—in recent reports from our Legation in China there is the intimation of the possibility that this tendency may soon become manifest in more active opposition to the special rights now held by foreigners. When Minister Schurman was here recently for consultation he confirmed the apprehension that there is the likelihood that in the relatively near future the Chinese will demand that what they call the “unequal treaties” shall be revised, insisting upon control of their tariff, freedom to tax foreigners, and the abolition of extraterritoriality. If such a policy were enunciated it would without doubt bring forth a degree of enthusiasm and popular approval such as no recent Chinese regime has been able to win. Should the powers unite in opposition to such a policy, it seems likely that the Chinese would be able to render of no worth foreign treaty rights by mere passive resistance if not by the use of more aggressive means such as a boycott. 5. Of course the proposal that the powers withhold recognition until a new Chinese administration has given assurances that it will carry out its treaty obligations, is intended to meet this situation. However, even though such foreign pressure might indeed be the means of causing the Chinese officials to yield upon any particular case in controversy, I am unable to make myself believe that it would bring about any general or permanent improvement in the attitude of the Chinese toward the treaty rights of foreigners. I fear on the contrary that if such pressure were used it would result either in a deadlock between the powers and the Chinese regime seeking recognition, or else cause that regime to lose support and therefore

weaken its chances of becoming established as the actual government of the country in proportion to the degree to which it agreed to the conditions demanded by the powers. In either case the particular tangible advantages that might be secured would be obtained at too great a price. 6. It is my firm conviction that, without resorting to force such as for present purposes is out of the question, the peril to foreign interests in China cannot be met by merely exercising pressure without regard to the temper which underlies the Chinese attitude on this subject. Unquestionably the Chinese have a strong feeling that the powers have not played fairly with them with respect to the Washington Conference treaties, and this feeling has influenced their temper with regard to foreign rights. It may be admitted that this feeling is without justification because in any case the political chaos in China would have frustrated our desire for the realization of the concrete plans which the Conference accepted. It is a psychological fact, nevertheless, that it is generally believed by the Chinese that the failure to go ahead with the extraterritoriality conference and the customs conference justifies them in disregarding their own responsibilities. However unjustifiable this feeling may be, it is too firmly fixed and widespread to be left out of consideration as a factor in the situation. I think it is essential therefore that the powers should prove their integrity by showing that they are willing, as soon as circumstances allow, to take up the promised consideration of matters which the Chinese consider fundamental. The decision as regards the extraterritoriality conference rests entirely with the foreign offices of the powers concerned. 7. As I understand the situation, France is withholding action both upon the extraterritoriality conference and upon the acceptance of the two Washington Conference treaties regarding China, and the consequent holding of the conference on customs, in accordance with a definite policy of taking no action favorable to the Chinese until France receives satisfaction with respect to the payment in gold of its share of the Boxer Indemnity. The fact that France has apparently a good case at least prima facie in the matter makes the situation harder to handle. In fact there is some reason to think that if it could be done without “loss of face” in view of the strong national sentiment aroused on this subject in China, the Chinese would now gladly yield. The reference of the issue to the World

Court might bring about a settlement practicable for the Chinese. It is, however, understood that France is so sure of its position that it is inclined to consider only a direct settlement with China. 8. Apparently this attitude on the part of France not only delays a possible satisfactory settlement of this case but it directly strengthens and makes more bitter a tendency increasingly endangering all foreign rights in China by preventing any progress in making effective the decisions concerning China taken at the Washington Conference. The French, therefore, have in their hands the only key to the situation. I hope that the British Foreign Minister may understand the situation as I see it and may be disposed to cooperate with me, if opportunity is presented, to endeavor to influence the Government of France to take action in such a way as to resolve the present deadlock. 9. It is understood that the French Ambassador at London, who until a short while ago was Minister at Peking, is fully informed on the gold franc question. You might take occasion to discuss the matter with him, saying that the American Government is apprehensive that unless the existing deadlock is broken a settlement will be unduly delayed, and that it hopes that some method by which a settlement could be assisted by other governments might be disclosed by a frank and informal discussion of the subject. The British Foreign Minister may of course be informed of this. 10. I have given you the above full explanation of my views so that you will be in a position to discuss the matter with the Foreign Minister confidentially and informally. Considering that there might be possible misunderstandings in other quarters I do not wish you to put these views into any memorandum or note. 11. Please repeat for information to Embassy in France as Department’s no. 412. HUGHES 47 See last paragraph for instructions to repeat to Embassy in France, as Department’s no. 412.

48 Infrd.

a view to the promised inquiry into the present practice of extraterritoriality and into the laws and the judicial system and the methods of judicial administration in China. While by no means disposed to extenuate any tendency of the Chinese Government to repudiate or evade its international responsibilities, the American Government feels that it would be ignoring the realities of the situation to overlook the effect produced upon the minds of the Chinese by their conviction that the Powers have on their part failed to give effect to measures adopted by them for the purpose of furthering the aspirations of the Chinese people for the development of their political life. The Powers are thus prejudiced and weakened in their insistence that China should observe their treaty rights in full, unless and until those rights may be modified by mutual consent; and in the opinion of the American Government there is grave danger of the inculcation of a spirit of distrust which might even more seriously attenuate the sense of responsibility of the Chinese with respect to their obligations. It is therefore the opinion of the Government of the United States that, in order to deal with the grave situation to which the French Embassy’s memorandum refers, it is essential that the Powers should make evident their own good faith and their intention to afford China the opportunity to obtain relief from what her people regard as oppressive restrictions upon their national freedom of action, to the extent that its Government may prove itself willing and able to exercise the normal functions of a Government in its treatment of those foreign interests for which the treaty restrictions were designed to afford a protection not yet available from the Chinese governing authorities.

To that end, the Government of the United States considers it indispensable that the interested Powers, in the course of makingclear their view that any new regime could expect to enjoy their confidence and cooperation only upon the condition that it gives satisfactory evidence of a willingness to observe existing treaty rights, should be prepared to offer reciprocal assurances of their own intentions towards China, and should in particular be in a position to promise that they will at the earliest practicable date

undertake the investigation for which provision is made by the Washington Conference Resolution on Extraterritoriality. While making this suggestion with regard to the particular matter of the Conference on Extraterritoriality, the American Government takes occasion to express its earnest hope that means may be found by which the Government of France may be enabled to contribute towards the amelioration of the present difficult situation in China by according the ratifications which would bring into force the two treaties concerning China concluded at Washington on February 6, 1922. WASHINGTON , November 25, 1924.

It is now known that on November 24th General Tuan Chi-jui provisionally assumed the functions of the Chief Executive of the Chinese Republic in response to the call of a fair majority of the practically autonomous province[s] in China and with the approval of the then existing Government under Mr. Huang Fu. On the same day he announced the formation of a new Cabinet composed of men who have long figured prominently in various factions and provinces. It appears that all these arrangements are intended to be only provisional and that a more lasting regime is reserved for discussion and settlement at a national assembly shortly to be convoked. The Japanese are not directly concerned in the question who will assume the reins of government in China or what form of political institution the proposed national assembly will adopt. Their chief preoccupation[s] have been in the question whether or not China will soon be provided with a sufficiently strong government to maintain law and order within her borders and to discharge her international obligations. But it is evident that whatever government may be established in China cannot possibly endure if it fails to find a way out of its pressing financial difficulties. Without funds to meet the expenditure it will be impossible for any government at Peking to organize an effective administration and to carry out the disbandment of troops and other measures of readjustment now urgently needed. Nor in the opinion of the Japanese Government can the destitution of China’s public treasury be remedied without the cooperation of foreign powers. In order to secure stabilization of China it will be necessary for the powers when they [the time?] becomes opportune to take up the question of financial assistance to be rendered to the Chinese Government. Such assistance is to be extended only upon full communication and understanding among the powers and in case it takes the form of a loan it should be undertaken in accordance with the principles that govern the existing consortium.

In all cases the fullest opportunity should be afforded to the Chinese people to work out a practical system of government and to restore peace and unity in the country. It is reported that the Provisional Government just inaugurated at Peking and its supporters are now seriously striving to attain these objects. The powers should watch their efforts with sympathy, toleration and hope”. Peking informed. BANCROFT

contracting parties. They further declare that on the above understanding their Governments are willing and anxious to proceed as soon as possible with the carrying out of the measures contemplated in the Washington treaties and resolutions.” 2. I make this recommendation for following reasons: First, I have believed for some time that we should combat Bolshevik attack in China in particular reference to so-called “unjust treaties” by an announcement that we were ready and willing to discuss treaty revision at earliest moment practicable. Second, I have considered that we have been and are severely handicapped by inability to initiate action under Washington Conference agreements and resolutions owing to French attitude. I believe that if nothing more eventuates from the effort to have the powers concerned agree upon proposed statement, such effort will at least bring pressure upon French Government toward ratification of Washington treaties. I deem this is in line with Department’s attitude and desire as expressed in its 294,

4. I would have preferred to have strengthened statement by definitely stating in so many words that the powers concerned would take up with a formally established Chinese Government the subject of treaty revision at the earliest moment practicable, thus turning this phase against those who now using it to our disadvantage. Statement as adopted this morning’s meeting by implication puts us on record as desirous to this effect. 5. Both British Minister and myself fearful that further strengthening our proposed statement might prevent French and Italian Governments from associating themselves therewith, the chances being that these two Governments would even oppose statement as now drafted. 6. Japanese Minister stated he had reason to believe Feng and Sun Yat-sen contemplate another coup in the very near future. Impossible to know Feng’s attitude as Tuan may be simply playing him off against foreigners demanding immediate treaty revision or cancellation. It would be difficult for us to issue proposed statement which Sun could then make to appear as result of his threats.

7. For above reasons I most earnestly recommend that if Department approves proposed statement I be instructed to this end at very earliest possible moment. 8. I venture to add that I consider the making of a statement similar to that proposed of so great importance at this time that I would favor its being made to present Chinese Government even if only by Great Britain and the United States; with Japan, the Netherlands and Belgium if possible. If necessary, however, I believe Japanese Government would be willing to join in such a statement even if all powers concerned would [not?] agree thereto. Possibly more danger of playing into Japanese hands by proposed statement is less than that of ill-advised agitation for treaty revision in my opinion. Of the two it goes without saying I greatly prefer to assist the Japanese. I would much appreciate simultaneous instructions on this point should the Department approve proposed statement in principle. British Minister of same opinion and is requesting similar instructions.

9. Repeated to Tokyo with request to hand copy to Minister Schurman.57a MAYER

The Minister of Foreign Affairs at The Hague being very anxious to learn the opinion of the American Government in this matter, Jonkheer de Graeff would highly appreciate if Mr. Hughes would be kind enough to give him the desired information at his earliest convenience. WASHINGTON , December 5, 1924.

While by no means disposed to extenuate any tendency of the Chinese Government to repudiate or evade its international responsibilities, the American Government feels that it would be ignoring the realities of the situation to overlook the effect produced upon the minds of the Chinese by their conviction that the Powers have on their part failed to give effect to measures adopted by them for the purpose of furthering the aspirations of the Chinese people for the development of their political life. The Powers are thus prejudiced and weakened in their insistence that China should observe their treaty rights in full, unless and until those rights may be modified by mutual consent; and in the opinion of the American Government there is grave danger of the inculcation of a spirit of distrust which might even more seriously attenuate the sense of responsibility of the Chinese with respect to their obligations. It is therefore the opinion of the Government of the United States that, in order to deal with the grave situation to which the Netherlands Minister’s memorandum refers, it is essential that the Powers should make evident their own good faith and their intention to afford China the opportunity to obtain relief from what her people regard as oppressive restrictions upon their national freedom of action, to the extent that its Government may prove itself willing and able to exercise the normal functions of a Government in its treatment of those foreign interests for which the treaty restrictions were designed to afford a protection not yet available from the Chinese governing authorities. To that end, the Government of the United States considers it indispensable that the interested Powers, in the course of making clear their view that any régime could expect to enjoy their confidence and cooperation only upon the condition that it gives satisfactory evidence of a willingness to observe existing treaty rights, should be prepared to offer reciprocal assurances of their own intentions towards China, and should in particular be in a position to promise that they will, as soon as possible, proceed with the carrying out of the measures contemplated in the Washington Conference treaties and resolutions. With a view to contributing something towards the amelioration of the present difficult situation in China the representatives at Peking of the United States, Belgium, Great-Britain, France, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands and Portugal have proposed to despatch to the present Government at

Peking the following note: [Here follows text of proposed note reported in telegram no. 472, December 4, from the Chargé in China, printed on page

to have statement inserted in last sentence of draft to effect that failure to carry out Washington Conference agreements not through fault of powers concerned. I strongly opposed this. To my mind very inadvisable to insert such controversial observation. Less said the better concerning failure execution Washington Conference agreements. I stood alone at first but finally, after much discussion, British Minister joined me. Latter suggested amendment (a) and I amendment (d) which together satisfied French Chargé. 4. Japanese Government had authorized its representative to sign draft with omission of “until such time as these international engagements shall be modified by the mutual consent of the contracting parties” at end of first sentence. Japanese argument in favor of this omission was that clause might incite Chinese Government to bring up treaty revision at once. British Minister and self opposed elimination of this clause. I regretted omission since I felt it advantageous to have mild intimation in our statement to effect that question of treaty revision not entirely remote from minds of powers concerned. Amendment (c) agreed to in view of great importance of immediate despatch and publication of statement and in view of delay which would ensue from resubmission of matter to Japanese Government. Clause substituted merely a truism. 5. I did my best to maintain statement as originally drafted and rather deplore the whittling away of some of its strength by amendments as made. However time element first importance and as all other representatives seemed satisfied I assented and signed. MAYER

relative to the application of the French share of the indemnity under consideration. In this connection I wish to take the liberty of reminding Your Excellency that the Government of the United States was pleased to recognize that my Government’s attitude was justified and that it has for two years officially associated itself with the collective action of the signatories of the protocol of 1901 to remind China that one of the most important provisions of that international instrument must be respected. In the opinion of my Government the fact that the payment in gold of the Boxer Indemnity is one of the foremost obligations of the Chinese Government should not be overlooked; and it believes that to grant to China the benefit of the treaties of Washington as long as she continues to evade the treaties validly concluded with the powers, would be an injustice to these powers and would lead China into a path full of dangers to herself. That opinion, moreover, seems to be shared by the majority of the powers signatory to the Washington agreements, since their representatives in Peking believe that the present situation of China does not permit of assembling the Commission on Extraterritoriality. The very sincere wish of the Government of the Republic is that the new Chinese Cabinet will gain sufficient authority and form a sufficiently accurate idea of its own interests to cast into oblivion the bad faith of the governments that have succeeded each other for the last two years in Peking. It has, therefore, just instructed me to remind Your Excellency that in its opinion the result could be better achieved if the Government of the United States would bring its influence to bear upon the Chinese Government, and give it to understand that the removal of the last obstacle which still stands in the way of the putting into effect of the treaties of Washington depends upon its good will and that the best way to bring to its country the benefits of the advantages flowing from the said treaties would be to meet the engagements heretofore signed by China. Be pleased [etc.] JUSSERAND

66 File translation revised.

which has been acceded to by Portugal in a Note dated December 18th, 1924, from the British Minister on behalf of the Portuguese Government, the Chinese Government desire to express their gratification at the declaration made by them in the names of their Governments, that they will lend their full support to the Provisional Government in Peking under the present Chief Executive which, they are correct in understanding, has been constituted with the concurrence of the Nation and will lead to the establishment of a formal Government truly representative of the Republic. The Chinese Government desire to assure them that the Chinese Government will continue to respect, as they have always respected, all the Treaties, Conventions, and other engagements duly entered into by China, and even in exceptional cases where a divergence of interpretation has arisen the Chinese Government have always endeavored to seek an equitable solution with the Power or Powers concerned in accordance with international usage. The Chinese Government are gratified to be apprised that the Governments signatory to the Washington Treaties are willing and anxious to proceed as soon as practicable with the carrying out of the measures contemplated in the Washington Treaties and Resolutions. These measures, which are purposely restricted to those which were immediately practicable, were unconditionally agreed upon to be forthwith carried out. The Chinese Government regret the delay which has unexpectedly occurred and sincerely hope that, with the assurance of friendly assistance now given by the Governments concerned, these measures could soon be put into execution, in accordance with the intentions and agreements of the Washington Conference. They wish to add, furthermore, that in view of the desire of the Chinese Government to consolidate the friendship between China and the friendly Powers on a permanent and sound basis, they hope that the Powers concerned will also at an early date give sympathetic consideration to the other well-known national aspirations of the Chinese people, submitted in recent years to different international conferences by the Chinese Government, so that their relations may be further improved to their mutual benefit. PEKING, December 23, 1924.

7 Not printed.

Negotiations leading to the occupation of the Russian Legation at Peking by the newly accredited Soviet Ambassador to China [416] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[420] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase] 2. Koo’s note leaves out of consideration the statement in the dean’s note of October 3, 1920, to the effect that the Russian Legation would be taken in charge by the representatives of the protocol powers until Russian representation recognized by the powers should be again established. See

3. Your Excellency’s suggestion to consider the question of handing over the former Russian Legation only on a request addressed to the foreign representatives by a Russian representative duly accredited to the Chinese Government appears to overlook the special interest of the Chinese Government to see the premises of the former Russian Legation promptly handed back to an authorized representative of the Russian Government. It will be recalled that the Diplomatic Quarter, though under the control of the foreign legations by the protocol of 1901, remains part of Chinese territory and that the premises of the Russian Legation, though situated in the said quarter, are themselves not subject to the control of the representatives of other powers. Indeed they cannot be subject to such control, as they are the property of a foreign power with which China has reestablished diplomatic relations and which Is anxious to take possession of the Legation through its authorized representative for use as its Legation. In asking for the delivery of the said premises to an authorized representative of the Soviet Government, the Chinese Government sought only to extend to a foreign government that act of friendly assistance which international courtesy expected of China to do in order to facilitate the establishment of [a] diplomatic representative [representation] which it has agreed to receive. They feel the more concerned because, as I may add for your information, it is their desire to discharge an obligation which they have undertaken vis- à-vis the Soviet Government in the Sino-Russian agreement of May 31, 1924. 4. They are further inclined to the view that the conventional status of the Diplomatic Quarter should not make it difficult for the foreign representatives to comply with the request of the Chinese Government,

since they have not asked to take control themselves of the said premises but have requested only to have them delivered to an authorized representative of the Soviet Government. 5. I hope the more sincerely that Your Excellency will see your way to arrange for compliance with this request, as any other course of action in the present case would not only embarrass the Chinese Government in their desire to extend every courtesy and facility prescribed by international usage to the representatives of foreign government[s] maintaining amicable relations with China, but would also appear to prejudice the right of foreign powers to establish their Legations on Chinese territory free from any condition other than the consent of the Chinese Government.” SCHURMAN 76 Text of Chinese note not paraphrased.

5. The eight Ministers must be notified of name of diplomatic representative officially accredited to Chinese Government by Russian Government, and Minister for Foreign Affairs is requested to ask this representative to put himself directly in touch with them to discuss and determine the matter. 6. This note was drafted at meeting of eight Ministers July 1st but despatch delayed because of absence from Peking of some of them.

the future, and I pointed out that the position of my colleagues was intended for that contingency whenever it might occur. He declared that the other signatories of the protocol had no right to lay down conditions for him and that he would not accept them either now or at any other time. 3. I went on to say that my colleagues were, in view of his published utterances, apprehensive as to his attitude with respect to their rights and prerogatives under the protocol. He admitted that he had expressed disapproval of the protocol provisions but assured me that he desired on entering the quarter to maintain good neighborly relations and observe municipal regulations. He added that if his Government should renounce its rights under the protocol they would notify the other powers in accordance with international usage. He also made and reiterated the statement that his Government would not bring any Red troops into the Legation Quarter. 4. I inquired whether I might communicate to my colleagues the statements he had just made. He consented on the express understanding however that they were not to be regarded as the fulfillment of preliminary conditions laid down by others but the voluntary expression of his own sentiments. He agreed to send me a written record of these observations. He will also make a formal demand of the powers for the transfer of the Legation premises. 5. Karakhan will never assent to conditions to get back the property. On the other hand most if not all of my colleagues insist on some stipulations. My hope is that Karakhan’s voluntary statement, unless he minimizes it in the note he is to send me, can be used to satisfy my colleagues. It is on this I base my hope of an early settlement of the difficulty. 6. I had a conference this morning with my British colleague who has just returned to Peking for a few days and informed him of my instructions on the subject and reported to him fully my conversation with Karakhan. He expressed much gratification at

the prospect of a settlement. No other minister of the protocol powers is in Peking. 7. As soon as I receive Karakhan’s written statement I will call a meeting of the representatives of the protocol powers. SCHURMAN 79 Not printed; it quoted telegrams exchanged with the Ambassador in Great Britain; paragraph referred to is also the penultimate paragraph of telegram

impressed with all the obligations of that protocol and of the protocol of 190482 and all subsequent arrangements which bound all the cosignatories to the maintenance of the conventional status of the Diplomatic Quarter, the diplomatic representatives of the signatory powers have consented to hand over to Your Excellency the Russian Legation and the keys thereof and have appointed the Chargé d’Affaires of the Netherlands Legation, Mr. Roell, to represent them in this business. As to the intimation given me by Your Excellency in the conversation above referred to that the Soviet might in the future renounce its interest in the protocol of 1901 which I also reported to my colleagues, I am requested to say that the representatives of the other powers signatory of the 1901 and 1904 protocols must reserve full liberty of action for their Governments in respect to the effect of such renunciation upon the rights, privileges and mutual obligations which accrue to and devolve upon all the signatories of these collective agreements. If Your Excellency will acquaint me with the name of the person you may delegate to take over the Russian Legation and the keys, I will communicate the information to Mr. Roell.” 4. I think it is the expectation of all the diplomatic representatives that this draft perhaps with minor changes will be approved by their Governments. If the respective Governments cabled their replies next week the matter could be settled before I left Peking for America. SCHURMAN 82 For text of protocol of 1904, see MacMurray, Treaties and Agreements with and concerning China, vol. I, p. 315.

Grew

Grew

5. Persistent reports which I cannot yet confirm are reaching me from reliable sources that prior to Karakhan’s conference with Schurman he had exchanged notes with Koo definitely giving up Russia’s extraterritorial rights, which of course would mean that Russia could no longer consider herself a protocol power. BELL

American colleague the limits of courtesy beyond [which] his fear might lead him. It should also be added for the information of Your Excellency’s American colleague and for that matter of your other colleagues who may have not had time yet, like the American Minister, to formulate their anxiety that there does not exist in international law and practice a method of restoration of diplomatic prerogative [relations] between two governments by way of returning to one of them a legation belonging to the latter government and situated in the capital of a third power by the other of those two governments which, but accidentally and without the consent of the real owner, has in its [hands] the keys from the buildings of such a legation. Herewith I beg to return the above-mentioned note of August 18, 1924. I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to you, Mr. Minister, the assurance of my highest consideration. Signed L. Karakhan.” The Bolshevik Rosta News Agency has also issued the following statement. “In a conversation he had with a representative of the Soviet Embassy the correspondent of the Rosta News Agency had the following statement made to him. The note which was returned to Mr. Yoshizawa by Mr. Karakhan was written by the former at the request of the American Minister. Mr. Karakhan has ho doubt that if Mr. Yoshizawa, who is now engaged in negotiations with the Government of the Union, had the right to refuse he would have declined to undertake the ungrateful task of representing American interests before [in regard to] the Soviet Government. The idiosyncrasy of the American diplomacy has up till now been forcing and still forces it today to act foolishly and [incorrectly] vis-à-vis the Government of the Union. In this respect American diplomacy differs widely from the American people which is endowed with

common sense, favorably distinguishing them even from other nations. As for American diplomacy it is so afraid and has such a hatred of the Soviet Union that in an official document presented to the Soviet representative it cannot refrain from discourteous formula[e]. It would be an ungrateful task to teach good manners and politeness to the representatives of the present American Government, it being, however, not so much a question of politeness or courtesy as one of bitter hatred which some of the elements now ruling in America feel towards the Soviet Government. No wonder that in China the American diplomacy is particularly sensitive with regard to the Soviet Union, for it is here in China that America has more strongly and acutely than other powers felt the blow which was dealt to her policy by the sincere and straightforward policy of the Soviet Government. Indeed the hypocrisy and Christian bigotry in which the Americans enveloped their policy in China have now been fully exposed in the eyes of the Chinese people. Much lustre has been taken off from good words about the respect for and the rights of the Chinese people since the Lincheng note, the threatening speeches of the American Minister at Harbin and the appearance and arbitrary actions of American warships in Chinese home waters. Of course the Americans who have made Mr. Yoshizawa write the note which was returned today could be told: You do not wish to recognize the regime existing in the Soviet Union? Well you know that at any future time the Soviet Government does not at all intend compelling you to do it. And they could also be told that the American people will force them to recognize the Government of the Union without any reservations. Then the present rulers of America could also be told that the day relations will be restored between America and the Union it will not in any way mean that the Government of the Union will have to recognize the regime which presently [at present] holds sway in America—if of course this regime will still be existing at the

time. The regime of violence in China, the infringement of the sovereignty of the Chinese people; the regime of the troops of the Philippines; the regime of the most unashamed interference with the affairs of the American Republics; the regime which has made of a negro a dog whom anyone may [with impunity] kill; the regime lastly which but quite recently has revealed itself in an unutterably monstrous form of corruption, decay, pillaging of state property—in which all take part whether senators, ministers or judges; a regime under which the President has had to use many an effort and much time to find an honest judge to investigate the oil scandal, for every judge on whom his choice fell happened himself to be involved in the scandal and the robbing of state property. It is to be hoped at least that the American Minister does not mean to say that the powers which recognize the Washington Government have also recognized all the above-enumerated brilliant aspects of the American regime. And we certainly hope that when we are going to resume relations with the American Government the latter is not going to insist upon the recognition of this regime on our part too. We have no doubt as to the fact that the best part of the American people, that is its huge majority, are against the policy of the present American Government with regard to the Soviet Union; nor do we have any doubts that today’s rulers of America know that their days are numbered and that those who will come after [in] their place will—whoever they may be—either by compulsion or their own free will, correct the mistake[s] made with regard to the Soviet Union and would, we [express the hope,] not only in regard to the Soviet Union but [also] to other peoples and in particular the Chinese nation.” I have just received call from Japanese Minister who incidentally ceased to be dean last night on return to Peking of British Minister. He is deeply offended at tone and substance of Karakhan’s note, particularly reference to Government of Japan being in the midst of negotiations with Karakhan regarding resumption of relations between two countries; feels this is an uncalled-for affront to him and has telegraphed home for instructions as to

whether he should return note to Karakhan. If he does so, as he has ceased to be dean, it will have to be as Japanese Minister and not as dean. If he decides to refer the matter to British Minister it will be extremely awkward for the latter whose only wish is to prevent friction with Bolshevik representative … I consider that I have discharged my duty to our Government in causing our Government’s views to be conveyed to Karakhan which they unquestionably have been and I do not intend to take any further part if I can possibly avoid it in the imbroglio which has arisen … BELL

If this takes place I think I should ask Japanese Minister not to address me formally sending me copy of such a communication, as I do not think I should receive such a note at the hands of the representative of any government with which we maintain diplomatic relations. Otherwise I think it best to let the matter drop, as Karakhan’s note will be addressed to Japanese Minister and not to me. Please instruct. BELL

modus vivendi between the Soviet Embassy and the Legations situated in the Diplomatic Quarter.” 3. British Minister in circulating foregoing expresses opinion that this may be considered satisfactory acknowledgment of our note and thinks reservations in third paragraph of our note sufficiently safeguard liberty of action of the other signatories of the 1901 protocol in the event of its subsequent cancelation by the Soviets or of renunciation of their interests therein and also in the event of its being found impossible to establish the modus vivendi mentioned in Karakhan’s reply. 4. I do not consider it a satisfactory reply as it appears to repudiate the conditions of the return as set forth in prefaced paragraph of protocol representative’s note of August 18th; and I fear that on publication of Karakhan’s note, which is to take place after he receives our final reply, it will appear that he has through the medium of the American Minister hoaxed the diplomatic body with regard to his position as a protocol representative. 5. However, it is probably the best we can hope for and, having regard to Department’s views as expressed in your telegram 144,

Beu

accept and which, as I already had the honor to remark, [is not] supported by international law and practice. Herewith I beg to enclose the note of August 18, 1924, which Your Excellency Sent me a second time on the 29th instant.” Yoshizawa, after consulting Netherlands Minister who has returned to Peking and resumed duties as dean of the diplomatic corps, sent the following reply to Karakhan yesterday: “In acknowledging the receipt of your note of the 30th August I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that your note under acknowledgment together with its enclosure has been transmitted to [His Excellency] the Netherlands Minister, the senior representative of the protocol ministers.” On learning today of this last exchange of notes I told the Japanese Minister I considered he had done all that could be asked as a colleague and as senior protocol minister and I begged that as far as I was concerned he would now let the matter drop as I thought nothing was to be gained by his continuing this controversy with Karakhan. He agreed and will take no further action. BELL

Efforts to obtain unanimity among the powers regarding the proposal to raise the diplomatic rank of their representatives in China [437] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg)

[441] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain (Kellogg)

[Washington,] July 31, 1924.

HUGHES 85 See last paragraph for instructions to repeat to Paris as Department’s no. 184. The same telegram sent to the Chargé in Japan as no. 97, for his information, as a basis for discreet inquiry at the Foreign Office, and with instructions to repeat to Peking as Department’s no. 124 for information. 86 Memorandum not printed. 86 Memorandum not printed.

Please instruct. Copy to European Information Center. KELLOGG 89 Not printed. 90 Sydney P. Waterlow, Counsellor in the British Foreign Office.

expected to cooperate with his colleagues for those purposes for which the Diplomatic Body exists. On the other hand, his exclusion from that body would appear inevitably to force him into the position of encouraging and cooperating with the Chinese Government in opposition to what would be termed the “pretensions” of the Treaty Powers—an alternative which would be particularly dangerous to the just rights of the Powers at this time when the disintegration of governmental authority in China has already resulted in so greatly impairing the sense of obligation and of responsibility.

It would seem that the inevitable recognition of a Soviet Ambassador as a member of the Diplomatic Body must tend to paralyse the activity of that organization as an instrumentality for the expression of the collective interests of the Powers, and it is to be anticipated that the Diplomatic Body, in so far as concerns its present peculiar character and functions, will fall into desuetude. It will be unfortunate to lose the benefit of the system of cooperation embodied in that organization; but at a time when cooperation among the Powers is more than ever necessary, it is to be hoped that this loss will be compensated by a cooperation suited to the exigency among the particular nations interested in such cases as from time to time may arise. A related question concerns the transfer to the Soviet Ambassador of the property of the Russian Legation in the Legation Quarter. It would seem an untenable position for the other Legations which have had this property in custody to claim a right to deny or to condition its transfer, upon his demand, to the person recognized by China as the duly accredited diplomatic representative of Russia. On this point, however, I should be happy to learn the views of the British Government, particularly in reference to the possibility that the occupation of the Russian Legation by the representatives of the Soviet might have the result of impairing the defensibility of the Legation Quarter for which provision is made by the Boxer Protocol.93 You will of course bear in mind that this Government, while not itself considering it advisable or feasible to enter into diplomatic relations with

the Soviet regime, desires to stand aloof from any question of the relationships of other Governments with the Soviets. Repeat to Paris for information as Department’s 220. HUGHES 91 See last paragraph for instructions to repeat to Paris as Department’s no. 220. 92 Not printed.

reply of four other interested Governments to this communication received here. He added that Japanese Government felt that there was strong sentiment in the Diet calling for this gesture on the part of Japan. Peking informed. CAFFERY

I replied that I had no information as to the official attitude of the Department of State other than that in the Department’s telegram of July 12th; however that I personally believed any action of any power at Peking tending to break up the international solidarity there was to be deplored; that I believed that isolated action in this case on the part of the Japanese would tend in that direction. During the past few weeks the British and French Ambassadors here both have had several conversations with Baron Shidehara on this subject and I understand that yesterday the British Ambassador took occasion to make some remarks to him in that connection similar to my own mentioned above. CAFFERY

It is very much to be regretted if the Department’s refusal of the Chinese proposal occurred so shortly before the Japanese Government’s suggestion of a contrary course of action as to give rise to a question of the possibility of our having acted in disregard of Japan’s suggestion. You may explain the matter fully and frankly to Baron Shidehara. GREW

Ambassador, might now desire to proceed on the basis which he suggested to you on July 22 as described in your 192 of that date. The French Chargé d’Affaires has inquired whether this Government would be disposed to instruct you to consult with your French and British colleagues with a view to making representations to the Japanese Government urging further postponement of the sending of a Japanese Ambassador to Peking. You may join in such consultation if proposed by your French colleague, submitting to the Department any conclusions or recommendations that may be proposed. The French Chargé dAffaires is being informed to that effect. The Italian Government, as you have already been informed through Peking, will not change the status of its representation at Peking for reasons of economy. Repeat to Peking as Department’s No. 182. GREW 99 See last paragraph for instructions to repeat to Peking as no. 182. Telegram, except for last paragraph, repeated to the Ambassador in Great Britain (no. 264), for his information and that of the British Government, with instructions to repeat to Paris as Department’s no. 256. 1 Neither printed.

missions at Peking be raised to that of Embassies and that in case the powers decline the Japanese Government intends nevertheless next spring to raise the status of their mission.” The telegram above quoted seems to indicate that the Japanese Government

If the United States Govermnent agree and will send instructions to the United States Ambassador at Tokio to approach the Japanese Government unofficially in the above sense, with a view to the postponement of the execution of their decision in this matter, His Majesty’s Government will be happy to instruct their Representative at Tokio to support the action of his United States Colleague. [ WASHINGTON ,] December 3, 1924.

to approach the Japanese Government in regard to it. Should the British Government, however, in the light of the situation as known to it, feel that there is occasion for urgency in dealing with the question, the Department of State would be glad to give further consideration to the matter upon being so informed. [ WASHINGTON ,] December 17, 1924.

Reservations by the United States and other powers regarding disposal to be made of the Chinese Eastern Railway under the Sino-Soviet agreement7 7 For previous correspondence concerning the Chinese Eastern Railway, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 758 ff. [458] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

5. The Cabinet approved in substance Wang’s report which is now before the President. The Cabinet will probably consider it again this week. 6. The present agreement is preliminary and only lays down the general lines for the final settlement. After recognition detailed agreements are to be signed. 7. Apparently agreement has been reached on the following points: reestablishment of full diplomatic relations between China and Russia; formal cancellation by Russia of extraterritoriality; abrogation of old treaties; return of Boxer Indemnity; Russian [recognition] that Mongolia is part of China; withdrawal of all Russian influence from Mongolia, determination of frontiers; drafting of new commercial agreement; drafting of new rules for the navigation of the Sungari and Amur Rivers. 8. The chief difficulty has always been the Chinese Eastern Railway. Apparently, however, the general lines of a settlement have been agreed upon. Russia declares that the title to the Chinese Eastern belongs to China and gives up all claims to sovereignty in the Railway Zone. The Chinese may take over the Chinese Eastern by paying for it earlier than the time fixed in the 1896 agreement, which was to be 40 years from that date. Russia is to share equally in the management in the meantime. Probably this will be accomplished by Russia’s merely replacing the Russo- Asiatic Bank in its relation to the railway. 9. The purchase price for the Chinese Eastern is to be fixed later. Russia wants China to pay the original cost. Yen told me that Karakhan put this at 1,100,000,000 gold rubles. This figure includes the cost of building the South Manchuria Railway, said to be 400,000,000 rubles. This would make 700,000,000 rubles for the Chinese Eastern alone. Yen thought that the railway could be reproduced today for not more than half that amount. 10. Karakhan probably foresees that it will be a generation or more before the Chinese treasury bills to be given in payment for

the Chinese Eastern are redeemed and is willing to trust to influence and time for [Russia?] to gain dominant control in effect through China’s [Russians?] 50-percent share in the management, or it may be that the Soviet Union already cherishes an alliance or entente with China. I do not see in any case how Russia can get along without the Chinese Eastern for transporting troops, etc. 11. It may be predicted that China will soon recognize the Soviet Union unless some difficulty arises not anticipated at present by either side. … SCHURMAN

Chinese Government especially for its subserviency to the imperialistic powers (who hold it in servitude) in regard to everything affecting Soviet Russia. Letter says: “Chinese Government was informed exactly of the course of negotiations including all the details and the Chinese delegate was acting with the full approval of his Government. However, suddenly, on the eve of the signing on March 12th an event took place which turned upside down all the work done theretofore; on the 12th instant France presented to the Chinese Government a warning and threatening note. This is the undeniable cause of the situation created. There are some other powers that have also conveyed a warning to China, but they did not do it in such an open way as France which of all the powers of the world is the one most hostile to us. … Agreement gives full satisfaction to the national and state interests of China in a measure which will never be filled voluntarily towards China by any other power. Chinese Government would certainly be most happy and thankful to any third power which would accord but a tenth part of the respect for China’s sovereignty [rights] and the national demands of the Chinese people embodied in the agreements signed on March 14th. … It suffices to point out our abandonment of the right of consular jurisdiction, of special rights and privileges relative to concessions, of the Boxer Indemnity. In vain did China strive at Versailles and Washington to get free of the humiliating fetters bound [with these] privileges. China got a promise at Washington that commission would be created to discuss the question of extraterritorial rights. However, until today this commission has not been created yet, for France is against it. … At Washington it was promised to China that the customs tariffs would be

raised, but up to the present time this pledge has not been redeemed and yet in the agreements of March 14 we refuse to force upon China commercial and customs agreements and we establish in this matter the principle of equality and reciprocity. … With regard to the Chinese Eastern Railway, we have given more to the Chinese Government than it could in fairness demand. The Chinese Government is satisfied with our fairness and yet it passes over in silence its attainments in this matter.” 6. In concluding, letter declares Russian Government will not renew discussions and will not hold itself bound by the conditions contained in the agreements signed on March 14, and will reserve full liberty of action with regard to future agreements with China, and “wishes to warn that henceforth the Chinese Government can resume negotiations only after it will have unconditionally and without any agreements established official normal relations with the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.” SCHURMAN

management of the said railway and which do not prejudice China’s right of sovereignty, shall be maintained.” According to circular telegram sent out by Cabinet only the following three matters remain in dispute, namely, China’s demand for cancellation treaties between Soviet and Outer Mongolia in which latter is considered as independent country, China’s demand for immediate withdrawal of Russian troops from Mongolia, Chinese refusal to grant Russian demand that Russian properties such as churches and immovable property should be handed over to the Russian Government. SCHURMAN

responsible to the third parties for the legal status arising from the concession and operation contracts of the Chinese Eastern Railway, to refuse to deal in this matter with the Soviet Government without having made a formal reservation of the rights of the foreign stockholders and creditors of the railway company. Resolution No. XIII at Washington14 has for its very object the protection of those rights. 11 Handed to the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs by the Counselor of the French Embassy Apr. 2, 1924. 12 File translation revised.

mentioning the Russo-Asiatic Bank, and should make it clear to the Chinese that the United States Government stands for the protection of all interests including Russian and is not endeavoring to prevent the conclusion of a Sino-Russian agreement.

“The powers other than China, in agreeing to the Resolution regarding the Chinese Eastern Railway, reserve the right to insist hereafter upon the responsibility of China for performance or non-performance of the obligations towards the foreign stockholders, bondholders and creditors of the Chinese Eastern Railway Company which the Powers deem to result from the contracts under which the Railroad was built and the action of China thereunder and the obligations which they deem to be in the nature of a trust resulting from the exercise of power by the Chinese Government over the possession and administration of the Railroad.” and to remind Your Excellency’s Government that China’s responsibility as Trustee for the Chinese Eastern Railway is an obligation that is not to be ignored or unilaterally invalidated by China in the course of any negotiations with other parties regarding the Railway. The Government of the United States of America stands for the protection of all interests in the Railway, including Russian, and could not approve a change of any kind in the status quo by whomsoever initiated unless the rights of all creditors and other parties in interest were adequately protected. I take the opportunity afforded by the communication of the foregoing declaration and reminder to repeat to Your Excellency, what Your Excellency already knows from my earlier oral assurances, that the Government of the United States has no desire to prevent the conclusion of a Sino-Russian Agreement. The object of my Government is to prevent future embarrassments, specially for Your Excellency’s Government, by calling timely attention to the rights and interests as well as to the obligations which China is bound respectively to safeguard and to fulfill in performance of the duties she has undertaken in respect of the Chinese Eastern Railway, as set forth in the Resolution quoted above. I avail myself [etc.] JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN

W asuincton ; May 6, 1924.

France, America and possibly other powers who believe world is theirs. Soviet has taught all great powers not to meddle with Russian affairs and now hopes to teach them not to interfere with Russo-Chinese affairs. Difficulty is that China is weak, cannot defend national dignity and sovereignty and takes more stock in French and American threats than friendship with Soviet. France and America are very strict about Washington resolutions when it is question of hostility toward Chinese interests but resolutions forgotten when same would benefit China. During several years France and America have failed to carry out decisions regarding extraterritoriality or customs tariff in disregard of China’s requests and in manner humiliating to China. If powers ever begin this work, it will only be to dupe China. Soviet alone could voluntarily renounce treaties imposed by force on [China].

SCHURMAN

categorically denied similar allegations that American Minister endeavored to interrupt negotiations. Negotiations were suspended or dormant on May 3d when our note was sent but above message makes it appear that we actively attempted to arrest their progress. Moreover, the statement that we had warned China that recognition of Soviet might have unpleasant consequence is contrary to terms of note which was based on

The matter will be taken up with the United Press as regards the action of its correspondents both here and in Peking. GREW

Apparently consuls at Harbin wish to anticipate removal of seals by the new Soviet regime. I fear, however, that if removal is deferred until new regime is established their action may then be construed as tacit recognition of the new agreements and consider that it would be preferable to effect removal

at an earlier date if suitable pretext can be found. French Minister shares this view. British Minister does not appear to attach great importance to the issue and seems indifferent to the possible interpretation referred to above. I infer he has in mind British recognition of the Soviet Government. He, however, reserves expression of opinion until consultation between four Ministers which will take place June 16th. I am of the opinion that no action other than above indicated called for at present. SCHURMAN

be stated, is not prejudicial to the rights of the various powers. The Chinese Government considers that there is no need for excessive anxiety in reference to the points raised by the American Government. I have the honor, Mr. Minister, to transmit the foregoing reply and trust that you will appreciate the position.”

I understand similar replies have been sent to French and Japanese Ministers. SCHURMAN

His Excellency the President of the Republic of China: Vi Kyuin Wellington Koo The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: Lev Mikhailovitch Karakhan Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon the following Articles: ARTICLE I. Immediately upon the signing of the present Agreement, the normal diplomatic and consular relations between the two Contracting Parties shall be re-established. The Government of the Republic of China agrees to take the necessary steps to transfer to the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics the Legation and Consular buildings formerly belonging to the Tsarist Government. ARTICLE II. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to hold, within one month after the signing of the present Agreement, a Conference which shall conclude and carry out detailed arrangements relative to the questions in accordance with the principles as provided in the following Articles. Such detailed arrangements shall be completed as soon as possible and, in any case, not later than six months from the date of the opening of the Conference as provided in the preceding paragraph. ARTICLE III. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to annul at the Conference as provided in the preceding Article, all Conventions, Treaties, Agreements, Protocols’, Contracts, etcetera, concluded between the Government of China and the Tsarist Government and to replace them with new treaties, agreements, etcetera, on the basis of equality, reciprocity and justice, as well as the spirit of the Declarations of the Soviet Government of the years of 1919 and 1920. ARTICLE IV. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, in accordance with its policy and Declarations of 1919 and 1920, declares that all Treaties, Agreements, etcetera, concluded between the former Tsarist

Government and any third party or parties affecting the sovereign rights or interests of China, are null and void. The Governments of both Contracting Parties declare that in future neither Government will conclude any treaties or agreements which prejudice the sovereign rights or interests of either Contracting Party. ARTICLE V. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics recognizes that Outer Mongolia is an integral part of the Republic of China and respects China’s sovereignty therein.

The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics declares that as soon as the questions for the withdrawal of all the troops of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics from Outer Mongolia—namely, as to the timelimit of the withdrawal of such troops and the measures to be adopted in the interests of the safety of the frontiers—are agreed upon at the Conference as provided in Article II of the present Agreement, it will effect the complete withdrawal of all the troops of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics from Outer Mongolia. ARTICLE VI. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties mutually pledge themselves not to permit, within their respective territories the existence and/or activities of any organisations or groups whose aim is to struggle by acts of violence against the Governments of either Contracting Party. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties further pledge themselves not to engage in propaganda directed against the political and social systems of either Contracting Party. ARTICLE VII. The Governments of the two contracting Parties agree to redemarcate their national boundaries at the Conference as provided in Article II of the present Agreement, and pending such redemarcation, to maintain the present boundaries. ARTICLE VIII. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to regulate at the aforementioned Conference the questions relating to the

navigation of rivers, lakes and other bodies of water which are common to their respective frontiers, on the basis of equality and reciprocity. ARTICLE IX. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to settle at the aforementioned Conference the question of the Chinese Eastern Railway in conformity with the principles as hereinafter provided: (1) The Governments of the two Contracting Parties declare that the Chinese Eastern Railway is a purely commercial enterprise. The Governments of the two Contracting Parties mutually declare that with the exception of matters pertaining to the business operations which are under the direct control of the Chinese Eastern Railway, all other matters affecting the rights of the National and the Local Governments of the Republic of China— such as judicial matters, matters relating to civil administration, military administration, police, municipal government, taxation, and landed property (with the exception of lands required by the said Railway)—shall be administered by the Chinese Authorities. (2) The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics agrees to the redemption by the Government of the Republic of China, with Chinese capital, of the Chinese Eastern Railway, as well as all appurtenant properties, and to the transfer to China of all shares and bonds of the said Railway. (3) The Governments of the two Contracting Parties shall settle at the Conference as provided in Article II of the present Agreement, the amount and conditions governing the redemption as well as the procedure for the transfer of the Chinese Eastern Railway. (4) The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics agrees to be responsible for the entire claims of the shareholders, bondholders and creditors of the Chinese Eastern Railway incurred prior to the Revolution of March 9th 1917. (5) The Governments of the two Contracting Parties mutually agree that the future of the Chinese Eastern Railway shall be

determined by the Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, to the exclusion of any third party or parties. (6) The Governments of the two Contracting Parties agree to draw up an arrangement for the provisional management of the Chinese Eastern Railway pending the settlement of the questions as provided under Section (3) of the present Article. (7) Until the various questions relating to the Chinese Eastern Railway are settled at the Conference as provided in Article II of the present Agreement, the rights of the two Governments arising

ARTICLE XV. The present Agreement shall come into effect from the date of signature. In witness whereof, the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the present Agreement in duplicate in the English language and have affixed thereto their seals. Done at the City of Peking this Thirty-First Day of the Fifth Month of the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of China, which is, the Thirty-First Day of May One Thousand Nine Hundred and Twenty-Four. [SEAL] V. K. WELLINGTON KOO [SEAL] L. M. KARAKHAN AGREEMENT FOR THE PROVISIONAL MANAGEMENT OF THE CHINESE EASTERN RAILWAY The Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics mutually recognizing that, inasmuch as the Chinese Eastern Railway was built with capital furnished by the Russian Government and constructed entirely within Chinese territory, the said Railway is a purely commercial enterprise and that, excepting for matters appertaining to its own business operations, all other matters which affect the rights of the Chinese National and Local Governments shall be administered by the Chinese Authorities, have agreed to conclude an Agreement for the Provisional Management of the Railway with a view to carrying on jointly the management of the said Railway until its final settlement at the Conference as provided in Article II of the Agreement on General Principles for the Settlement of the Questions between the Republic of China and the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics of May 31, 1924, and have to that end named as their Plenipotentiaries, that is to say: His Excellency the President of the Republic of China: Vi Kyuin Wellington Koo The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: Lev Mikhailovitch Karakhan

Who, having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon the following Articles: ARTICLE I. The Railway shall establish, for discussion and decision of all matters relative to the Chinese Eastern Railway, a Board of Directors to be composed of ten persons, of whom five shall be appointed by the Government of the Republic of China and five by the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The Government of the Republic of China shall appoint one of the Chinese Directors as President of the Board of Directors, who shall also be the Director-General. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics shall appoint one of the Russian Directors as Vice-President of the Board of Directors, who shall also be the Assistant Director-General. Seven persons shall constitute a quorum, and all decisions of the Board of Directors shall have the consent of not less than six persons before they can be carried out. The Director-General and Assistant Director-General shall jointly manage the affairs of the Board of Directors and they shall both sign all the documents of the Board. In the absence of either the Director-General or the Assistant Director- General, their respective Governments may appoint another Director to officiate as the Director-General or the Assistant Director-General (in the case of the Director-General, by one of the Chinese Directors, and in that of the Assistant Director-General, by one of the Russian Directors). ARTICLE II. The Railway shall establish a Board of Auditors to be composed of five persons, namely two Chinese Auditors, who shall be appointed by the Government of the Republic of China and 3 Russian Auditors who shall be appointed by the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The Chairman of the Board of Auditors shall be elected from among the Chinese Auditors. ARTICLE III. The Railway shall have a Manager, who shall be a national of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and two Assistant Managers, one to be a national of the Republic of China and the other to be a national of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The said officers shall be appointed by the Board of Directors and such appointments shall be confirmed by their respective Governments. The rights and duties of the Manager and the Assistant Managers shall be defined by the Board of Directors. ARTICLE IV. The Chiefs and Assistant Chiefs of the various Departments of the Railway shall be appointed by the Board of Directors. If the Chief of Department is a national of the Republic of China, the Assistant Chief of Department shall be a national of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and if the Chief of Department is a national of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Assistant Chief of Department shall be a national of the Republic of China. ARTICLE V. The employment of persons in the various departments of the Railway shall be in accordance with the principle of equal representation between the nationals of the Republic of China and those of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. ARTICLE VI. With the exception of the estimates and budgets, as provided in article VII of the present Agreement, all other matters on which the Board of Directors cannot reach an agreement shall be referred for settlement to the Governments of the Contracting Parties. ARTICLE VII. The Board of Directors shall present the estimates and budgets of the Railway to a joint meeting of the Board of Directors and the Board of Auditors for consideration and approval.

ARTICLE VIII. All the net profits of the Railway shall be held by the Board of Directors and shall not be used pending a final settlement of the question of the present Railway. ARTICLE IX. The Board of Directors shall revise as soon as possible the statutes of the Chinese Eastern Railway Company, approved on December 4, 1896, by the Tsarist Government, in accordance with the present Agreement and the Agreement on General Principles for the Settlement of the Questions between the Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of May 31, 1924, and in any case, not later than six months from the date of the constitution of the Board of Directors. Pending their revision, the aforesaid statutes, insofar as they do not conflict with the present Agreement on General Principles for the Settlement of the Questions between the Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and do not prejudice the rights of sovereignty of the Republic of China, shall continue to be observed. ARTICLE X. The present Agreement shall cease to have effect as soon as the question of the Chinese Eastern Railway is finally settled at the Conference as provided in Article II of the Agreement on General Principles for the Settlement of the Questions between the Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of May 31, 1924. ARTICLE XI. The present Agreement shall come into effect from the date of signature. In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Agreement in duplicate in the English language and have affixed thereto their seals. Done at the City of Peking this Thirty-First Day of the Fifth Month of the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of China, which is, the Thirty-First Day of May One Thousand Nine Hundred and Twenty-Four. [SEAL] V. K. WELLINGTON KOO [SEAL] L. M. KARAKHAN

18 Not printed. 19 Agreements between the Republic of China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Annexes. The declarations and exchange of notes printed in this pamphlet are not reproduced here. They are included in the agreements printed in the League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. XXXVII, pp. 176 ff.

accept with gratitude anything American Government may choose to give her. Hopes people will realize China no longer submissive and obedient to acts of violence at the hands of imperialism. The Chinese people well able itself see who are its enemies and who its friends. Work of imperialistic agents in China who have perfect disregard for Chinese people is itself best schooling for right understanding of China’s interests and it does not need to be supplemented by influence from Moscow.” SCHURMAN

Railway is concerned, cannot affect the existence or nature of such claims. It is not contemplated by the Chinese Government in their recent agreements with the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republic that any legitimate claims of the other Powers or of their nationals should be jeopardized. On the contrary, they will continue to be disposed to take steps with a view to the protection of those claims if circumstances should be such as to make friendly interposition on the part of the Chinese Government desirable as well as useful. WASHINGTON , June 30, 1924.

Allied Technical Board for the purpose of saving the Railway from breakdown and deterioration at a time when its operations were of necessity conducted at a loss. That debt from the Railway Company to the American Government was among the obligations which the Chinese Government, in assuming the responsibilities of the trusteeship recognized by the Conference upon the understanding set forth in Resolution No. XIII, undertook to preserve and safeguard. The Government of the United States does not consider that the Chinese Government, in devolving that trusteeship upon another party, without consultation with others in interest and without any reservation of their rights, can have divested itself of the responsibilities incidental to that trust. The American Government has therefore felt it necessary, in order to safeguard its position in any eventual adjustment of the affairs of the Chinese Eastern Railway, to renew the reservation made in the American Minister’s note of May 3 last to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. WASHINGTON , July 11, 1924.

Eastern Railway and to emphasize the obligations which those resolutions impose upon the Chinese Government. In addition they wish to call the special attention of His Excellency to the serious consequences which would ensue from change in the economic and legal status of the railway should such a change impair the administrative integrity of China and the principle of equal opportunity. In view of the signature of the Sino-Russian Agreement of May 31st the representatives of the four Powers would be glad to receive satisfactory assurances on the above-mentioned points for communication to their Governments.” 3 [sic]. My British colleague said he had thus far sent nothing in writing on this subject to the Chinese Government. 4. My Japanese colleague said that in view of his instructions he believed his Government would not unite in a joint note. The position of his Government in Manchuria was a little different from ours as their note of June 7th24 indicated. To join in sending this proposed note might prejudice their own. 5. Please instruct. SCHURMAN

moment be handed over by the local authorities, willing or unwilling, to the Bolshevists for transportation to and punishment in Siberia. The Department might suggest to the Associated Press or other news agency that it detail to Harbin a special correspondent in order to report regarding Bolshevik activities in North Manchuria and on the Chinese Eastern Railway, arrests of foreigners by Chinese military and police and trials of foreigners by Chinese courts. Such reports would enlighten the American public in regard to communism and the necessity of retaining extraterritorial rights in China. Informed the Legation. HANSON

Proposal by the Chinese Government to convene a preliminary customs conference, and the rejection of the proposal by the powers [498] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[502] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[508] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)

<2 Not printed.

Chinese finances, and (2) receipt of Chinese plan for abolition of likin, etc. 4. While favoring the program suggested, I consider it my duty to point out to the Department that if it is carried out and the representatives cannot agree among themselves as to the purposes for which the surtax revenue is to be used that might hereafter be urged as an argument against the holding of the special conference itself. SCHURMAN

4. In view of the widespread disregard of treaty rights by Chinese officials in the provinces, even in those professing allegiance to the Peking Government, as instanced by the Kiangsu cigarette tax; and in view of the growing attitude of irresponsibility on the part of the Peking Government itself as evidenced by the imposition of discriminatory railway rates, and by numerous instances of failure to accord prompt satisfaction in cases of outrages upon foreigners, this Government questions whether it is not now inopportune and even dangerous to assume a responsive attitude toward requests from the Peking Government which are not based upon any definite right. 5. In furtherance of the cooperation with the British Government in this matter which was initiated by Mr. Wellesley’s conferences with the Department a year or so ago,33 it is desired that the Embassy consult informally with the British Foreign Office and explain this Government’s views as above outlined, and inquire concerning the attitude of the British Government toward the proposed preliminary conference. HUGHES 33 Mr. Victor Wellesley, head of the Far Eastern Department, British Foreign Office, conferred with officials in the Department of State in January 1923.

“© Telegram not printed.

formulation of views and plans which might prejudice the work of the special tariff conference when it is held. In making this communication the above-mentioned representatives are authorized to state that the powers concerned are thoroughly alive to the importance of the situation and intend to consult together as to the best means for giving practical effect to the Washington agreements, having regard to present conditions in China.” 3. I consider foregoing satisfactory if Department approves of consultations contemplated in last paragraph and participation therein by all the powers mentioned in the first paragraph. It is based on instruction by telegraph to British Minister for which

tariff conference a preliminary conference should be arranged for the purpose of preparing the ground for the formal conference. Under instructions from the Secretary of State at Washington I have now the honor to inform Your Excellency that my Government is unable to comply with this suggestion because in their opinion the foreign representatives at the proposed preliminary conference would not be in a position to carry on effective negotiations and the task of the preparatory conference would be limited [to] the formation [formulation] of views and plans which might prejudice the work of the special tariff conference when it is held.” 4. British Minister sending similar note. I shall forward texts of all notes when copies received.38 SCHURMAN

Further postponement of the meeting of the Commission on Extraterritoriality in China39

2. China has been hoping that the signatory powers who attended the Washington Conference would carry out the covenants made at Washington as early as possible. 3. The nonfulfillment of the covenants in the present case may be seized as a precedent by other powers who may not be anxious to carry out the terms of the other treaties and agreements. 4. Since there was a special resolution providing that the powers are free to accept or reject all or any portion of the recommendations of the Commission, it does not seem necessary for the powers to take a collective attitude and share the responsibility for delaying the visit of the Commission. 5. The early despatch of the Commission will further demonstrate the importance of the Washington Conference to the Chinese people and stimulate the interest and encourage them to get together to solve their political problems.” In reply to Dr. Koo’s question regarding the attitude of each of the individual governments, I replied that I was not fully informed on these conditions. The danger of further delay in the visit of the Commission affects Dr. Koo very strongly, the more so [as] he was one of China’s delegates to the Washington Conference. SCHURMAN

This request of the Chinese Government has been presented to the American Government through the American Minister at Peking. In connection with this subject the Chinese Government has been informed by the French Minister at Peking that the French Government informed the American Ambassador in Paris to the effect that the consent of the French

Government to take part in the Extraterritoriality Commission would be dependent upon the settlement of the question now pending between China and France regarding the payments of the French share of the Boxer indemnity. Now the Boxer indemnity question has no bearing whatever upon matters that concern the Extraterritoriality Commission, and will no doubt be adjusted in due time to the satisfaction of both Governments. The Chinese Minister begs leave to point out that the position taken by the French Government does not seem to be compatible with the spirit of the Resolution as expressed in the concluding clause thereof. WASHINGTON , March 27, 1924.

Consent by the United States to join other powers in negotiations to restore the Shanghai Mixed Court to the Chinese [513] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[517] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)

questions also outstanding, as for instance: (1) settlement extension; (2) port improvements; (3) Chinese representation on Municipal Council; (4) foreign representation in municipal councils of the adjoining Chinese areas. I opposed making this a condition precedent to rendition negotiations as was generally favored by my colleagues, and the formula finally adopted and expressed in the preceding sentence appears to me consistent with the Department’s views relative to separate settlement of the rendition question. Many considerations appear to render my concurrence in this note highly advisable. I request the Department’s instructions by telegraph. SCHURMAN 43 Not printed. 43 Not printed. 43 Not printed. 43 Not printed. 44 Report not printed. The consular body at Shanghai had assumed control of the Mixed Court in 1911, during the revolution of that year, and had continued to exercise control.

the dean of the diplomatic corps. More complete information is desired with respect to the considerations which seem to make it advisable to concur in the proposed note. HUGHES 45 Not printed. 46 For protests against internal taxes, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, p. 579.

on circular number 69 in April 192347 but the outlook for the meeting seems too dubious. 6. [Paraphrase.] Objections offered by members of the diplomatic corps in 1923 circular 69 appear to indicate greater concern for other interests than for the Mixed Court. This was especially true with respect to the British Minister. I had a conversation with him yesterday in which he admitted that political conditions had not improved, but said that, despite these conditions, longer experience as a Minister had strengthened his feeling of the importance of the rendition of the court. I also gathered that he had come to realize the unquestionable fact that, until this basic cause of Chinese resentment is removed, it will not be possible to secure any public improvement in Shanghai, which is dependent upon Chinese concurrence. [End paraphrase.] 7. The American consul general at Shanghai in despatch just mailed to the Department48 strongly urges resumption rendition negotiations at earliest practicable moment. Among urgent reasons he advances are desirability of securing effect in other Chinese courts for the Mixed Court decisions and processes and hope that through rendition appeal court may be organized, lack of which is universally regretted and condemned. He also refers to the continual Chinese agitation for return of court especially in the matter of purely Chinese civil cases, which agitation negotiations will serve to appease. 8. [Paraphrase.] It would put the United States in an embarrassing and false position in China should our Government oppose negotiations for rendition of the Mixed Court. A policy of conciliation toward China has been adopted by Japan and, more recently, by Great Britain. As an example, note the way the British Minister has reversed himself in this matter. The Soviet Union also is now courting China and is casting odium upon the Chinese policy of other powers. To put ourselves in the position of leadership in a program with respect to the Mixed Court which would be denounced by many foreigners, as well as by the

Chinese, as perpetuating an injustice to China, would be fatal to our policy and interests in this country. I am all the more earnest in urging a policy which I consider wise and just, as, in negotiations with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and other officials, as well as in public addresses, I have firmly insisted that China observe all our rights, especially the treaty rights which guarantee to our citizens their lives, liberty, and property. [End paraphrase.] SCHURMAN 47 Not printed. 48 Not printed.

am confident that the Chinese Government and public thoroughly understand that the question of rendition will be decided on its own merits solely. SCHURMAN 52 Not printed. 53 Prolonged negotiations between the diplomatic corps and the Chinese Foreign Office and between the consular representatives at Shanghai and the Kiangsu provincial officials resulted in the signing of an agreement Dec. 31, 1926, for the rendition of the Shanghai Mixed Court.

Failure of efforts to secure from the interested powers a general acceptance of the arms embargo resolution proposed at the Washington Conference54 54 For previous correspondence regarding efforts by British and American Governments to secure acceptance of the arms embargo resolution, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 606 ff. [519] The Chargé in Portugal (Carroll) to the Secretary of State

[522] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard) Washington, November 11, 1924.

[528] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State Washington, December 10, 1924.

(For the Ambassador) H. G. Cunron

goods to China. As regards the export of aircraft and parts thereof as mentioned in the interpretative note, I would state that although there is at present no restriction upon the export of aeroplanes from the United Kingdom, His Majesty’s Government are prepared to take the necessary steps to obtain the addition of the words “aircraft and component parts thereof” to the Order in Council referred to above. In order, however, that the export of aircraft to countries other than China may suffer no interference, His Majesty’s Government propose to issue through the Board of Trade a general licence permitting aircraft to be exported freely to countries other than China. As regards machinery and materials destined for warlike purposes, also referred to in the interpretative note, His Majesty’s Government do not consider it possible to prohibit the export of “machinery destined exclusively for the manufacture of arms or the equipment of arsenals,” as in the opinion of my Government this would not only be impossible to administer but also it is very doubtful whether they have the power to prohibit the exportation of such machinery, in view of the provisions of Section 8 of the Customs and Inland Revenue Act, 1879, as amended by Section 17 of the Finance Act, 1921. His Majesty’s Government desire me to point out, however, that materials so destined are already very largely covered by the list of articles specifically prohibited to be exported by the Order in Council of December 13th, 1921. In so far as my Government are concerned, therefore, the situation is that they are now in a position practically to enforce the Washington resolution and a considerable portion of the interpretative note. Consequently, now that sufficient unanimity has been reached among the signatories of the Embargo Agreement, I have been instructed to enquire whether the United States Government, assuming that they are prepared, if they have not done so already, to adopt equivalent administrative measures themselves, would be disposed to make formal proposals to the various governments concerned for the adoption, from January 1st, 1925, of the Washington resolution and of at least so much of the interpretative note as His Majesty’s Government are able to enforce. In this connection, I would add that my Government, although, as has been explained above, unable to enforce the portion of the interpretative note relating to machinery destined exclusively

for the manufacture of arms or the equipment of arsenals, will nevertheless continue to discourage transactions coming under this heading, on the understanding that the other governments concerned do likewise. The Governments of His Majesty’s Dominions overseas and the Government of India are prepared to take corresponding action. In conclusion I would state that if the other governments concerned express their willingness to adopt the resolution and to take steps to enforce it, the necessary additions will be made to the Order in Council of 1921. I request that I may be favoured at an early date with an expression of the views of the United States Government upon the matters dealt with in this note. I have [etc.] ESME HOWARD

[Enclosure—Translation62 ] The Danish Minister for Foreign Affairs (Moltke) to the American Chargé (Harriman) COPENHAGEN, November 6, 1924. MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: By a note dated November 5, 1923, you were good enough to submit to the Royal Government an interpretation of the draft resolution in regard to the prohibition of the importation of arms and munitions into

China, presented at the Washington Conference, and discussed at a meeting of the Chiefs of Mission at Peking on October 3, 1922. At the same time you informed my predecessor that your Government intended to advise its Minister at Peking that it would be ready to adhere formally to the resolution, as well as to the interpretation, on the condition that there should be substantial unanimity on the subject between the powers represented at Peking. In making this communication you expressed the hope that the Danish Government might find it possible to instruct its representative at Peking in a similar sense. By a note of September 10th last, Mr. Prince63 subsequently advised my Government that the United States Government would appreciate being informed without delay as to the point of view of the Royal Government with regard to this question. After having had recourse to the competent authorities, I have the honor to inform you as follows: The Royal Government shares warmly the general desire to see normal conditions reestablished in China. For that same reason it adhered in due course without hesitation to the agreement of 1919, within the limits permitted by legislation. The Danish Government considers it of great importance that the arrangement eventually adopted on the subject in question shall obtain the approval of all the powers whose adherence would have real importance for its efficacy. The Royal Government has subjected the draft resolution discussed at the Washington Conference to a thorough examination, and, as far as it is concerned, would see with much pleasure a sufficiently general support of the resolution in order to attain the object sought. The interpretation of the draft discussed at the meeting of the Chiefs of Mission at Peking on October 3, 1922, does not conform to the Danish laws now in force. However, the reports of the King’s Minister at Peking have given the Royal Government the impression that some doubt has arisen as to the results of that meeting, inasmuch as there is some uncertainty as to

whether the interpretation in question can be adopted to an extent necessary to insure its efficacy. The Ministry for Foreign Affairs has again requested information from the Royal Legation at Peking on that point. The Royal Government would, however, be disposed—on the condition that all the other powers interested adopt an analogous position—to adhere, in conformity with the recommendation voted by the Chiefs of Mission at Peking on February 9, 1923, to the resolution proposed at the Washington Conference without interpretation, with the reservation, however, that airplanes be excluded insofar as the regulations in force governing the prohibition of exportation in Denmark are concerned. Please accept [etc.] C. MOLTKE 60 Not printed.

Conference), with a subsequent interpretative note adopted by the diplomatic corps at Peking on October 3, 1922. In reply, I have the honor to inform you that, as the Netherlands Delegation to the Washington Conference has already pointed out, the legislation of the Netherlands relating to trade in arms and munitions does not permit an embargo on exports to other countries of the articles mentioned in the interpretative note of the diplomatic corps at Peking which is referred to above. Moreover, Her Majesty’s Government wonders whether it is opportune at the present moment to extend the scope of the draft resolution of Washington, inasmuch as, according to information in the possession of the Royal Government, this draft, even in its most limited original form, has not yet been adopted by all the interested States. And one is justified in wondering whether the anticipated action is desirable at the present moment when, it seems, important shipments of arms and munitions of all kinds continue to be forwarded to China from all sides. On the other hand, the Government of the Queen is in principle disposed to cooperate as far as possible towards any project which would offer serious international guarantees of success. Please accept [etc.] KARNEBEEK

resolutions discussed by the diplomatic corps in Peking in a meeting held on October 3, 1922, concerning the embargo on the export of arms and munitions destined for China. These recommendations were based, according to the letter in question, on the adhesion of the powers represented in Peking to the amended project of the resolution on this subject presented on January 31, 1922, to the Washington Conference, and to a more extensive interpretative formula of this project of which the letter contained the text. At the same time Mr. Cord Meyer expressed the hope of his Government that the Swedish Government would find itself in a position to give to its representative in Peking instructions in the same sense. The question having been subjected to a thorough study, I find myself today able to communicate to you the following: The Swedish Government is fully convinced of the extreme importance of the reestablishment in China of a normal situation, and is willing to believe that measures having for their object the effective prevention of the importation of arms and munitions into that country cannot fail to contribute to that end. It will therefore not refuse, on condition that all the interested powers do likewise, to adhere in equal degree to the aforementioned project of resolution, presented to the Washington Conference. It is also disposed, subject to the same condition, to join in the recommendation adopted on February 9, 1923,71 by the Chiefs of Mission at Peking, which has for its object extending the projected resolution aforementioned to cover aircraft other than commercial aircraft. As to the far greater extension of the prohibition of export set forth in the meeting of October 3, 1922, this would not be in accordance with the dispositions of Swedish law and so the Swedish Government does not find itself in a position to acquiesce therein. It would, moreover, feel itself less warranted in doing so in view of the fact that the reports concerning the deliberations of Washington and Peking and information received from still other sources scarcely permit a full reliance on a general adhesion to such an extension by the powers concerned.

The Swedish Government, at this juncture, permits itself to call your attention to the fact that an additional conference, summoned for the purpose of studying the question, is about to meet in Geneva next year. And it wonders, inasmuch as the prohibition of export of arms and munitions to China does not seem on the whole to have had the desired efficacy up to the present, whether it would not be better to submit the question in hand for study by that conference. Pray accept [etc.] ÖSTEN UNDEN 68 Not printed.

aircraft to China, since it appears that, at the present time, there is no such thing as commercial aviation in China and that shipments of this character almost invariably are found to fall into the hands of militarists and to be used by them for military purposes. The suggestion of the American Chargé d’Affaires at Paris, to which you refer, related to an agreement regarding aircraft by all the interested Powers rather than merely by the three Powers named in your notes. In the opinion of this Government, the participation of France in such an agreement is of particular importance; and, should the French Government indicate a willingness to accede to such a proposal, this Government would be glad to join with the British and French Governments in giving immediate effect to an agreement of the nature above indicated and to cooperate in afterward extending its scope so as to include as many as possible of the other Powers whose adherence might be deemed desirable. I shall be glad if you will inform me of the attitude of the British Government toward such a proposal, and whether it will be disposed to instruct its representative at Paris to cooperate in sounding the French Government with regard thereto. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

“Le Gouvernement Royal serait cependant disposé—sous condition que tous les autres Etats interessés adoptent un procédé analogue—à adherer, en conformité de la recommandation votée par les chefs de mission réunis à Pékin le 9 février 1923, à la résolution présentée a la Conference de Washington sans interpretation, sous la réserve toutefois que les aéronefs ne sont pas compris par les règies concernant la prohibition d’exportation en vigueur en Danemark.” It is the understanding of this Government that the new formula is to be adopted in substitution for the Agreement of May, 1919;76 for it would seem impracticable for the Powers to apply two varying formulae simultaneously. If the new formula were, therefore, to be adopted at the present time, we should lose the adherence to the embargo of the Netherlands and Brazilian Governments, which are signatory to the Agreement of May, 1919; and we should have, on the part of Denmark, only a qualified adherence of substantially the same character as the 1919 Agreement. With reference, moreover, to the question of the adoption of the new formula in its entirety, the British Government, as explained in your note under reference, finds itself unable to enforce the portion of the interpretative note relating to machinery destined exclusively for the manufacture of arms or the equipment of arsenals, although it is stated that transactions of this character will continue to be discouraged on the understanding that the other governments concerned do likewise. The situation confronting the British Government in this particular is similar to that in which this Government would find itself with respect to its strict legal authority to prohibit the export of materials and machinery destined exclusively for the manufacture of arms and the equipment of arsenals; although, as a matter of actual practice, this Government has, with a very fair degree of success, discouraged the shipment to China of exports of this character on the part of its nationals. It would seem, however, that, before definitely binding themselves to the new formula, it would be necessary for both the American and British Governments to qualify the acceptance on their part of a very considerable portion of the interpretative note.

From a survey of the actual working of the Agreement of May, 1919, it is the view of this Government that the precise formula in use has been of less importance than the intent and spirit of the various governments concerned in carrying out the Agreement entered into at that time. In spite of the infractions of the embargo which have occurred from time to time, this Government is of the opinion that the embargo has attained a measurable success, and it desires in every way to strengthen its effectiveness. In view, however, of the difficulties apparently to be met at the present time in substituting the revised Washington formula (with the interpretative note) for the Agreement of May, 1919, this Government questions whether any practical benefits would be derived from an attempt to do so until a more complete unanimity can be had among the interested Powers. I need hardly say that I regret that no greater success has thus far attended the efforts which have been made to procure substantial unanimity in this matter. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

Decision by the Consortium Council to continue unmodified the Consortium Agreement of October 15, 1920, after its expiration on October 15, 192577

MY DEAR WHIGHAM: I understand that Mr. Lamont is expected here sometime in July and, if it would suit his convenience, I should propose to convene a meeting of the Consortium Council at this office for Monday, July 28. As soon as we have agreed the date of the meeting with Lamont I should advise the other groups and invite them to give me as early notice as possible of any items they desire to place on the agenda.

I may take this opportunity of reminding you that the Consortium Agreement, which was for a period of five years, will expire in October, 1925. It may be expedient, therefore, at our meeting to consider in advance what step, if any, should be taken to provide for its renewal. It might take the form, for instance, of a resolution for its renewal without any limit of time, subject to the right of any Group to withdraw on giving six or twelve months’ notice. I have taken advantage of the return from China of Major Nathan, C. M. G., who has recently been appointed Chairman of the British and Chinese Corporation, and of the presence of Mayers, to ask them to formulate what in their view constitutes the chief difficulties in the way of industrial progress in China. I enclose an advance copy of the memorandum which they have prepared. With the permission of my colleagues on the Council I should propose to ask these gentlemen to be present at our meeting in July for the purpose of answering any questions which the Council may wish to put to them. Their proposals, which, it will be noted, involve the elimination of Residuary Participation, are intended to secure greater individual freedom of action on the part of the Peking Representatives of the Consortium. I reserve the expression of any opinion on the merits of the proposals until their authors have had an opportunity of explaining them to the Council. As soon as the date of the meeting is fixed I propose to communicate a copy of the Memorandum to each of the other Groups who will, no doubt, wish to discuss this very important matter with their respective Governments.

Yours sincerely, C. S. ADDIS [Subenclosure] Memorandum by Mr. S. F. Mayers, of the British Group in Peking, and Mr. W. S. Nathan, Chairman of the British and Chinese Corporation, Ltd. LONDON, May 12, 1924. LACK OF PROGRESS IN RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION 1. It is now two years since the Consortium recorded the view that there was no reason why the development of railways should wait on the solution of China’s administrative problems. 2. During these two years the increase of disorder in China and the continued reluctance of the Government to seek assistance from the Consortium have rendered progress impossible.

3. We suggest that the time has arrived to bring to a test the question as to how far assistance from the Consortium, as at present constituted, is practicable. CHINESE RELUCTANCE TO NEGOTIATE WITH THE CONSORTIUM 4. In the sphere of general debt consolidation the Chinese objections to dealing with the Consortium are apparently less pronounced than in the sphere of railway development. In the opinion of our representatives on the spot, the prospects of assistance from the Consortium being ultimately found practicable for financial or administrative loans are better than the prospects of making a Consortium loan for railway purposes. 5. The reason they assign for this is that the Chinese have less fear of losing their liberty of action by concluding a financial loan, with an international combination such as the Consortium than they have of seeking from such a

combination the funds needed for railway purposes. In the case of a financial loan the Chinese feel that once the security has been allocated and the arrangements made for its supervision by the Customs or Salt Revenue departments, there will be no marked increase in foreign control of their affairs. On the other hand, in the case of railway loans, they foresee serious administrative difficulties in entrusting to the nominees of a quadruple international body the increased foreign control of their railways which they know is inevitable if they are to regain the confidence of foreign investors. DISSOLUTION OF THE CONSORTIUM UNDESIRABLE 6. The disordered condition of China, with the consequent lack of security, renders it difficult to see any advantage, at the present time, in considering either the dissolution of the Consortium or the separation of industrial or railway loans from the scope of its intended activities. If such loans were now thrown open to international competition, it is at least doubtful whether railway development would be accelerated. In any case, before such considerations are taken into account, it appears advisable to examine the possibility of making some progress by means of an understanding which would permit of greater liberty of action on the part of the individual Groups. POSSIBILITY OF DEVELOPING EXISTING BRITISH-FINANCED RAILWAYS 7. The various existing railways, for example those in which the British Group is especially interested, viz. the Peking-Mukden, Tientsin-Pukow, Shanghai-Nanking, Shanghai-Hangchow-Ningpo and Canton-Kowloon lines, could each profitably employ a considerable amount of new capital; but the Ministry of Communications will not entertain any suggestion of a Consortium loan for these railways, and the Consortium Agreement precludes any proposal for public issues for these lines without participation being offered to the other groups. In these circumstances it would conduce to progress if the British Group were at liberty to arrange for the finance required by these existing railways without the obligation of offering participation to the other groups. POSSIBILITY OF DEVELOPING OTHER EXISTING OR NEW RAILWAYS

8. As regards other existing railways, the Peking-Hankow and Peking Suiyuan lines are in urgent need of new capital for the payment of debts and for further development. We believe that an offer of a loan for the rehabilitation of these two railways would be welcomed by the Ministry of Communications, if means can be found to present such an offer in a manner acceptable to Chinese public opinion. We therefore suggest that, so soon as any one of the groups has decided on its ability to make such an offer, it should inform the other groups of its intention and proceed with negotiations individually. 9. Similarly, in the case of loans for the construction of new railways any group which is in a position to make proposals to the Ministry of Communications for the issue of a loan should be at liberty to do so individually, after informing the other groups of its intention. 10. In both of these cases it would be understood that upon signature of an agreement the group concerned would be bound to offer a share to any other group desirous of actual participation but without obligation to offer residuary participation. PROPOSALS FOR GREATER INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY OF ACTION 11. In order to put the foregoing into concrete form, we suggest the adoption by the Consortium of a resolution on the following lines:— With a view to giving effect to the opinion expressed in Article 12 of the Report of the Consortium Council dated May 1922, that the development of railways in China should not wait upon the solution of China’s administrative problems it is resolved that:— (a) With regard to existing railways in respect to which any group holds mortgage rights or rights in respect of further finance, such group shall be free to conclude agreements for the further finance of such railways by public issue without offering participation to other groups.

(b) With regard to other existing railways, new railways or industrial enterprises, any group which is in a position and desires to make a public issue shall be free, after informing the other groups, to negotiate and conclude agreements for such railways or enterprises either individually or with any other group or groups who are also in a position and desire to take their share of the public issue for the same purpose. (c) It shall be understood that no negotiations for any one of the railways for which an agreement has been pooled by an individual group shall be initiated without the consent in writing of that group. ALTERNATIVE PROPOSAL FOR INTER-GOVERNMENT NEGOTIATIONS 12. If, on the other hand, it is felt by all the groups that the principle of equal participation must be strictly maintained, it appears to us advisable to ask the four Governments to ascertain, either through their Ministers in Peking, or by sending a special mission to China, by what means and under what conditions the Chinese Government can be induced to agree to a Consortium loan for railways on the lines of equal participation contemplated by the Agreement. In the absence of an understanding between the Chinese Government on the one side and the Consortium Powers on the other, it appears to us improbable that the Consortium Agreement as it stands can be made operative for railway loans. W. S. NATHAN S. F. MAYERS 78 Proposed agenda not printed.

16),79 that these proposals “seem almost tantamount to abandoning Consortium principles entirely”, at least in so far as concerns loans for industrial purposes. I am apprehensive that the adoption of the phraseology of Clause 11 of the memorandum would be likely to lead to misunderstandings among the several national groups of the Consortium, such as might tend to disrupt their unity of action and lead to a reversion to the former regime of nationalistic competition which it was the fundamental purpose of the Consortium to obviate. It is possibly premature to make more detailed comment upon these proposals until Mr. Mayers and Mr. Nathan shall have had an opportunity to elaborate them at the meeting of the Consortium Council on July 14 next. If it is then felt that there is sufficient ground for their belief that the Chinese Government would be more readily inclined to negotiate with individual groups, it would seem that the modifications to the proposals, as outlined by Mr. Anderson in his telegram above mentioned, might afford a means of facilitating dealing with the Chinese Government and at the same time conserving the essential basis of principle animating the Consortium Agreement, in the event that it should still appear desirable, in spite of the progressive disintegration of the Chinese Government, that the development of railways should proceed without awaiting a solution of China’s administrative problems.

I have read with much interest the proposed agenda which you have submitted for the meeting of the Consortium Council in London on July 14, 1924. CHARLES E. HUGHES 79 Not printed; the telegram referred to was sent from Paris by Mr. A.M. Anderson of the staff of the American group to Mr. Thomas W. Lamont, representative of the American group. Mr. Malcolm D. Simpson was

secretary for the American group and Mr. John Van A. MacMurray was Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs of the Department of State.

Memorandum containing proposals for greater elasticity in the working of Railway loans. It was decided to leave the Memorandum for further consideration in order to enable the writers to discuss further the proposed resolutions therein contained with the object of meeting the views of the Delegates. CHINESE GROUP. Referring to the original declaration of the Consortium, made upon its meeting at New York, October 15, 1920, expressing its desire to receive co-operation from a Chinese Banking Group, it is the sense of the Council that the Peking Representatives of the Consortium be requested to consider again measures for undertaking at some appropriate moment conversations with Chinese Bankers in order to discuss possible means looking to the formation of a Representative Chinese Banking Group organised to co-operate with the Consortium. The meeting then adjourned. C. S. ADDIS R. TH. DE LA CHAUME THOMAS W. LAMONT K. YANO

Joint Resolution of Congress authorizing the President at his discretion to remit to China further payments on the Boxer indemnity81 81 For previous correspondence regarding the Boxer indemnity, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 592 ff. [534] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)

the injury of the Chinese people. Both Chinese and Americans would however oppose an unconditional grant of the balance of the Boxer Indemnity funds to the Peking Government. 4. The time is inopportune for the enactment of the proposed legislation. Not only does the Chinese Government persist in its refusal to pay loans and debts to American citizens, not only were American ships engaged in lawful traffic last season on the Yangtze fired on, but today American treaty rights in regard to trade and commerce are violated in several provinces and 6 American missionaries within the last 60 days have been attacked or carried off or murdered by bandits or soldiers. Against these enormities the American Government has protested. The display at this juncture of the generosity and friendship towards China contemplated in the joint resolution introduced in the Senate December 6, 1923, could not fail seriously to weaken the force of these protests both with the Chinese Government and the Chinese public opinion. 5. If the passage of the joint resolution involves the relinquishment by the United States of the position it has maintained in relation to the Chinese Maritime Customs since the indemnity was imposed upon China in 1901, I should consider this result under existing conditions in China gravely detrimental to Chinese interests. China must soon face the great issues of unification, stabilization of government, financial rehabilitation, disbandment of troops, etc., and she will need the help of America. Until these questions are disposed of America, should not either in her own interest or in the interest of China part with any of the leverage she now enjoys in common with other nations. In comparison with the British, French and Japanese our diplomatic position has already been impaired by our nonparticipation in the control of the salt revenues. To turn over to these nations the power and influence we now share with them in connection with the customs revenues would be a fatal mistake.

6. There is an inherent difficulty in combining with an unconditional act of grace like the remission of the remainder of the indemnity some stipulation or at least understanding with regard to the uses to which the funds shall be put. Though it was overcome in 1908 it would be much more difficult to overcome today in a divided China with an impotent government and a racially self-conscious people. Yet the great majority of Americans in China and practically all thoughtful Chinese insist on this feature as an essential part of the program for the remission of the remainder of the indemnity. This is therefore an additional consideration in favor of delay. 7. In connection with this subject I have the honor to refer to my

hereby authorized, in his discretion, to remit to China as an act of friendship any or all further payments of the annual installments of the Chinese indemnity due under the bond received from China pursuant to the protocol

Sao-Ke Arrep Sze

88 On the same day the Chinese Minister transmitted a similar expression of appreciation from the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Secretary

to the Minister of Foreign Affairs that it perceived no objection to the personnel of the Board of Trustees. Before, however, venturing to recommend to you affirmative action on this matter, it has seemed to me highly desirable, and perhaps essential, that this Government should receive some reasonably definite statement as to the general purposes to which the Foundation contemplates devoting the Indemnity funds. While appreciating that the determination of the specific uses of the funds within its control will perhaps form the most important function of the Board of Trustees, and not desiring inappropriately to circumscribe its latitude of action, I have felt that this Government might subject itself to criticism, were it not to require some such statement as I have indicated, in order that there may be an assurance that the funds will actually be expended in conformity with the intent of the Congress. With a view to providing a satisfactory formula, there has been informally suggested to me the following Resolution: “That the Board of Trustees of the China Foundation for the promotion of Education and Culture resolves that the released Boxer Indemnity funds shall be used for the promotion of scientific study, for the application of modern science to the specific needs of China, and for the training of individuals and the conduct of experiment, either individual or group, for the application of modern science to the specific conditions of China.” The language of this resolution appears to me quite satisfactory, but before proceeding further with respect to this question I should like to have your views. Should the course suggested meet with your approval, I shall be glad to take such further action as will, within the near future, I hope, enable the Department formally to submit to you its recommendations. There are certain other facts in our relations with China, which, although not directly connected with the question of the remission of the Indemnity, nevertheless seem to me to deserve consideration simultaneously. There have been within the last few years numerous instances in China of assaults and depredations by Chinese bandits and soldiers upon the persons and property of American citizens. In a majority of these cases, the Department has had reason to hold that the outrages, as well as the failure to take steps

properly to punish those guilty of them, were due to the negligence of the Chinese Government; and, as a result, numerous claims for damages have been presented to that Government, a large portion of which remain unsatisfied. I also regret to be obliged to bring to your attention the further fact that, in order to tide over financial emergencies in the last few years in connection with the maintenance of Chinese students in this country, representatives of the Chinese Government in Washington have borrowed from local banks amounts aggregating approximately $180,000, which sums, although long overdue, have not as yet been repaid. These banks have sought to have a sufficient sum to cover these obligations retained from any funds that may be remitted to China. The Department has, however, taken the position that these loans, from a strictly legal point of view, are on the same basis as any other financial obligation of the Chinese Government to American citizens, and that it could not recommend the action desired by the banks without, at the same time, discriminating against numerous American creditors of the Chinese Government, the total of whose overdue obligations far exceeds the amount involved in the remission of the Indemnity. In both of the above classes of claims against the Chinese Government, I am, however, of the opinion that not only a legal, but a particular moral, obligation rests upon the Chinese Government to pay those American citizens whose interests are suffering by reason of a failure to liquidate their just claims. At the moment this Government is demonstrating its friendship for China by the return of the Indemnity, it would seem peculiarly fitting for the Government of that country to make an endeavor to satisfy these claims. I therefore propose, if it meets with your approval to make these views known to the Chinese Government in such manner as may seem most appropriate for the purpose of bringing those now in authority in that country to a realization of the peculiar obligation resting upon the Chinese Government promptly to meet its commitments to American citizens of the character which I have described. Faithfully yours, CHARLES E. HUGHES

Concurrence by the United States in the contention by certain powers that the Boxer indemnity payments should be made in gold currency91

[545] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)

3. In requesting telegraphic instructions whether I should participate in supporting the Belgian Government in this matter, I venture to direct the Department’s attention to the fact that it would appear from the joint memorandum of 191894 referred to in my observation that each of the powers signatory, namely, Belgium, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, Portugal and Russia, are at liberty to effect individual arrangements with the Chinese Government as to the method by which the suspended portion of the indemnity shall be paid. Therefore, if we now assist the Belgian Government in securing execution of its preferential treatment arrangement with the Chinese authorities, a precedent will be established for our acting similarly in the event of any other of the afore-mentioned of having made or making such individual arrangements with the Chinese Government possibly in terms especially advantageous to the respective powers. Likewise, it is to be observed that thus far we have made no arrangement ourselves with the Chinese Government regarding the payment of the suspended portion of the indemnity. While the desirability of perfect unanimity among the protocol powers in all that relates to the execution of that instrument is evident, I venture to suggest that disadvantages may arise from our associating ourselves with the other signatories in invoking the protocol to support an arrangement like the present one. I am not convinced that the obligation of China to pay the suspended Belgian indemnity at a particular time and in a particular manner is an obligation of the same order as the obligations arising from the final protocol of 1901 with regard to the indemnity generally. 4. I am informed by the Belgian Minister that he has addressed a formal note to the Chinese Government requesting the payment in question to which no reply has been received and I also have it on good authority that the Inspector General of Customs states that he has no money with which to liquidate the Sino-Belgian undertaking. SCHURMAN

should make a strong reply to Koo’s note so that it will be obvious to everybody that no settlement is possible except by arbitration. If at this critical juncture the American Minister refused to sign the diplomatic body’s reply, a new situation would be created and further delay become unavoidable. Please telegraph instructions. SCHURMAN

MONSIEUR LE MINISTRE: The eight undersigned Ministers of the Netherlands, Belgium, The United States, France, Italy, Great Britain and Japan have taken cognizance of the note which Your Excellency addressed to them separately on December 26th last in reply to their collective notes of

equivalent of a tael, comformably to the respective weights and legal standards of each one of the eight gold currencies mentioned in the said Article VI.; in other words, insofar as the franc is concerned, for each Haikwan Tael owed to Belgium or to Spain or to France or to Italy, China

The rates of exchange of the Haikwan Tael on April 1, 1901, were inserted in Article 6 of the Final Protocol whose text it is fitting to quote below in order to cause to stand out clearly how the Powers and China insisted at that time on the importance of a payment “in gold”.

Russia took the same precaution with regard to the gold rouble in adding the legal weight of fine gold of this currency. 2) The currencies of Belgium, France and Italy have always been quoted at different rates in the international exchanges. On April

rested. In answering the first contention of the note of December 26, 1923, regarding the meaning of the words “in gold” they have, in so doing, refuted the second which, as the Chinese note itself admits, refers solely to the manner of execution of the obligations subscribed to by the Chinese Government in 1901. The character and the total amount of the debt owed by virtue of an obligation cannot depend upon the means adopted for the settlement of this debt. After having recalled this principle of law which is certainly recognized by the Chinese Government, the eight Ministers consider it their duty to take up the principal points of the portion of the notes of December 26, 1923, which concern the exchange of letters of July 2, 1905. The arrangement resulting from this exchange confirmed and carried out Article 6 of the Final Protocol which it had completed. Such as it is, it answers perfectly to their present needs and the Signatory Powers have never thought of modifying it.

In recalling the circumstances which preceded and brought about the

settled by the Protocol of 1901, occasioned the subsequent rise of discussions and difficulties ended by the exchange of letters of July 2, 1905. By the terms of Section 3 of these letters China was entitled to bring about the payment to the Powers of the Indemnity of 1901 by one of three systems: “either in silver according to the price of silver on the London market, or in gold bills, or in telegraphic transfers.” The machinery of the two last systems, gold drafts and telegraphic transfers, differ only in the more or less rapid means of transmission of the document of exchange from one place to another with a resulting difference corresponding to the rates of exchange. In the two cases, China, the debtor, buys with silver Taels instruments of exchange representing the amount of gold which she owes to her creditor. These purchases, insofar as the service of the Indemnity of 1901 is concerned, are generally made of the banking agents of the Signatory Powers at Shanghai. The arrangement of 1905 has at the same time and quite justly reserved to China the, right “to obtain drafts and telegraphic transfers to the best of her interests in any locality and in any bank as cheaply as possible, or by award.” The three methods of payment enumerated in Section 3 of the letters of July 2, 1905, lend themselves perfectly to payment “in gold” as it has been defined above by the eight Ministers. The note of December 26 last has confused the quotations of the international exchanges by telegraphic transfer with the telegraphic transfer itself. Telegraphic transfer, in effect, is applied as well to a gold currency as to a silver currency, to a paper currency or an exchange currency.

When, on December 30, 1922, the Chinese Government attempted to resume the service of the Indemnity of 1901, in the matter indicated by its note of December 26 [1923?], her representative presented himself, according to established custom, to the Shanghai agents of the interested Governments to negotiate the purchase of telegraphic transfers in francs. The disagreement which ensued was solely about the rates of exchange of the Tael quoted by the two parties. If the representative of the Chinese

Government had accepted the rate of the gold franc quoted by the agents of the interested Governments, these agents would have effected the required telegraphic transfers. The Chinese Government, moreover, cannot be ignorant of the possibility of carrying on transactions in gold francs, since it must pay its share of the expenses of the League of Nations in gold francs and since it has accepted the gold franc as the currency of the Universal Postal Union and of its postal conventions with several countries. The eight Ministers, accordingly, support the conclusions drawn in their

Continued support by the United States to the Federal Telegraph Company in efforts to obtain execution of its contract with the Chinese Government3

Washington, August 21, 1924.

In coming to this decision His Majesty’s Government have been influenced by the fact that there is no difference of opinion between the United States Government and His Majesty’s Government, who both consider the recommendations to represent a practicable adjustment of the interests of the four Powers concerned and who both still hope that they may furnish a basis of a satisfactory understanding. The only point seriously at issue is between the United States and Japan in regard to Section 2 of the experts’ memorandum, and my Government greatly regret that they are unable to allow this divergence of view to operate to the disadvantage of the cable companies, whose existing agreements provide that until December 31st, 1930, no other party will be allowed without their consent “to establish telegraphic connections which might create competition with, or injure the interests of, the existing lines”.9

In these circumstances, His Majesty’s Ambassador at Tokio has been instructed to inform the Imperial Japanese Government that, while His Majesty’s Government would have been glad if the views of the United States and Japanese Governments could have been harmonised in respect of Section 2, they are in agreement with the United States Government in considering the experts’ recommendations as providing a reasonable compromise which it is hoped will still furnish a basis for a satisfactory understanding, but that His Majesty’s Government cannot allow this divergence of views between the United States and the Japanese Governments to operate to the prejudice of the existing contractual interests of the cable companies. In bringing to your notice the sense of the instructions sent to Sir C. Eliot I have been directed to assure you that the action of His Majesty’s Government in China has been taken in no spirit of hostility to the United States interests concerned, but as the only course available in the circumstances to protect the existing rights of the Eastern Extension Telegraph Company. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON

‘I acquired my stock holdings in the Federal Telegraph Co. (California) after the contracts were consummated, but I cannot permit this company to become further involved in a transaction of this character without protest. ‘It is quite clear to me that the present attitude of the Chinese Government toward the contracts concern the Federal Telegraph Co. of Delaware alone, but I am unwilling that any officer of the Federal Telegraph Co. (California) shall be involved in negotiations with the Chinese Government in connection with these contracts, or in the execution of the contracts. In other words, it is no longer satisfactory for this company and the Federal Telegraph Co. of Delaware to have the same individual as the executive head. Yours very truly, (Signed) R. SPRECKELS’ and Whereas, at a meeting of the Board of Directors of the Federal Telegraph Company of California on April 15th, 1924, R. P. Schwerin was removed as President of that corporation and all powers of attorney theretofore given by that corporation to him as President or General Manager or otherwise to act for or on behalf of that corporation were revoked, and Whereas, notwithstanding the fact that the Board of Directors of the Radio Corporation of America understand and believe that the State Department at Washington has been correctly informed of the true situation in connection with these contracts and has always understood the precise scope and meaning thereof, and Whereas, Radio Corporation of America does not believe that any advantage has been taken of the ignorance or lack of

understanding of the Chinese Government in the negotiation of these contracts, and Whereas, Radio Corporation of America did cause to be organized the Federal Telegraph Company of Delaware, for the purpose of taking over said Chinese concessions from the Federal Telegraph Company of California and the financing and construction of the Chinese stations, in which Federal Telegraph Company of Delaware the Radio Corporation of America owns seventy per cent of the capital stock. Nevertheless, the Radio Corporation of America being unwilling to proceed with the carrying out of these contracts, if it be true that the Chinese Government has acted under misapprehension or lack of knowledge and if the said Chinese Government shall so assert, Resolved that the Radio Corporation of America is willing and tenders itself ready to join with the Federal Telegraph Company of California in cancelling all contracts relating to the said concessions or to the carrying out thereof, and Further Resolved, that the President be and he hereby is authorized and instructed to take steps to ascertain whether the State Department has been correctly informed of the true situation in connection with these contracts and whether the Chinese Government makes any claim or complaint as to having signed these contracts under misapprehension of fact or lack of knowledge.” The Radio Corporation of America entered upon this Chino-Federal enterprise on direct assurance from Mr. R. P. Schwerin that it had the hearty approval of both the American State Department and the Chinese Government. Copies of all the contracts were long since furnished to the State Department. That it has understood and has had no question of their integrity has been shown by its continued and efficient support of them to this day. The signatures of the proper officials of the Chinese Government to the contracts have been witnessed by proper American Legation officials

in Peking. Our information is that Dr. Sun, the Chinese Vice Minister of Communications, is a graduate of Cornell University, knowing English well, and that he repeatedly discussed these contracts with Mr. Bell, Mr. Peck, Mr. Julean Arnold of the American Legation and Mr. Schwerin and Mr. Moss. These gentlemen with Minister Schurman had numerous discussions with Dr. Koo, Wu Yu Lin, the Minister of Communications, and the Prime Minister Chan Tze Ti’In[sic]. Of the integrity of the contracts we have had no doubt. Mr. Rudolph Spreckels, of San Francisco, very recently and suddenly purchased a control in the Federal Telegraph Company of California, and now charges that our State Department has not been correctly informed of the true situation in connection with these contracts and that the Chinese Government signed them under deception. I am instructed by the Board of Directors of the Radio Corporation of America to ask assurance of the State Department on these two points, in order that we may know whether it is proper for us to proceed in this enterprise from the standpoint of morality and business integrity. Very respectfully, J. G. HARBORD

that Government so asserts; that your corporation would in that case be willing and ready to join with the Federal Telegraph Company of California in cancelling all the contracts in question; and that you are therefore instructed to take steps to ascertain whether the Department of State has been correctly informed of the true situation in regard to these contracts and whether the Chinese Government makes any claim or complaint of having signed these contracts under misapprehension of fact or lack of knowledge. In reply I am happy to inform you, for the reassurance of your Board of Directors, that I know of no basis whatsoever for the assumptions stated in the letter quoted in the resolution. As you are no doubt aware, the several contracts between the Federal Telegraph Company of California and the Chinese Government in regard to this matter were all negotiated with the cognizance of the Department of State and in consultation with the American Legation at Peking, were witnessed by officials of that Legation, and were in each case communicated immediately to this Department, which considered the project to be of primary importance to American interests in China as a test of the practical application of the principle of the open door or equality of opportunity in such enterprises in China and as a means of establishing a direct and wholly independent Chinese-American circuit between the two countries. It is understood that the American interests concerned are to construct the proposed wireless stations for the Chinese Government at a cost to that Government of approximately $13,000,000, $6,500,000 of which is to be paid in bonds and the balance to be paid in cash over a period of ten years from the time of completing the last station; and that during the period to elapse until the cash payments are completed, the contractors are to participate with the Chinese Government, under an arrangement analogous to a partnership, in the operation of the stations. The project thus contemplated has not been the subject of any complaint by the Chinese Government to the Department of State, and I have no reason to believe that that Government misapprehends the arrangement or considers that the contracts establishing it were concluded under any misunderstanding or in ignorance of their scope and meaning.

Carnes E. Hocues

Esme Howarp

America, the Federal Telegraph Company of California and the Federal Telegraph Company of Delaware with each other or the respective rights of those companies, nor has the Department considered the question whether the contracts between the Federal Telegraph Company of California and the Chinese Government include the terms and conditions which are usually contained in such contracts or whether they contemplate the payment of reasonable or excessive compensation for the services to be rendered and the material to be furnished by the Company. This is a question which, of course, the contracting parties should consider and decide for themselves. In iteration and confirmation of what has already been orally communicated to Mr. Schwerin by representatives of this Department it should be stated that it is not within the province of the Department to negotiate contracts between foreign governments and American interests, and that the Department’s activities in relation to the contracts between the Federal Telegraph Company of California and the Chinese Government have been calculated to obtain a practical application of the principle of the open door in China and to assist the American interests concerned in their negotiations with the Chinese Government to the end that a circuit of communication might be established which would prove advantageous to the relations between the United States and China. For the Secretary of State: LELAND HARRISON Assistant Secretary 10 Not printed. 11 Mr. William Brown, general attorney for the Radio Corporation of America.

Explanations of policy by the Department of State respecting questions of treaty rights raised by Americans in China [560] Report of the Annual Meeting of the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China, at Shanghai, October 16 and 17, 1923

Washington, April 1, 1924.

interior of China it has caused withdrawals and losses or depreciation of investment which has been most serious. Practically the same thing applies to American missionary and educational endeavor in the interior of the country. Obviously a country harassed by unrestrained banditry and uncontrolled soldiery offers little opportunity for the efficient conduct of missionary educational work. The American people have probably invested in China an amount of money in missionaryeducation work which far exceeds the amount which has been invested in business and it obviously is the affair of the American Government to adopt measures for protecting these enterprises as well as the enterprises of business men. It is our hope that these resolutions will be of service to American Governmental officials, chambers of commerce and other bodies in the United States which are interested in China and in a continuance of American effort in this part of the world, as well as a further cementing of the relations of the American and Chinese peoples. Inasmuch as America took the lead in calling the Washington. Conference and in directing its discussions, it is to be expected that this leadership on the part of the United States is to be maintained, otherwise the prestige which accrued to America as a result of the Washington meeting is likely to be lost. [RESOLUTIONS]

ILLEGAL TAXATION Various treaties between China and the foreign powers have put a limitation upon the taxation of imported goods, without regard to their nature. Any taxation levied in excess of those provided for in these treaties is therefore a violation of the said treaties. The first exception to this principle appears in the Washington Agreement in the provision that has been made for the levying of a tax on luxuries. It therefore applies that any violation of treaties by the illegal taxation of any article of commerce jeopardises the principle established by treaty and would further establish a precedent which might be extended to all importations. Under the treaties, when goods are imported into China they may be shipped from treaty ports to the interior under transit pass, the payment for which exempts goods from all other taxation. This however, has been a point in dispute between the Chinese Government and foreign powers, the Chinese claiming that when goods reach their destination they are subject to additional taxes. This position has been strongly contested by the various Legations and the maintenance of the spirit of the treaties has been insisted upon although the Government in Peking does not successfully exercise its authority over all the provinces. Under the provisions of the treaties providing for the use of the transit pass the shipper is given the option of either using the transit pass or shipping his goods to the interior without a transit pass, paying instead the local taxes. When the tax is paid by the use of the transit pass the funds are put into the regular Customs revenues which are hypothecated for certain purposes. Taxes paid in this form do not directly reach the provincial Governments or any other branch of the Central Government than the Customs. Certain provinces, however, have fixed the local taxes at such rates as would induce shippers to forward their goods without transit passes thus benefiting the particular locality. The effect of the treaties has therefore been to make the cost of the transit pass the limit of taxation on any article of commerce shipped into the interior. The treaties also provide that trade in the treaty ports be free from taxation so that the only taxes a merchant has to consider are those levied upon his goods when they leave the treaty port. But in spite

of treaty obligations and special agreements arrived at between the Chinese Government and several Legations, various provinces have illegally imposed further taxes on certain commodities not only in the interior districts but even in treaty ports. The action of these provinces has been strongly protested by the British and American Legations both to the Peking Government and thru the consulates to the provincial authorities. The Peking authorities have admitted the illegality of the action on the part of the provinces but declare themselves helpless to enforce the rights and obligations created by the treaties and agreements made thru the Legations. But as these violations of the rights of foreign merchants established a precedent which may be followed and extended by military leaders in all sections of the country in order to secure funds for the maintenance of their armies: therefore, in view of the action taken at the Washington Conference wherein it is provided that a Special Conference is to be held in China for the purpose of revising China’s customs revenues by the addition of a 2½ percent surtax on ordinary commercial goods and a 5 percent surtax on luxuries, the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend that the American Delegation to the Special Conference in association with the other delegations from the various nations give serious consideration to this matter of illegal taxation before agreeing to China’s request for further increases in the customs tariff.

DISORDER IN CHINA In view of the long series of outrages in China culminating in the so-called Lincheng Incident of May 5, 1923, which constitute a menace to the lives and property of American citizens and other foreign nationals residing in the country, the Diplomatic Body consisting of official representatives of sixteen nations on August 10, 1923, addressed a formal note of protest to the Chinese Government.15 This note demanded that the foreign passengers be reimbursed for property losses, for loss of time and injuries sustained and also demanded the punishment of Chinese officials responsible and that proper means be taken at once by the Chinese Government for the protection of travelers and transportation of merchandise on the Chinese Government Railways. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Chinese Government in reply to this note stated among other things that “The safety of foreigners has always been the subject of very deep solicitude on the part of the Chinese Government,” and said further “That through the series of measures recently adopted the lives, property and interests of foreigners in China will enjoy added security.”16 Since this reply of the Chinese Government was written there have been additional bandit and military outrages, one of which in Szechuan province resulted in the murder of two missionaries, and others in Honan and Hupeh provinces resulting in the murder of a Catholic priest, the kidnapping of two women missionaries and the destruction of considerable missionary property. In addition to these incidents there has been frequent firing upon peaceful American cargo and passenger boats on the Upper Yangtsze and in the case of a ship belonging to another foreign nation interested in this trade the vessel was raided by soldiers, several members of the crew killed, the chief officers carried into captivity and the cargo destroyed. Lists of these outrages affecting the lives and property interests of American and other foreigners and the Chinese people as well have been compiled by the

Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China and are on file at the American Legation in Peking. These outrages are a direct consequence of the condition of military anarchy which has developed in China since the country became a republic in 1911 which matter received the attention of the Washington Conference

Powers would be sufficient to bring China’s military dictators to a realization of the obligations of China as a sovereign and independent country among the nations of the world. Until such time as the nations which participated in the Washington Conference are prepared to adopt a definite policy in respect to China, it is vital that the United States take steps to secure to American citizens their just treaty rights in China. To this end we feel that at the present time the maximum of protection in China for our interests can only be obtained by increasing our military and naval forces to the strength we are entitled to under treaty rights. This involves the bringing of our military and marine forces stationed in Peking and Tientsin under the Boxer protocol of 190118 up to their full strength, and additions to the China section of the Pacific Fleet and the Yangtsze Patrol Squadron. Both the State and Navy Departments at Washington in correspondence

In the cases of Shanghai and Amoy where the consular property is owned, the property consists of antiquated residence buildings in a dilapidated condition which have been converted to office use. The condition of these buildings is such that frequent repairs are necessary to keep them in a habitable condition. In all of the other points in China, the American Government follows the shortsighted policy of renting property usually from native landlords and in very few cases is the property suitable for the purpose desired. In Tientsin a few years ago, the American Consul was forced to vacate his premises at short notice because the property was desired for other purposes by a Japanese landlord. In the city of Antung, the house occupied by the American Consul in 1923 collapsed during a heavy rain storm and had it not been for the hospitality offered by the Commissioner of the Chinese Customs, the official representative of the United States Government would have had no place to go At one station in South China the house occupied by the American Consul is located on ground so poorly located as to be frequently flooded at high tide. In Hankow the foreign concession where the American Consulate is located has become so congested that it is questionable whether the present lease can be renewed on any terms. The examples above, which are typical of the situation, point to the necessity of the United States Government acquiring its own consular property in China. The present rented property in use at most of the ports is inadequate from the standpoint of efficient conduct of the business of the United States which has grown proportionately with the rapid increase of American interests in this part of the world. America’s share in the direct

of the American consuls. It is difficult for the average Chinese, whose principal knowledge of the United States comes from his acquaintance with the American consul and his surroundings, to understand why America which plays such an important part in the affairs of the Far East, should be so negligent in respect to the housing of its official representatives. The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend that a Government architect be sent to China to make a report and recommendation on the possibility of obtaining suitable land and the construction of buildings at the principal Chinese ports and cities where American consular officials are maintained. IMPROVEMENT OF DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR SERVICES There has been before Congress for several years a measure known as the “Rogers Bill” which is intended to improve the consular and diplomatic services of the United States through combining the two services into a unified foreign service. According to the terms of the Rogers Bill provision is made for increases in salaries, travelling expenses, retirement and for promotions in accordance with the abilities of the individual. In view of the fact that the question of improvements in the United States Consular and Diplomatic Services in China have been a frequent source of consideration on the part of this body as well as other American organizations in China the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China desire to go on record as being in favor of and fully endorsing the Rogers Bill and expresses the hope it may be speedily enacted into law by Congress.

AMERICAN POLICY TOWARD CHINA The Washington Conference which met in Washington on November 12, 1921, while called principally for the purpose of discussing the limitation of naval armament devoted most of its time to a consideration of the problem of China. At the close of the Conference a number of treaties and resolutions were adopted calculated to improve not only the international status of China but also provide a basis for an improvement of the internal situation. In spite of the hopes of the leading statesmen of the world as expressed in the treaties and resolutions of the Washington Conference in respect to China, conditions in this country have deteriorated rather than improved and up to the present the leaders of China have shown an absolute disregard of the obligations of China as a sovereign power among the nations of the world. Owing to the failure of the unanimous ratification of the various treaties and resolutions adopted at the Washington Conference the United States has made no move toward bringing into effect the Washington Conference decisions. In view of the serious situation which has developed in China as a result of the continued serious internal disorder the practical effect has been to damage the prestige of the United States which nation took the lead in the call and deliberations of the Washington Conference. Unless all Governments concerned ratify the Washington Conference treaties without further delay the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend that the United States Government take up this question with the Governments prepared to adopt a united policy in respect to the protection of their nationals and the general improvement of conditions in this country. Inasmuch as America took the lead in calling the Washington Conference and in directing its discussions it is to be expected that this leadership on the part of the United States is to be maintained, otherwise the prestige which accrued to America as a result of the Washington Meeting is likely to be lost.

EXTRATERRITORIALITY In accordance with the terms of a resolution adopted at the Washington Conference21 an international commission of jurists was to visit China within six months after the adjournment of the Conference to report upon the status of extraterritoriality and to make recommendations for improvements. On May 6, 1922,22 the Chinese Minister to the United States requested the State Department to postpone the visit of the Commission for a year owing to the desperate political situation existing in China. In view of the fact that the year’s postponement requested by the Chinese Minister has now expired and conditions in China have deteriorated rather than improved it is the opinion of the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China that any consideration of a revision of the system of extraterritoriality now existing in China should be indefinitely postponed.

TONNAGE DUES IN CHINESE PORTS The tonnage dues which China is permitted to charge foreign vessels are based upon treaties between China and other nations beginning with the Tientsin treaty between China and Great Britain signed in 1858. These dues amount to 4 mace (equivalent to 30 cents U. S. currency) per net registered

SPECIAL TARIFF CONFERENCE In accordance with the terms of a treaty adopted at the Washington Conference on February 6, 1922,23 a special conference of the powers is to be held in China to prepare the way for the speedy abolition of likin with a view to levying surtaxes provided for in the treaty, the surtax to be levied at the uniform rate of 2½ per cent ad valorem provided that in case of certain articles of luxury which in the opinion of the special conference can bear a greater increase without unduly impeding trade the total surtax may be increased to but may not exceed 5 percent ad valorem. Although two years have elapsed since the close of the Washington Conference the special Tariff Conference has not been called owing to the non-ratification of the various treaties and resolutions by all of the Powers concerned. In case the various Governments finally ratify the treaties and the special Conference is called, the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China desire to go on record that any increases granted to China under the Washington Conference treaty be predicated upon the condition that all defaulted foreign obligations be secured out of the increased monies resulting from the revised tariff regulations; it being understood that obligations incurred by the operating departments of the Chinese Government for materials supplied take precedence over all bonded indebtedness. EXCHANGE OF NEWS BETWEEN UNITED STATES AND CHINA Among the resolutions adopted by this body at its last annual meeting was one urging the importance of a fuller exchange and distribution of American news in this part of the world. Since the passage of this resolution the Federal Telegraph Corporation of San Francisco in association with the Radio Corporation of America has made a contract with the Chinese Government whereby a number of high powered American radio stations are to be constructed in China, the chief one being at Shanghai with feeder stations in the interior.

Owing to protests by other foreign interests the work of the American companies in the construction of these radio stations has been seriously retarded. The Chamber heartily approves of the policy of Secretary of State Hughes in upholding American rights in connection with the Federal Telegraph Company’s contract24 and hopes that his vigorous policy in this connection will be continued.

It is the belief of the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China that the erection here of a high powered radio station will be of tremendous service in placing China in direct communication with the United States for the exchange not only of news but of commercial messages as well at reasonable rates.

YANGTZE PATROL FORCE In view of the serious political situation existing along the Yangtze River which constitutes a menace to the lives and property of American citizens engaged in business and missionary activities, the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China desire to incorporate as a part of this report a pamphlet entitled “For the Protection of American Lives and

REPRESENTATION AT WASHINGTON The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China realize that more suitable action may be obtained on matters pertaining to China and the Far East, affecting American business and interests generally, if the Associated Chambers were directly represented at Washington. It is therefore recommended that arrangements be made at once to appoint a resident representative of the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China at Washington who shall be empowered to give publicity to all matters which may be referred to him from time to time, to enlist the aid of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America, Government officials and departments and commercial and other organizations interested in the various subjects referred to him for attention. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS AGAINST THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT As a result of the disorder which has existed in China for many years American interests have suffered greatly by the loss or destruction of property resulting from bandit outrages, uncontrolled soldiery and internal fighting. Claims covering these losses have been on file at the various consulates and the Legation in Peking for years with no settlement being made by the Chinese Government. The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend that these claims be brought forward by the American authorities at the special conference and that the American Delegation, be instructed to insist upon payment of these claims before agreement is given to the revision of the Customs Tariff.

PUBLICITY CAMPAIGN IN AMERICA Owing to the fact that foreign trade occupies such a small portion of the interest or activities of the American people generally, it is always difficult to induce the American Government to adopt constructive and continuing policies in foreign affairs and especially in respect to American interests in this part of the world. The lack of familiarity on the part of many of the officials at Washington in respect to the protection of the lives and property of its own citizens not to mention the larger diplomatic and strategic interests of America in the Far East has made it necessary for American citizens both individually and through their organizations to frequently conduct publicity campaigns in the United States. Such publicity campaigns in the past, although largely unorganized, have nevertheless been of considerable benefit in concentrating the attention of the American people and through them of the government upon particular problems affecting the interests of Americans in this part of the world. In view of the serious situation now existing in China which constitute[s] a menace to the lives and interests of American citizens residing in the Chinese Republic, it is recommended that the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China give this subject special attention and that a special committee be appointed to work out in cooperation with other American organizations, a definite publicity campaign calculated to bring to the attention of the American people, members of Congress and other officials of our government the necessity of a definite policy in respect to the present situation of China.

THE BOXER INDEMNITY In view of the fact that Congress has not yet taken action in respect to the disposition of the unexpended balance of the American share of the Boxer Indemnity amounting to approximately fifteen million gold dollars, it was decided that it would not be in accordance with traditional American policy toward China for the United States Government to withhold payment of this money on account of the present default on the part of the Chinese Government of American loans or obligations for materials purchased by the Chinese Government Railways and other departments. In view of the great number of proposals which have been placed before this body covering possible uses for this money it was decided that the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China should take no action on this subject at the present time. The Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China are of the opinion however that any expenditure for educational or other purposes in China should be closely supervised by an American committee composed of representatives of the United States diplomatic or consular services and of the American business and missionary organizations in China.

AMERICAN INCOME TAX American Chambers of Commerce in London, Paris, Mexico City, Buenos Aires, Manila and elsewhere representing American commercial interests engaged in foreign trade have for many years agitated against the injustice of the United States Government enforcing its domestic income tax regulations upon Americans residing abroad who derive their income from non-American sources. The American Chamber of Commerce (Shanghai) after an agitation lasting over several years was able to obtain the passage by Congress of a measure known as the China Trade Act26 which exempts American companies registered under the Act from the operation of the domestic income and excess profits taxes but was unable to obtain an exemption of American citizens generally from the domestic personal income taxes. The provision in the Revenue Bill passed by Congress in 1921 intended to exempt Americans residing in the Far East including the Philippine Islands, and China was stricken from the bill when it went to conference before final passage. There are approximately 240,000 foreigners residing in China of which number about 9,000 are Americans. Americans are the only foreigners who are required by their home Government to pay income taxes upon income derived from activities in this part of the world and entirely outside of the United States. The handicap which this places upon the American citizen in his competition with the British, Japanese, French, Germans and other foreigners interested in foreign trade in this part of the world is self-evident. Governor-General Leonard Wood of the Philippine Islands has well stated the case in letters and cables to the Secretary of War and to the President of

“Filipinos and foreign residents of the Philippine Islands, business competitors of Americans, are exempt from Federal income tax paying only local taxes which are very much lower. Resulting discrimination against Americans on an outpost of our foreign commerce is grossly unjust.—British subjects abroad have never been subjected to British taxation on income derived from sources outside of Great Britain. By the Finance Act of 1920 Great Britain has even gone to the extent of refunding to overseas British subjects taxes heretofore levied on income derived solely from British sources. Relief on the part of Congress would greatly facilitate the general efforts to build up our foreign trade now seriously interfered with by subjecting it here and elsewhere abroad to the handicap of heavier income taxes than those paid by foreign competitors. … I feel very strongly that the least the home Government can do is to give a considerate hearing to the American business men of this community in order that all the facts may be before you before definite action is taken.” The situation affecting Americans interested in business and other activities in China is exactly the same as the situation outlined by Governor-General Wood in the Philippines. All foreigners residing in China are subject to certain municipal and other taxes in the communities wherein they live but it is only the Americans residing in China who are subjected by their home Government to all of the domestic taxes of the United States even though the incomes are derived from sources entirely outside of the United States. In view of the above factors the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China desire to approve of the action of other American Chambers of Commerce in various parts of the world, and especially the action of the American Chamber of Commerce of the Philippine Islands, as well as the action of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America to the effect that Congress in framing the next Revenue Bill may exempt Americans residing overseas and deriving their income from non- American sources from the operation of our domestic income tax law.

UNPAID ACCOUNTS FOR MATERIALS SUPPLIED TO THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT RAILWAYS AND OTHER SERVICES

With regard to the obligations of the Chinese Government Railways the United States Government has adopted the position that obligations for materials supplied to the Chinese Government Railways “constitute a part of the operating expenses of the railways, and as such should be met before any charges on the surplus revenues are provided for, or before, in fact, it can be said that any surplus exists” or in other words, “that such obligations for equipment become a part of the operating expenses of the railways and as such form a prior lien on the actual earnings of the railways before any surplus can be said to exist,” which position was transmitted to the Chinese Government by the American Minister in his notes No. 168, May 18,

resolutions contained in this report presumably represent the leadership of American business in China. They are doubtless well informed with respect to conditions in that country. Although they may not have in general as full a knowledge of the political conditions, of which they complain, as diplomatic and consular officials have, they nevertheless come in even closer contact, in some respects, with the resulting practical conditions, than do government officials. They have a first-hand access to many sources of information which the Government’s representatives lack; and the information obtained by Government officials comes in large part from the business firms represented by these Chambers of Commerce. It may furthermore be remarked that the problems to be solved in connection with the maintenance of our treaty rights in the protection of persons and property are not, in general, of a technical character. The problems, and the practical remedies to be applied, if such may be found, are such as may appropriately be made the subject of discussion and recommendation by any group of intelligent persons having an accurate knowledge of the existing conditions. The question of the adequate protection of American interests in China is one in which these business men may be presumed to have a vital interest; for the failure to receive an adequate degree of protection means the serious impairment, if not the ultimate destruction, of the business interests which they have built up. The Department, accordingly, notes with surprise that (with such few exceptions as will be noted later) these resolutions are phrased in the most general language and contain almost nothing which is of assistance to the Department either by way of concrete proposals or by way of suggestions from which it might be possible to evolve some practical method of dealing with the situation. By way of example, your attention is invited to the recommendation with respect to illegal taxation (page 529 ) that “… the American Delegation to the Special Conference … give serious consideration to this matter of illegal taxation before agreeing to China’s request for further increases in the Customs tariff.”

On the subject of disorders in China, the Chambers are of the opinion (page 8) that “nothing short of a definite stand on the part of the Powers would be sufficient to bring China’s military dictators to a realization of the obligations of China … Until such time as the nations … are prepared to adopt a definite policy in respect to China, it is vital that the United States take steps to secure to American citizens their just treaty rights in China.” In the section entitled “American Policy in China”, it is stated (pages 13– 14) that “Unless all governments concerned ratify the Washington Conference treaties without further delay, the Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China recommend that the United States Government take up this question with the governments prepared to adopt a united policy in respect to the protection of their nationals and the general improvement of conditions in this country.” Under the heading of “Publicity Campaign in America”, reference is made to the “necessity of a definite policy in respect to the situation in China” (page 22). The Report closes with the recommendation, relating to the unpaid accounts due from the Chinese Government for materials supplied by American firms (page 27), that “The State Department instruct the American Minister to bring more pressure to bear on the Chinese Government and that he insist that immediate arrangements be made to meet the obligations incurred by the Chinese Government.” The phrases underlined above indicate the vagueness of the resolutions forming this report; and I cannot but acknowledge my regret that, in matters so vital to their interests, the Chambers have not found it possible to make, for my consideration, more definite and more helpful suggestions as to measures that might prove practical to adopt for the better safeguarding of American interests in China.

This sense of disappointment is deepened by a consideration of the one or two concrete suggestions which the Chambers have offered. On page 8 occurs the statement: “… we feel that at the present time the maximum of protection in China for our interests can only be obtained by increasing our military and naval forces to the strength we are entitled under treaty rights. This involves the bringing of our military and marine forces stationed in Peking and Tientsin under the Boxer Protocol of 1901 up to their full strength, and additions to the China section of the Pacific fleet, and the Yangtze Patrol Squadron.” To the best of the information and judgment of both this Department and the War Department, the contingents now stationed at Peking and Tientsin are sufficient in point of numbers for the purposes of their detail; and, in the absence of any special emergency, there would appear to be no special advantage to be derived by adding to the number of Marines at Peking or by transferring from Manila to Tientsin another battalion of the 15th Infantry. As to the latter of these alternatives, it should be understood that such a disposition of troops is considered by the War Department not to be feasible, in view of the requirements to be met elsewhere with the limited available military establishment which the Congress has determined in accordance with the manifest desire of the people of this country. Quite apart from the administrative impracticability of this proposal, however, it seems plain that the presence of these few hundred soldiers would have no effect whatsoever upon the general protection of the persons and property of American citizens scattered throughout China, and would afford no remedy for the widespread conditions of which the Chambers complain. It is not clear what is the interest in the Chamber’s recommendation that “additions to the China section of the Pacific fleet” should be made. The cruising ships of the Asiatic fleet, including a large number of destroyers, have been readily available at Chinese seaports; and this Government recently assembled at Canton a larger number of vessels for a naval demonstration than did any other foreign Power. On this point, it would appear that the Chambers are in error as to the facts, and that there is no

paucity of naval units of this character for the purpose of such conditions as exist at present. The recommendation with respect to an increase in the force of the Yangtze Patrol is, on the other hand, most pertinent; and as you are aware, the Department has for a long time been endeavoring, in cooperation with the Navy Department, to obtain legislative authority for the construction of new ships for this purpose. You were informed in the

Deploring the evident existence of a feeling of dissatisfaction and misunderstanding among American business men in China as to the attitude of the Department toward the protection of their interests, I hope that, in the exercise of a sound discretion, you may find occasions to acquaint representative business men and others with the facts of the situation in such a way as will lead them to bring a less impetuous judgment to bear upon the question of dealing with those common American interests, with the protection of which this Department is charged. It is particularly suggested that you might find it possible to impress upon the more responsible and influential members of the American community the futility and the danger of the reiteration of threats of intervention, which, when for any reason not carried out, tend inevitably to lead the Chinese to the conviction that the remonstrances of the foreign Powers may safely be ignored. The unfortunate state of domestic politics now existing in China, approaching a condition of political chaos, has likewise, and even to a greater degree, affected adversely the interests of foreign missionaries. The very great extent of American enterprise in this direction, constituting, both in the number of persons engaged and in the amount of capital invested, a larger element of American activity than is found in trade, adds materially to the problem of affording protection to our nationals in China. The right of residence in the interior, of which this group of our citizens has taken full advantage, has resulted in a diffusion of American missionaries throughout even the most remote and isolated parts of the country. This movement, over which the Government cannot exercise any degree of positive control, and which it would only reluctantly use, its influence to restrict, has, in the growing disorder now so general, greatly complicated the problem of protection. In this particular, it is not possible to separate the interests of the trader from those of the missionary; and an act of violence to a member of either group reacts equally unfavorably upon the safety and well-being of both. It is felt that this has possibly not been wholly appreciated by the Chambers of Commerce, although the recent report of the formation in Shanghai of a joint committee, composed of both traders and missionaries, for the study of matters affecting their common interests, would indicate a quickening perception in this respect.

It may be remarked, furthermore, that the missionaries, as a group, have reacted to the present adverse situation in a somewhat different manner than have the business interests. With the exception of the Lincheng outrage, cases of actual violence to American persons and property have occurred chiefly to the missionaries. In so far as the Department is informed, however, missionaries have refrained from public resolutions of the kind passed by the American Chambers of Commerce, and have sought rather to keep their Boards at home informed of the very dangerous trend of Chinese affairs and to bring to the attention of the Department through various agencies, the difficulties of their situation and the very real need of such protection as the Government is able to extend. This attitude has suggested to the Department the desirability of obtaining a measure of direct cooperation with these interests in matters relating to the direction of their policies in China, in so far as such policies have a bearing on the problem of protection; and it has been felt that a frank exchange of views with representatives of the various Boards, in confidence, would be of service to this end. For this purpose I authorized the Chief of the Far Eastern Division to meet in New York, on February 21, with representatives of the Foreign Missions Conference of North America. In the course of this conference he made it clear that the Department had no intention of dictating to them or even of advising them, but desired only to give them an exposition of the present situation in China from the viewpoint of the Department, in order that they might be in a position to understand the problems of protection involved, and make their own decisions accordingly. He quite unreservedly explained the impossibility of controlling the situation by a display of force, or by such diplomatic methods as a proposal to withdraw recognition from the Peking Government; and he pointed out that this Government would in all probability find it increasingly difficult to give adequate protection to our missionary and other interests in the interior of China, and that it is possible only to rely upon our moral position, and to deal with each individual case as it arises. Under such circumstances, the mission Boards would have to take into consideration, in formulating the policies of their respective organizations, the very considerable limitations upon our ability to afford protection, especially in isolated stations, against the dangers likely to result from the revulsion of Chinese feeling against the special privileges enjoyed by foreigners and from the greatly lowered prestige of our western civilization in the eyes of the Chinese. The response of those

present seemed to indicate an understanding of the limitations imposed by the changed situation in China, and the consequences involved therein. It may be of interest to the Legation to note that there was a report from one of the representatives present of a strong and growing movement among the missionaries in China against any reliance upon such special privileges as extraterritorial rights, or upon any form of force, since it was not thought consistent with missionary ideals to ask indemnities for depredations, or even to expect to be forcibly rescued or ransomed in case of capture by brigands. To such an attitude, Mr. MacMurray made it clear that the Department is unreservedly opposed: in the interest of all our residents in China, and in the interest of China itself, it is felt to be necessary to hold the Chinese Government to as rigorous fulfillment as we may of the obligations due to foreigners. He pointed out that it is untimely to yield our rights in the face of an effort on the part of the Chinese to break them down, and that the interests of all Americans would be jeopardized by making any such renunciations so long as China does not in good faith and effectively live up to existing obligations. The Department is hopeful that the discussion of these matters will prove of value in assuring sympathetic cooperation between the missionary interests and the various agencies of the Government charged with the protection of American interests in China. I should also be glad to receive from you such comments on the matters herein discussed as may suggest themselves to you. CHARLES E. HUGHES 28 Omissions here and in the excerpts that follow are indicated on the original instruction. 29 Refers to the page number of the original pamphlet. 30 Not printed.

bear on all persons under all circumstances. So we understand the teaching and example of Jesus Christ our Lord and it is to the extension of His Kingdom that our lives are dedicated. In signing this statement we wish it to be clear that we have no authority to speak for our missions or churches, and sign simply in our individual capacity.” This statement originated in China, but I have no information as to how many if any signatures were secured thereto. I would like to ask therefore if you can make a ruling upon some points which seem to bear upon this entire question. 1. The extra-territorial rights in China are rights by treaty as I understand. Has an American the right and privilege of vacating rights thus secured? 2. Should a missionary, in accordance with the above statement, decline to accept those rights as they relate to his person and property? Would that position endanger the life and property of other American missionaries, and if other American missionaries, then other Americans engaged in other pursuits in China? 3. If a missionary, contrary to the treaty, should be arrested and imprisoned and should refuse to make an appeal to his consul or the representatives of his government in China for protection, would the consul or representatives of the government, for that reason, refuse to insist that the Chinese Government should observe the treaties existing between the United States and China quite irrespective of the wishes of the party more directly affected? In a word, has an American the right in any country, and would that right be recognized by the U. S. government, to vacate his rights which belong to him as an American citizen by treaty, thus excusing the government in his case from insisting that treaties shall be observed? That is, can an American in China in some respects be an American citizen and in other respects not, so far as the claiming of his rights as a citizen are concerned?

I am preparing an article bearing upon some of these subjects for the general instruction of mission boards represented in the Committee of Reference and Counsel, and I would very much appreciate a ruling if you could give me one upon the question involved in this communication for use with these boards and with the missionaries concerned. I have [etc.] JAMES L. BARTON

designed for the protection of all classes of American citizens in that country. It is hoped, therefore, that, in the article which you are preparing for the general instruction of mission boards, you may be in a position to make clear the attitude? of the Department with respect to this subject. For the Secretary of State: J. V. A. MACMURRAY, Chief, Division of Far Eastern Affairs

missionary work in China and also in substance in the article to which I referred. I want to thank you for the clear answer to a question which has a very important bearing, I believe, on mission work in China, and I think it is unanswerable. With much appreciation [etc.] JAMES L. BARTON

Protest by the United States against pardon and restoration to command of the Chinese general held responsible for the murder of an American missionary31 31 For documents relating to the murder of Rev. William A. Reimert by troops under command of Gen. Chang Ching-yao, see Foreign Relations, [565] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

[568] The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State

393.1123 Reimert, William A.: Telegram [Document 565] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

393.1123 Reimert, William A.: Telegram [Document 566] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)

393.1123 Reimert, William A.: Telegram [Document 567] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State

I replied that the fact remained that the Chinese Government had promised that the charge against Chang in condition [connection] Reimert murder would be included with the other charges for investigation, and the present mandate absolved Chang from trial. Referring to the alleged political character of the pardon, I inquired whether the Chinese Government intended that Chang should still be tried in connection with Reimert charge. Dr. Koo replied that my note had been referred to Ministry of War and he wished to defer expressing himself definitely until he had received a reply. I consented to refrain from publicity or other measure until I heard further from him. SCHURMAN

393.1123 Reimert, William A.: Telegram [Document 568] The Chargé in China (Bell) to the Secretary of State

393.1123 Reimert, William A. [Document 569] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, November 22, 1924. [Received December 30.] No. 2624

Colombia:

Contents

Boundary dispute with Panama. (See under General.)

Passage of an amnesty bill by the Cuban Congress [570] The Ambassador in Cuba (Crowder) to the Secretary of State

The Cuban House of Representatives on April 22, 1924, rejected the Senate amendments to the original Amnesty Bill of 1921, and appointed a committee of five of its members to confer with a similar committee of the Senate and to report on the Bill, Upon being reported by this joint committee, the Senate passed it on May 26, 1924, and at midnight it was, with unseemly haste, passed by the House. The votes were 13 to 4 in the Senate, and 62 to 18 in the House. As I deemed it of importance that the President, before acting upon this bill, should have before him the views of this Embassy, I wrote a further letter to President Zayas under date of May 30, 1924, in which I reviewed the original bill as revised by the Congress in order that the comments of the Embassy might be responsive to the bill awaiting the President’s action. A copy of this letter is transmitted herewith for the information of the Department.3 The President has not as yet signed the bill but according to newspaper forecasts he is likely to do so.4 Even though he should vetoit, the significant majority with which it passed both Houses would probably ensure its being passed over his veto. I have [etc.] E. H. CROWDER

influence of the personages was measured by the number of these favors which lie was able to distribute.” All cases of the character described in this quotation are covered by the amnesty and, in addition, those that are pointed out in the clipping from the Havana Post of June 6th hereto attached marked Enclosure “B”.5 I have [etc.] E. H. CROWDER [Enclosure—Translation6 ] President Zayas to the American Ambassador (Crowder) HABANA, June 2, 1924. MY DEAR MR. AMBASSADOR: I take pleasure in acknowledging the receipt of your kind communication of May 30th last, relative to the Project of Amnesty Law, now pending my sanction. In truth, I remember that when steps were being taken to obtain a Foreign Loan to take up the Floating Debt of the Cuban State, the Honorable Secretary of State of the United States, upon notifying our Chargé d’Affaires of the assent of his Government to said transaction, in accordance with the provisions of the Permanent Treaty, indicated that that Government was confident that the Secretaries of the Cabinet would not be removed, nor the Amnesty Law, which was already projected, approved. Naturally, I accept these friendly recommendations thankful to their good purposes, and I complied with them, although considering them as inspired by the circumstances of the moment in which they were made, and not as permanently maintained. I also remember the communications from Your Excellency of June 16th,

to extend amnesty as to most of the grave crimes, which are likely to be disclosed by the Superior Liquidating Commission.” (This objection is now out of place, because the Law pending excludes said cases from the Amnesty, in paragraph 3 of Section (a) of Article I.) “I know of no measure that would strike more directly and effectively at the financial credit of Cuba, at a time when every effort is being made to restore public confidence.” (The words underlined refer to a moment which has already passed.) “No amnesty bill will be passed at the present session of Congress.” In the communication of November 10th, Your Excellency said: “It would be very unfortunate if any Amnesty legislation were passed by the Cuban Congress pending the loan negotiations. This is an inopportune time to agitate the question of amnesty.” Your communication of December 9th, more lengthy than the two previous ones, was for the purpose of suggesting your points of view in connection with the amnesty then pending, “in order that they may be the cause of revision by such persons whose services I might request, and whose knowledge in the matter and in the application of the Law might be better than your own.” It is precisely the line of conduct which I have followed, because I consider your friendly advice as proper, and, after obtaining a delay of nearly three years, I have succeeded in reducing in an extraordinary manner the extension of the benefits of the amnesty. It will suffice, to demonstrate this, that on December 9, 1921, when Your Excellency examined Article I of the Project of Law pending, listed up to 29 crimes or faults as included in the amnesty; and in the present Law, after my efforts with the Members of the Mixed Committee of Congress, they have been reduced to 17, and of these cases, there are two which have not given rise to sentences. Article II of the former Project has been left out entirely. Article I of the Law pending, in Section (b), does not seem to me to deserve the commentaries which Your Excellency makes, because it unquestionably presents a wide range to doubt of the justice or equity of a sentence of

condemnation, the fact that three Magistrates, out of seven which formed the Court, may have given a vote of absolution. As to the inclusion in the amnesty of such cases in which the offender alleged the complete circumstances of legitimate defence, but it is declared that the manner in which the facts were initiated or occurred, was not known or not proved, that is to say, the circumstances result incomplete, I must remind you that in Article 59 of the Electoral Code so much consideration was given to this circumstance, that, when they concur in the crimes of homicide, greater and lesser injuries, these are exempted from constituting penal antecedents, for the effects of said Code. Within the opinion which peoples of saxon origin have of oath, and the respect which they have for it, Your Excellency is right in criticising Section (a) of Article II of the Law pending. I wish oath deserved the same respect among us, but unfortunately this is not so, in general, and it is for this reason that Congress includes such crime in the Amnesty, together with that of duel, to which importance is not given also, and to simple infractions and disciplinary corrections. It is precisely because I am convinced of the little efficacy of oath, that I have been trying to induce Congressmen that when Article 102 of the Electoral Code is modified, they may demand some proof in writing to effect any inscription of electors. Section (b) of Article II concedes amnesty to public officials and employees. It is the second time, during the existence of the Republic that this has been done. The first time I was the promotor in the Senate, in the year 19)2 [sic], of an amnesty which included all American citizens and their co-offenders who had committed crimes during the Intervention, and the principal object pursued was to grant amnesty to the high officials of the Post-Office Department, General Rathbone, Mr. Neely and Mr. Reeve. I wish to state that the Project of Law which I saw before approving the present, conceded the benefits of amnesty to the public officials and employees without limiting it to the crimes or misdemeanors committed in the exercise of their duties, or because of them; and, at my suggestion, that limitation was introduced, for the Constitution does not permit pardon in such circumstances.

Section (c) of said Article II has for its actual object the amnesty for members of the same Congress which has voted it, and from the point of view of principles, Dr. Dolz was right in attacking this extreme of the Law: but the same Senator, in a letter, which I have before me, directed to Mr. Wifredo Fernandez, says: “I have combatted that law with my word and my vote: But, once it is approved by Congress, it represents the will of the latter, which I revere, and which in my judgment, should also weigh in the consideration of the President of the Republic.” The two paragraphs of Article III seem to Your Excellency tobe drawn up to cover certain cases of individuals, and not a general situation. It is probable that that is so, but they are without importance, for it is not an attempt to pardon crimes, but to annul penal antecedents only for political crimes, committed previous to the year 1915; for the crime of infidelity in the custody of prisoners, of the same epoch, and for those crimes whose penalty was accomplished, or pardoned (it does not include those who have not fulfilled the penalty involved), if in the sentence there were absolutory votes, which implies doubts as to the culpability. I think that Your Excellency wrongly interprets the provision of Article VI of the pending Law, in thinking that it may infringe on the Constitution, in Article XIII. To reject such an idea, it is sufficient to consider that it does not annul nor alter any civil liability originating from the criminal actions for which amnesty is granted. Rather, the former Laws of Amnesty, in obliging the parties interested to discuss before the Courts of civil jurisdiction that liability, injured them, for they had to resort to proceedings that were costly, complicated and delayed. By the prevailing Law of Civil Procedure, in every criminal case, the Fiscal exercises, in addition to penal action, the civil action, for the restoration of the things, reparation of damages, and indemnification for injuries, and on issuing the sentence, the Court should decide all questions referring to the civil liability. The new Law leaves in the charge of the Criminal Court, the obligation which it had to fix the amount of the indemnification, which has always been fixed by analogy with former cases, but in treating of injuries, as these require proofs, and admit of discussion, the Law follows the rule established in Article 116 of the Law of Civil Procedure, even though there

had been no sentence, for, if it had been issued and were final, they would comply with that point. It is true that the electoral crimes, because of the importance of the penalty imposed, are included in the Amnesty but there will be very few cases pending. As for the extinction of penal antecedents, for the effects of the Electoral Code, paragraph four of Article 59 of said Code prevents the consideration of this amnesty, which in no way influences in the application of the Electoral Code. I do not believe that the American citizens can feel aggrieved at a, Law of Amnesty which is constitutionally issued by Congress, and which obligates them in accordance with Article X of the Constitution; but, of course, the diplomatic way is a perfectly legal channel through which to treat of any concrete case. I have detained, for three years, the definite passing of the Law of Amnesty, and I have succeeded in so reducing the cases which it includes, that, according to calculations made, there will not be more than thirty individuals who will come out of the Prison. I must not systematically and for a longer time oppose the manifest and persistent will of the Legislative Power, which, I am sure, would reject the veto, for I have in my possession a communication supporting and requesting the passing of the Law, signed by 18 Senators and 80 Representatives. With the same purpose, of supporting and soliciting said approbation, I was visited by a goodly number of journalists, who represented the majority of the newspapers of this city. Very truly yours, ALFREDO ZAYAS 5 Not printed. 6 Spanish text not in Department files.

Czechoslovakia: Contents Exchange of notes between the United States and Czechoslovakia prolonging the customs agreement of

Exchange of notes between the United States and Czechoslovakia prolonging the customs agreement of October 29, 19231 1 For correspondence concerning the agreement of 1923, see Foreign Relations 1923, vol. I, pp. 866 ff. [572] The Chargé in Czechoslovakia (Pearson) to the Secretary of State

[Enclosure 1] The American Chargé (Pearson) to the Czechoslovak Minister for Foreign Affairs (Beneš) PRAGUE, December 5, 1924. No. 628 Mr. MINISTER: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s note of this day, by which you were good enough to inform me that your Government desires to prolong the commercial arrangement between Czechoslovakia and the United States concluded on October 29, 1923, and which not having been denounced before that date was to remain effective until December 31, 1924. The Government of the United States being animated by the same intentions is in entire agreement with the proposition of the Czechoslovak Government. Under these circumstances I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that my Government considers the agreement in question prolonged as from the exchange of the present notes until the conclusion of a definitive treaty of commerce, under the reservation, however, that each of the High Contracting Parties be empowered to denounce this agreement on condition that it give thirty days advance notice of such denunciation. Accept [etc.] FREDERICK F. A. PEARSON [Enclosure 2—Translation] The Czechoslovak Minister for Foreign Affairs (Beneš) to the American Chargé (Pearson) PRAGUE, December 5, 1924.

MONSIEUR LE CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of this day, by which you were good enough; to inform me that your Government desires to prolong the commercial arrangement between the United States and Czechoslovakia, concluded on October 29, 1923, and, which not having been denounced before that date was to remain effective until December 31, 1924. The Government of Czechoslovakia being animated by the same intentions is in entire agreement with the proposition of the United States Government. Under these circumstances I have the honor to inform you, Monsieur le Chargé d’Affaires, that my Government considers the agreement in question prolonged as from the exchange of the present notes until the conclusion of a definitive treaty of commerce, under the reservation, however, that each of the High Contracting Parties can denounce this agreement on condition that it gives thirty days advance notice of such denunciation. I avail myself [etc.] DR. EDUARD BENEŠ 2 Not printed.

Dominican Republic:

Contents

The election of Horacio Vasquez to the Presidency and the evacuation of the forces of the United States1 1 For previous correspondence concerning the holding of elections in fulfillment of the plan of evacuation, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 892 ff. [575] The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the Secretary of State

[578] The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the Secretary of State

the voters in the coming elections the number of voters will be comparatively small and the charge will be made by the critics of the United States Government that the coming constitutional government does not represent the majority of the Dominican people and that consequently the ratification of the treaty of evacuation stipulated in the plan will have been obtained by a minority vote. This charge can be easily disproved by reference to the registration figures for the elections which indicate 150,000 voters desiring to vote for candidates pledged to carry out the Plan of Evacuation and by reference to the fact that the opponents of the plan although they have had ample opportunity to do so have never brought forward candidates pledged to combat the carrying out of the Plan of Evacuation. I am [confident?] should this agreement be satisfactorily carried out that the ablest men in the country will be disposed to enter the Cabinet, the Senate and the House making it possible for the majority of the old school politicians who are responsible for the disastrous history of this country to be permanently eliminated from participation in public affairs. With the written commitment which I have obtained from General Vasquez and Señor Velasquez regarding the Policia Nacional Dominicana referred to in my telegram of January 5, 11 a.m., with their like written commitment to maintain the civil service law in all branches of the Executive department and to obtain the adoption of a constitutional amendment providing for life tenure of office during good behavior, I have reason to believe that the Government of the United States can be reasonably confident that a period of peace and progressive government is assured for this Republic. WELLES

were not elected in accordance with the Constitution. Finally in response to a plea that the date of the elections be once more postponed in order that Señor Peynado’s friends might be given an opportunity to obtain additional funds for the campaign, I stated that the date of the elections had been set with the consent of both parties, and that the elections without change positively take place on that day. Every attempt will now be made by certain elements in the coalition to obstruct the electoral procedure and to protest against the result of the elections, should the Alliance Party be the only party to go to the polls. After conversation with all the leaders of the former party, however, I am convinced that the saner element will cooperate with a government headed by General Vasquez, should Señor Peynado persist in his resignation, and that only a few for purely political ends will insist upon obstruction. WELLES

granted the municipal boards above referred to in which to complete the electoral register; and that a similar extension be granted for the purpose of demanding the inclusion or exclusion of voters in those communes after the registers were completed. The adoption of the proposal of the Coalition Party would necessarily have implied complete abandonment of the basic principle upon which the entire electoral procedure under the present law is built up. The promulgation today by the President of a decree embodying the modification adopted by the Commission has rendered it impossible for any elections to be annulled on the ground that the electoral registers were not completed within the legal time limit. WELLES

033.3911/orig.: Telegram [Document 583] The Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) to the Secretary of State

033.3911/orig.: Telegram [Document 584] The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles)

obtain the opportunity of conversing with yourself and the President regarding the future policy of his Government as well as its relations with the Government of the United States. It is in particular the desire of General Vasquez to reach an agreement with the Department of State looking towards the refunding of the foreign debt of the Republic through the flotation of a loan in the United States. The satisfactory carrying out of this operation which of course by reason of the convention 19075 requires the consent of the Government of the United States would make it possible for the Dominican Government to obtain the use of a larger portion of the customs revenues for current expenses and at the same time obtain additional funds to be used in the carrying out of the complete program of public works. This operation in my opinion is essential if the Republic is really to progress. Futhermore it is the desire of General Vasquez to discuss the possibility of negotiating a new commercial treaty with the United States. In this connection I desire to refer to my telegram of March 27, 3 p.m., and to the Department’s reply thereto of April 1, 5 p.m. I appreciate of course that under ordinary circumstances it is not desirable for the Government of the United States to invite the Presidents-elect of Latin American Republics to visit the United States before they assume office. The approaching evacuation of this Republic by the American Forces of [Occupation?] after eight years of Military Government and the installation of a Constitutional Government in the Dominican Republic friendly disposed to American interests create an exceptional case. Even if the Department does not desire to invite General Vasquez to be the guest of the nation during his brief stay in Washington, I trust that in view of these special circumstances the attempt will be made to accord him an official reception and to facilitate the accomplishment of the objective which he is seeking. The situation here is in general entirely satisfactory. My information leads us to believe that the program of evacuation will be carried through speedily and without delay. I consider that it would be highly desirable for me to be in Washington during the time of General Vasquez’s visit there and for this reason I request your permission to return to Washington without delay. I am also exceedingly desirous of laying before you certain considerations of the utmost importance regarding conditions in Central

America. I believe the situation in certain of the Central American countries to be exceedingly precarious and I desire to have the opportunity of suggesting important changes in our policy. In addition for personal reasons it is necessary for me to return to the United States without delay. In view of these considerations I hope that you will authorize me to return to Washington during the week.6 WELLES 4 From Honduras, to which country, on Apr. 8, the Commissioner had been instructed to proceed; see vol. II, p. 300.

Treaty Series No. 729 [Document 593] Convention between the United States of America and the Dominican Republic, Signed at Santo Domingo, June 12, 19249 WHEREAS, in the month of May, 1916, the territory of the Dominican Republic was occupied by the forces of the United States of America, during which occupation there was established, in substitution of the Dominican Government, a Military Government which issued governmental regulations under the name of Executive Orders and Resolutions and Administrative Regulations, and also celebrated several contracts by virtue of said Executive Orders or by virtue of some existing laws of the Republic; WHEREAS, the Dominican Republic has always maintained its right to selfgovernment, the disoccupation of its territory and the integrity of its sovereignty and independence; and the Government of the United States has declared that, on occupying the territory of the Dominican Republic, it never had, nor has at present, the purpose of attacking the sovereignty and independence of the Dominican Nation; and these rights and declarations gave rise to a Plan or Modus Operandi of Evacuation signed on June 30, 1922, by Monseñor A. Nouel, General Horacio Vasquez, Don Federico Velasquez y H., Don Elías Brache, hijo, and Don Francisco J. Peynado, and the Department of State, represented by the Honorable William W. Russell, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States in the Dominican Republic, and the Honorable Sumner Welles, Commissioner of the President of the United States, which met with the approval of the Dominican people, and which approval was confirmed at the elections that took place on March 15, of the present year; WHEREAS, although the Dominican Republic has never delegated authority to any foreign power to legislate for it, still, it understands that the internal interests of the Republic require the validation or ratification of several of the Executive Orders and Resolutions, published in the Official Gazette, as well as the Administrative Regulations and Contracts of the Military Government celebrated by virtue of said Orders or of any Law of the Republic; and, on its part, the United States considers that it is also to its interest that said acts be validated or

ratified; for these reasons one of the stipulations in the above-mentioned Plan of Evacuation provides for the celebration of a Treaty or Convention of Ratification or Validation of said Orders, Resolutions, Regulations and Contracts; THEREFORE, the United States of America and the Dominican Republic, desirous of celebrating the above-mentioned Treaty or Convention, have named for this purpose their Plenipotentiaries as follows: The President of the United States, William W. Russell, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States in Santo Domingo, and, The Provisional President of the Dominican Republic, Don Horacio Vasquez, Don Federico Velasquez y H., and Don Francisco J. Peynado, who, after having exchanged their full powers, and after having found them in due and proper form, have agreed upon the following: I. The Dominican Government hereby recognizes the validity of all the Executive Orders and Resolutions, promulgated by the Military Government and published in the Official Gazette, which may have levied taxes, authorized expenditures, or established rights on behalf of third persons, and the administrative regulations issued, and contracts which may have been entered into, in accordance with those Orders or with any law of the Republic. Those Executive Orders and Resolutions, Administrative Regulations and Contracts are those listed below: EXECUTIVE ORDERS 81 —85 inclusive

Resowutions

FOMENTO AND COMMUNICATIONS Resolution — Official Gazette No. 2790 —Barahona Company. 2821 —Sante Fe Plantation Sugar Co. 2845 —Central Romana. 2849 —Central Romana. 2850 —Santa Fe Plantation Sugar Co. 2861 —Central Boca Chica Co. 2862 —Installation of a telephone line. 2911 —Installation of a telephone line. 2911 —Santa Fe Plantation Sugar Co. 2929 —Ingenio Cristobal Colon. 2967 —Cancellation. 2993 —Cía. Anónima de Explotaciones Industriales. 2993 —San Cristobal Mining Co. 3008 —Bentz Hnos. 3015 —Bentz Hnos. 3036 —Barahona Company. 3037 —Julio V. Abreu. 3076 —Central Romana. 3076 —Barahona Company. 3093 —Luis del Monte. 3093 —Jose Mota Ranché. 3106 —Central Romana. 3106 —Central Romana. 3106 —Castillo Hnos. 3106 —Barahona Company. 3106 —Barahona Company.

3121 —Consuelo Sugar Co. 3126 —Sres. Noboa Hnos. 3129 —Barahona Company. 3129 —Consuelo Sugar Co. 3159 —Barahona Company. 3159 —Central Romana. 3160 —Barahona Company. 3162 —Pardo y Ely Dorsey.

Resolution — Official Gazette No. 3162 —J. Amando Bermudez. 3196 —Lorenzo Gautier Olives. 3203 —Barahona Company. 3235 —Barahona Company. 3242 —Central Romana. 3243 —Manuel Bermudez. 3274 —Cía. Anonima de Inversiones Inmobiliarias. 3243 —Cía. Anónima de Inversiones Inmobiliarias. 3354 —Barahona Company. 3313 —Ingenio Santa Fe de San Pedro de Macoris. 2786 —Central Romana. 2787 —L. E. Alvarez. 3358 —Barahona Company.

AGRICULTURE AND IMMIGRATION Resolution No. 61 — Official Gazette No. 2838 —Declaración de Zonas Agrícolas en la Provincia de Barahona. 64 — Official Gazette Nos. 2853 and 2854 —Declaración de Zonas Agrícolas en la Provincia de Barahona. 66 — Official Gazette No. 3003 —Declaración de Zonas Agrícolas en la Provincia de Barahona. 86 — Official Gazette No. 3089 —Luis Holguer. Todos los permisos de inmigración y ordenes de deportacion expedidos por esta Secretaría. 88 — Official Gazette No. 3133 —Declaración de Zonas Agrícolas en Barahona. 89 — Official Gazette No. 3145 —Declaración de Zonas Agrícolas en la Provincia de Barahona. 91 — Official Gazette No. 3167 —Declaración de Zonas Agrícolas en la Provincia de Santo Domingo. 92 — Official Gazette No. 3180 —Industrial Alcohol Cía. 93 — Official Gazette No. 3180 —Declaración de Zonas Agrícolas en la Provincia de Santo Domingo. 94 — Official Gazette No. 3197 —Declaración de Zonas Agrícolas en la Provincia de Santo Domingo.

95 — Official Gazette No. 3219 —Declaración de Zonas Agrícolas en la Provincia de Monte Cristi. 96 — Official Gazette No. 3242 —Alvaro Fernández. 97 —“ 3243 —Rectificación Limites Mencionados en Resolución No. referente a Baní. 98 — Official Gazette No. 3301 —Cancelando Resolución No. 97. 99 — Official Gazette No. 3332 —Asociación de Regantes.

Water titles issued by the Secretariat of State for Agriculture by virtue of Executive Oder No. 318, to the following: Domingo Rodriguez— Agua del Río San Juan, Azua. Jesús M. Vargas— el Caño de Boña, Neiba, Barahona. Alberto Perdomo— Plaza Cacique. Santiago J. Rodriguez— Macasía, Matas de Farfán. J. Julio Coiscou— Birán, Barahona. Asociación La Altagracia Agua del Río El Manguito, Neiba. Arbaje Hnos— Agua del Río Macasía, Matas de Farfán. A. Santiago— Manuel de Pérez— “ Camana, Neiba. Sociedad de Irrigación Los Tres—Agua del Rio San Juan, San Juan, Azua. Joaquín Gracia—Agua del Río Yaque del Sur, Barahona.

Sociedad de Irrigación Amantes de las Agricultura—Agua del Rio San Juan, San Juan, Azua. Ismael Mateo—Agua del Río de Jacahueque, Matas de Farfán. Inomina Palmer—Agua del Río Jacahueque, Matas de Farfán. Sociedad de Irrigación La Unión—Agua del Rio San Juan, San Juan, Azua. Sociedad de Irrigación La Unión—Agua del Río Macasía, Matas de Farfán. Sociedad de Irrigación La Competencia—Agua del Río María Chiquita, Neiba. Francisco Tomillo—Agua del Río San Juan, San Juan, Azua. Sociedad de Irrigación, El Porvenir— Rio Las Marías, Neiba. El Esfuerzo— Agua del Rio Bani. El Progresso— “ La Voluntad— “ La Legalidad— “ El Adelanto— “ Wenceslao Ramirez—Agua del Río Mijo, San Juan, Azua. Resolution No. 74—Official Gazette No. 3355—Luis L. Bogaert. All letters of naturalization and permits to establish residence granted for the purpose of naturalization, in accordance with Article 11 of the Constitution. All permits issued to establish legal residence in the Republic in accordance with Article 14 of the Civil Code. [INTERIOR AND POLICE] Resolution regarding the sale of the Cruiser Independencia, under date of

yet published.) Resolution—Official Gazette No. 3203, approving the increase in the tariff tax of the municipal aqueduct (Puerto Plata). All the resolutions passed by the Ayuntamientos and approved by the Military Government.

SANITATION AND CHARITY Sanitary Code published in the Official Gazette No. 3181, December 29, 1920.

TREASURY

FOMENTO AND COMMUNICATIONS Spanish-American Postal Convention of Madrid of November 2, 1920.

FOMENTO AND COMMUNICATIONS Departmental Order—Official Gazette No. 2801—Department of Fomento Order No. 1. “ “ —No. 6— Official Gazette No. 2841. 8— “ 2852. 10— “ 2856. 12— “ 2861. 11— “ 2862. 14— “ 2863. 15— “ 2868 B. 16— “ 2923. 19— “ 2933. 21— “ 2960. 22— “ 2988. 23— “ 2998. 24– “ 3026. 25— “ 3035. 27— “ 3124. 28— “ 3159. 29— “ 3192.

AGRICULTURE AND IMMIGRATION

Departmental Order No. 2— Official Gazette No. 2992.

INTERIOR AND POLICE Departmental Order No. 13 granting authorization to the Junta de Caridad “Padre Billirii” in order that it might contract a loan of $15,000. (Not yet published.)

JUSTICE AND PUBLIC INSTRUCTION

TREASURY Contracts entered into between the Military Government and the persons listed below for the rental of urban properties of the Republic: Contract No.

FOMENTO AND COMMUNICATIONS All the contracts existing between the Department of Fomento and Communications and other persons for the rental of buildings for postoffices in force on the date of the installation of the Provisional Government. Marck Engineering & Contracting Co.—Contract dated August 23, 1921, for “Construction Barahona Market”. Chief of Surveyors:—(Land Survey) Four contracts which have been made for the advance of funds as follows: (a) Central Romana, Inc., June 29, 1921. (b) Barahona and allied companies: December 31, 1921. (c) Ingenio Santa Fé—March 3, 1922. (d) Ingenio Santa Fé, May 16, 1920.

INTERIOR AND POLICE Contract between the Military Government and the Commune of Azua for a

Loan of the Military Government to the Commune of Azua of $15,000.00

The Dominican Government further agrees that neither the subsequent abrogation of those Executive Orders, resolutions, administrative regulations, or contracts, or any other law, Executive Order, or other official act of the Dominican Government, shall affect the validity or security of rights acquired in accordance with those orders, those resolutions, those administrative regulations and those contracts of the Military Government; the controversies which may arise related with those rights acquired will be determined solely by the Dominican Courts, subject, however, in accordance with the generally accepted rules and principles of international law, to the right of diplomatic intervention if those Courts should be responsible for eases of notorious injustice or denial of justice. The determination of such cases in which the interests of the United States and the Dominican Republic only are concerned shall, should the two Governments disagree, be by arbitration. In the carrying out of this agreement, in each individual case, the High Contracting Parties, once the necessity of arbitration is determined, shall conclude a special agreement defining clearly the scope of the dispute, the scope of the powers of the arbitrators, and the periods to be fixed for the formation of the arbitral tribunal and the several stages of the procedure. It is understood that on the part of the United States, such special agreements will be made by the President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereto, and on the part of the Dominican Republic shall be subject to the procedure required by the Constitution and laws thereof.

II. The Dominican Government, in accordance with the provisions of Article I, specifically recognizes the bond issue of 1918 and the twenty-year five and one-half percent Customs Administration Sinking Fund Gold Bond Issue authorized in 1922, as legal, binding, and irrevocable obligations of the Republic, and pledges its full faith and credit to the maintenance of the service of those bond issues. With reference to the stipulation contained in Article 10 of the Executive Order No. 735, in accordance with which the loan of five and one-half percent authorized in 1922 was issued, which provides:—

“That the present customs tariff will not be changed during the life of this loan without previous agreement between the Dominican Government and the Government of the United States;” the two Governments concerned agree in interpreting this stipulation in the sense that, in accordance with article 3 of the Convention of 1907, a previous agreement between the Dominican Government and the United States shall be necessary to modify the import duties of the Dominican Republic, it being an indispensable condition for the modification of such duties that the Dominican Executive demonstrate and that the President of the United States recognize that, on the basis of exportations and importations to the like amount and the like character during the two years preceding that in which it is desired to make such modification, the total net customs receipts would at such altered rates of duties have been, for each of such two years, in excess of the sum of $2,000,000 United States gold. III. The Dominican Government and the Government of the United States agree that the Convention signed on February 8, 1907, between the United States and the Dominican Republic, shall remain in force so long as any bonds of the issues of 1918 and 1922 shall remain unpaid, and that the duties of the General Receiver of Dominican Customs appointed in accordance with that Convention shall be extended to include the application of the revenues pledged for the service of those bond issues in accordance with the terms of the Executive Orders and of the contracts under which the bonds were issued. IV. This arrangement shall take effect after its approval by the Senate of the United States and the Congress of the Dominican Republic. DONE in four originals, two in the English language, and two in the Spanish, and the representatives of the High Contracting Powers signing them in the City of Santo Domingo, this twelfth day of June, nineteen hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] WILLIAM W. RUSSELL [SEAL] HORACIO VASQUEZ

[SEAL] FED co VELÁSQUEZ Y H. [SEAL] FRAN c J. PEYNADO 9 In English and Spanish; Spanish text not printed. Ratification advised by

Approval by the United States of the issue of $2,500,000 of two-year notes by the Dominican Republic [596] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell) to the Secretary of State

[605] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell)

Denby’s communication, did not yield as much revenue as had been anticipated when the budget of 1923 was compiled. Before making a definite reply to the letter of the Secretary of the Navy, the Department would be glad to receive such comments as you may desire to make concerning the statements contained therein. CHARLES E. HUGHES 13 This Instruction was misdirected to the Legation and was numbered accordingly; Mr. Welles did not receive it before his reply to the Department’s subsequent instruction, no. 5, March 21, infra. (File no.

[Document 601] The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican Republic (Welles) WASHINGTON, March 21, 1924. No. 5 SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 550, dated February 17 [27], regarding the financial situation in the Dominican Republic, there is transmitted herewith for your information and comment a copy of a letter dated March 8, 1924,15 from the former Secretary of the Navy inviting the Department’s attention to the increasingly critical condition of the Republic’s finances. Mr. Denby also states that “an American financial adviser in the Dominican Government, with authority established by mutual assent of the two countries, somewhat along the lines of the arrangement in Haiti, is imperatively needed.” The Department desires an expression of your opinion by cable, whether you consider the situation so serious as to make it advisable for the Department to authorize you to discuss this matter informally with the Provisional President in order to ascertain his views in the premises, and more especially whether he would make the suggestion to the Commission that the Provisional Government ask the United States to designate a suitable person as Financial Adviser. It is, of course, considered essential by the Department that the initiative in this matter should come from the Dominicans themselves, that any decision on this point should be arrived at by the Provisional Government of its own judgment and that the Commission should be committed to such a decision, so that there would be reasonable assurance that, later on, there would be no serious opposition to such a course either among the political leaders or the people in general. The Department considers it especially important that no unfounded suspicion should arise in the minds of the Dominican people that an attempt is being made to prolong the control of this Government over the Republic

beyond the time of evacuation, other than that provided in the Treaty of 1907.16 The Department’s desire in this matter is merely to render suck assistance as it properly can to the Dominican Government and people in order that they may solve, in a satisfactory manner, their financial and other problems. CHARLES E. HUGHES 15 Not printed.

The figure for total expenditures in 1923 includes the cost of continuing the public works program amounting to $1,200,000. The President determined to meet this cost from ordinary government revenues rather than from the special reserve fund of $800,000 remaining from the loan of 1922 and destined for public works above mentioned, for the reason that the latter fund was drawing 6 percent interest while ordinary government deposits draw but 3 percent. It is likewise to be noted that this total of expenditures includes extraordinary electoral expenses of $200,000. The statement of the Military Governor to the effect that from now on the Dominican Government will incur a monthly deficit of $100,000 [omission?] will be by the month of May when the remainder of the reserve fund of $800,000 for public works, which has been drawn upon since January 1st, will be exhausted. This estimated monthly deficit corresponds to the amount expended monthly on the continuation of the public works program. It is, however, the President’s hope that a speedy settlement of the controversy with the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company will make possible the issuance in the month of April of the authorized $2,000,000 of bonds of the 1922 loan as the result of which the public works expenditures would no longer be a charge upon the general governmental revenues but would naturally be met from the proceeds of this loan. The statement of the Military Governor regarding the inability of the Provisional Government to meet necessary educational expenses is incident [incorrect?]. The Government is expending over $35,000 monthly on the public instruction chapter of the budget. All schools provided for by law are functioning for the first time since the Military Government closed the majority of the schools for lack of funds in 1921. Every possible economy has been effected. The salaries of the Government employees outside of the Policia Nacional [Dominicana] have been reduced by 33 percent and all unnecessary employees have been discharged. The Government has likewise increased revenues by imposing special license taxes on motor vehicles and by increasing the wharfage taxes. It is, however, unable to accomplish more because of the restrictions occasioned by the contracts entered into by the Military Government for the issuance of the 1918 and 1922 loans which permit the Government to receive only 15 percent of all

customs receipts in excess of 3,000,000 and because internal revenue taxes on national products are now as high as the industries can stand. The decision of the Department that the imposition of internal revenue taxes on imported articles constitutes a modification of the tariff infringing the terms of the convention of 1907,17 makes it impossible for the Government to increase its revenues by establishment of a luxury or excise tax. In view of the difficulties which it has encountered, I believe that the financial administration of the Provisional Government has been eminently successful and the actual financial situation of the Government demonstrates that there is no basis for the concern shown by the Military Government. With reference to the opinion of Mr. Denby that an “American financial adviser in the Dominican Republic is imperatively needed,” I am strongly of the belief that the suggestion by the United States Government, even made informally, would tend to destroy the beneficial effects of the Department’s policy here. It was because of President Henríquez’s refusal to accede to our instructions on this point that his resignation and the resignations of the members of Iris Cabinet were forced in 1916, resignations which brought about the establishment of a Military Government.18 I feel certain that the President especially would refuse to assume the office to which he has been elected rather than accept it under such conditions. Furthermore, were it possible to induce the Dominican Government on its own apparent initiative to request the appointment of an American financial adviser, such an appointment would destroy public confidence in the good faith of the Government of the United States since it would undoubtedly be believed that it had not been sincere in stating to the Dominican people when the Plan of Evacuation was adopted that it desired no control over this Republic other than that provided in the convention of 1907. In conclusion it is my belief that such an appointment is neither necessary nor desirable. WELLES

Before closing the negotiations I should like to know whether the President of the United States would give his consent to this loan in accordance with the provision in the Convention of 1907, and would agree to let the bonds

appointed by the President of the United States in the same manner as was appointed the present Receiver General of the Dominican Customs;

agreement of the United States Government to the issues specified above, as required in Article III of the Convention of 1907 between the Government of the United States and the Government of the Dominican Republic.

The Government of the United States will interpose no objection should the Government of the Dominican Republic desire to extend the following assurances in connection with the five and one-half per cent bonds of 1922 to the amount of $3,300,000, which are to be pledged as collateral for the two year notes: 1. That the Receiver General of Customs of the Dominican Republic, appointed under the Convention of 1907, shall during the life of that Convention make from the customs revenues accruing to the Dominican Government such payments as may be necessary for the service of the bonds pledged as collateral to secure the short term notes now to be issued. 2. That, if the Convention of 1907 should expire before the bonds of 1922 are paid in full, the customs revenues shall continue to be collected and applied by an official appointed by the President of the United States in the same form as the present Receiver General of Customs of the Dominican Republic, so long as any of the bonds authorized in 1922 remain outstanding. 3. That, after the expiration of the Convention of 1907, the bonds authorized in 1922 to the amount of $10,000,000, or any portion of these bonds which remain unpaid, shall enjoy a first lien on the customs revenues subject to the necessary expenses of collection until these bonds have been paid in full. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

accruing to the Dominican, Government, and has further consented to the giving of assurances by the Dominican Republic “1. That after the expiration of said Convention of 1907, the Customs revenues pledged for the service of this Loan shall be collected and applied by an official appointed by the President of the United States in the same manner as the present General Receiver of Customs; “2. That after the expiration of said Convention of 1907, this Loan now authorized, together with and equally with the bonds of the same issue of 1922, amounting to $6,700,000 previously issued, shall have a first lien upon such Customs revenues, after the payment of the necessary expenses of collection, until all the bonds thereof are paid in full.” Furthermore, this Department perceived no objection to the printing of a statement on each of the two-year notes to the effect that the notes are “issued with the consent of the Government of the United States of America, as required by Article III of the treaty between the United States and the Dominican Republic.” It will be understood by you, however, that while the fact of this consent may appropriately appear, this letter is not to be published in any circular or statement to be issued in connection with these securities. With reference to your letter of September 10, 1924,28 to Mr. Munro, I may add that this Department, in a note to the Dominican Minister, has expressed its consent that these bonds should be in form similar to the $6,700,000 of this issue now outstanding with such appropriate changes as are made necessary by the difference in the amount of the bonds and the establishment of a Constitutional Government in the Dominican Republic, and has stated that the note may be regarded as conveying the consent of the United States Government to these issues of bonds and notes as required

by Article III of the Convention of 1907 between the Government of the United States and the Government of the Dominican Republic.

This Department also stated that the Government of the United States will interpose no objection to the giving of assurances by the Dominican Government similar to those contained in the proposed draft of the bonds. CHARLES E. HUGHES 27 Legal counsel for Lee, Higginson & Co.; Mr. Clapp’s letter not printed. 28 Not printed.

Lee, Higginson & Company shall hold said pledged bonds as Trustees for the noteholders under an Indenture containing appropriate provisions for that purpose. During the term of said notes Lee, Higginson & Company shall retain from the monthly deposits to be made with them by the Dominican Republic for the payment of interest on the pledged bonds in accordance with the provisions thereof, the following sums: From the first of such deposits

4. They are to bear interest at the rate of five and one-half (5½) per cent, per annum and are to be paid principal and interest in gold coin of the United States of the present standard of weight and fineness at the offices of Lee, Higginson & Company in Boston, New York and Chicago, at the option of the holders. They shall be exempt from any taxes or impositions now or hereafter to be established or levied by or within the Dominican Republic against the notes or the income arising therefrom or the holders thereof. 5. Interest is to be payable semi-annually on the first days of March and September.

6. The notes, bonds and legal instruments connected therewith are to be in form appropriate to carry out the above provisions, and they and the governmental authority therefor are to be satisfactory to counsel of Lee, Higginson & Company. The Dominican Republic agrees to make provision for the payment of these notes, principal and interest, in accordance with their terms, and to have on deposit with Lee, Higginson & Company funds sufficient for the payment of each instalment of interest and of the principal amount at least eleven days before such payment is due. 7. A temporary note or notes and a temporary bond in form satisfactory to counsel for Lee, Higginson & Company, without coupons may be issued in anticipation of the definitive notes and bonds and to be exchanged therefor. 8. Lee, Higginson & Company may associate with themselves in the disposal of these notes, such banks, banking firms, and other agencies as they may in their discretion deem desirable. They may issue their own interim receipts to purchasers of the notes. 9. All expenses in connection with the printing, engraving, and executing of said notes and of said pledged bonds, and all expenses including legal expenses incidental to their preparation shall be paid forthwith as they accrue by the Dominican Republic, but Lee, Higginson & Company and their associates shall bear all expenses in connection with the advertising and sale of said notes.

10. Lee, Higginson & Company are hereby appointed by the Dominican Republic Fiscal Agents for the service of the Loan, and accept said appointment. 11. The Dominican Republic states that its formal intention is to use the proceeds of these notes in connection with its public highways and public works. 12. The proceeds from the sale of these notes by Lee, Higginson & Company, as set forth in paragraph 1. of this contract, shall be credited on the books of Lee, Higginson & Company to the account of the Dominican Republic as of the dates of the sales thereof, less the compensation to be allowed said firm as hereinafter set forth; and until the proceeds of the sale are withdrawn by the Dominican Republic, interest is to be allowed at the same rate as similar balances on deposit with them are receiving at the time. 13. Lee, Higginson & Company shall hold all such deposits at the disposal of the Dominican Republic and subject to its draft or cheque. 14. Lee, Higginson & Company agree that if they have not effected the sale of said notes within ten (10) days after the temporary note duly executed has been delivered to them and the temporary bond and Indenture of Trust duly executed have been delivered to them as trustees, that they will at once purchase all of said notes then remaining unsold at par and accrued interest. 15. Lee, Higginson & Company shall receive as compensation for their services in arranging this Loan and selling said notes a commission of 1½% on the entire issue of $2,500,000. 16. Lee, Higginson & Company shall receive for the authentication and countersignature of receipts and definitive notes and the pledged bonds the sum of twenty-five cents each. 17. Lee, Higginson & Company shall receive one-fourth of one per cent, of the amounts paid out for interest on these notes and one-twentieth of one per cent, on principal. They shall be reimbursed for all expenses incurred in connection with the call and redemption of said notes.

18. All coupons and notes paid shall be cancelled by Lee, Higginson & Company by perforation and then delivered to the Auditor of the Dominican Republic for further cancellation. 19. Lee, Higginson & Company shall allow the Dominican Republic interest on deposits held for the payment of interest and for redemption requirements at a rate of two per cent, less than the rediscount rate of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with a minimum of two per cent, and a maximum of four and one-half per cent, while such sums are on deposit with Lee, Higginson & Company. 20. In acting under this agreement, Lee, Higginson & Company may, subject to the provisions of these notes, not [act] in accordance with the written order of the Secretario de Estado de Hacienda y Comercio of the Dominican Republic, and the drafts, cheques or orders of the said Secretario de Estado de Hacienda y Comercio shall be full protection to them for action in accordance therewith. 21. All accounts connected with the service of the Loan shall be kept by Lee, Higginson & Company, either in their office in the City of Boston or in their office in the City of New York, and a statement of such accounts shall be rendered by them to the Auditor of the Dominican Republic within a reasonable time after the maturity of the issue. Unless objection to this statement of account shall be made by said Auditor to them within ninety days, particularly specifying the ground or grounds of such objection or objections, said statement of account shall be deemed to be correct and conclusive between the parties. The Dominican Republic shall have the right at any time to examine and audit the books and accounts of Lee, Higginson & Company in connection with their note as such Fiscal Agents and Trustees. 22. In case any of the notes of this issue shall at any time become mutilated, lost, or destroyed, the Dominican Republic may issue new notes of like amount, tenor and date, and bearing the same serial numbers, and Lee, Higginson & Company, at the request of the Department of Finance and Commerce of the Dominican Republic shall authenticate the same for delivery in exchange for, and upon cancellation of the notes so mutilated, or in lieu of the note so lost or destroyed, but, in case of lost or destroyed

notes, only upon receipt by the Dominican Republic and Lee, Higginson & Company of evidence satisfactory to them that such notes were lost or destroyed and upon receipt also of indemnity satisfactory to them in their discretion. 23. All notices, demands or requests from Lee, Higginson & Company to the Dominican Republic in connection with this agreement or the notes shall be sufficiently given if mailed in a securely enclosed postpaid envelope addressed to the Secretario de Estado de Hacienda y Comercio of the Dominican Republic, Santo Domingo City, Dominican Republic, or if given by cable so addressed. All notices, demands or requests from the Dominican Republic to Lee, Higginson & Company may similarly be given addressed to them at 43 Exchange Place, New York, N. Y. 24. This employment of Lee, Higginson & Company as Fiscal Agents is irrevocable, except for good and sufficient cause, but they may resign at any time as such Agents by giving notice of such resignation to the Dominican Republic in the manner provided above, and by publishing such notice at least twice a week for six successive weeks in two daily newspapers published and of general circulation in the City of New York. Such resignation shall take effect upon the expiration of such publication. The appointment of a successor to the Fiscal Agents shall be by mutual agreement between the Dominican Republic and the Fiscal Agents who may be retiring. 25. The provisions of this agreement shall be applicable to said firm of Lee, Higginson & Company as the same now is or may be hereafter constituted. It is agreed between the parties that upon the death or withdrawal of any partner or partners of Lee, Higginson & Company, the remaining partners, with such persons, if any, who have or may become partners of said firm, shall have all the rights and duties and be subject to the obligations conferred or imposed upon said firm by these presents. 26. This agreement for the sale of said notes is conditional upon receipt by Lee, Higginson & Company of assurance satisfactory to their counsel as to the procedure in the issue and execution of said notes and said bonds as security therefor, and upon delivery to said firm of the temporary note or notes herein mentioned, duly executed, and upon delivery of the temporary

bond or bonds and Indenture of Trust to Lee, Higginson & Company as Trustees, duly executed on or before September 26th, 1924.

27. It is intended that this note issue be refunded by bonds authorized by a new Convention now under discussion. 28. The provisions of the contract between Lee, Higginson & Company and the Dominican Republic of April 4, 1922, shall apply to the pledged bonds so far as applicable under the changed circumstances of their issue and under the changed conditions of the Dominican Government. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Dominican Republic has caused this Contract to be signed and the seal of its Legation in the United States of America to be affixed by José del Carmen, Ariza, its Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary, and said Lee, Higginson & Company by Jerome D. Greene, a partner, have hereunto affixed their firm name and seal this Twentyfifth day of September, 1924. DOMINICAN REPUBLIC By J. C. ARIZA E. E. and Minister Plenipotentiary LEE, HIGGINSON & Co., By JEROME D. GREENE 29 Jerome D. Greene, a partner in the firm of Lee, Higginson & Co. 30 Not printed.

Convention between the United States and the Dominican Republic, signed on December 27, 1924, to replace the convention of February 8, 190731

Treaty Series No. 726 [Document 614] Convention between the United States of America and the Dominican Republic, Signed at Washington, December 27, 192432 WHEREAS a convention between the United States of America and the Dominican Republic providing for the assistance of the United States in the collection and application of the customs revenues of the Dominican Republic, was concluded and signed by their respective Plenipotentiaries at the City of Santo Domingo, on the eighth day of February, one thousand nine hundred and seven, and WHEREAS that convention was entered into to enable the Dominican Government to carry out a plan of settlement for the adjustment of debts and claims against the Government; and WHEREAS, in accordance with that plan of settlement, the Dominican Republic issued in

$25,000,000, in order to provide for the refunding on terms more advantageous to the Republic of its obligations represented by the bonds of the three issues above mentioned still outstanding and for a balance remaining after such operation is concluded to be devoted to permanent public improvements and to other projects designed to further the economic and industrial development of the country; and WHEREAS the whole of this plan is conditioned and dependent upon the assistance of the United States in the collection of customs revenues of the Dominican Republic and the application thereof so far as necessary to the interest upon and the amortization and redemption of said bonds, and the Dominican Republic has requested the United States to give and the United States is willing to give such assistance: The United States of America, represented by Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America; and the Dominican Republic, represented by Señor José del Carmen Ariza, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Dominican Republic in Washington, have agreed: ARTICLE I That the President of the United States shall appoint, a General Receiver of Dominican Customs, who, with such Assistant Receivers and other employees of the Receivership as shall be appointed by the President of the United States in his discretion, shall collect all the customs duties accruing at the several customs houses of the Dominican Republic until the payment or retirement of any and all bonds issued by the Dominican Government in accordance with the plan and under the limitations as to terms and amounts hereinbefore recited; and said General Receiver shall apply the sums so collected, as follows: First, to paying the expenses of the receivership; second, to the payment of interest upon all bonds outstanding; third, to the payment of the annual sums provided for amortization of said bonds including interest upon all bonds held in sinking fund; fourth, to the purchase and cancellation or the retirement and cancellation pursuant to the terms thereof of any of said bonds as may be directed by the Dominican Government; fifth, the remainder to be paid to the Dominican Government. The method of distributing the current collections of revenue in order to accomplish the application thereof as hereinbefore provided shall be as follows: The expenses of the receivership shall be paid by the Receiver as they arise. The allowances to the General Receiver and his assistants for the

expenses of collecting the revenues shall not exceed five per cent unless by agreement between the two Governments. On the first day of each calendar month shall be paid over by the Receiver to the Fiscal Agent of the loan a sum equal to one twelfth of the annual interest of all the bonds issued and of the annual sums provided for amortization of said bonds and the remaining collection of the last preceding month shall be paid over to the Dominican Government, or applied to the sinking fund for the purchase or redemption of bonds or for other purposes as the Dominican Government shall direct. Provided, that in case the customs revenues collected by the General Receiver shall in any year exceed the sum of $4,000,000, 10 per cent of the surplus above such sum of $4,000,000 shall be applied to the sinking fund for the redemption of bonds. ARTICLE II The Dominican Government will provide by law for the payment of all customs duties to the General Receiver and his assistants, and will give to them all needful aid and assistance and full protection to the extent of its powers. The Government of the United States will give to the General Receiver and his assistants such protection as it may find to be requisite for the performance of their duties.

ARTICLE III Until the Dominican Republic has paid the whole amount of the bonds of the debt, its public debt shall not be increased except by previous agreement between the Dominican Government and the United States. ARTICLE IV The Dominican Government agrees that the import duties will at no time be modified to such an extent that, on the basis of exportation and importations to the like amount and the like character during the two years preceding that

in which it is desired to make such modification, the total net customs receipts would not at such altered rates have amounted for each of such two years to at least 1–½ times the amount necessary to provide for the interest and sinking fund charges upon its public debt. ARTICLE V The accounts of the General Receiver shall be rendered monthly to the Ministry of Finance and Commerce of the Dominican Republic and to the State Department of the United States and shall be subject to examination and verification by the appropriate officers of the Dominican and the United States Governments. ARTICLE VI The determination of any controversy which may arise between the Contracting Parties in the carrying out of the provisions of this Convention shall, should the two Governments be unable to come to an agreement through diplomatic channels, be by arbitration. In the carrying out of this agreement in each individual case, the Contracting Parties, once the necessity of arbitration is determined, shall conclude a special agreement defining clearly the scope of the dispute, the scope of the powers of the arbitrators, and the periods to be fixed for the formation of the arbitral tribunal and the several stages of the procedure. The special agreement providing for arbitration shall, in all cases, be signed within a period of three months from the date upon which either one of the Contracting Parties shall notify the other Contracting Party of its desire to resort to arbitration. It is understood that on the part of the United States, such special agreements will be made by the President of the United States by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereto, and on the part of the Dominican Republic, shall be subject to the procedure required by the Constitution and laws thereof.

ARTICLE VII

This agreement shall take effect after its approval by the Contracting Parties in accordance with their respective Constitutional methods. Upon the exchange of ratifications of this convention, which shall take place at Washington as soon as possible, the Convention between the United States of America and the Dominican Republic providing for the assistance of the United States in the collection and application of the customs revenues, concluded and signed at the City of Santo Domingo on the 8th day of February, 1907, shall be deemed to be abrogated. Done in duplicate in the English and Spanish languages at the City of Washington this 27th day of December, nineteen hundred and twenty-four. CHARLES EVANS HUGHES [SEAL] J. C. ARIZA [SEAL] 32 In English and Spanish; Spanish text not printed. Ratification advised by

Exchange of notes between the United States and the Dominican Republic according mutual unconditional mostfavored-nation treatment in customs matters [615] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge Washington, June 20, 1924.

Slovakia,35 and which are now being negotiated with Nicaragua36 and with Poland. The effect of this exchange of notes would constitute an agreement between the two Governments pending the arrival of a convenient time for the conclusion of a comprehensive commercial treaty, by which each country will maintain for the commerce of the other a basis of equality with the commerce of every foreign country, an exception will of course be made in the case of the United States to allow for the preferential rates granted by the United States to Cuba. Should this suggestion meet with your approval, I will endeavor to reach an agreement in principle in this matter with the President elect of the Dominican Republic in order that the suggested notes may be exchanged as soon as possible after his inauguration as Constitutional President of the Republic. Faithfully yours, CHARLES E. HUGHES

the other, than are payable on the exportation of like articles to any foreign country; Every concession with respect to any duty or charge affecting commerce now accorded or that may hereafter be accorded by the United States or by the Dominican Republic, by law, proclamation, decree or commercial treaty or agreement, to the products of any third country will become immediately applicable without request and without compensation to the commerce of the Dominican Republic and of the United States, its territories and possessions, respectively: Provided that this understanding does not relate to (1) The treatment which the United States accords or may hereafter accord to the commerce of Cuba or any of the territories or possessions of the United States or the Panama Canal Zone, or to the treatment which is or may hereafter be accorded to the commerce of the United States with any of its territories or possessions or to the commerce of its territories or possessions with one another; (2) Prohibitions or restrictions of a sanitary character or designed to protect human, animal or plant life or regulations for the enforcement of police or revenue laws. The present arrangement shall become operative on the day of signature and, unless sooner terminated by mutual agreement, shall continue in force until thirty days after notice of its termination shall have been given by either party; but should either party be prevented by future action of its legislature from carrying out the terms of this arrangement, the obligations thereof shall thereupon lapse.

I shall be glad to have your confirmation of the accord thus reached. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

In the same sense there shall not be imposed in the United States, its territories or possessions, nor in the Dominican Republic on articles exported from one country to the other or to any territory or possession of the other, export duties higher or other than those that are or may be assessed when the said articles are exported to any other foreign country whatsoever.

Any concession granted or that may be hereafter granted by the United States, or by the Dominican Republic by means of a law, decree, resolution, or agreement on the products of any other country with respect to the duties or dues that affect commerce, will as of right extend without request or compensation of any kind to the commerce of the Dominican Republic and that of the United States, its territories and possessions respectively. Provided, however, that this understanding does not refer: 1. To the treatment that the United States now accords or may hereafter accord to the commerce of Cuba or any of the territories or possessions of the United States or the Panama Canal Zone or to the treatment that is granted or may be granted to the commerce between the United States and any of its territories or possessions or to the commerce of its territories and possessions with one another. 2. To the prohibitions or restrictions of a sanitary character or for the protection of human beings, animals or plants, or the regulations for the enforcement of the revenue or police laws. It is understood that this agreement will go into effect immediately upon the date of its signature and unless terminated before, by common accord, will continue in force until thirty days shall have elapsed after the notice given by one party to the other of its intention to terminate the agreement; but in case either one of the two parties should be unable to fulfill the terms of this agreement by reason of future action of its legislature the obligations which it imposes will be without effect.

I have the honor to inform your Excellency that I have received instructions from my Government to confirm this agreement and to send to Your Excellency this note in reply to yours. I avail myself [etc.] J. C. ARIZA

Purchase of the properties of the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company by the Dominican Government37 37 For previous correspondence concerning the properties of the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Co., see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 918 ff. [618] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic (Russell)

[631] The Secretary of State to the Dominican Minister (Ariza) Washington, October 1, 1924.

The President, as the Department has been informed, I understand, by the American Minister, is most favorably disposed to the most speedy settlement possible of this controversy but he, of course, cannot, in view of the financial situation of the Government, accept a settlement on a basis never foreseen by either party and a settlement to which his Government is in no wise obligated. If the company desires the matter adjusted, it should send Hunt to Santa Domingo immediately to negotiate directly with the Government.

to the agreement. The Government is doubtless surprised that an impartial expert should find the property as valuable as it is but this does not appear to furnish grounds not to carry out its obligations under the contract. However, in view of the apparent feeling of the Government that the estimate for repairs is too high, the Department stated in its telegram to the Legation of February 6, 1 p.m., that it would be disposed to recommend to the Company to accept $450,000. gold or its equivalent in Dominican bonds at 90 per cent of their par value in full payment of properties described in contract which shall thereupon be transferred to the order of the Dominican Government in their present condition. This was practically the same settlement that the Department had suggested in its telegram No. 7 to the

offer is made without prejudice to the rights of my principals under the record of this case as filed in the State Department.” In view of all the circumstances of this case, the difficulties experienced by the Company in coming to an agreement with the municipalities and with the Government, the fact that Mr. Hunt has already made three trips to Santo Domingo and has negotiated a contract for the settlement of the matter, the Department is not disposed to ask Mr. Hunt to go again to Santo Domingo to try to make another contract. In view of the attitude which the Government has apparently taken on the contract of June 15, 1923, there would appear to be no assurance that a new contract, if made, would be carried out. The Department feels that the two alternative propositions made by the Company offer the basis for a fair and equitable settlement and when it is advised that one of these propositions is accepted it will then be in a position to inform the Legation regarding the proposed bond issue. The Department hopes that you will use your influence to have one of these propositions accepted by the Dominican Government. HUGHES

company’s properties on the ground that the company had violated the terms of its concession. In order to avoid the serious problems which the continuance of this suit might entail and in order to obtain a settlement of the dispute which would prove satisfactory to the American interests involved, I had, upon my return to Santo Domingo in April, 1923, several interviews with the Provisional President and stated to him that while I realized the dispute was one with which the National Government was not directly concerned, nevertheless, the continuance of it would prove detrimental to Dominican credit in the United States and would tend to promote ill feeling on the part of the Dominican people against American interests at a time when it was our common object to remove all causes of friction. The President took that point of view of the situation and adopted my suggestion that the National Government agree to lend the municipalities sufficient money to purchase the properties of the company, the National Government assuring itself that the interest and sinking fund charges on its loan to the municipalities would be paid by taking over the collection of a portion of the municipal revenues of the two cities concerned. It was upon this basis—a basis which the Military Government had refused to consider—that Mr. Hunt, representative of the American interests, negotiated the contract of June 15, 1923, mentioned in the Department’s telegram under reference.

This contract provides that the Government will pay the company in Dominican Government bonds the equivalent of whatever price might be fixed as the value of properties specified by an expert selected by common accord. Article 4 of said contract reads as follows: “The expert will make a detailed study of the properties and of every part of them, determining their actual condition and price and specifying the cost which the repairs and improvements to assure good and regular operation may require in toto as well as in detail, it being understood that the costs of such repairs and improvements shall not exceed $60,000 American money.”

The amount of $60,000 was set because Mr. Hunt stated to me several times and stated in my presence to the Minister of the Interior, that the properties were in such good condition that the necessary repairs could be accomplished for less than that sum. His statements were confirmed by the fact that an American engineer under the Military Government the preceding year had estimated the cost of repairs at $45,000. To be certain, however, that an appraisal of repairs by the expert a few thousand dollars in excess of the limit set in the contract would not endanger the execution of the contract, Mr. Hunt, in accordance with the Government’s request, stated in a letter to the Minister of the Interior, that should the cost of repairs be fixed at a sum somewhat in excess of $60,000, he would recommend to his principals that the necessary sum be advanced by them. The expert set the value of the properties in their present condition at $533,012 and fixed the cost of necessary repairs at $323,424. The value of the properties is $133,012 in excess of the price at which the company was willing to sell to the municipalities. 2. After some delay the Government, however, would be willing to buy at this price since this is the price set by the expert in accordance with the contract were it possible to place the municipalities [properties] in good condition for a sum within or near the limit set in the same contract. It is not, however, willing to buy the plant at the price fixed by the expert when the cost of repairs fixed by the same expert is $263,424 above the limit set in the contract. In view of these facts the final sentence of the first paragraph of the Department’s telegram referred to appears to me misleading since the Government is entirely willing to carry out its obligations to purchase the plant at the sum fixed by the expert but is not willing to spend over six times the amount for repairs when [which] it expressed its willingness to pay in the contract, which amount as fixed in the contract it was informed by the representative of the company would be ample to pay for all necessary repairs. It is, therefore, my feeling that an attempt on our part to force the Dominican Government to accept either one of the propositions contained in the Department’s cable referred to would constitute material injustice; as

regards the first proposition for the reasons above expressed; as regards the second because it would constitute an effort on the part of our Government to force the Dominican Government to purchase properties at a price $50,000 higher than that at which the company was willing to sell two years ago when the properties have depreciated during those two years and when the Government would have to spend $300,000 on repairs before the properties could be profitably operated. The question of policy is, however, the following: When the Provisional Government took over from the Military Government it was with the understanding that the public works program of roads construction inaugurated in 1922 would be carried on. The funds for carrying out of this program were obtained by the 1922 loan of $10,000,000 authorized by the Department of which only $6,700,000 of bonds were actually issued, it being the understanding that the Department would agree to the issuance of the remainder whenever the public works program demanded. With this understanding the Provisional President framed his budget for 1924. He has repeatedly endeavored since last October to obtain the Department’s consent to the issuance of a portion of the remainder of the bonds of the authorized loan, without success. The situation is now such that if authorization is not granted at once the whole program must cease, when the present slight improvement in the economic situation here is due entirely to the opening up of these roads and when such cessation also means the throwing out of work of thousands of laborers at a time when the unemployment situation is peculiarly acute. I am, however, informed by the Department’s telegram under reference that when the Department is advised that one of the propositions presented by the Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company is accepted by the Dominican Government, it will then be in a position to reach a decision regarding the proposed bond issue. In other words, the Department’s apparent intention is to force the Dominican Government to accept one of two propositions each of which appears unfair or else resign itself to do without funds upon the obtaining of which the present tenuous prosperity of the country actually depends. I cannot help but feel that a policy of this nature in former years has been directly responsible for the suspicion and ill will toward the United States which exists in so many of the smaller Latin

American countries. And I cannot in particular reconcile the adoption of the policy outlined in the Department’s telegram referred to with our announced intention of assisting the Dominican people in every way possible to establish a stable government and to increase the prosperity of the Republic.

It is because of my strong belief in the unwisdom of the policy to be adopted according to the Department’s telegraphic instructions that I have ventured to express my views at such length as well as to recommend most earnestly that the Department grant immediately the necessary authorization for the issuance of that portion of the remainder of the 1922 loan requested by the Dominican Government. The Santo Domingo Water, Light and Power Company will find the Provisional President disposed to meet it more than half way as he has been disposed since the original negotiations were initiated in reaching an agreement which is equitable to both parties and in overcoming the difficulties which the expert’s report has presented. WELLES

Three methods of settling the Power Company’s controversy suggest themselves: 1. The Company and the Government could agree to abide by the findings of the expert. As you are aware the Company is willing to do so. It appears that the Government however found the cost of repairs too high and as they were vastly in excess of the $60,000 mentioned in the contract it does not wish to do so. 2. In view of the Government’s feeling regarding proposition No. 1 the Company offered to accept $450,000 gold, or its equivalent in Dominican 5½ per cent bonds at 90 per cent of their par value, in full payment of the properties which would thereupon be transferred to the order of the Dominican Government in their present condition. The Company takes the position that although it was willing to sell this property in 1921 for $400,000, the sum of $450,000 should not now be regarded as excessive, as the Company has incurred considerable losses and expenses in the last three years, such as interest on its investment, the fee of over $10,000 to Dwight

P. Robinson and Company, attorney’s fees, and the cost of the maintenance of the property, the latter amounting to from $12,000 to $15,000 annually. In considering this position of the Company the Department cannot disregard the fact that the expert selected by the Dominican Government has valued the properties in their present condition at $533,012. If the matter were to be adjusted on the basis of taking the properties over as they are without reference to repairs, it would be difficult for the Department, in the face of the expert’s report, to insist that the Company should take less than $450,000 which is $83,000 under the valuation. This proposal, however, would mean that the Government would perhaps have to make new contracts for the reconditioning of the plant and they may prefer an arrangement by which the plants would be put in operating condition by the issuance of Dominican bonds to cover the cost thereof and thus acquire possession of the plants in working order in one transaction. The Department would therefore be willing to approve the following settlement should it meet with the Dominican Government’s approval. The Department is advised that this would be acceptable to the Company. 3. The Government to buy the plant at the value fixed by the expert, namely $533,012. The Government would then designate the repairs it desires made (the Department presumes that the expert’s valuation was based on putting the plant in an absolutely perfect condition whereas it may be possible to put it in working condition for very much less and that this is what the Dominican Government desires). The repairs would then be made by the Power Company at cost under the supervision of the Dwight P. Robinson Company, the latter to certify to the cost of the repairs and that they have been properly carried out. The Company would be given sufficient bonds at par value to amount to $533,012 at 90 per cent, and a sufficient number of bonds at par value to cover the cost of repairs at 90 per cent would be held in escrow by the Fiscal Agent until he is advised by the Robinson Company that the repairs have been made whereupon he will immediately turn over bonds to the Power Company to the amount certified by the Robinson Company. While the Company would prefer to receive immediately the bonds covering the present value of the property the Department understands that it would be willing, should the Government prefer, to have

the bonds for that amount also held in escrow by the Fiscal Agent until the repairs are made. It is furthermore possible that the Dominican Government may have still another proposal to make and the Department understands that the Company would be glad, in that case, to have the Government make their proposal as soon as possible whereupon the Company will give it careful consideration. Your statements in paragraphs eleven and twelve imply that the Department is attempting to force the Dominican Government to accept one of the Power Company’s proposals by not authorizing the loan. This is not the Department’s policy. The Department is constantly solicitous that all matters should be dealt with on the fairest possible basis and with due consideration of the exigencies of the Dominican Government. You are referred to the note from the Minister of Foreign Affairs to Minister Russell

issuance of a further loan of $2,000,000 on the understanding that $951,000 par value bonds thereof shall be held in escrow by the Fiscal Agent of the Dominican Government pending an agreement between the Government and the Company. This amount is suggested merely because it is the maximum and is the amount of the valuation plus the repairs as fixed by the expert, but of course this amount will be subject to reduction to meet the terms of any new agreement that is made. The Department feels that the above arrangement offers a fair basis for an adjustment of the difficulty, giving the Government wide latitude of choice as to the method to be followed out in acquiring the property, protecting the interest of the Company and permitting the Government to carry on its other needed public works. The Department hopes that the Government will be prepared to accept one of the above proposals or to make immediately a reasonable counter proposal. HUGHES 44 Not printed.

in order to place the properties in operating condition, using Public Works funds for the cost of such repairs. The President is therefore inclined to the belief that the properties should be purchased by the National Government for its own account. I am making every effort to have the Government make proposition to the company at the earliest possible moment. The report of the Director of Public Works will be forwarded by March 31st, and I trust that the Government will be in a position to make the desired counterproposal within a week after the reception of the report. WELLES

Accept [etc. ]

Cuartes E. Hy0cues

48 Not printed.

Rejection of claim by a British subject against the United States for injuries at the hands of Dominican bandits48 48 For previous correspondence concerning this claim, see Foreign Relations 1922, vol. II, pp. 95 ff. [632] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State Washington, April 1, 1924.

49 Not printed.

to take this step. Therefore, it would seem that Mr. McPhail is not at this time in a position to assert his claim diplomatically since he has not complied with the generally accepted principle that the legal remedies in the country against which a claim is made should be exhausted before diplomatic intervention is resorted to. The foregoing statements have been based upon the possibility that Mr. McPhail may have a just claim against the Dominican Republic. So far as concerns his assertion of a claim against the Government of the United States, I beg to refer you to the position consistently taken by the Department in the previous correspondence with your Embassy regarding this case that Mr. McPhail’s claim, if any, is against the Dominican Republic. With respect to the merits of the claim, and as bearing upon statements contained in Mr. McPhail’s memorial, the following observations may be made: Mr. McPhail seems to imply that bandit activities in the Dominican Republic did not exist prior to the time when American troops entered the Republic, or in 1916. On this point it may be observed that in a letter addressed to the Department October 3, 1921,52 by Mr. F. A. Vicini, President of the company which owned the plantation upon which Mr. McPhail was employed at the time he suffered the injuries in question, Mr. Vicini referred to the bandits who committed the outrage, and said: “Bands of this nature are called in Santo Domingo ‘gavilleros’, and they operated in the country long before the American occupation and were usually formed during revolutionary times.” As you are aware the British subject Thomas J. Steele was kidnapped by bandits on the occasion when Mr. McPhail was injured, and in a report on this matter from the American Legation at Santo Domingo dated October 9, 1921,53 the Legation said: “The Marines had been quite active around the neighborhood of the sugar estate of which Mr. Steele is manager for several weeks, and the very night he was taken they caught up with the band that had him but were unaware of this fact. In the encounter that followed, several of the bandits were wounded, but all escaped.” Referring to the leader of the band which committed the outrage in question, the Legation said: “From the time of the death of ‘Vicentico’, Nateras has been the

acknowledged leader of the bandits in the East. For some time he has been, apparently, quiet.” The Legation added: “It is a very difficult matter to deal with this present condition of bandit revolution. Every sugar estate has amongst its own employees emissaries of the bandits, who are working peacefully during the day and in connection with the bandits at night. The bandits are bold and with absolutely no respect for life.” The Navy Department advised this Department November 21, 1921,53 that during the month following the attack upon Mr. McPhail 223 bandits were captured by the United States military forces in the Dominican Republic, of whom, at the date of the letter, 105 had already been tried, convicted and sentenced by Provost Court. In your Embassy’s note of December 21, 1921,54 the Embassy submitted statements by Messrs. Steele and McPhail of the incident in question, and in Mr. Steele’s statement he referred to the “successful efforts of the United States troops” as against the bandits, and stated that because of the information he had given the troops it would be necessary for him to leave the country, and therefore requested the British Government to support his claim for $120,000 against the Dominican Government. However, in neither of the statements is it alleged that the troops of the United States failed to afford proper protection to the plantation on which Messrs. Steele and McPhail were employed, or to the officers or employees of that plantation. As you were advised in the Department’s note of May 10, 1924,53 the claim of Mr. McPhail was referred to the appropriate authority of this Government. That authority has now replied at length to the statements contained in the memorial, and I beg to set forth below a synopsis of certain portions of that reply: The forces of the United States did not proceed to the

Dominican Republic prior to the constitution of the military government, and that sugar estates and planters were victims of depredations by bandits. Indeed, it may be stated that the lawless acts of bandits and the inability of the Republic to suppress them was one of the main causes for the landing of naval forces of the United States. Banditry in the Dominican Republic was closely associated with the political and revolutionary movements, which perpetually disturbed the Republic, and it was customary for each new government to grant amnesty to bandits upon the conclusion of a revolution, thus, not only preventing the suppression of brigandage but countenancing its existence. Mr. McPhail’s statement that the Dominican Government afforded protection to planters in the Republic is hardly conceivable in the light of Dominican history, since between 1899 and 1916 parts of the Republic were in almost constant revolution, and thirteen different Presidents functioned during this time, who, with but one exception, were inaugurated and deposed by revolutionists. It is unreasonable to believe that a country so affected by political and revolutionary strife could guarantee protection to planters, and if such protection were enjoyed it was not afforded by the Dominican Government but attained by the employment of other means. In this relation it may be said that a communication in the possession of authorities of the United States from a manager of one of the large sugar estates concedes that during the various revolutionary movements the Dominican Government was unable to afford any relief to the property and that protection was afforded through the efforts of a notorious bandit chief. It is common knowledge that when the American forces entered the Republic a large number of bandit leaders were carrying on operations. Mr. McPhail’s statements that less, rather than more, protection was afforded after the advent of the United States forces, and that the estate by which he was employed was deprived of any protection from such forces, are misleading and erroneous. United States marines were frequently stationed on sugar estates between the years 1917 and 1921, and the properties of the sugar estates were constantly patrolled by the American forces, which action constituted a greater protection to the estates than would have been afforded by the posting of fixed guards within the enclosures of the sugar mill premises. However, the American forces could

not, of course, devote their entire energies to the protection of sugar estates, and extended their efforts to protect the people of the Republic as a whole, and to this end were obliged to adopt offensive measures for the suppression of bandits, the primary necessity of which was to maintain fresh troops in the field of operation to pursue bandits unceasingly. The rugged and inaccessible character of the country was a great obstacle to military operations and largely rendered it difficult to keep in constant touch with the bandit groups, and this was especially the case in the Provinces of Seibo and Macoris, the territory of which constituted a principal field of bandit operations and comprised within its borders the rich sugar cane belt and other sources of wealth which were tempting to the bandits. The military government was not delinquent in affording reasonable protection, and did not fail in taking adequate measures to suppress

circumstances, and every resource at the disposal of the military government was fully utilized to destroy banditry. The Guardia Nacional was organized April 17, 1917, and was a variable quantity fluctuating with the amount of available national funds, but was not fully established as a definite fixed force until October 20, 1922. After the abduction of Mr. Steele every means at the disposal of the military government was set in operation to effect his immediate release, and the pressure exerted against the bandits became so strong that they were compelled to release Mr. Steele September 30, 1921, or two and one-half days after his abduction. Banditry in the Eastern district was completely suppressed in May 1922, practically seven months after the abduction of Mr. Steele, and as a result of the persistent and continuous operations of the Marine forces of the United States. Since that time the Dominican Republic has enjoyed a state of tranquillity never before realized, and which is reflected in the improvement of conditions in general. Accept [etc.] CHARLES E. HUGHES

Ecuador:

Contents

Resumption of interest payments by Ecuador on the bonds of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company1 1 For previous correspondence concerning the railway bonds, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 931 ff. [634] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Boding) Washington, June 13, 1924.

contract has not as yet materialized, and from all information obtainable on the present status of these loan negotiations it will in all probability never be, realized. The contract itself embodied terms which to any well informed person indicated that they would not be carried out. Mr. Powers Farr further states that “the bondholders have waited patiently for Ecuador to meet this obligation in the expectation that steps would be taken to reorganize the financial structure of the country” and bases his request that the United States Government use its good offices in protecting the rights of the bondholders to the full amount of the customs pledged to them on the statement that there is no immediate prospect of relief from this source: (reorganization of the financial structure). The Ecuadorian Government has in the past and is at the present time utilizing the revenue obtained from the aduana (customs) and from other sources for general governmental purposes, including, of course, the item of the upkeep and maintenance of the army, which in the past year has consumed 40% of the total revenue obtained by it, and the total revenue thus obtained is not sufficient to meet those expenditures, much less any obligations assumed as to foreign indebtedness. Realizing the situation, the Government of Ecuador has finally engaged the services of a financial expert in the person of John S. Hord, who, however, arrived here at a time when Congress was in session and who therefore did not have sufficient time to make a detailed and careful study of the finances of the country with a view to presenting a program of reform to the Congress then in session. However, since his arrival Mr. Hord has devoted his time to investigation and study, as I have had the honor to inform the Department from time to time, and is now prepared to present to the Congress which has just opened its session a complete program for the financial reorganization of the various governmental departments, as well as a balanced budget, which it is hoped Congress will endorse and adopt, and Mr. Hord informs me that this budget provides for the taking care of Ecuador’s external obligations. Under the circumstances it would seem to me ill-timed to make representations to the Ecuadorian Government on a matter which it cannot possibly meet unless Mr. Hord’s program is carried out, and by making

such representations at the present time it might possibly handicap Mr. Hord in carrying out his plans. I have talked over the situation with Mr. Harman, president of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company, who is now here, as well as with Mr. Hord, Financial Advisor to the Ecuadorian Government, both of whom agree with me that by making representations to the Government at this time nothing can be gained and much may be lost. Mr. Hord feels optimistic as to the attitude towards his program which Congress may adopt, and as he has the assurance of President elect Cordova, who takes office September 1st, that he is in full agreement with the plans so far prepared, it would seem to me that it might be a more opportune time to call the Ecuadorian Government’s attention to its delinquency in connection with these bonds in case Congress should adopt an attitude antagonistic to the proposed reforms, (which we do not now expect) in which case strong representations, in my opinion, would be indicated and opportune, and I would request the Department to give me such instructions as would enable me to use my discretion as to the time such representations might be made, and in case it becomes necessary to make these representations it is requested that I be permitted to present them in a strong and forceful manner. With the hope that the Department will concur with my view of the situation at the present time, I have [etc.] G. A. BADING 3 Latter not printed. 4 Neither printed.

endeavor made next year to find ways and means of beginning payments on the many years’ overdue interest in connection with these bonds. When, therefore, an editorial appeared in El Comercio, calling attention to the fact that any budget which did not take into consideration the country’s external indebtedness was not a budget based on sound principles, I thought the moment opportune to discuss this entire question with the Minister of Hacienda and for that purpose secured an interview with him. I informed the Minister of Hacienda that it was not my purpose at this time to protest to the Ecuadorian Government against the continued ignoring of its obligations guaranteed by the customs receipts, but that my only purpose was to discuss with him the effect such neglect of obligations on its part had exercised on Ecuador’s credit and further informed him that my conference with him on this subject was sought merely in order to enable me to correctly inform my Government as to what were the intentions of the Government of Ecuador towards satisfying the increasing clamor and demand on the part of the bondholders for satisfaction; informing him at the same time that I had had instructions from the Department of State to bring this matter to the attention of the Ecuadorian Government, that I had, however, exercised my discretion in withholding action on these instructions, because I had understood that the budget bill would contain provisions for meeting the guaranteed obligations of the Ecuadorian Government in connection with these bonds, but that my attention had been called by the editorial in El Comercio to the action of the Permanent Legislative Commission, which had unquestionably acted in harmony with the ideas of the Minister of Hacienda, in eliminating from the budget all reference to these obligations, and I asked him for a frank expression of his opinion as to how the situation was to be met, and what information might be given the bondholders. The Minister of Hacienda gave me what was presumably the same answer he had given to Lord Hervey, that the Permanent Legislative Commission had decided that the financial situation at the present time did not permit the payment of any of these external obligations at this time but it was thought some sort of provision could be made next year.

I thereupon requested the Minister of Finance to permit me to discuss the entire situation with him in a sincere and frank manner and to permit me to express to him the opinion I had formed after living in Ecuador for two years and a half, and after having given careful study to the entire subject of Ecuador’s credit and economic situation. The Minister not only gave me permission but invited me openly and frankly to discuss the situation with him. I proceeded to outline to him that Ecuador’s failure to take definite action in connection with her external bonded indebtedness and her failure definitely to settle the Agriculturists’ Association-Mercantile Bank matter had been the principal underlying factors in destroying Ecuador’s credit abroad and had been in the past as it would be in the future the reason for Ecuador’s failure to secure a loan. I pointed out that Ecuador invariably had failed to live up to her guarantees in the matter of the bonded indebtedness and had failed to live up to her promises in the Mercantile Bank matter; that it was expected of Ecuador that the new administration, with its intended program of fiscal reform under the guidance of the financial expert employed, find means to carry out some action which would at least in part restore confidence in her good intentions by satisfying to the best of her ability at this time the just demands of these external creditors; that I had personally had confidence that such action would be taken until Congress, which up to this time had apparently completely ignored the recommendations contained in President Cordova’s inaugural address as well as the recommendations made by Mr. Hord, the financial expert, has passed a bill which not only called for an increase in the per diem allowance for each Senator and Congressman but had also in addition to that passed a bill materially increasing the pay to the army, the latter increase totaling not less than one million five hundred thousand sucres per annum; that under such circumstances it would be exceedingly difficult to persuade the bondholders that the financial situation of the country and Government was such that it could not at least in part satisfy demands not only based on justice but secured by the absolute guarantee of the Government of Ecuador as such an attitude would imply bad faith and the effect would be disastrous.

I pointed out to him that my personal experience extending over a period of a considerable number of years of budget making for a city of more than five hundred thousand population had taught me that the only proper course to pursue, and the only course which would restore confidence in the promises of the Ecuadorian Government and thereby have the tendency to improve her credit situation was to cut to the bone all unnecessary expenses, such as increase in pay of the army, which at the present time is better equipped and in every respect on a far greater basis of efficiency than ever before, and it certainly was no time to provide an increase in the per diem pay of the members of Congress who were expected to have the welfare and good name of their country at heart. I informed him that under the circumstances I hesitated to inform my Government of the actual state of affairs unless he, as Minister of Finance assured me that the course adopted so far by the Permanent Legislative Commission and by Congress met with his approval, and that if he, on the other hand agreed with me I would withhold a report which necessarily would come to the knowledge of the external creditors until it had been demonstrated one way or the other what would be the attitude of the Government and the final action; that there was now on deposit in the banks in Guayaquil a sufficient amount of money to enable the Government to make a part payment on the back interest due on these bonds and that this money had been accumulated for that purpose but withheld by action of President Tamayo merely because of the exchange situation. The Minister was greatly impressed and rather depressed with the manner in which I presented the entire situation to him. He informed [me] that I was correct, that Congress had made a mistake and that he would immediately call a meeting of the Permanent Legislative Commission for the purpose of trying to induce them to reverse their action and would also discuss the matter with the President with a view to getting his support. Late in the afternoon, I was called by phone and informed that the Legislative Commission had delegated Mr. Hord, the Financial Adviser, and Mr. Dobbie, the General Manager of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Co., who had been called in by the Permanent Legislative Commission to give

his opinion in the matter, to call upon me to discuss ways and means by which the situation might be remedied and the bondholders satisfied. In due course of time these two gentlemen appeared at the Legation both of them informing me that I had made a profound impression on the Minister of Finance who had outlined my position to the Permanent Legislative Commission, informing that body at the same time that he was exceedingly grateful to me for the courteous, although emphatic manner, in which I had expressed myself and that he felt convinced that I had the welfare of his country at heart in the position I had taken. Mr. Dobbie informed me that if it met with my approval, the Permanent Legislative Commission had decided to provide, by decree, for the payment to the bondholders of one coupon either immediately or on the regular interest day in January and follow that up by the payment of a second coupon six months later, Mr. Hord having assured them that with the money now available additional sums could be deposited to secure these two payments and that he felt confident that he could make the necessary arrangements to secure by monthly deposits in the banks a sufficient sum of money to insure regular payments thereafter, providing however, at this time there would be no demand made for the payment of additional amounts for sinking fund purposes. Mr. Dobbie communicated by telegram with Mr. Archer Harman, President of the Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company, who is now at Huigra, and secured his consent to this arrangement with also a statement by Mr. Harman. that sinking fund requirements might be deferred until all back interest payments had been met. In accordance with the agreement arrived at between myself, Mr. Archer Harman and Mr. Dobbie, the Permanent Legislative Commission was notified that we expected the first coupon payment to be made on January 2nd, the regular interest paying date. … I am inclined to feel confident that the action I have taken in connection with this matter was opportune and may, in all probability, result in a settlement of this old source of irritation and complaint. It is, of course, understood that the above arrangement, if carried out, will meet with the entire satisfaction of the bondholders and induce them to withhold further complaint against the Government of Ecuador.

When the necessary decrees providing for this payment have actually been issued, I will inform the Department by cable. I hope that the Department will approve of my attitude and action taken in the above matter. I have [etc.] G. A. BADING

The Department approves of your action and desires to commend you for the energy and effectiveness with which you have handled this matter. For the Secretary of State: JOSEPH C. GREW

Claim of the Mercantile Bank of the Americas against Ecuador for the debt of the Cacao Growers Association7 7 For previous correspondence concerning the debts of the association, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 940 ff. [640] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Ecuador (Bading)

[644] The Minister in Ecuador (Bading) to the Secretary of State

Association will not be paid and the credit of Ecuador in exterior will be thereby impaired. Report briefly by cable. HUGHES 8 Not printed.

The budget finally adopted by the Government, in spite of the protests of Mr. Hord, does not contain any provision whatever in regard to the amount to be collected by this three sucre tax nor as to its disposal. Copy and translation of the law of centralization are hereto attached.13 With regard to the first paragraph of the Department’s cable above mentioned, I may state that we are now making an investigation as to whether the Asociación has made full payment of its debts to local banks and holders of “vales” and a report will be made by telegraph, doubtless some time before this despatch reaches the Department. I have [etc.] G. A. BADING 12 Not printed. 13 Not printed.

any other balance left after carrying out its operations according to the Decree creating said tax; 3. That if the Government obtains a foreign loan it will immediately pay half of the debt due to the above mentioned Bank. The Government of the United States has learned with profound surprise that not only has the 22 per cent of the tax aforementioned not been devoted to the cancellation of the Mercantile Bank debt but that there has been actual discrimination against the Bank in favor of Ecuadorean nationals as evidenced by the payment by the Agricultural Association of all its debts to the banks in Guayaquil and to all the holders of “vales” with the exception of one “vale” now in litigation. The United States Government consequently expects that the 22 per cent of the tax allocated to the Mercantile Bank which has been withheld up to now will immediately be paid to the Bank and that the full 66 per cent of the tax allocated for the payment of the debts of the Association will, now that the other debts have been paid with the exception indicated, be paid to the Mercantile Bank in the future or else that the Government of Ecuador will oblige the Association to deposit in a bank acceptable to both parties all the funds now on hand and regularly in the future those to be collected, to be held in escrow until a settlement of the accounts has been reached. In furtherance of this proposal the Government of the United States must express its expectation that there will be immediate compliance with the provisions of the law of 1921 and the appointment of a comptroller or interventor for the Association to assure that the latter will make a just settlement of its debts to the American creditors. The Government of the United States is constrained to consider the Government of Ecuador responsible for the discrimination mentioned in the preceding paragraph as, according to the aforementioned Ecuadorean law of 1921, the Government of Ecuador appears obligated to control the activities of the

Association and moreover it is understood that the President of Ecuador assigned, as stated above, a certain portion of the proceeds of the tax which should be paid to the Mercantile Bank at the same time that another portion of the proceeds of the tax was allocated to the remaining creditors. The Government of the United States furthermore confidently expects that the export tax on cacao will be continued after its expiration December 31, 1925, until the debt is fully satisfied as was promised by the President of Ecuador in the note above referred to. The question of the debt of the Association of Agriculturists to the Mercantile Bank of the Americas has been pending for a number of years without any efficacious action on the part of the Ecuadorean Government and the Government of the United States feels that it must now ask for a prompt settlement and desires to be informed without delay of the steps contemplated by the Ecuadorean Government to bring the matter to a satisfactory conclusion.” A copy of the above note has been handed to the Ecuadorean Minister in Washington and he has been informed that this Government is wholly dissatisfied with the attitude and action of the Ecuadorean authorities in the premises and that this Government feels that a settlement of the matter cannot well be prolonged and it expects to be advised without delay of the intentions of the Ecuadorean Government in the premises. HUGHES

Boundary dispute with Peru. (See under General.)

Refusal by the United States to assent to the collection of the Gaffir tax from American nationals [650] The Minister in Egypt (Howell) to the Secretary of State

The Gaffir Tax was established by a Decree of November 10, 1884, as a police regulation for the security of rural property, and as a true complement of the land tax. Article 49 of this Decree provides in intent that “collectors of taxes are also charged with the collection of the Gaffir Tax and that the Sarrafs of the villages shall inform the authorities of the names of persons who refuse to pay their quota, in order that they may be treated as those who are in arrears with their taxes.” Subsequently the Gaffir Tax was extended to cities by a Decree of February 17, 1896, which, at the same time established “joint and separate liability between proprietors and tenants of each house for the payment of his quota as a contribution to the Gaffir Tax.” In taking this position the Egyptian Government has kept within the limits which were imposed upon it by international agreements concerning real property of foreigners. Article 2 of the Ottoman Law of the 7th of Safar, 1284, specifies in intent that “foreign proprietors of landed property, city or rural, are likened to Ottoman subjects in all that concerns their real property, and that this assimilation is for legal effect: “1st. It binds them to conform to all laws, and to all police or municipal regulations which govern at the present time, or will govern in the future, the possession, transmission, legal conveyance of property to another, and the mortgaging of landed property. “2nd. To pay all charges and taxes, under whatever denomination they are levied, or shall hereafter be levied, on city or rural property.” Now it is manifest that all this taxation applies as well to the owner as to the tenant of city or rural property, and that, therefore, it is perfectly right that the Government address the tenants as well as the proprietors for payment. To insure the collection of this tax, the Egyptian Government orders the seizure and administrative sale against the tax-payer. But these methods of procedure are necessarily slow, and in order to avoid all difficulty or delay during the war, the General Commander-in-Chief of the forces of His

Britannic Majesty in Egypt, responsible for order and security, thought it necessary to support, by proclamation these means of coercion respecting tax-payers. Under these conditions the said proclamations were not able to be considered as having established the Gaffir Tax since it already existed and was perfectly legal, but simply as having been used as a mode of additional coercion, for its collection. Consequently the abolishment of Martial Law would not have any effect upon the legality of the tax which continues to be due from all the inhabitants of the territory. 1 This note was sent by the Egyptian Ministry of Finance to the British Consulate at Cairo with a view to its subsequent communication to the consuls of the other powers.

Under these circumstances and in view of the fact that other capitulatory powers in Egypt have not given their assent to the collection of the tax from their nationals, the Department cannot admit the application of it to American nationals. Should occasion arise you may inform the Egyptian Government of this Government’s views on the subject. The Department will be pleased to receive for possible future use a copy of the law. For the Secretary of State: LELAND HARRISON

participation of all persons who profit by it. It would then be quite unjust that one category of beneficiaries be able to avoid their duty of paying the tax above mentioned, and the Egyptian Government is right in expecting that Capitulatory citizens continue to pay this tax as they have already done for many years. Consequently I have the honor to transmit herewith the text of a Decree rendered February 16th, last,3 on the subject of the payment of Gaffir Tax throughout the whole territory of Egypt, and I have recourse to your kind intervention with your Government to the end that it kindly give its assent to the provisions of this Decree in respect of American citizens, from the date above mentioned.

In the hope that the American Government will appreciate the reason for this service and the justice which prompts the present request of the Egyptian Government, and thanking you in advance for your co-operation in this respect, I seize this occasion to renew to you, Mr. Minister, the assurance of my high consideration. WACYF BOUTROS GHALI 2 Transmitted by the Minister in Egypt as an enclosure to his despatch no.

2 Not printed.

adopted the same attitude. The British High Commissioner very kindly furnished me with a copy of the formal reply of his Government, a copy and translation of which I transmit herewith.6 I also enclose a copy of the Legation’s Note Verbale of today adopting the same attitude. I have [etc.] STEWART JOHNSON [Enclosure] The American Legation to the Egyptian Ministry for Foreign Affairs No. 168 The Legation of the United States of America presents its compliments to the Royal Egyptian Ministry for Foreign Affairs, and has the honor to

Legation will appreciate information from time to time, with regard to progress made in the direction indicated, in order that it may transmit it to the Department of State. CAIRO, June 13, 1924. 6 Not printed. 6 Not printed. 6 Not printed.

Efforts by the United States to protect the interests of American archeologists in Egypt [655] The President of the Metropolitan Museum of Art (De Forest) to the Secretary of State

RESOLVED: That the Director of the Museum be and hereby is instructed to see that the work of its Expedition in Egypt is brought to an end as soon after the new ruling of the Service des Antiquites goes into effect as can be done consistently with the interests of the Museum. RESOLVED: That a copy of these preambles and resolutions, with the seal of the Museum affixed, be forwarded to the Director-General of the Service des Antiquités through Mr. Lythgoe. Yours respectfully, ROBERT W. DE FOREST

interests of their nationals, you should refer the matter to the Department by telegraph before making representations to the Egyptian Government. You will note that this matter is also being brought to the attention of the American Embassies at London, Paris, and Rome. For the Secretary of State: WILLIAM PHILLIPS 9 Latter not printed. 10 Not printed.

It may be stated in this connection that Lord Allenby fully shares the opinion expressed by the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the American Federation of Art, with respect to this proposed law, and has already filed a protest against this step which would not appear to be in the interest of either English, American, French or Egyptian nationals. Following the interview with Lord Allenby, the French Minister called at the American Legation and substantially said: that he would speak to the head of the Antiquities, M. Lacau, as to his opinion of this matter, that he personally was opposed to the passage of this proposed law; that he would also telegraph his Government if the projected measure should become more probable and he would write his Government in any case, touching the matter. He said that probably the French Government would agree with his personal opinion which was that of the English and American Governments, and that any such proposed law would prevent their national excavators continuing their work here. He thought his Government would take the same view as the English and American Governments against such a provision. It is not believed the Italian Government is interested at this time. The Italian Minister is out of the country and the Chargé d’Affaires is in Alexandria. I have this day written a protest to the Egyptian Government against this proposed raw, a copy of which is herewith enclosed.12 I have [etc.] J. MORTON HOWELL 11 British High Commissioner for Egypt. 12 Not printed.

RESOLVED: That the Director be instructed to forward the following cablegram to Mr. Lansing: Yours received. Inform Dr. Howell that Trustees positively decline to resume excavations under conditions proposed or under any permit which threatens or infringes upon the eminently fair and equitable arrangement under which Metmusart has hitherto excavated. This vote was transmitted to Mr. Lansing by cable immediately after the meeting.

In sending you this information, and in behalf of the Trustees of the Museum, I beg to express the hope that we may continue to count upon the sympathy of the State Department in our position, and the continuance of the support which has been so very helpful to us in the past towards maintaining the rights and privileges which we, in common with all other foreign excavators in Egypt, have enjoyed for many years past. The situation appears to be critical and to call for immediate action. Very respectfully yours EDWARD ROBINSON

AIDE MÉMOIRE The American Minister in a conversation with His Excellency the Royal Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs this morning, briefly outlined the situation as he understood it, with regard to the proposed change in the Antiquities Law (adopted 1912).

The American Minister observed that this measure was proposed and its passage was insisted upon by M. Lacau, Director of Antiquities, one year ago and that those engaged in the work of excavation, holding concessions from the Egyptian Government representing various museums in other countries, had found the proposed law so out of keeping or conformity with the provisions which had hitherto obtained (in the Law of 1912), and at the same time prejudicial to the interests of these various museums, as to positively preclude the possibility of further work being carried on by these museums if this contemplated change was made effective. It was held by them, and especially by the Metropolitan Museum of New York, that the work carried on by them, was wholly dependent upon voluntary subscriptions by individuals interested in archaeology and in the securement of these institutions of objects of historical interest discovered in the excavations being made here. It was pointed out by the Minister that as he understood it, these various museums had not and would not, be technical in the division of articles found as the result of excavations; that only such articles as were, perhaps, found to be duplicates of those already possessed by the Royal Egyptian Government would be available for foreign museums; and such other objects as might be agreed upon within keeping of the Law on the fifty-fifty percent basis. The Minister further called attention to the fact that during the course of a conversation with His Excellency the Minister of Public Works, Morcos Hanna Pasha, on or about March 25, 1924, he alluded to this proposed change in the Law of 1912, and observed that the various museums of the United States had the impression, probably derived from the agitation as to

this proposed change in the law, together with the feeling which had gone forth in America regarding the Carter controversy, that work of these various museums in America was at an end. The Minister referred to a newspaper clipping of April 1, 1924, which showed that already one of the large museums in Pennsylvania, had decided to withdraw all forces from Egypt engaged in this line of work. It was further pointed out, that as noted above, this proposed measure whereby it was left entirely optional with the Egyptian Government as to whether any articles found by those engaged in excavation work in Egypt would be subject to division, would positively put a stop to all work by other museums in America, and especially was this true of the Metropolitan Museum of New York. His Excellency, the Minister of Public Works in his reply stated substantially, that: the Egyptian Government appreciated the work which had been done by Americans in this country and when the proper time arrived this matter referred to would be adjusted to the satisfaction of the American people and American museums. Later on, however, the Minister in question observed: “that all modification of the laws, depends upon Parliament.” The American Minister, wishes finally to observe, with respect to this question, in speaking particularly of the Metropolitan Museum of New York, that its budget is made up for the year’s work, for work of this kind in Egypt, about May 15th, and it is most solicitous with respect as to what it may depend upon for the coming year; indeed, it is incumbent upon it to know upon what it may depend, if work this coming year and in future years be continued. [Enclosure 2—Translation] The Egyptian Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the American Legation CAIRO, May 27, 1924.

NOTE By an aide mémoire, dated April 22nd, last, the American Legation informed this Ministry of the fears of American Museums and especially those of the Metropolitan Museum of New York concerning the matter of the modifications which the Egyptian Government proposes to make in the Law of 1912 concerning antiquities. The competent Department, which the Ministry for Foreign Affairs has not failed to address on this subject, has just advised that it cannot abandon the plan of modifying the law in question in so far as it concerns the division of antiquities found. However, it adds that it is not accurate that the Egyptian Government does not wish to give any of the objects found. It desires only not to be bound by the word “half” at the time of the division, so as to establish easily and in conformity with general scientific interests, complete and logical series of documents representing the continuity of Egyptian civilisation. This duty fulfilled regarding science, the Egyptian Government will be pleased to give foreign museums objects of equal importance which will be sufficiently representative in their collections. It desires in that way to thank and to encourage the excavators and to facilitate the study of ancient Egypt in foreign university centers. This change may, in fact, momentarily embarrass some scientific institutions from a financial point of view, but this embarrassment should not permit the sacrifice of scientific interests. Besides, it should not be a matter of surprise, the Egyptian Government having informed all those interested by a circular letter dated October 10,

16 This enclosure was inadvertently omitted from the despatch, but was

Finland: Contents Extradition treaty between the United States and Finland,

Extradition treaty between the United States and Finland, signed August 1, 1924 [663] Treaty between the United States of America and Finland, Signed at Helsingfors, August 1, 1924 Done in duplicate at Helsingfors this 1st day of August nineteen hundred and twenty-four. Treaty Series No. 710

Treaty Series No. 710 [Document 663] Treaty between the United States of America and Finland, Signed at Helsingfors, August 1, 19241 The United States of America and Finland desiring to promote the cause of justice, have resolved to conclude a treaty for the extradition of fugitives from justice between the two countries and have appointed for that purpose the following Plenipotentiaries: The President of the United States of America, Charles L. Kagey, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to Finland, and the President of the Republic of Finland, Hj. J. Procopé, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Finland. Who, after having communicated to each other their respective full powers, found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon and concluded the following articles: ARTICLE I It is agreed that the Government of the United States and the Government of Finland shall, upon requisition duly made as herein provided, deliver up to justice any person, who may be charged with, or may have been convicted of, any of the crimes specified in Article II of the present Treaty committed within the jurisdiction of one of the High Contracting Parties, and who shall seek an asylum or shall be found within the territories of the other; provided that such surrender shall take place only upon such evidence of criminality, as according to the laws of the place where the fugitive or person so charged shall be found, would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial if the crime or offence had been there committed.

ARTICLE II

Persons shall be delivered up according to the provisions of the present Treaty, who shall have been charged with or convicted of any of the following crimes: 1. Murder, comprehending the crimes designated by the terms parricide, assassination, nianslaughter when voluntary, poisoning or infanticide. 2. The attempt to commit murder. 3. Rape, abortion, and the carnal knowledge of a girl under the age of twelve years. 4. Abduction or detention of women or girls for immoral purposes. 5. Bigamy. 6. Arson. 7. Wilful and unlawful destruction or obstruction of railroads, which endangers human life. 8. Crimes committed at sea: (a) Piracy, as commonly known and defined by the law of nations, or by statute; (b) Wrongfully sinking or destroying a vessel at sea or attempting to do so; (c) Mutiny or conspiracy by two or more members of the crew or other persons on board of a vessel on the high seas, for the purpose of rebelling against the authority of the Captain or Commander of such vessel, or by fraud or violence taking possession of such vessel;

(d) Assault on board ship upon the high seas with intent to do actual bodily harm. 9. Burglary, robbery with violence, and larceny when the amount stolen exceeds two hundred dollars or Finnish equivalent. 10. Forgery or the utterance of forged papers and including the forgery or falsification of the official acts of the Government or public authority, including Courts of Justice, or the uttering or fraudulent use of any of the same. 11. The fabrication of counterfeit money, whether coin or paper, counterfeit titles or coupons of public debt, created by National, State, Provincial, Territorial, Local or Municipal Governments, bank notes or other instruments of public credit, counterfeit seals, stamps, dies and marks of State or public administrations, and the utterance, circulation or fraudulent use of the above mentioned objects. 12. Embezzlement committed within the jurisdiction of one or the other party by public officers or depositaries, and embezzlement by any person or persons hired, salaried or employed, to the detriment of their employers or principals, where, in either case, the amount embezzled exceeds two hundred dollars or Finnish equivalent. 13. Kidnapping of minors or adults, defined to be the abduction or detention of a person or persons, in order to exact money from them, their families or any other person or persons, or for any other unlawful end. 14. Obtaining money, valuable securities or other property by false pretences or receiving any money, valuable securities or other property knowing the same to have been unlawfully obtained through theft, robbery or extortion, where the amount of money or the value of the property so obtained or received exceeds two hundred dollars or Finnish equivalent.

15. Perjury or subornation of perjury. 16. Crimes and offences against the laws of both countries for the suppression of slavery and slave trading. 17. Extradition shall also take place for participation in any of the crimes before mentioned as an accessory before the fact; provided such participation be punishable by the laws of both the High Contracting Parties. ARTICLE III The provisions of the present Treaty shall not import a claim of extradition for any crime or offence of a political character, nor for acts connected with such crimes or offences; and no person surrendered by or to either of the High Contracting Parties in virtue of this Treaty shall be tried or punished for a political crime or offence. When the offence charged comprises the act either of murder or assassination or of poisoning, either consummated or attempted, the fact that the offence was committed or attempted against the life of the Head of a foreign State or against the life of any member of his family, shall not be deemed sufficient to sustain that such crime or offence was of a political character: or was an act connected with crimes or offences of a political character. ARTICLE IV No person shall be tried for any crime or offence other than that for which he was surrendered. ARTICLE V A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered under the provisions hereof, when, from lapse of time or other lawful cause, according to the laws of the place within the jurisdiction of which the crime was committed, the criminal is exempt from prosecution or punishment for the offence for which the surrender is asked.

ARTICLE VI If a fugitive criminal whose surrender may be claimed pursuant to the stipulations hereof, be actually under prosecution, out on bail or in custody, for a crime or offence committed in the country where he has sought asylum, or shall have been convicted thereof, his extradition may be deferred until such proceedings be determined, and until he shall have been set at liberty in due course of law. ARTICLE VII If a fugitive criminal claimed by one of the parties hereto, shall be also claimed by one or more powers pursuant to treaty provisions, on account of crimes committed within their jurisdiction, such criminal shall be delivered to that State whose demand is first received. ARTICLE VIII Under the stipulations of this Treaty, neither of the High Contracting Parties shall be bound to deliver up its own citizens. ARTICLE IX The expense of arrest, detention, examination and transportation of the accused shall be paid by the Government which has preferred the demand for extradition. ARTICLE X Everything found in the possession of the fugitive criminal at the time of his arrest, whether being the proceeds of the crime or offence, or which may be material as evidence in making proof of the crime, shall so far as practicable, according to the laws of either of the High Contracting Parties, be delivered up with his person at the time of surrender. Nevertheless, the rights of a third party with regard to the articles referred to, shall be duly respected. ARTICLE XI

The stipulations of the present Treaty shall be applicable to all territory wherever situated, belonging to either of the High Contracting Parties or in the occupancy and under the control of either of them, during such occupancy or control. Requisitions for the surrender of fugitives from justice shall be made by the respective diplomatic agents of the High Contracting Parties. In the event of the absence of such agents from the country or its seat of Government, or where extradition is sought from territory included in the preceding paragraphs, other than the United States or Finland, requisitions may be made by superior consular officers. It shall be competent for such diplomatic or superior consular officers to ask and obtain a mandate or preliminary warrant of arrest for the person whose surrender is sought, whereupon the judges and magistrates of the two Governments shall respectively have power and authority, upon complaint made under oath, to issue a warrant for the apprehension of the person charged, in order that he or she may be brought before such judge or magistrate, that the evidence of criminality may be heard and considered and if, on such hearing, the evidence be deemed sufficient to sustain the charge, it shall be the duty of the examining judge or magistrate to certify it to the proper executive authority, that a warrant may issue for the surrender of the fugitive. In case of urgency, the application for arrest and detention may be addressed directly to the competent magistrate in conformity to the statutes in force. The person provisionally arrested shall be released, unless within two months from the date of arrest in Finland, or from the date of commitment in the United States, the formal requisition for surrender with the documentary proofs hereinafter prescribed be made as aforesaid by the diplomatic agent of the demanding Government, or, in his absence, by a consular officer thereof. If the fugitive criminal shall have been convicted of the crime for which his surrender is asked, a copy of the sentence of the court before which such conviction took place, duly authenticated, shall be produced. If, however, the fugitive is merely charged with crime, a duly authenticated copy of the warrant of arrest in the country where the crime was committed, and of the

depositions upon which such warrant may have been issued, shall be produced, with such other evidence or proof as may be deemed competent in the case. ARTICLE XII In every case of a request made by either of the High Contracting Parties for the arrest, detention or extradition of fugitive criminals, the appropriate legal officers of the country where the proceedings of extradition are had, shall assist the officers of the Government demanding the extradition before the respective judges and magistrates, by every legal means within their power; and no claim whatever for compensation for any of the services so rendered shall be made against the Government demanding the extradition; provided, however, that any officer or officers of the surrendering Government so giving assistance, who shall, in the usual course of their duty, receive no salary or compensation other than specific fees for services performed, shall be entitled to receive from the Government demanding the extradition the customary fees for the acts or services performed by them, in the same manner and to the same amount as though such acts or services had been performed in ordinary criminal proceedings under the laws of the country of which they are officers. ARTICLE XIII The present Treaty shall be ratified by the High Contracting Parties in accordance with their respective constitutional methods and shall take effect on the date of the exchange of ratifications which shall take place at Helsingfors as soon as possible. ARTICLE XIV The present Treaty shall remain in force for a period of ten years, and in case neither of the High Contracting Parties shall have given notice one year before the expiration of that period of its intention to terminate the Treaty, it shall continue in force until the expiration of one year from the date on which such notice of termination shall be given by either of the High Contracting Parties.

In witness whereof the above-named Plenipotentiaries have signed the present Treaty and have hereunto affixed their seals. Done in duplicate at Helsingfors this 1st day of August nineteen hundred and twenty-four. [SEAL] CHARLES L. KAGEY [SEAL] HJ. J. PROCOPÉ

France:

Contents

Convention between the United States and France regarding rights in Syria and the Lebanon, signed April 4, 19241 1 For previous correspondence concerning negotiations to ensure treaty rights of United States in Syria and the Lebanon, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. II, pp. 1 ff. [664] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

Paris, April 4, 1924.

Hocues

HERRICK

The Federal Government would like to receive the assurance that its nationals, as well as itself, will benefit in these countries by the most favorable treatment resulting not only from the Agreement recently concluded between France and Italy, but by all other agreements or conventions which may be concluded between the French Government and other governments concerning Syria and the Lebanon. The French Government willingly gives this assurance to the Government of the United States of America.

In the second place, the Federal Government desires that it should be agreed that the extradition treaties concluded between the United States and France should be applicable to the Syrian and Lebanon territories. I have the honor to point out to Your Excellency that Article 7 of the Mandate provides that: “while awaiting the conclusion of special extradition conventions, the extradition treaties in force between foreign Powers and the Mandatory shall be applied in the territories of Syria and the Lebanon”. On this account, the extradition treaties between the United States and France are already applicable and would only cease to be so if the Federal Government should desire to have substituted therefor a convention applying especially to the mandated countries. Lastly, the Federal Government expresses the desire that the Consular Convention in force between the United States and France may also be applicable in Syria and the Lebanon and especially those of its provisions which refer to the immunities and privileges of consuls. The French Government would very willingly introduce a clause on this subject into the draft convention to be concluded with the United States of America if, on account of the peculiar regime of the mandated countries, the insertion of this clause in a convention might not cause reactions, as regards a still undetermined number of other states, whose bearing it is difficult to foresee. Therefore, the French Government thinks it preferable to give in the present letter to the Federal Government the assurance that it will see no objection to the establishment, in any part of Syria and the Lebanon where the Federal Government might deem it useful, of consuls, vice-consuls and consular agents of the United States who will enjoy the treatment accorded

by international custom. It also gives the assurance that as far as the privileges and immunities attached to their duties are concerned, the consuls and vice-consuls of the United States will benefit by all the provisions of the Franco American Convention of 1853, it being understood that the said consuls and vice-consuls shall be citizens of the United States. The French Government having agreed, at the request of the Federal Government, not to maintain in favor of consuls of both countries the right stipulated in the Convention of 1853 to request the arrest in the United States and in France of deserters from war and merchant ships, it is understood, on the other hand, that this right will not be exercised by the consuls of France with regard to Syrian and Lebanon sailors in the United States. I would be much obliged if Your Excellency would be good enough to inform me if these assurances give satisfaction to the Federal Government and allow it to proceed to the signature of the draft convention drawn up on July 13, 1922, with the sole changes in drafting proposed by Your Excellency and recalled in the enclosure herewith.11 Please accept, Mr. Ambassador, the assurances of my very high consideration.

1853 would be reciprocal, i. e., apply to nationals of Syria and the Lebanon in the United States as well as to American nationals in the mandate territory. This is not the correct view. The same principles apply to the Consular Convention as in the case of the

effect in the proposed Convention with regard to the Mandate. It is my understanding that for reasons which have already been explained it is not the desire of your Government to include such a provision but that the French Government is prepared to assure to the United States and to American nationals in the mandated territory the rights and privileges provided under the Treaty and Convention respectively. I am instructed by my Government to express its appreciation of the assurances of the French Government in this respect and to state that on the basis of this understanding, and of the assurances which you have embodied in your communication of November 2, 1923,13 and of this date (here insert date of French draft note as finally communicated) is prepared to proceed to the signature of the Convention. In order, however, that there may be no misunderstanding with regard to the position of nationals of Syria and the Lebanon in the United States, my Government desires me to state that the provisions of the Consular Convention of 1853 would not be applicable with respect to such nationals in the absence of a treaty provision specifically providing for such application, and that, furthermore, the Government of the United States could not assure the application to such nationals in the United States of the provisions of the Extradition Treaty of 1909, in the absence of a treaty provision so providing. At the same time, I take pleasure in informing you that upon the conclusion and ratification of the Mandate Convention my Government will raise no objection to the assumption by the diplomatic and consular officers of France of the protection of the interests of the nationals of Syria and the Lebanon in the United States.”

(4) You may show above note to the French Foreign Office in draft form and in case the latter is prepared to omit paragraph five of their draft note and to make the slight amendments suggested in paragraph one of this telegram and in the paragraph next below numbered (5) and thoroughly appreciates the position of this Government with regard to the non-reciprocal character of the Consular and Extradition Treaties, the Department is prepared to proceed to the immediate signature of the Mandate Convention as

Lastly, the Federal Government expresses the desire that the Consular Convention in force between the United States and France may also be applicable in Syria and the Lebanon and especially those of its provisions which refer to the immunities and privileges of consuls. The French Government would very willingly introduce a clause on this subject into the draft convention to be concluded with the United States of America if, on account of the peculiar regime of the mandated countries, the insertion of this clause in a convention might not cause reactions, as regards a still undetermined number of other states, whose bearing it is difficult to foresee. Therefore, the French Government thinks it preferable to give in the present letter to the Federal Government the assurance that it will see no objection to the establishment, in any part of Syria and the Lebanon where the Federal Government might deem it useful, of consuls, vice-consuls and consular agents of the United States who will enjoy the treatment accorded by international custom. It also gives the assurance that as far as the privileges and immunities attached to their duties are concerned, the consuls and vice-consuls of the United States will benefit by all the existing provisions of the Franco-American Convention of 1853, it being understood that the said consuls and vice-consuls shall be citizens of the United States. I would be much obliged if Your Excellency would be good enough to inform me if these assurances, as well as those contained in my communication of November 2, 1923,20 give satisfaction to the Federal Government and allow it to proceed to the signature of the draft convention drawn up on July 13, 1922, with the sole changes in wording proposed by Your Excellency and which have just been made therein. Please accept [etc.] R. POINCARÉ 18 Transmitted by the Ambassador in France as an enclosure to his despatch

could not assure the application to such nationals in the United States of the provisions of the Extradition Treaty of 1909 in the absence of a treaty provision so providing. At the same time I take pleasure in informing you that, upon the conclusion and ratification of the mandate convention, my Government will raise no objection to the assumption by the diplomatic and consular officers of France of the protection of the interests of the nationals of Syria and the Lebanon in the United States. I have [etc.] MYRON T. HERRICK 21 Transmitted by the Ambassador in France as an enclosure to his despatch

Treaty Series No. 695 [Document 674] Convention between the United States of America and France, Signed at Paris, April 4, 192425 THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, Whereas by the Treaty of Peace concluded with the Allied Powers, Turkey renounces all her rights and titles over Syria and the Lebanon, and, Whereas Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations in the Treaty of Versailles provides that in the case of certain territories which as a consequence of the late war ceased to be under? the sovereignty of the states which formerly governed them, mandates should be issued and that the terms of the mandate should be explicitly defined in each case by the Council of the League, and, Whereas the Principal Allied Powers have agreed to entrust the mandate for Syria and the Lebanon to France, and, Whereas the terms of the said mandate have been defined by the Council of the League of Nations as follows: ARTICLE 1.—The Mandatory shall frame, within a period of three years from the coming into force of this mandate, an organic law for Syria and the Lebanon. This organic law shall be framed in agreement with the native authorities and shall take into account the rights, interests, and wishes of all the population inhabiting the said territory. The Mandatory shall further enact measures to facilitate the progressive development of Syria and the Lebanon as independent States. Pending the coming into effect of the organic law, the government of Syria and the Lebanon shall be conducted in accordance with the spirit of this mandate. The Mandatory shall, as far as circumstances permit, encourage local autonomy. ARTICLE 2.—The Mandatory may maintain its troops in the said territory for its defence. It shall further be empowered, until the entry into force of the organic law and the re-establishment of public security, to organise such

local militia as may be necessary for the defence of the territory, and to employ this militia for defence and also for the maintenance of order. These local forces may only be recruited from the inhabitants of the said territory. The said militia shall thereafter be under the local authorities, subject to the authority and the control which the Mandatory shall retain over these forces. It shall not be used for purposes other than those above specified save with the consent of the Mandatory. Nothing shall preclude Syria and the Lebanon from contributing to the cost of the maintenance of the forces of the Mandatory stationed in the territory.

The Mandatory shall at all times possess the right to make use of the ports, railways and means of communication of Syria and the Lebanon for the passage of its troops and of all materials, supplies and fuel. ARTICLE 3.—The Mandatory shall be entrusted with the exclusive control of the foreign relations of Syria and the Lebanon and with the right to issue exequaturs to the consuls appointed by foreign Powers. Nationals of Syria and the Lebanon living outside the limits of the territory shall be under the diplomatic and consular protection of the Mandatory. ARTICLE 4.—The Mandatory shall be responsible for seeing that no part of the territory of Syria and the Lebanon is ceded or leased or in any way placed under the control of a foreign Power. ARTICLE 5.—The privileges and immunities of foreigners, including the benefits of consular jurisdiction and protection as formerly enjoyed by Capitulation or usage in the Ottoman Empire, shall not be applicable in Syria and the Lebanon. Foreign consular tribunals shall, however, continue to perform their duties until the coming into force of the new legal organisation provided for in Article 6. Unless the Powers whose nationals enjoyed the afore-mentioned privileges and immunities on August 1st, 1914, shall have previously renounced the right to their re-establishment, or shall have agreed to their non-application

during a specified period, these privileges and immunities shall at the expiration of the mandate be immediately reestablished in their entirety or with such modifications as may have been agreed upon between the Powers concerned. ARTICLE 6.—The Mandatory shall establish in Syria and the Lebanon a judicial system which shall assure to natives as well as to foreigners a complete guarantee of their rights. Respect for the personal status of the various peoples and for their religious interests shall be fully guaranteed. In particular, the control and administration of Wakfs shall be exercised in complete accordance with religious law and the dispositions of the founders. ARTICLE 7.—Pending the conclusion of special extradition agreements, the extradition treaties at present in force between foreign Powers and the Mandatory shall apply within the territory of Syria and the Lebanon. ARTICLE 8.—The Mandatory shall ensure to all complete freedom of conscience and the free exercise of all forms of worship which are consonant with public order and morality. No discrimination of any kind shall be made between the inhabitants of Syria and the Lebanon on the ground of differences in race, religion or language. The Mandatory shall encourage public instruction, which shall be given through the medium of the native languages in use in the territory of Syria and the Lebanon. The right of each community to maintain its own schools for the instruction and education of its own members in its own language, while conforming to such educational requirements of a general nature as the administration may impose, shall not be denied or impaired. ARTICLE 9.—The Mandatory shall refrain from all interference in the administration of the Councils of management (Conseils de fabrique) or in the management of religious communities and sacred shrines belonging to the various religions, the immunity of which has been expressly guaranteed.

ARTICLE 10.—The supervision exercised by the Mandatory over the religious missions in Syria and the Lebanon shall be limited to the maintenance of public order and good government; the activities of these religious missions shall in no way be restricted, nor shall their members be subjected to any restrictive measures on the ground of nationality, provided that their activities are confined to the domain of religion. The religious missions may also concern themselves with education and relief, subject to the general right of regulation and control by the Mandatory or of the local government, in regard to education, public instruction and charitable relief. ARTICLE 11.—The Mandatory shall see that there is no discrimination in Syria or the Lebanon against the nationals, including societies and associations, of any State Member of the League of Nations as compared with its own nationals, including societies and associations, or with the nationals of any other foreign State in matters concerning taxation or commerce, the exercise of professions or industries, or navigation, or in the treatment of ships or aircraft. Similarly, there shall be no discrimination in Syria or the Lebanon against goods originating in or destined for any of the said States; there shall be freedom of transit, under equitable conditions, across the said territory. Subject to the above, the Mandatory may impose or cause to be imposed by the local governments such taxes and customs duties as it may consider necessary. The Mandatory, or the local governments acting under its advice, may also conclude on grounds of contiguity any special customs arrangements with an adjoining country. The Mandatory may take or cause to be taken, subject to the provisions of paragraph 1 of this article, such steps as it may think best to ensure the development of the natural resources of the said territory and to safeguard the interests of the local population. Concessions for the development of these natural resources shall be granted without distinction of nationality between the nationals of all States Members of the League of Nations, but on condition that they do not infringe upon the authority of the local Government. Concessions in the

nature of a general monopoly shall not be granted. This clause shall in no way limit the right of the Mandatory to create monopolies of a purely fiscal character in the interest of the territory of Syria and the Lebanon, and with a view to assuring to the territory the fiscal resources which would appear best adapted to the local needs, or, in certain cases, with a view to developing the natural resources either directly by the State or through an organisation under its control, provided that this does not involve either directly or indirectly the creation of a monopoly of the natural resources in favour of the Mandatory or its nationals, nor involve any preferential treatment which would be incompatible with the economic, commercial and industrial equality guaranteed above. ARTICLE 12.—The Mandatory shall adhere, on behalf of Syria and the Lebanon, to any general international agreements already existing, or which may be concluded hereafter with the approval of the League of Nations, in respect of the following: the slave trade, the traffic in drugs, the traffic in arms and ammunition, commercial equality, freedom of transit and navigation, aerial navigation, postal, telegraphic or wireless communications, and measures for the protection of literature, art or industries. ARTICLE 13.—The Mandatory shall secure the adhesion of Syria and the Lebanon, so far as social, religious and other conditions permit, to such measures of common utility as may be adopted by the League of Nations for preventing and combating disease, including diseases of animals and plants. ARTICLE 14.—The Mandatory shall draw up and put into force within twelve months from this date a law of antiquities in conformity with the following provisions. This law shall ensure equality of treatment in the matter of excavations and archaeological research to the nationals of all States Members of the League of Nations. 1° “Antiquity” means any construction or any product of human activity earlier than the year 1700 A. D. 2° The law for the protection of antiquities shall proceed by encouragement rather than by threat.

Any person who, having discovered an antiquity without being furnished with the authorisation referred to in paragraph 5, reports the same to an official of the competent Department, shall be rewarded according to the value of the discovery. 3° No antiquity may be disposed of except to the competent Department, unless this Department renounces the acquisition of any such antiquity. No antiquity may leave the country without an export license from the said Department. 4° Any person who maliciously or negligently destroys or damages an antiquity shall be liable to a penalty to be fixed. 5° No clearing of ground or digging with the object of finding antiquities shall be permitted, under penalty of fine, except to persons authorised by the competent Department. 6° Equitable terms shall be fixed for expropriation, temporary or permanent, of lands which might be of historical or archæological interest. 7° Authorisation to excavate shall only be granted to persons who show sufficient guarantees of archaeological experience. The Mandatory shall not, in granting these authorisations act in such a way as to exclude scholars of any nation without good grounds. 8° The proceeds of excavations may be divided between the excavator and the competent Department in a proportion fixed by that Department. If division seems impossible for scientific reasons, the excavator shall receive a fair indemnity in lieu of a part of the find. ARTICLE 15.—Upon the coming into force of the organic law referred to in article 1, an arrangement shall be made between the Mandatory and the local governments for reimbursement by the latter of all expenses incurred by the Mandatory in organising the administration, developing local

resources, and carrying out permanent public works, of which the country retains the benefit. Such arrangement shall be communicated to the Council of the League of Nations. ARTICLE 16.—French and Arabic shall be the official languages of Syria and the Lebanon, ARTICLE 17.—The Mandatory shall make to the Council of the League of Nations an annual report to the satisfaction of the Council as to the measures taken during the year to carry out the provisions of this mandate. Copies of all laws and regulations promulgated during the year shall be attached to the said report. ARTICLE 18.—The consent of the Council of the League of Nations is required for any modification of the terms of this mandate. ARTICLE 19.—On the termination of the mandate, the Council of the League of Nations shall use its influence to safeguard for the future the fulfilment by the Government of Syria and the Lebanon of the financial obligations, including pensions and allowances, regularly assumed by the administration of Syria or of the Lebanon during the period of the mandate. ARTICLE 20.—The Mandatory agrees that if any dispute whatever should arise between the Mandatory and another Member of the League of Nations relating to the interpretation or the application of the provisions of the mandate, such dispute, if it cannot be settled by negotiation, shall be submitted to the Permanent Court of International Justice provided for by Article 14 of the Covenant of the League of Nations. Whereas the mandate in the above terms came into force on September 29, 1923, and, Whereas the United States of America by participating in the war against Germany contributed to her defeat and the defeat of her allies and to the renunciation of the rights and titles of her allies in the territory transferred by them, but has not ratified the Covenant of the League of Nations embodied in the Treaty of Versailles, and, Whereas the Government of the United States and the Government of France desire to reach a definite understanding with respect to the rights of the two Governments and their respective nationals in Syria and the Lebanon; The President of the United

States of America and the President of the French Republic have decided to conclude a convention to this effect and have nominated as their Plenipotentiaries: THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. His Excellency Mr. Myron T. Herrick, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to France, AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC: M. Raymond Poincaré, Senator, President of the Council, Minister of Foreign Affairs, WHO after communicating to each other their respective full powers found in good and due form, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE 1 Subject to the provisions of the present convention the United States consents to the administration by the French Republic, pursuant to the aforesaid mandate, of Syria and the Lebanon.

ARTICLE 2 The United States and its nationals shall have and enjoy all the rights and benefits secured under the terms of the mandate to members of the League of Nations and their nationals, notwithstanding the fact that the United States is not a member of the League of Nations. ARTICLE 3 Vested American property rights in the mandated territories shall be respected and in no way impaired. ARTICLE 4 A duplicate of the annual report to be made by the mandatory under Article 17 of the mandate shall be furnished to the United States.

ARTICLE 5 Subject to the provisions of any local laws for the maintenance of public order and public morals, the nationals of the United States will be permitted freely to establish and maintain educational, philantropic [sic] and religious institutions in the mandated territory, to receive voluntary applicants and to teach in the English language. ARTICLE 6 Nothing contained in the present convention shall be affected by any modification which may be made in the terms of the mandate as recited above unless such modification shall have been assented to by the United States. ARTICLE 7 The present convention shall be ratified in accordance with the respective constitutional methods of the High Contracting Parties. The ratifications shall be exchanged at Paris as soon as practicable. The present convention shall take effect on the date of the exchange of ratifications. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this Convention and have affixed thereto their seals. DONE in duplicate at Paris, the 4 day of April, in the year 1924. [SEAL] MYRON T. HERRICK [SEAL] R POINCARÉ 25 In English and French; French text not printed. Ratification advised by

Consent of the United States to increased duties on imports into Syria pending ratification of the Syrian mandate treaty [675] The Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

[679] The Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

Opinion by the Department of State regarding jurisdiction over American nationals in Syria [681] The Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

b) The American Consular Court in civil cases when both parties to the suit are American citizens. c) The American Consular Court in civil cases between American citizens and the citizens or subjects of other Powers enjoying capitulatory privileges, when the American is the defendant.

Second.—a) The Consular Court of another capitulatory Power in criminal cases wherein the defendant is a subject of that Power and the complainant an American citizen. b) The Consular Court of another capitulatory Power in civil cases wherein the defendant is a subject of that Power and the complainant an American citizen. Third.—a) Local Tribunal (the Mixed Commercial Court) in civil cases (not arising out of landed property interests) wherein one of the parties is an American citizen and the other a local subject. Cases so heard in this Court are attended by a Dragoman of this Consulate General and two American citizens appointed by the Consulate General sit as associates with the native judges. Judgments rendered in this Court against American citizens must be referred to the Consulate General for execution. If, in the opinion of the Dragoman and the American associates, justice has not been rendered in accordance with the applicable law, the Dragoman refuses to sign the judgment and it is consequently not executed by the Consulate General, in which case a new hearing may be demanded. b) The local tribunals, without the assistance of American associates or the presence of a dragoman, in cases arising out of landed property interests, in accordance with the Turkish law of 1867, accepted by the United States on

It should be noted that in all cases in the local tribunals attended by the Dragoman of the Consulate General, the judgment must be signed by the Dragoman to make it effective. If the Dragoman refuses to sign the judgment a new case may be commenced. If the native Judge insists upon the execution of the judgment, even though the Dragoman refused to sign it, the case must be settled administratively between the French High Commission and the Consulate General. All services in connection with cases in any of the above mentioned courts should be made upon American citizens through the intermediary of the American Consulate General. It is my opinion that the case between Mr. Zoghzoghy and Mr. Abraham, being, as it is, an alleged breach of contract not involving real estate, should come properly in the Mixed Commercial Tribunal, and service could only be made upon Mr. Abraham through this Consulate General, irrespective of whether he resides in Syria or the United States. Mr. Abraham has given a power-of-attorney to Mr. Kaleel Muallem to act for him and defend his interests before the local tribunal. The case has been set for hearing on February 11, 1924. It appears that the plaintiff in his action has caused the defendant’s property in Syria to be attached. Inasmuch as an attachment in a case of this kind constitutes more or less an act of execution of a judgment, which can only be effected against American citizens by the Consulate General, and inasmuch as the Consulate General was not notified by the Court in this regard, Mr. Abraham’s lawyer and the Dragoman of this Consulate General will protest against the judgment at the next hearing of the case. If their protest is unsuccessful, the matter will be taken up administratively between the Consulate General and the French High Commission. There is one more point in connection with this case and any similar cases which will be of interest to the Department. By despatch No. 1120 of August 18, 1923,28 this office transmitted to the Department a summons for service upon Salim Ibrahim Nihra, the name by which Mr. Joe Abraham is known in Syria. In its reply of September 24, 1923 (File No.

“In reply you are informed that the papers mentioned have been sent to the person to whom they are addressed with the statement that the Department is not in any sense undertaking to make service of the documents but that it is merely, without incurring any responsibility in connection with the delivery thereof, bringing the papers to his attention as of possible interest to him.” I should like to call the Department’s attention to the fact that summonses issued by the Consular Courts in Syria against local subjects who are required to appear before the Consular Court must be served through the intermediary of the local Government. Reciprocally, summonses, issued by the local courts for service upon American citizens whose attendance is required before the local courts, must be served through the intermediary of the Consulate General. That being so, it would seem incumbent upon the Department to cause, on behalf of the Consulate General, the legal service of summonses transmitted to the Department for service upon American citizens residing in the United States. It is suggested that the proper procedure would probably be through the Department of Justice. I should be glad to have the Department’s reconsidered opinion in this regard. I have [etc.] P. KNABENSHUE 26 Not printed.

personal service of process upon a defendant beyond its territorial jurisdiction.” In view of these statements of law, it would appear that processes which, by reason of extraterritorial privileges, must be served through the American Consulate Court, may not be served outside of the jurisdiction of the Consular Court, which obviously does not extend to the United States. For the Secretary of State: WILLIAM PHILLIPS

Further protests by the United States against the grant of exclusive privileges to French archeologists for research in Albania and Afghanistan30

34 Not printed.

I have [etc.] MYRON T. HERRICK [Enclosure—Translation] The French Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American Embassy [PARIS,] March 28, 1924. In its note of the 18th of this month, the Embassy of the United States was good enough to call the attention of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs to a protest made by the President of the Archaeological Institute of America, in behalf of that Organization and of a great many American Museums, against the concession of a monopoly for archaeological excavations in Albania, granted recently to the French Government by the Albanian Government. The Ministry for Foreign Affairs has the honor to inform the Embassy of the United States of America that the Franco-Albanian Convention in question, relative to excavations, does not cover all the Albanian territory. It provides only for the exclusive privilege of excavations in favor of the Government of the Republic, in certain districts which are very few and exactly delimited.36 35 Not printed. 36 The Department made no further representations regarding archeological exploration in Albania and Afghanistan.

Discrimination against American shipping by French authorities in refusing to recognize classification and inspection of vessels by the American Bureau of Shipping [687] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick) Washington, June 2, 1924.

195/609: Telegram [691] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State

195/597: Telegram [Document 688] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

For your information and guidance. Please reinforce the foregoing note with vigorous oral representations and endeavor in all proper ways to obtain prompt favorable decision. The essential fact is that France recognizes Lloyds but not the American Bureau. The refusal to recognize latter is not only important to vessels immediately affected, but has broader significance to American shipping inasmuch as greater part of American merchant marine is registered in American Bureau and any action that might be construed as reflection upon the standing of the Bureau would tend to weaken position of vessels registered therein. The Shipping Board adopted a resolution on May 15, 1924, to the effect that the action of the French Government in this case presents a situation contemplated by Section 26 of the Shipping Act 1916 whereby it is authorized in cases of discrimination against American shipping to propose remedial measures to the President, and by Section 19 (b) of the Merchant Marine Act 1920 under which the Board is authorized “to make rules and regulations affecting shipping in the foreign trade not in conflict with law in order to adjust or meet general or special conditions unfavorable to shipping in the foreign trade.” The resolution called upon the Department to communicate with the French Government, preliminary to final action by the Board, with a view to causing that Government to accept as sufficient classifications by the American Bureau of Shipping of vessels documented under the American flag in cases in which, under similar circumstances, classifications by other foreign societies are accepted. You may informally advise the Foreign Office of the purport of the resolution at the same time furnishing it with copies of Section 26 of the

195/598: Telegram [Document 689] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

Please endeavor to ascertain the grounds on which French Government requires inspection of Dollar Line vessels, consulting Consul at Marseilles if necessary, and report to Department by telegraph all particulars obtainable concerning reasons for attitude of French Government in this matter, giving references to laws and decrees on which French position is based and mailing copies if not already forwarded Suggest you communicate with agent of Dollar Line, Paris, which is understood to be United States Lines, 1 Rue Auber, which may know or which may be able to ascertain informally from Ministry Marine precise nature of inspection in question. Transmit copy hereof and copies of other correspondence with Department on this subject to Consul at Marseilles for his information. GREW 39 Telegram of July 10 not printed. 40 Not printed.

195/609: Telegram [Document 690] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State PARIS, August 23, 1924—noon.

195/611: Telegram [Document 691] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State PARIS, August 26, 1924—noon.

Index Afghanistan, concession for archeological research, U. S. protest

Supervision of control of traffic in arms,

Brazil, 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]; U. S. attitude, 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242] Colombia and Peru, 300– [Pgs.

Ecuador–Peru, protocol signed June 21 for submission of question to arbitration in Washington, 304–305 [Pgs.

Capitulations. See under Mandates. Chile: Treaty of 1904 with Bolivia, disinclination of U. S. Secretary of State to offer good offices requested by Bolivia for

538–539 include portions of Doc.

Report of annual meeting at Shanghai, Oct.

Overthrow of President Tsao Kun and establishment of Provisional Government: Coup d’état of Oct. 23 followed by resignation of Tsao Kun and cabinet

includes portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364] Provisional Government. See Provisional Government, infra. Soviet influence, reports and discussions

Ex-Emperor of China, interest of British, Japanese, and Netherlands Governments in

Chinese attitude, 368 [Pg. 368 includes

Proposals of British group for greater individual liberty of action,

discussions concerning, 468 [Pg. 468 includes

Federal Telegraph Co. contract. See under Radio communications, infra. Feng Yu-hsiang. See Civil war in North China, supra. Kiangsu-Chekiang conflict. See Civil war in North China, supra.

Peking Government. See Central Government, supra. Provisional Government (see also Central Government: Overthrow of President Tsao Kun, supra):

U. S. position and emphasis of necessity for reciprocal assurances of intentions of powers toward China, 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of

Doc. 416]; Netherland attitude, 433–

Attitude of United States in regard to relations between contracting

Correspondence between Chinese Government and representatives of protocol

Preliminary customs conference, Chinese

U. S. military and naval forces, including Yangtze Patrol Force, recommendations of Associated American Chambers of Commerce of China concerning, 585 [Pg.

Manchurian-Soviet agreement (see also Arrests, supra),

protecting foreign rights: British suggestion and U. S. concurrence,

U. S. representations to Chinese

Commissions, committees, etc.: Claims Commission, U. S.–Austria and Hungary. See Austria and Hungary: Agreement with United States. Commission on extraterritoriality in China,

Concessions, contracts, etc. See China: Radio communications; Dominican Republic: Bond issue: Loan contract; also under Albania and France. Conferences, international: Control of traffic in arms, proposed conference: League

Treaty. Dominican Republic: Bond issue of $2,500,000: Effect on political situation, 644 [Pg. 644 includes

include portions of Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc.

Position of Government, 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and

Water, Light and Power Co., 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 603, Doc.

Ecuador: Asociacion de Agricultores del Ecuador. See Cacao Growers Association, infra. Boundary dispute with Peru, protocol for submission to

Extraterritoriality. See under China. Federal Telegraph Co. contract. See under China: Radio communications. Finland, extradition treaty with United States, text signed Aug. 1,

Great Britain (see also Arms and munitions; Aviation; Canada; China; Chinese Eastern Railway; Dominican Republic: Claim of British subject; Liquor control; Mormon missionaries; Narcotics Conference; Relief loans: Relief Credits Committee; Spitzbergen Treaty; Treaty for the limitation of naval armament): Egyptian antiquities law, attitude regarding proposed modifications, 716–

Hague Opium Convention of 1912, international conference of signatory powers and members of League of Nations for further restriction of traffic in habit-forming drugs. See Narcotics Conference. Hord, John S., activities as Financial Adviser to Ecuador, 693–

Permanent Court of International Justice, proposed modification in U. S.-Netherlands liquor-smuggling convention concerning possible submission of claims

Liquor control under U. S. prohibition laws, conventions between United States and other governments for prevention of smuggling: Canada: Summary of negotiations, 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]; text of convention between United States and Great Britain in respect of Canada,

submission of claims to Permanent Court of International Justice in lieu of Permanent Court of

Convention between United States and France to ensure U. S. rights: Negotiations, 730–740

Mormon missionaries, American, exclusion from or discriminatory treatment by certain countries: Correspondence between Senator Reed Smoot and U. S.

British-Japanese controversy on exportation

Communication of views in support of conference to Peru, Bolivia,

Open-door policy, U. S. protests against alleged French monopoly on concessions for archeological research in Albania and

Portugal (see also China), participation in International Narcotics

British proposal, including suggested attendance of member of World War Foreign

U. S. Congress. See U. S. Congress. Washington Conference on the Limitation of Armament. See Chinese Eastern Railway: Sino-Soviet agreements: Reservations by the powers; also Arms and munitions embargo: Formula, and Extraterritoriality under China. Rumania. See Aviation; Immigration into United States. Russian and Armenian refugees, U. S. acceptance of certificates of identity issued by League of Nations in lieu of passports, 83–

Siam (see also Aviation), signature of international narcotics

Hague Opium Convention of 1912, conference of signatory powers and members of League of Nations looking toward agreement for further restriction of traffic in habit-forming drugs. See Narcotics Conference. Liquor smuggling into United States, conventions for prevention of. See Liquor control. Mandate convention, U. S.–France. See under Mandates: Syria and the Lebanon. Narcotics agreement, international, 119 [Pg. 119 includes

U. S.–Albania, treaty defining relations, postponement

Consular convention of 1853, question of applicability in Syria and the Lebanon, 730

U. S.–Hungary (see also under Austria and Hungary), treaty establishing friendly relations (1921), U. S. rights

Four-power treaty relating to insular possessions and insular dominions in the region of the Pacific Ocean, nonapplicability to question of Philippine independence, 264–

U. S. Army airplanes, proposed flight around the world. See Aviation. U. S. citizens. See Mandates: Syria and the Lebanon: Jurisdiction; Mormon missionaries; and under China. U. S. Congress: Act approved Mar. 3, 1919, providing for

U. S. Secretary of Navy, letter to Secretary of State concerning question of increase in gun elevation on U. S. capital ships, 9–12

Recommendation of U. S., British, French, and Japanese experts concerning radio communications in China, British position following Japan’s refusal to

Yugoslavia (see also Aviation): Opposition to certain provisions of Albano-Italian treaty of commerce and navigation, 317–318 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 266]; recognition of revolutionary government in
