1006  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
technical assistance and loan assistance have been applied in  a 
manner that has supported U.S. policy objectives and has been in accord 
with a reasoned appraisal of Paraguay’s national self-­interest;
the political thinking of the Government of Paraguay has been 
educated to express itself in undeviating accord with that of the United 
States in all regional and international assemblies;
the people of Paraguay do radiate and demonstrate a genuine 
friendliness and respect for North Americans, and being genuine, it has 
made our tasks here easier and more rewarding;
not only have we avoided the pretensions of condoning dictator-
ship, but on the contrary, we have openly and avowedly advocated the 
immediate necessity to initiate democratic processes in Paraguay; but
the pressures applied to the present government to move it toward 
greater political liberalism have not been measurably fruitful.
2. Economic
Program Appraisal—In an effort to evaluate the Country Program 
for the past two years, we would say:
1. Country Team
All components have been brought together into a harmonious 
and “hard-­hitting” unit. Early in the period, there were discernible sec-
tional weaknesses in the Air Force Mission and in the United States 
Operations Mission. These debilities were promptly eliminated. For the 
past year there has not only been the closest cooperation based upon a 
mutuality of respect, but complete and effective support has been given 
to all sections of the Embassy. Today, the Country Team is an opera-
tional fact rather than only a semantic concept.
2. The Stabilization Program
In December of 1957, the Economic Section of the U.S. Embassy 
cast a statement of Paraguay’s external indebtedness and her annual 
service requirements, and then carefully estimated Paraguay’s ability 
to meet those requirements together with her further absorptive capac-
ity for modest and feasible development. (See Exhibit I—appended3.)
It is our belief that this was the first time any of the lending agen-
cies of the United States, or the International Bank, or the IMF, had a 
factual photograph of Paraguay’s external debt obligations or of her 
potential ability to service them. It is certain that it came as a surprise to 
the Government of Paraguay.
Based on that study, the Team was able to recommend credits 
for selected public works and for private enterprise. The former were 
directed toward those that would be essential to provide a basis for 
private investment. Every recommendation was predicated upon the 
conviction that monetary and fiscal stability had to be reinforced, that 
3 Not printed.
