528
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of uninstructed experts and therefore we can’t lobby openly. However,
he will talk to some key delegates with whom he has personal relation-
ships, and he is more optimistic about the outcome than I had expected.
I assured him of the White House’s strong support for the most vig-
orous possible efforts to avert a negative vote against the U.S. (despite
State’s lukewarm approach to this mess) and promised to talk with him
after the vote (Monday) about changes in staffing and procedures that
will avoid this kind of thing in the future.” (NSC Global Issues Cluster
September 6 evening report; ibid.)
The Subcommission considered the complaint against the United
States during a September 11 closed meeting. In telegram 13662 from
Geneva, September 12, the Mission reported that the Subcommission
voted not to elevate the communication regarding the United States to
the UN Human Rights Commission by a vote of 5–5 with 11 absten-
tions. (National
Archives,
RG 59,
Central
Foreign Policy
File,
D780370–0575) Tuchman Mathews and Denend summarized the out-
come in the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s September 15 evening report:
“The vote of the UN Human Rights Sub-Commission on whether the
US should be cited as a gross and consistent violator of human rights
was as close as it could be 5–5 with 11 abstentions. The tie means that
we will not be cited. However the incident reveals many things that
need changing, particularly our staffing of these Commissions (it is a
contradiction in terms to have an FSO, not to mention an Ambassador,
functioning as an ‘uninstructed expert’). Also our procedures for re-
sponding to complaints against ourselves and for helping others to file
complaints (e.g., against the USSR) are woefully inadequate. The inci-
dent also revealed a profound difference of opinion within the gov-
ernment (and the NSC staff) as to what our posture should be with re-
spect to our own human rights record. At our request, Ambassador
Vanden Heuvel, who did an excellent job in dealing with this problem
will be sending in his suggestions for steps that should be taken.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global
Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports:
9–12/78)
