Yugoslavia
901
the outlook for the latter appears to be dimming rapidly, Tito is still
able to function well, but increasingly focuses ever more narrowly on
foreign affairs. There is no successor-designate. The collective leader-
ship machinery which Tito will leave behind him is designed to prevent
the emergence of any new Caesar. But history indicates that sooner or
later, and probably sooner, some faction will emerge to take charge,
followed by a rise to pre-eminence of a leader from within that faction.
But we cannot at this stage predict who he will be.
8. The United States can influence events here. We support the
unity, territorial integrity and independence of Yugoslavia. That sup-
port is visible and welcome. If, in the time remaining to us before Tito
dies, as well as at the time of the event, the United States is seen as a
powerful friend and an effective force for stability in Europe, this
will aid the post-Tito leaders enormously. Our objective in the pre-
succession period is to weave a web of relationships—political, eco-
nomic, cultural, and military—which projects the image of a steadfast
friend and gives substance to the bilateral relationship.
9. President Tito, at 87, has had severe health problems, but contin-
ues amazingly vigorous. Over the past 4–5 years he has progressively
shed oversight over day-to-day management of the government and
party and has focused on foreign affairs. His is still the last word,
however, on major personnel assignments and indeed on any major
issue which cannot be resolved at a lower level.
10. The ever-pragmatic Tito continues to tinker with the succession
machinery, which now consists of a 24-man party presidency and a
nine-man state presidency. Tito heads both for life, and also holds the
post of Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. The composition
of both presidencies reflects a delicate national balance between Yugo-
slavia’s six constituent republics and two autonomous provinces.
11. The two presidencies contain almost all of the most important
personalities. In general, they are a tough, able, but not very brilliant
group. Most important is a small group of “1941 fighters,” including
the Croatian Party Baron Vladimir Bakaric; Serb Minister of Defense
Nikola Ljubicic, Serb Milos Minic, Principal Foreign Policy Adviser;
Petar Stambolic, Senior Serbian Party figure; and Admiral Branko
Mamula, Croatian Serb who has recently been appointed Armed Forces
Chief of Staff. The most visible younger men are Slovene Stane Dolanc
and Bosnian Croat Branko Mikulic, contenders for day-to-day Party
direction.
12. Since Edvard Kardelj’s death last February, no one has been
designated dauphin or has seized that position. Tito has seen to that.
Speculation about friction between Dolanc and Mikulic, and between
other members of the leadership, may have substance, but we have
lamentably little hard information on which to make judgments. For
