110  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
All agencies, except the JCS, favor returning to the negotiations 
with our current D&S position on both issues. Some favor this because 
they believe our negotiating capital is limited and our position is sound 
over the long term. Others favor returning with our current position, 
but believe that there are options for modifying it that would make 
progress, and that these options should be studied over the summer. 
We can sort this out after negotiations resume.
We suggest that you take the papers in order, and briefly discuss 
the options of each.
DST 001—Testing rights during a non-­withdrawal period. All agen-
cies, except the JCS, believe we should return to Geneva with our 
current position (Option 1). This position provides a unilateral U.S. 
assurance that the number of ABM test satellites orbited at any one 
time would not exceed 15. Further, the Parties would agree to spe-
cific notification procedures regarding those satellites. This would be 
intended to address stated Soviet concerns that U.S. ABM testing in 
space could become de facto deployment. It would also, if the Soviets 
were to agree, obtain implicit Soviet acceptance of testing under the 
broad interpretation of the ABM Treaty, without subjecting the broad 
interpretation to direct negotiation. The current U.S. position is that 
the assurance and notification procedures are fully consistent with the 
ABM Treaty.
The JCS favor an option (Option 2) that would negotiate an 
explicit agreement based on the terms of the U.S. position. Moreover, 
it would go beyond the ABM Treaty, inasmuch as it would permit 
testing in space of all ABM weapons, whether or not they are based 
on “other physical principles.” Thus, the proposal would require 
negotiation and agreement. If successful, it could provide better pro-
tection for U.S. testing rights, and counter congressional efforts to leg-
islate a narrow interpretation of the ABM Treaty. On the other hand, 
it could also put on the negotiating table what we already believe to 
be our right.
All agencies are agreed that we should retain our proposal to allow 
unlimited development, testing, and deployment of space-­based sen-
sors, regardless of their capability. This proposal would have the effect 
of amending the ABM Treaty. It is an attempt to reconcile the increas-
ing needs and capabilities of both sides for warning and attack assess-
ment, with the fact that there will be no way to distinguish with NTM 
whether or not certain sensor satellites are ABM capable.
If past practice holds, the Chiefs will try to defer substantive dis-
cussion on the options to the NSC meeting. Given that they stand apart 
from all other agencies, the meeting should simply serve to ensure that 
the options are fairly and completely stated.
