Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX in fact, be better performed by the existence of one Board—the Board of RFE/RL. The difficulty which flows from the fact that the RFE/RL Board is a “private” Board must be overcome. I offer several not carefully thought out alternatives. 1) Can the RFE/RL structure, and especially its officers and Board, be made quasi-public with the responsibility to report to Congress and the President? The present operation is, in fact though not in form, quasi-public. 2) Should the RFE/RL Board elect a five-member committee of its members with those members appointed to the BIB by the President subject to Congressional approval? Redundancy of membership is vital if this approach is to work so long as the BIB continues to exist. The formation of such a five-member committee of the Board of RFE/RL has an additional virtue. The present full Board of RFE/RL has exceptional experience, competence and stature. It is, however, too large to function as an effective board of directors. The present size and range are suggestive of an aggregation of consultants covering the very wide scope of the expertise required to guide the Radios. 3) Should the GAO and OMB assume a large part of the necessary oversight and accounting? This memo closes with several questions. My inquiry was insufficient to examine them. 1) Does the present arrangement and the present functioning of RFE/RL provide a broadcasting capability sufficiently responsive to U.S. needs in a radically changed world? 2) Are we still over-reacting to the sensitivity about government abuse of the Radios which flowed from the period of intense concern with our intelligence activities? 3) Do the Radios fill the new target needs—ethnic, religious, geographic and political—so large a part of present and future foreign policy concerns? 4) Can our national needs be fully served by ably run broadcasting instruments, staffed by gifted journalists seeking to preserve a reputation for accuracy, objectivity and independence? Each makes an important contribution to credibility. At what cost, in a very new time? Leo Cherne
