Afghanistan Memorandum for the Record by Thomas Thornton of the National Security Council Staff1 Washington, May 3, 1978 SUBJECT SCC Working Group Meeting on Afghanistan This morning I chaired an SCC Working Group Meeting on Afghanistan. In attendance were NIO, David Blee, Rear Admiral Thomas from ISA, with Commander Zwart, and Peter Lande of State who was acting as Deputy Assistant Secretary. I used the agenda attached as a focus for discussion.2 Most of the discussion was operational. The principal substantive matters that arose were: —Diplomatic Recognition. Vance apparently wants to go ahead routinely with diplomatic recognition unless the Iranians urge strongly otherwise and even then he may rather keep in step with the OECD countries than with Iran. I said that you would want to have a voice in this and decide whether the matter needs to go to the President. Most of us at the meeting thought it would be wise to take fuller account of Iranian concerns and, if they felt strongly, attempt to slow down our OECD colleagues. —Covert Action. There was no great enthusiasm for covert action, particularly on the part of CIA, which felt that it would be pointless. Blee’s informal estimate was that the greatest period of weakness would come in 6 to 12 months because of deteriorating economic conditions. We discussed this at some length and much against his will I instructed him to prepare a paper which looks at the possibility of covert actions in the short term. —General Attitude. There was a general consensus that this regime will be bad news for us but that we should not take the initiative in breaking ties. We decided that personnel should not be withdrawn from Kabul on an accelerated schedule as proposed by the Ambassador.3 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File, Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1978. Secret; Sensitive. Printed from an uninitialed copy. Copies were sent to Brzezinski and Hoskinson. Attached but not printed is a covering memorandum, May 3, from Thornton to Brzezinski which characterizes the memorandum as a “run-down” of the meeting Thornton chaired earlier that morning. 2 Attached but not printed.
