Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
573
remarks of Israeli President Yitzhak Navon and Carter at a welcoming
ceremony in Tel Aviv the evening of March 10, see ibid., pages 415–417.
Following these remarks, Carter went by motorcade with Begin to the
entrance of the city of Jerusalem. On March 11, Carter and Begin, in ad-
dition to other U.S. and Israeli officials, met from 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m.,
3:08 to 3:35 p.m., and 5 to 5:30 p.m. For the public remarks of Begin and
Carter, made at the conclusion of this meeting, see Public Papers: Carter,
1979, Book I, pages 417–419.
Carter and U.S. officials met with Begin and members of the Israeli
Cabinet the morning of March 12, from 10:20 to 11:20 a.m. At 12:16
p.m., Carter addressed the members of the Israeli Knesset. In his
opening remarks, the President affirmed the U.S. commitment to Israel
before turning to a discussion of the peace process:
“At Camp David, Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat
forged two frameworks for the building of that comprehensive peace.
The genius of that accomplishment is that negotiations under these
frameworks can go forward independently of each other, without de-
stroying the obvious relationship between them.
“They are designed to be mutually reinforcing, with the intrinsic
flexibility necessary to promote the comprehensive peace that we all
desire. Both will be fulfilled only when others of your Arab neighbors
follow the visionary example of President Sadat, when they put ancient
animosities behind them and agree to negotiate, as you desire, as
you’ve already done with President Sadat, an honorable solution to the
differences between you.
“It’s important that the door be kept open to all the parties to the
conflict, including the Palestinians, with whom, above all, Israel shares
a common interest in living in peace and living with mutual respect.
“Peace in the Middle East, always important to the security of the
entire region, in recent weeks has become an even more urgent
concern.
“Israel’s security will rest not only on how the negotiations affect
the situation on your own borders but also on how it affects the forces
of stability and moderation beyond your borders.
“I’m convinced that nothing can do more to create a hospitable at-
mosphere for those more distant forces in the long run than an equi-
table peace treaty between Israel and Egypt.
“The risks of peace between you and your Egyptian neighbors are
real. But America is ready to reduce any risks and to balance them
within the bounds of our strength and our influence.
“I came to Israel representing the most powerful country on Earth.
And I can assure you that the United States intends to use that power in
the pursuit of a stable and a peaceful Middle East.
