Arms Control and Disarmament 1349 For example: 1. Whenever the disarmament question comes up we should con­ tinue and redouble our emphasis on inspection—on “open sky”, on the idea of “openness”, on the suspicions and dangers of war caused by excessive secrecy. 2. As soon as possible but not later than the 13th GA we should draw together this and other topics—Open Sky, the IGY, the cultural exchange program—into a top-­level, long-­range proposal for opening the USSR and the US to unrestricted travel by each other’s citizens; unrestricted sale of each other’s newspapers, magazines, books and films; exchange of professors by hundreds and university students by thousands; equal access to each other’s domestic radio and TV net­ works; and similar steps to build mutual confidence in an open world. There should be no difficulty in making such a proposal so far reaching USSR would undoubtedly reject it but so reasonable that we would earn wide sympathy and USSR would be put on continuing defensive. Lodge 327. Telegram 1310 From USUN1 New York, May 14, 1958, 7 p.m. 1310. Re UN Report on Effects of Atomic Radiation. 1. In our opinion comprehensive report of UN Scientific Commit­ tee on effects of atomic radiation likely to give further impetus opposi­ tion to nuclear tests on health and medical grounds, generating further political difficulty for US on testing issue. 2. We think this will be case in spite of fact report shows health haz­ ards from testing are statistically only fraction of hazards from medical and natural sources. It seems to us numerous deleterious effects from radiation, which is main subject of the report, will heavily outweigh this fact in public mind and that there will be opposition to any dangers from tests, no matter how small. 3. We recognize few of facts contained are entirely new and that many of them actually stem from report US National Academy of Sci­ ence. But UN report inevitably does not have qualifications re security 1 Source: U.N. report on effects of atomic radiation. Secret. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/5–1458.
