Arms Control and Disarmament  1429
now suspend all tests, the Russians may well think that they have got 
substantially what they want without having to pay any price for it. 
What I mean by this is that they might refuse to agree to any genuine 
international control, calculating that the West would never be able to 
resume the tests which they had voluntarily suspended.
If we felt that we must make some forward move on tests at the 
present time, I would much prefer to see it limited to those tests which 
we know can be detected by existing national systems—say, everything 
above 25 kilotons. A proposal on those lines would be consistent with 
our past insistence on linking suspension to control and would also go 
a long way to meeting public criticism of tests on grounds of injury to 
health, since it would eliminate all tests which release fission products 
into the stratosphere.
A limited suspension of this kind would also make things much 
easier for the French. I am seriously troubled about their attitude. I feel 
that after all our difficulties with de Gaulle over recent events, while he 
is still suspicious of our intentions towards him, it would be a serious 
mistake to force the French Government into a position of dissociating 
itself from our proposals. The trouble which we are having with them 
already at Geneva shows how suspicious they are on this question. We 
really must consult them fully and give them time to come to a conclu­
sion. But de Gaulle will be in Africa for at least a week from now. I do 
feel strongly that the whole economic future of Europe, and perhaps its 
political future too, may be jeopardized if we allow the French to feel 
isolated or roughly treated over this question.
For myself, I should much prefer that any statement we may agree 
to make on future policy in relation to nuclear tests should be related, 
not to the end of the Geneva Conference, but to the opening of the Gen­
eral Assembly. We shall all be under acute pressure there to make some 
forward move with a view to getting the maximum benefit from it in 
the Assembly. If we play this card sooner we shall be bound to be asked 
for more when the Assembly meets.
Finally, I ought to tell you that the test series which we have just 
announced will not in fact be completed, at earliest, until the middle of 
October.
May I ask you, my dear Friend, to take these points into account. 
They seem to me to merit serious consideration. This is a very import­
ant decision. I agree with you absolutely as to your purpose, but I am 
anxious that we should make no mistake as to method and timing.
With warm regards,
Yours ever,
Harold Macmillan
