Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 6. Security for Soviet citizens primary but probably not only concern. Security for the hundreds of Soviet citizens—especially in Kabul where they have been targeted for elimination—was most probably a major consideration in the decision to send troops, although I suspect the move has several goals. This particular thesis, however, would be buttressed should the Soviet troops eventually be sent to Kabul to protect the Soviet housing area and Embassy. So far, we have not detected any of the just arrived Soviet combat units in the capital, although Bagram Air Base is only about 40 miles away, and the Soviet decision-makers may elect to leave the troops there, rather than raising their visibility dramatically. 7. The troops may eventually play a role in domestic Afghan politics. I assume that the Soviets are very aware that Amin is widely perceived as the cause of much of this country’s woes, and it is conceivable they may have concluded that his departure may be necessary to save the revolution. I don’t think so. Most of us here are agreed that Moscow’s fundamental commitment is to the revolution (and party) and not to specific individuals. Whether or not Moscow may have a hand in any anti-Amin move, there are probably many individuals or small groups gunning for him, and Amin-Soviet tensions flowing from the Taraki affair are widely believed to be serious. By stationing Soviet troops near the capital, Moscow may want to be ready to intervene to back a specific contending faction in the event of intraparty civil war— to preserve the special position of the Soviet Union in the country. I should point out too that these troops represent an impressive argument should the Soviets decide to try and “convince” Amin to leave the scene “voluntarily” for the sake of the revolution’s survival, and in favor of a less “tainted” leftist leader—perhaps a currently unknown military man. At this point, however, I cannot identify any Khalqi leader who could come close to filling Amin’s shoes, and the exiled Parchamists appear not to hold out much promise as alternate leadership. 8. Direct Soviet combat role strikes me as unlikely, but cannot be ruled out. I doubt that the Soviet troops here will actually take the field against the insurgents, unless some key DRA military corps or division collapses and Kabul is threatened. At most they might man a roadblock to safeguard one of the approaches to the capital—until loyal DRA relief forces arrived. 9. Winter is approaching fast, the countryside is extremely rugged, and, were Soviet units to get spread thin, and engage in search and destroy missions, Soviet combat casualties could well become significant, especially since the guerrilla warfare being waged by the insurgents is not necessarily vulnerable to sophisticated armies. Nonetheless, General Pavlovskiy, Commander of Soviet Ground Forces, may have
