Human Rights
505
156.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs (Bergsten) to the Deputy Secretary
of State (Christopher)1
Washington, July 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Procedures for Handling Human Rights
This is a follow-up to your discussions of this subject with Under
Secretary Solomon and me in May.2 Our executive directors have again
reviewed ways of obtaining from bank managements information on
prospective loans far in advance of their consideration by the Board so
that there is ample time to consider human rights objectives. Based on
their views, I suggest the following procedure as a means of making
more effective use of our voice and vote in the international develop-
ment banks.
Treasury will provide for each of the banks a list of projects likely
to be presented to the Board during the coming year, accompanied by
brief project descriptions to provide a general idea of the nature of the
proposed project.
Such a list will be provided for each problem country—currently
13 whose loans we have been opposing. See the attachment for a
sample.3 We would be prepared, however, to obtain similar informa-
tion whenever it is decided that a country should be shifted from the
“watch list” to the “active list.”
With lead time of up to a year, we would have ample time to con-
sult with like-minded governments to seek support for parallel actions
on their part. This is what the Secretary suggested to Chancellor Denis
Healey in his recent letter.4 We would then be in a better position to in-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780140–2031. Lim-
ited Official Use. Copies were sent to Hormats and Lake. Schneider and John Spiegel sent
the memorandum to Oxman under an August 28 covering memorandum. Schneider and
Speigel also transmitted a copy of a draft response from Christopher to Bergsten, which
Bova had drafted on August 16, and a copy of an August 22 memorandum from Leslie
Brown (T) to Bova indicating that T would not clear the draft response unless the Depart-
ment of Defense and NSC also cleared. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 145.
3 The attached undated paper, “U.S. Opposition to MDB Loans on Human Rights
Grounds and IBRD/IDA Tentative Pipeline of Projects FY 1979,” is not printed.
4 Reference is to Blumenthal’s July 12 letter to Healey, wherein Blumenthal pro-
posed that the United States, the United Kingdom, and “others having similar objectives”
meet to “exchange information and determine where we have common concerns and
how it might be feasible to seek improvements as a condition for providing continued
assistance.” (Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat,
1978 Files, 56–83–69)
