Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I tions who practice restraint in arms sales sometimes find that they simply lose valuable commercial markets to other suppliers. We hope to work with other supplier nations to cut back on the flow of arms and to reduce the rate at which the most advanced and sophisticated weapon technologies spread around the world. We do not expect this task to be easy or to produce instant results. But we are committed to stop the spiral of increasing sale of weapons. Equally important, we hope that purchaser nations, individually and through regional organizations, will limit their arms imports. We are ready to provide to some nations the necessary means for legitimate self-defense, but we are also eager to work with any nation or region in order to decrease the need for more numerous, more deadly, and ever more expensive weapons. Fourteen years ago one of my predecessors spoke in this very room under circumstances that in certain ways resembled these.4 It was a time, he said, of comparative calm, and there was an atmosphere of rising hope about the prospect of controlling nuclear energy. The first specific step had been taken to limit the nuclear arms race—a test ban treaty signed by nearly a hundred nations.5 But the succeeding years did not live up to the optimistic prospect John F. Kennedy placed before this assembly, because as a community of nations, we failed to address the deepest sources of potential conflict among us. As we seek to establish the principles of de´tente among the major nuclear powers, we believe that these principles must also apply in regional conflicts. The United States is committed to the peaceful settlement of differences. We are committed to the strengthening of the peacemaking capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations, such as the Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American States. The United States supports Great Britain’s efforts to bring about a peaceful, rapid transition to majority rule and independence in Zim-
