260
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tions who practice restraint in arms sales sometimes find that they
simply lose valuable commercial markets to other suppliers.
We hope to work with other supplier nations to cut back on the
flow of arms and to reduce the rate at which the most advanced and so-
phisticated weapon technologies spread around the world. We do not
expect this task to be easy or to produce instant results. But we are com-
mitted to stop the spiral of increasing sale of weapons.
Equally important, we hope that purchaser nations, individually
and through regional organizations, will limit their arms imports. We
are ready to provide to some nations the necessary means for legitimate
self-defense, but we are also eager to work with any nation or region in
order to decrease the need for more numerous, more deadly, and ever
more expensive weapons.
Fourteen years ago one of my predecessors spoke in this very
room under circumstances that in certain ways resembled these.4 It was
a time, he said, of comparative calm, and there was an atmosphere of
rising hope about the prospect of controlling nuclear energy.
The first specific step had been taken to limit the nuclear arms
race—a test ban treaty signed by nearly a hundred nations.5
But the succeeding years did not live up to the optimistic prospect
John F. Kennedy placed before this assembly, because as a community
of nations, we failed to address the deepest sources of potential conflict
among us.
As we seek to establish the principles of de´tente among the major
nuclear powers, we believe that these principles must also apply in re-
gional conflicts.
The United States is committed to the peaceful settlement of differ-
ences. We are committed to the strengthening of the peacemaking ca-
pabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations, such as the
Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American
States.
The United States supports Great Britain’s efforts to bring about a
peaceful, rapid transition to majority rule and independence in Zim-
4 Kennedy addressed the UN General Assembly on September 20, 1963. For the text
of his address, see Public Papers: Kennedy, 1963, pp. 693–698.
5 Reference is to the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, which banned nuclear weapons tests
in the atmosphere and under water. Officials from the United States, the United
Kingdom, and the Soviet Union signed the treaty in Moscow on August 5, 1963. Fol-
lowing the Senate’s favorable consideration of the treaty on September 24, Kennedy
signed the treaty on October 7, and it entered into force on October 10. For additional in-
formation, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. VII, Arms Control and Disarmament,
Documents 359 and 366.
