Yugoslavia turing, some of which is privately-owned). These enterprises operate under a broad economic policy and planning mandate, but with substantial independent management authority which they share with the workers’ self-management organs (having a voice in selection of managers, production, investment and wage policy) within each enterprise. This unique system, coupled with Eastern Europe’s only real banking system and active participation in international markets, has given Yugoslavia a dynamic industrial quasi-market (albeit somewhat inefficient) economy which is, in many respects, far removed from the statist economies of its Eastern European neighbors. As a self-proclaimed leader of the nonaligned movement, Yugoslavia participates actively in a host of international bodies and often seeks the role of spokesman or mediator on issues which concern the nonaligned and the third world. Yugoslav positions on most international questions reflect both the leadership’s philosophical proclivities and their sense of what will reinforce Yugoslavia’s position in the nonaligned movement. While these motivations more often than not lead Yugoslavia to positions different from ours, there have been some recent signs of a tendency to play a moderating role between opposing positions, such as the Middle East and the Horn of Africa. This is illustrated in Yugoslavia’s recent actions on Middle East developments. Without dropping their long-standing support for the Arabs, the Yugoslavs have moved significantly to express openly the view that the existence of Israel must be accepted and assured. Tito has recently lent his personal prestige to this position in messages to Arab leaders. In the contemporary dynamics of today’s world, with East-West issues at the surface at the CSCE in Belgrade, with Eurocommunism near the surface in Western Europe, and with an array of issues facing us all in the Middle East, Africa and elsewhere, Yugoslavia will inevitably retain an importance and, thus, have an interest to the United States well beyond its nominal place in the world. Whether Yugoslavia’s importance will survive Tito’s departure from the scene—a prospect which must be considered despite his remarkable longevity—will depend on both internal and external forces. Yugoslavia’s leaders have had to contend with nationalist strains among the ethnic and religious groupings, as well as with wide disparities among the republics in economic development. Tito’s passing will remove the greatest single symbol of national unity and could threaten the nation’s stability. It is difficult to predict what the Soviets might be tempted to do in such a situation in the interests of bringing Yugoslavia back into communist conformity. Clearly the Yugoslavs are totally committed to preserving their independence. Equally clearly, their leaders are aware of the risk of Soviet interference, and believe that Western interest, engagement and commitment to Yugoslav inde-
