Yugoslavia
815
turing, some of which is privately-owned). These enterprises operate
under a broad economic policy and planning mandate, but with sub-
stantial independent management authority which they share with
the workers’ self-management organs (having a voice in selection of
managers, production, investment and wage policy) within each enter-
prise. This unique system, coupled with Eastern Europe’s only real
banking system and active participation in international markets, has
given Yugoslavia a dynamic industrial quasi-market (albeit somewhat
inefficient) economy which is, in many respects, far removed from the
statist economies of its Eastern European neighbors.
As a self-proclaimed leader of the nonaligned movement, Yugo-
slavia participates actively in a host of international bodies and often
seeks the role of spokesman or mediator on issues which concern the
nonaligned and the third world. Yugoslav positions on most interna-
tional questions reflect both the leadership’s philosophical proclivities
and their sense of what will reinforce Yugoslavia’s position in the
nonaligned movement. While these motivations more often than not
lead Yugoslavia to positions different from ours, there have been some
recent signs of a tendency to play a moderating role between opposing
positions, such as the Middle East and the Horn of Africa. This is
illustrated in Yugoslavia’s recent actions on Middle East developments.
Without dropping their long-standing support for the Arabs, the Yugo-
slavs have moved significantly to express openly the view that the
existence of Israel must be accepted and assured. Tito has recently lent
his personal prestige to this position in messages to Arab leaders.
In the contemporary dynamics of today’s world, with East-West
issues at the surface at the CSCE in Belgrade, with Eurocommunism
near the surface in Western Europe, and with an array of issues facing us
all in the Middle East, Africa and elsewhere, Yugoslavia will inevitably
retain an importance and, thus, have an interest to the United States
well beyond its nominal place in the world.
Whether Yugoslavia’s importance will survive Tito’s departure
from the scene—a prospect which must be considered despite his
remarkable longevity—will depend on both internal and external
forces. Yugoslavia’s leaders have had to contend with nationalist strains
among the ethnic and religious groupings, as well as with wide dispari-
ties among the republics in economic development. Tito’s passing will
remove the greatest single symbol of national unity and could threaten
the nation’s stability. It is difficult to predict what the Soviets might
be tempted to do in such a situation in the interests of bringing Yugo-
slavia back into communist conformity. Clearly the Yugoslavs are
totally committed to preserving their independence. Equally clearly,
their leaders are aware of the risk of Soviet interference, and believe
that Western interest, engagement and commitment to Yugoslav inde-
