XII
Preface
mately inconclusive) autonomy talks on track, securing the continued
goodwill and stability of Egypt by negotiating resupply of the military
with U.S. arms, mediating in Sadat’s mounting public rivalry with
Saudi Arabia, dealing with the ongoing upheaval in Lebanon, and ad-
dressing the series of resolutions related to the Arab-Israeli dispute
brought before the United Nations Security Council.
In keeping with the other Foreign Relations volumes in the Carter
administration subseries, the emphasis of this volume is on policy for-
mulation, rather than the implementation of policy or day-to-day di-
plomacy. As in other volumes in this subseries, the National Security
Council and the Department of State were the primary agents of U.S.
policymaking. Given the intense personal interest of the President in
the peace process through much of the period covered by this volume
as well as the President’s April 1979 decision to turn over the negotia-
tions to a special representative answerable directly to him, the former
occupied a more sustained place in determining policy. Following the
conclusion of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty, these two agencies
were joined more directly in the policy making process by the Depart-
ment of Defense, especially in assessing and meeting the perceived
strategic needs of Egypt and Israel.
Acknowledgments
The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the
Jimmy Carter Presidential Library and Museum in Atlanta, Georgia,
particularly Ceri McCarron, Brittany Parris, David Stanhope, and
James Yancey for their patient and tireless assistance. Thanks are also
due to the Central Intelligence Agency for arranging access to the
Carter Library materials scanned for the Remote Archive Capture proj-
ect. The Historical Staff of the Central Intelligence Agency were helpful
in arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelligence Agency,
and Sandy Meagher was helpful in providing access to Department of
Defense materials. Thanks are due to the staff of the Manuscript Divi-
sion of the Library of Congress for expediting access to the papers of
Harold Brown and Sol M. Linowitz. The editor thanks the staff at the
National Archives and Records Administration facility in College Park,
Maryland, for their valuable assistance.
Alexander R. Wieland collected and selected documentation and
edited the volume under the supervision of Adam Howard, then Chief
of the Middle East and Africa Division, and Susan C. Weetman/Adam
Howard, General Editor of the series. Dean Weatherhead coordinated
the declassification review under the supervision of Carl Ashley, Chief
of the Declassification and Publishing Division. Stephanie Eckroth and
Craig Daigle did the copy and technical editing. Do Mi Stauber, Inc.
prepared the index.
Alexander R. Wieland, Ph.D.
Historian
