744  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Appendix A
Paper Prepared by the Chief of Staff of the Army, 
the Chief of Naval Operations, and the Commandant 
of the Marine Corps
Washington, undated
VIEW OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF, U.S. ARMY; CHIEF OF NAVAL 
OPERATIONS; AND THE COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS
on
BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY (NSC 5906) (C)
1. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; the Chief of Naval Operations; and 
the Commandant of the Marine Corps have reviewed the draft state­
ment of policy (NSC 5906) prepared by the National Security Council 
Planning Board for consideration by the National Security Council at 
its meeting on Thursday, 25 June 1959.
2. In the past, the United States has assumed that possession of 
the nuclear deterrent would severely curb the scope of USSR military 
actions in conflict short of general war. This assumption was based on 
our possession of the sole capability to employ massive nuclear retalia­
tion at a time of our choosing should a situation get out of hand. Even 
though there may have been questions in the minds of many as to what 
circumstances would be critical enough to evoke a nuclear reaction 
from the United States, the United States did have the known capa­
bility to employ a nuclear attack without receiving unacceptable dam­
age in return. Possession of this capability gave confidence to our allies 
and inhibited the USSR. With the removal of this inhibition due to their 
achievement of a capability to launch a crippling attack against the 
United States, Soviet actions can be expected to become more aggres­
sive and venturesome, including resort to limited wars of increased 
scope and severity. On the other hand, our allies have already shown 
signs of a decreasing confidence in our ability to provide a meaningful 
security to the Free World. Therefore, the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; the 
Chief of Naval Operations; and the Commandant of the Marine Corps 
believe that present Basic National Security Policy is not responsive to 
the present or prospective world situation. They, therefore, hold that 
the military strategy outlined in NSC 5906 should be changed.
3. U.S. military strategy should be designed to cope with a condi­
tion of relative nuclear parity, in which it is recognized that general war 
will result in mutual devastation. To do so, it must provide not only 
for an evident, secure nuclear retaliatory capability and an acceptable 
doctrine for its use, but it must also provide an evident, adequate and
