404  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the day for the Ministerials. Jim’s thought is the end of January, but of 
course we will be flexible.
[Omitted here are discussions not related to START.]
The President: Arms control: I want to get rid of chemical weapons. 
I mean it. Let me offer a new suggestion, granting a concession on my 
part. If you will agree to the CW initiative I put forward at the UN in 
September, I am prepared to terminate the U.S. binary modernization 
program as soon as a global ban is in force. I hope we can get agreement 
to substantially reduce our stockpiles. CFE: I want to complete a CFE 
Treaty. High level political attention from your side and our side will 
be needed to get it done. I worry about getting bogged down in the 
bureaucracies. I would like to have a goal of a CFE Summit in Vienna 
to sign a CFE Treaty in 1990. On START, I want to put some steam 
behind the process. You and I should agree to get all our differences 
out of the way by the 1990 Summit and hopefully conclude a treaty by 
then. To that end, we need to concentrate on three issues—ALCM’s, 
non-­deployed missiles, and telemetry encryption—­to be resolved at the 
January Ministerial meeting. I am expediting the START process. We 
will table most major issues by the January meeting, and will table all 
positions by the time of the next Ministerial following the Open Skies 
conference.2 I am instructing my negotiator in Geneva to lift the U.S.-­
proposed ban on mobiles and make acceptance of mobile ICBMs part 
of the negotiating text. I would also like you to consider an idea that 
would improve strategic stability. The SS-18 is the only “heavy” mis-
sile in either arsenal. I hope you will consider ending modernization 
of the SS-18 and deeper unilateral reductions in the SS-18 force. On 
nuclear testing, I propose that we complete the TTBT and PNET proto-
cols for signature at our summit next year. In addition, I propose that 
you announce a unilateral decision to adhere to the limits of the Missile 
Technology Control Regime, to which the U.S. and six other industrial 
powers adhere. [The Soviets didn’t seem to know what we are talking 
about.] On your military budget, could you consider making public the 
details of your budget, force posture, and weapons production figures, 
the way the U.S. does? As a former CIA man, I hope you got these from 
the KGB before our meeting. (S)
Chairman Gorbachev: They say you are not publishing everything. (C)
The President: I hope you can do this as a trust-­building measure. 
Let me raise some general points for the future. I suggest that we sup-
port Berlin as the Olympic site in 2004. This would be a fitting sym-
bol of the new era in East-West relations. On the environment, I know 
you are getting hit hard. I am getting hit hard. Global climate change 
2 Negotiations on a Treaty on Open Skies began in Ottawa in February 1990 and 
continued in Budapest in April and May 1990.
