800
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
which would guarantee Consular access to American citizens who are
also considered to be Yugoslav citizens. The GOY turned the U.S.
proposal down primarily for two reasons: (1) Yugoslav citizenship and
nationality laws do not permit foreign Consular access to Yugoslav
citizens who happen to have another nationality; and (2) if such an
agreement were signed other countries (Canada, Australia, France, etc)
would demand the same arrangement. In 1974 the GOY circulated a
so-called pro memoria to all diplomatic missions in which it declared
that such agreements would be “contrary to the constitutional principle
of the equality of Yugoslav citizens before the law. . .” The GOY did
promise to “take into account” the fact that a person detained also
possessed another nationality.
20. In the Embassy’s view, only a carefully drawn and executed
agreement on receiving-state responsibilities regarding notification and
access in the case of limitation of personal freedom of sending-state
nationals will assure the interests of both governments in this trouble-
some and potentially poisonous area of our Consular relations. Cases
of this nature continue to arise, straining our otherwise good relations,
and efforts should now be made to remove this problem area in the
near future.
Cultural and Informational Activities:
21. Culturalandinformationprogramshavealsoplayedamajorrole
in the development of bilateral relations. Exchange activities, particu-
larly the Fulbright and International Visitors programs, strengthen ties
between the two countries. Complementing activities of the Embassy,
U.S. Information Centers (USIC) in Belgrade, Zagreb, Ljubljana, Skopje
and Sarajevo offer another means for advancing U.S. interests in Yugo-
slavia. With resident American officers, these centers provide not only
an American presence in the community, but a unique outlet in five of
the six Yugoslav Republics for American ideas.
22. As Yugoslavia enters the transitional period leading to the post-
Tito era, we can act to put the United States into a position of influence
by intensifying cultural and information contacts and exchanges, and
by expanding them into areas of the society which have been all but
untouched until now (such as the LCY, SAWPY, social scientists and
regional political groupings).
Eagleburger
