354 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 153. Memorandum of Conversation1 Moscow, March 29, 1977, 4:30–7:30 p.m. SUBJECT Middle East, Arms Control PARTICIPANTS UNITED STATES USSR Secretary Cyrus R. Vance Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko Ambassador Malcolm Toon Deputy Chairman of the Council Mr. Paul Warnke of Ministers L.V. Smirnov Assistant Secretary Arthur Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Hartman Korniyenko Mr. William Hyland Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin Mr. Leslie Gelb Notetaker—Name Unknown Mr. William D. Krimer, Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter Interpreter [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a comprehensive test ban.] CTB Gromyko said that, as the Secretary would know, the Soviet Union was in favor of resolving the problem of completely stopping nuclear weapon testing. The USSR had proposed that all nuclear powers, without exception, enter into discussions as soon as possible, with the participation of non-nuclear states, with a view to conclusion of a treaty on this subject, providing for a complete and universal ban on testing nuclear weapons. In connection with that proposal, the question of verification would arise, and the Soviet Union had taken it into account, although he was convinced that given today’s level of technology, verification by national technical means should be sufficient. Still, the Soviet Union was prepared to go further and find mutually acceptable understandings that would preserve the framework of voluntary decisions in the context of on-site investigation of certain phenomena. This should be aimed at providing assurances for all parties to the treaty that obligations under the treaty were being complied with. Something of this kind had been suggested by the Swedes. The Soviets would suggest 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 8, Vance to Moscow, March 28–30, 1977. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Krimer; and approved by Hyland (in draft), and Twadell on May 9. The meeting took place at the Kremlin. The memorandum is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 20. Vance reported on his conversation with Gromkyo to Carter and Brzezinski in Secto 3033 from the Secretary’s Delegation, March 29. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840076–0315)
