Peru  1101
second cruiser—whether it would serve our interests in Peru and the 
hemisphere as a whole now to deny Peru the loan and rehabilitation of 
the Ship Loan Act destroyer earmarked for Peru in the grant military 
assistance program. I have concluded, for the reasons specified below, 
that we can find no position that would adequately justify our denial of 
the destroyer to Peru while to do so would greatly prejudice our rela-
tions with Peru and our ability to carry out basic constructive programs 
in that country. I have therefore concluded that we must implement the 
program as originally planned.
Our Position re Naval Vessels for Other Latin American Countries
Neither Peru nor other Latin American countries have assumed 
bilateral or multilateral commitments which impose limits on the size or 
character of military forces they may maintain for hemispheric or national 
defense. In the absence of any such agreement, Peru obviously has the 
sovereign right to determine unilaterally its military requirements.
We have not withheld, nor made known any intention to withhold, 
U.S. naval vessels from other Latin American countries which have 
acquired or are in process of acquiring naval vessels considered by us 
to be militarily and economically unjustifiable. After U.S. representations 
to the Brazilian and British Governments had failed in 1957 to prevent 
Brazilian acquisition of a British aircraft carrier, we found it necessary 
(in connection with the maintenance of a USAF missiles tracking facility 
on Brazilian territory) to agree to provide Brazil with about $87 million 
in military equipment, including four destroyers. One of these ships was 
delivered this year; the others are to be delivered during the next two 
years. Subsequent to Argentina’s acquisition of a British carrier in 1958, 
we found it in our interest to comply with President Frondizi’s personal 
request that we help him assure continued Argentine military support 
for his forward-­looking economic policies, which serve U.S. interests, by 
extending Argentina a sizable credit for the procurement of U.S. military 
equipment, including two submarines scheduled for delivery this fiscal 
year. Now Argentina is reportedly planning to purchase three British 
destroyers as replacements for old vessels. We imposed no penalty when 
Chile purchased two British destroyers (to be delivered in the near future), 
Colombia two Swedish destroyers or Ecuador two British frigates, and 
we have earmarked one ship loan vessel, or its equivalent in the case of 
Ecuador, for each of these countries in the FY 1960 program. Although 
Venezuela has acquired eleven European destroyers since 1953, we have 
considered it necessary in view of our special defense and military credit 
arrangement which bears upon the security of the Venezuelan oil fields, 
to approve the sale to Venezuela of one submarine and two destroyers.
Probable Consequences in Peru if we Deny Destroyers
In the light of the instances described above, Peru would be certain 
to regard the withdrawal or deferral of a programmed naval vessel as 
discriminatory and retaliatory.
