Non-Proliferation
849
Category B: Material requiring relatively simple chemical operation
—HEU in UF6 form (i.e. the output of enrichment plants).
—HEU oxide or metal in unirradiated fuel elements.
—HEU and/or Pu in nitrate form (i.e. the output of reprocessing
plants).
Category C:4 Material requiring more complex chemical operation
—unseparated U-Pu nitrates (e.g. from “coprocessed” LWR fuel).
—mixed oxide (U-Pu) fuel for LWRs (Pu less than 20%).
Category D: Material involving complex chemical operation, in presence
of high radioactivity levels, or involving isotopic separation (decreasing order
of difficulty)
—low enriched or natural uranium.
—all irradiated fuel.
—partially coprocessed fuel (i.e. some fission products removed).
II. Technologies/Facilities
The major nuclear fuel cycles are presented in Table I, and identi-
fied by their utilization or production of the various categories of mate-
rial. The Table reveals much useful information concerning prolifera-
tion. For example, it indicates that only one strictly non-sensitive fuel
cycle now exists: the heavy water natural uranium cycle (HWR) with-
out reprocessing. It should be noted however, that the HWR has signifi-
cant non-proliferation problems. Its core uses many more, smaller indi-
vidual (and therefore harder to keep track of) fuel rods than an LWR,
and it is reloaded continuously, without shutting down the reactor. On
the other hand, an LWR must be shut down to be reloaded, and this is
only done twice a year, after which it is sealed. The HWR is also capable
of producing high quality weapons grade plutonium without inter-
fering with its power production. It was a research version of this re-
actor which produced the material for the Indian explosion.
The other attractive fuel cycle from the proliferation viewpoint is
the LWR without recycle. A large majority of nuclear power programs
are based on this reactor (though not on this fuel cycle). The principle
drawback of the LWR cycle, is of course that it requires—somewhere—
an enrichment capability. All known enrichment processes produce a
Category B product, except laser isotope separation which produces
Category A.
The decisions which arise from these technical analyses relate to
which technologies will be included in our international program, and
4 There is some controversy over whether Categories B and C are really different.
The answer is not yet known. You should note that they may turn out to be essentially
one category. However the gap between C and D is very large. [Footnote is in the
original.]
