International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
403
The existing DISC rewards companies for export profits, not for export
sales. The rewards go primarily to big multinationals that export
anyway. At best, the additional exports created in 1978 by DISC are
only about $3 billion, while the revenue cost is about $1.1 billion.
These arguments are still valid. Yet there appears to be virtually
no chance that Congress will terminate the DISC program this year.
Twenty-eight of the 37 members of the Ways and Means Committee
have indicated their opposition to any cutback in DISC benefits. It ap-
pears, however, that some of those members are willing to talk compro-
mise. The Export Policy Task Force has developed an export tax incentive pro-
posal that contains the elements of a compromise which reconciles the needs of
trade policy with the needs of tax policy, and holds the possibility of turning
this issue into a victory for the Administration.
Operational Constraints
The policy considerations stem primarily from our growing bal-
ance of payments problems:
—The U.S. badly needs to recoup export market shares. Adjusted
for inflation, U.S. exports have not grown since 1974; the volume of U.S.
manufactured goods has actually declined. The rest of the industrial
world, by contrast, has seen a 12 percent growth in export volume since
1974;
—Incentives will have to be provided to medium and small-sized
firms if we are to augment the export accomplishments of large
multinationals;
—In the eyes of the business community, a credible and effective
export policy must include an appropriate incentive for exports;
—The Congress views a tax incentive as the simplest, fastest and
most nearly self-executing method of export stimulation. Rightly or
wrongly, it is in no mood to jettison DISC in the absence of an
alternative.
Proposed Alternative
The Export Policy Task Force’s basic proposal would: (1) reduce the
benefits of the present DISC program; (2) restructure the benefits to em-
phasize export sales rather than export profits; and (3) use part of the
revenue saving to create, within the DISC framework, a direct export
incentive targeted on small and medium-sized companies. The spe-
cifics of this proposal are summarized at Tab A.2 The revenue cost totals
$750 million, a $350 million reduction from the present DISC program.
This proposal is designed to make the DISC significantly more
cost-effective while keeping the number of legislative changes to a min-
imum. The Congress has no appetite for a complicated revision of
2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated memorandum entitled “Specifics of
Export Policy Task Force Proposal.”
