Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, December 21, 1979 SUBJECT The Soviets and Afghanistan It is hard to exaggerate the importance of what the Soviets are now poised to do in Afghanistan. Essentially, they seem to have made a decision to risk whatever is necessary, including major involvement in armed combat, to maintain a Communist government in Kabul. Given their military capabilities, the terrain and the division of the insurgents, they will almost certainly have considerable initial success if they pull out all stops (as we learned in Viet Nam, the helicopter gunship can be a very successful “pacification” tool). The real military question boils down to the staying power of the insurgents and the attitude of the Pakistanis, and we can play a key role on both counts. This was not an easy decision for the Kremlin, which realizes that its own “counter-insurgency” effort will inevitably be compared to what we did in Viet Nam. As such, they will be doubly determined to succeed where we failed. They are also far more experienced in this area than we are, and their ruthlessness will not hurt them either. Equally important is the fact that this is the first time since World War II that the Soviets are using their own forces in a combat situation outside the borders of the USSR and Eastern Europe. This therefore seems to complete a chain of events which began in Angola in 1975, was continued in Ethiopia (where a Soviet General assumed command of the operation), and now culminates in Afghanistan. If the Soviets manage a successful counter-insurgency effort, it will lead almost inevitably to further “adventurism” in the years ahead. What is to be done? Given the current situation, we are not in a position to ignore what is happening in Afghanistan. It is necessary for us to develop both a 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
