204  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
ICBMs and/or less highly fractionated SLBMs and/or submarines with 
fewer launchers. (Because of the high cost per warhead of deploying 
deMIRVed SLBMs, this may mean a net move away from SLBMs, which 
the U.S. has consistently claimed is stabilizing.)
— Realistic U.S. deMIRVing options may require downloading, 
which poses verification and breakout problems.
— The Soviets have realistic deMIRVing options that would permit 
them to outbid the U.S. in negotiating a specific limit.
— A sublimit of 4200 MIRVed warheads will not be perceived pub-
licly as a serious deMIRVing proposal; a lower sublimit would require 
unrealistically expensive restructuring of U.S. forces.
— There may be political drawbacks in softening past U.S. posi-
tions on the importance of ICBMs.
— A MIRV warhead sublimit will appear to some to be a recre-
ation of the SALT II sublimit structure, with attendant adverse political 
consequences.
II. Reduce instability by reducing vulnerability. The United States might 
seek dramatic reductions in silo based missiles, especially highly frac-
tionated ones. This approach is based on the view that fractionation is 
not destabilizing except when it is associated with vulnerable systems. In 
this view there is no practical way to make silo-­based ICBMs survivable. 
Such an approach assumes that mobile ICBMs will be allowed.
Two alternative approaches exist:
Alternative 1—Silo-­based MIRV ICBM ban. In this alternative we would 
ban all silo-­based ICBMs except single-­warhead missiles. Single warhead 
missiles do not pose stability problems to the same extent as MIRVed 
ICBMs. Under this alternative, Soviet SS-17, 18, 19 and 24 (silo-­based) 
missiles and U.S. Minuteman III and Peacekeeper (silo-­based) would be 
eliminated. To protect the U.S. investment in Minuteman III (and to make 
the proposal more palatable to the Soviets) we might consider allowing 
downloading of existing MIRV missiles to single warhead missiles. As 
noted above, downloading increases breakout potential; as envisioned 
in this alternative, the breakout risk is especially high from downloaded, 
highly MIRVed, Soviet ICBMs. Finally, the 1600 delivery vehicle limit 
could affect our ability to deploy 4900 ballistic missile warheads.
Alternative 2—Total silo-­based ICBM ban. In this alternative we 
would ban all silo-­based ICBMs. This alternative implies a dramatic 
restructuring of forces—­about 60% of Soviet warheads are on silo-­
based ICBMs. The phase in period might have to be much longer than 
the seven years we currently envision under START.
Potential advantages of such a proposal include:
— It would dramatically improve stability.
— Because of the greater emphasis on ICBMs in the Soviet force 
structure, it would impact the Soviets more than the United States.
