September 1953–December 1954
945
of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company’s ability to interfere in internal Ira-
nian matters.
33. With the passing of time and the strengthening effect of oil rev-
enues, however, difficulties may arise over the oil question. Iran will al-
most certainly share the desire of other Middle East producers for in-
creasing oil revenues and for exercising a growing voice in oil policy
and operations at the expense of the oil companies. It will be extremely
sensitive about real or apparent slights to its prestige and independ-
ence by foreign oil interests, particularly British, and Iranian politicians
may attempt to play off the consortium members and interested gov-
ernments against each other. Finally, the oil settlement may arouse ex-
cessive hopes of benefits which cannot be achieved.
34. These dangers do not appear imminent, however, and in any
event the risks to the consortium and to the Western Powers in future
oil operations are probably not now significantly greater than those in-
volved in Western oil operations in other Middle East countries. If the
consortium members and the interested Western nations pursue pol-
icies which take into account Iranian sensitivity and aspirations, and if
the country maintains a reasonable degree of political stability, pros-
pects for satisfactory oil operations with accompanying benefits to all
concerned are good.
The Outlook for the Tudeh Party
35. The Communist Tudeh Party is currently at one of the low
points in its history, though it remains the only political opposition
group in Iran that has some organization and discipline.4 Strong pop-
ular opposition to Tudeh flared up at the time of Mossadeq’s downfall,
and since then the party has been subjected to severe governmental re-
strictions and uninterrupted press and radio attacks. These develop-
ments have almost certainly taken a heavy toll among its sympathizers
and have probably cut into its membership as well. The uncovering in
August 1954 of a Tudeh network in the armed forces and the subse-
quent arrest of hundreds of persons who were implicated has been a se-
vere blow. The discovery and confiscation of the clandestine printing
plants of Tudeh and of its youth organization has been a further set-
back, as has been the recent intensification of government efforts to root
Tudeh members and sympathizers out of the bureaucracy. For the
present, in the face of government plans to introduce stringent laws pe-
nalizing Communist membership or activities, the party is almost cer-
4 During the last year of Dr. Mossadeq’s regime (1953) Tudeh membership prob-
ably reached a peak of about 35,000. Present active membership probably numbers about
7 to 8 thousand. [Footnote is in the original.]
