1036 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI that the treaty include only the second U.S. alternative; i.e., a consolidated status notification at the end of a dispersal. Q: Why had the U.S. side introduced a new proposal for two additional inspections following dispersals? A: Following a dispersal, it was important that the sides understand the status of the strategic forces of the other side. Otherwise they would lose the stability benefits of the entire notification regime. Inspections were one way of insuring confidence that the sides understood the status of forces. In addition, dispersals should not be undertaken lightly. The knowledge that a side declaring a dispersal would have to accept additional inspections, along with already agreed language stating that dispersals were intended to be rare events, would insure that a dispersal would not be declared for trivial reasons. Q: Why did the U.S. propose two additional inspections rather than some other number? A: The U.S. side sought a number as low as possible consistent with the objectives discussed earlier. Brooks would consider a different number if Nazarkin recommended one. Q: What was the purpose behind the so-­called ‘‘reciprocity” provisions? A: If the U.S. side were to declare a dispersal, the Soviet side would be faced with a dilemma. It might not wish to declare a dispersal itself, since it might wish to defuse the situation. If no Soviet dispersal were declared, the Soviet side might wish to forbid U.S. inspections on the grounds of reciprocity. On the other hand, the Soviet side might wish to encourage such inspections to demonstrate that no abnormal events were occurring. No one could predict which course was best; thus the treaty should make both options available. 13. Nazarkin said Brooks’ explanations had been helpful. Referring specifically to additional inspections after dispersals he said he thought the U.S. case was sound. The only problems were bureaucratic, since the idea was new. Brooks agreed that the U.S. approach was new, but pointed out it had replaced an older approach of post dispersal inspections which would have applied only to mobile ICBMs. The new U.S. approach allowed each side to concentrate on the strategic offensive arms of greatest concern to it. Issues List 14. Nazarkin then handed over a list of outstanding issues.2 The two-­part list included a summary of major issues and a more detailed 2 Not found.
