this even though admitting that more than a year before the Chinese
delegation had rebuffed the offer of the surtaxes. However he stated that
when the surtaxes had once been put into force by the Special Conference,
faithful observance of all conditions which might be stipulated could be and
would be secured by the Peking Administration. As I knew, the argument
could be carried no further, and undoubtedly he was aware that I knew these
statements did not represent anything real.
2. Koo was most insistent concerning the matter which he termed the
universal demand by the public that the Conference be resumed. Discussion
of this pretension was similarly difficult. The situation is this: no one
unconnected with the present regime in Peking has the least desire to have
the Conference continued for the creation of a new source of revenue for
the benefit of Chang Tso-lin and his associates in the warfare going on.
3. Nevertheless, the fact is that such public opinion as exists in China
regards as evidence of bad faith by the foreign powers that they do not carry
out the provisions of the Washington Treaty, although the great part of the
people, I feel convinced, would feel bitter resentment if we made an
agreement with the Peking regime implementing the recent obligations. If
we bar the highly improbable contingency of a stable, responsible central
government being established at an early date, we are confronted with a
dilemma. The sole means of escape from it that I have thought of are the
following: (1) To take [garbled group] action through the making of several
regional agreements—as to this, the disapproval of the Department is to be
inferred, in view of its telegram No. 226 of October 13;25 (2) to indicate in
outline form the general conditions upon which basis the powers would be
prepared to put into effect the Washington surtaxes, the powers to make a
statement of willingness to negotiate with any Chinese delegation for this
purpose if the delegation were constituted so as to represent the whole
Chinese people and to be competent to offer effective assurances in regard
to any agreements arrived at being generally respected; (3) the powers to
take action independently of China to enforce the surtaxes upon their own
nationals, waiving all such conditions as were contemplated by the Customs
treaty and by the Tariff Conference; (4) to take the radical action of
conceding unanimous tariff autonomy immediately, with the single
condition that most-favored-nation treatment be provided for. Only the
