782
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
our own interests above all else. This means that we shall not be able
to do anything for you. Furthermore, you claim to be the legitimate
government of the Iranian Islamic Republic but that is not enough. In
order for your legitimacy to secure international acceptance, it must
be translated into deeds. Words alone are not enough and no longer
suffice. If you are incapable of having your decisions implemented,
you must draw the consequences of this state of affairs, resign your
position and have the country confront its responsibilities. As you
know, you belong with the Arab countries and with Europe but you
are destroying your place. You must do something concrete and signifi-
cant to enable the Europeans not to take any measures on the 17th of
May and postpone them far into the future.”
4. This is what Ghotbzadeh answered (GB found him to be rather
dejected, just as I have found him to be): he understood the situation.
He had met with Waldheim in Belgrade and their talks boiled down
to three points: first, Waldheim is available; second, he offered to reacti-
vate the UN commission; third, the problem of a gesture enabling the
Europeans to put off their decision.
GB points out to me that a reactivation of the UN commission is
Waldheim’s wish because he wants to be re-elected and it also is very
dear to GH who had gone very far in that direction. GH says that he
is interested but he wants to wait and see how the atmosphere will be
at Islamabad and he wants some clarifications from Waldheim.
In this context one should point out that Ghotbzadeh would like to
enjoy the advantages of the commission without any of the undesirable
aspects meaning that where the visit to the hostages is concerned the
ICRC visit would be considered as having been made in its place. The
idea here is that the work of the commission, its report and its findings
will enable the parliament to discuss the hostages in a climate of moral
satisfaction (in addition we would have the non-aligned seminar and
the new Salamatian Commission set up by Bani-Sadr, as directed by
the Imam, to investigate “the American interventions in Iran following
the aborted strike of Tabass”).
Is that all, asked his interlocutors? And Ghotbzadeh then gave
them explanations similar to those he gave me (see my message 465).3
Both GB and his Deputy Foreign Minister then said that that was
not enough. You must place the hostages under governmental control
never mind if it is in one or several locations. Then you must say to
the country from now on the Revolutionary Council is in control and
then you must effectively do this.
3 Not found.
