3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 271 a. the questions it raises about U.S.-Soviet relations in general; b. it follows, and the Soviets were stimulated by, the Soviet-Cuban victory in Angola; c. it is another example of Soviet-Cuban collaboration where Cuban troops are politically less unacceptable than Soviet, while the West, unlike the Shaba, has so far no equivalent for the Cubans; d. in Angola several thousand Cubans can make the difference between victory and defeat; e. the Horn is geopolitically far more important for the West than Angola; and f. Soviet bases in the Horn would be very useful for future Soviet involvement in southern Africa. 2. However, the U.S. faces major regional obstacles to checking expansion of Soviet influence in the Horn: Ethiopia’s Soviet-supported struggle against the Somali invasion of the Ogaden is a position which the OAU unanimously supports, and which the U.S. can hardly contest, while the U.S.’s principal Arab allies support Somalia. Kenya fears both Soviet influence in Ethiopia and Somali irredentism in northern Kenya. 3. In domestic U.S. politics, the “Vietnam syndrome” generally inhibits U.S. action. However, U.S. opinion on the Soviet Union is increasingly negative, and Ethiopian-Soviet-Cuban victories in the Horn could merge with a worsening Middle Eastern situation (at least very possible) to endanger any SALT agreement and destabilize U.S. relations with the Soviet Union and the whole international situation. 4. How to influence the Soviet Union to limit or reverse its intervention in the Horn requires a global and regional analysis of available “pressure points” on the Soviet Union and the degree of priority for their use for this purpose as compared to other Soviet-U.S. issues which these points involve. 5. The Horn suffers, from the U.S. viewpoint, from a very high level of unpredictability, for the combatants involved are not subject to decisive Soviet influence and certainly not to U.S. influence, and the military outcome will be the major factor in determining the future. 6. No matter what the military and political outcome is in the near future, U.S. planning should assume that the Horn will be an intermittent crisis area over the next decade or two. 7. Even if the Ethiopians, Soviets, and Cubans do win a military victory, and particularly if they do, conservative Arabs and the Shah will be the more anti-Soviet for Moscow’s expansion of its influence and support of Ethiopian “ex-Christian communists.” 8. If the U.S. does not check the Soviets in the Horn, they and the Cubans are more likely to become involved in southern Africa, particularly if a black civil war breaks out in Zimbabwe.
