Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks (d) Political/Diplomatic Initiatives The US should not make demarches to African states until we see the Soviet reaction at Mexico City. However, the Delegation could agree to the issuance of a joint public statement at the end of the session that would encourage regional initiatives. C. Asia 1. East Asia The Soviets have made it clear they intend to raise the question of China within the context of their East Asia proposal. [Prior to the official start of the round, the head of Delegation should reiterate what we have told the Soviets informally—namely: —That as far as we are concerned, East Asia is not an appropriate topic for the talks, and we will have no comment to make; —state that to address East Asia in the CAT context would be too much of a burden for CAT and would doom the talks to failure; and —firmly refuse to discuss the subject, ask no questions, make no proposals, and not agree to inclusion of this area on the agenda. Tell them that if they persist, the US Delegation will have to seek instructions from Washington prior to proceeding with the formal discussion.] The same applies to both China and Korea. 2. Southeast Asia The Soviets have indicated that they will not raise the Southeast Asian sub-region. However, if they reverse their position and do so, the Delegation should: —listen to what the Soviets have to say and ask questions to clarify the proposal; and —not offer any US counter-proposals. 3. West Asia Particularly because of the current delicate internal situation in Iran, but also due to other factors, it is not in the US interest to raise the West Asian area at this time. However, we can expect that the Soviet side will raise the area for discussion. [Prior to the round, the head of Delegation should inform the Soviets that it is not appropriate to discuss this region at this time, and take the same position as on East Asia.] 4. South Asia The Soviets have indicated they will not raise the South Asian subregion. However, if they reverse their position and do so, the Delegation should: —listen to what the Soviets have to say, ask questions to clarify the proposal, but not offer any US counter-proposals.
