Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
751
our unilateral restraint policy was prefaced by the need to protect US
national security interests.
Brown stated that walking out might be the appropriate response
on Iran. Gelb asked Brown what his objective was in that strategy.
Brown replied that progress in this round of CAT was too high a price
to pay if Iran were to be further destabilized, or if we had to go through
another round of reassuring the Koreans, such as he had just been
through in the past year. Gelb asked why he thought that explaining to
the government of Iran what might happen would lead to such destabi-
lization. Brown replied that it was simply the fact that the talks were
going on. Keeny argued that this issue is not related to the current situ-
ation in Iran. Brown agreed but argued that these discussions would
make the situation very much worse. Keeny replied that if that were
true then we should break off the talks, but he was challenging the
basic thesis that the fact of something being brought up would have
such cosmic implications. Aaron asked whether listening to the Soviets
on Iran was more important than making progress on Latin America
and Africa. Blechman answered that in order to make progress we
must be prepared to listen. Secretary Brown then had to leave.
Aaron then said that he would try to frame the issues. First, do we
try to negotiate an agenda at the beginning of the talks. Our position on
Korea and on China is that we would simply not discuss it. On the re-
gion including Iran there are options. We could be prepared to discuss
it. We could listen and then exclude it. Or we could treat it like China as
not being an appropriate matter for discussion. Christopher said that
this position was that Iran belonged in the same category as China.
Blechman said that we should listen to the Soviet proposal and then de-
flect the discussion to a sub-region, namely the Yemens. McGiffert said
that Iran should be treated like China.
Christopher asked what our experience has been. Will the Soviets
persist in pursuing this region, or will they heed our warning? Gelb re-
plied that they will persist. Keeny asked what we would do if they do
persist. McGiffert said the US should walk out. Gelb disagreed with the
State Department’s position on how to treat Iran. He disagreed also
with Brown’s assessment of what will happen in Iran if we consult with
them. These kinds of problems in our bilateral relations can be easily
managed at the stage where we now are with the Soviets which is es-
sentially ground zero. If we stonewall on this region, in his opinion we
put the talks at serious risk. If we want to do that there should be ex-
plicit guidance from the President. Aaron said that we would need an
official State Department position on whether or not we should consult
in advance of the round with the government of Iran. He noted that the
Shah may consider this the last straw and would surely wonder what
our intentions are. We should keep a sense of perspective. We had de-
