1530  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Secretary also said US could understand Soviet attitude on voting and 
thought presentation as offered by Soviet delegation of list items they 
believed should be subject unanimity might well assist resolution this 
problem but similarly hoped Soviets understood our inability accept 
any arrangement which would frustrate effective operation control sys­
tem. He expressed hope Soviets would continue talks and in process 
find proof their misgivings unfounded. Mikoyan indicated entirely 
willing continue and commented that agreement if reached on this sub­
ject should prove stepping stone to further agreements.
Dulles
410.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, January 16, 1959
OTHERS PRESENT
Chairman McCone
General Goodpaster
Mr. McCone said that Sir Edwin Plowden, who had been his host 
in the United Kingdom in November, is coming to the United States 
about 1 March for two or three days to visit atomic installations. He 
asked if the President would be agreeable to attending a luncheon or 
dinner for him. The President said he would prefer to have a stag lun­
cheon, suggesting the date of March 2, with the British Ambassador 
also present.
Mr. McCone next reported to the President that the British wished 
to buy a substantial quantity of refined atomic materials. Defense, 
State and the Commission agree on the desirability of supplying them. 
The materials amount to some fourteen tons of plutonium, and in the 
longer range a contract for a supply of U–235 for the next 10–12 years 
(thus avoiding British necessity to build a gaseous diffusion plant) 
with initial acquisitions from us of the order of about fourteen tons. 
The British would like to pay for the plutonium (to be available in the 
near future) in cash, and to pay for the U–235 over a longer period 
with plutonium. The President asked what ratio would be used in 
1 Source: U.S.–U.K. nuclear cooperation, Department of Defense plutonium require­
ments, domestic nuclear power, thermocouples to power satellites, sales of U–235 to 
IAEA. No classification marking. 5 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
