520 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 175. Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department of State1 Budapest, November 26, 1980, 1420Z 6196. Subject: Official-Informal. EUR/EE only; three copies only. For Bridges from Kuchel. 1. (U) Transition: Peter, we are most grateful for the background information2 you have been giving us on the composition and interests of the foreign affairs transition teams. The Ambassador and I find it extremely helpful to have your comments which both amplify and lend a little chiaroscuro to the wireless reports. 2. (C) We hope that the following appraisal of the current situation in Hungary and US-Hungarian relations will be useful in preparing your briefing paper on Hungary for the transition staff. 3. (C) Kadarism—Under Janos Kadar Hungary has forged a unique position in Eastern Europe. During the past twenty-five years, Kadar has brought Hungary out of the depression of a failed revolution and into a period of sustained stability and general prosperity at home. The essence of Kadar’s policies has been substantial, if sometimes nuanced, support for Soviet foreign policy goals in exchange for a measure of latitude to pursue internal reforms and a relatively relaxed social policy. The success by Eastern European standards of the new economic mechanism in achieving prosperity at home and the politically adept implementation of Kadar’s National Alliance policy has allowed the Hungarian Communist Party to achieve a level of legitimacy that few would have imagined in 1956. By achieving compromises with religious institutions, permitting individual travel to the West every three years and generally allowing Hungarians of all persuasions to work within the system, Kadar has earned the acquiescence, if not the support of most of Hungary’s population. Kadar’s famous dictum “Those who are not against us are with us” remains the basis of the Hungarian Party’s approach. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800566–0890. Confidential; Immediate. 2 In telegram 307509 to Budapest, November 19, the Department informed the Embassy of the transition papers proposed by the Bureau of European Affairs following Reagan’s election. While Hungary did not figure as a separate topic, EUR/EE requested that Budapest send suggestions of what might be included in a separate paper if one was requested. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800553–0952) In telegram 6142 from Budapest, November 21, the Embassy cabled a brief overview of U.S.-Hungarian relations, concluding that it did not see any “pressing or immediate issues in Hungarian-American relations that warrant isolated attention.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800557–0751)
