300 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI know Gorbachev will be writing to the President and we will want to look again at our aims for the Ministerial in light of what he has to say. What We Want to Accomplish at the Ministerial START — Verification and stability (V/S) measures: (a) Baker-Shevardnadze signature of the exercise notification agreement; (b) agreement in principle on one or more of the other six V/S measures we’ve tabled. — ALCMs/Heavy Bombers: Agreement on a package that closes this major subject of the negotiations (e.g., count ALCMS favorably, preserve U.S. conventional ALCM programs, exempt conventional bombers). — Mobile ICBM verification: Agreement expanding the common ground on verification procedures reached at the Moscow Summit (e.g. agreement on notification and deployment areas). — Unit of account: Agreement on the role of missiles vice launchers as the basis for the terms of the treaty, resolving a large number of brackets in the JDT (to be done by the Working Group). Nuclear Testing — Agreement on Soviet proposed compromise (we get CORRTEX, they get seismic stations) on TTBT verification protocol, allowing the delegations to complete the TTBT and PNET protocol texts in time for signature at a spring summit. CFE — Press Shevardnadze to move to our aircraft definition and not press naval forces, as necessary to avoid obstacles that could impede early CFE agreement. Chemical Weapons — Sign MOU establishing an early bilateral data exchange and visits to a number of storage sites and production plants. Issue a covering communique recording the progress that has been made toward a CW treaty and destruction of stocks. — Propose new ideas for the CW treaty, including moving from “anywhere/anytime” to START-­like inspection procedures, and adding export controls to the draft text. — Seek Soviet support for our Canberra objectives, including establishment of an early secretariat for exchange of information on transfers of precursor chemicals. Proliferation — Missile: Compare assessments; set November date for bilateral talks.
