September 18–December 16, 1978
255
dalities for setting up the self-governing authority. Dayan disagreed,
and said that if the others don’t come in, Egypt will not wish to go into
great detail relating to the West Bank and Gaza. Instead, Sadat would
devote himself to principles which would govern West Bank/Gaza ar-
rangements and then turn the negotiations over to the Palestinians and
the Jordanians. This first phase of the negotiations might take no more
than one month to conclude. In Dayan’s judgment, Sadat would want
to have launched the “modalities” concerning the West Bank and Gaza
authority before he signed his peace treaty with Israel over Sinai, and
that would propel the former talks forward at considerable speed.
10. I then stressed to Dayan that you and the President understood
“negotiations” as used in our formulation to refer to the period of dis-
cussion leading to agreement on setting up the self-governing au-
thority. The second U.S. sentence dealt with the subsequent period, and
future new settlements would be the subject of negotiations and agree-
ment among the four parties, and not the three. Rosenne confirmed that
both U.S. sentences were indeed in Barak’s notes, but he repeated yet
again that Begin had only agreed to think about this formulation
overnight.
11. In concluding, I said that I would report what Dayan had told
me and would, of course, transmit the Prime Minister’s letter when it
was received. But this news would be very badly received in Wash-
ington. Dayan got in the last word by saying that despite this disagree-
ment, he was optimistic that once the issue of settlement freeze was out
of the headlines, it could be dealt with practically. But the issue had to
be treated quietly. Could I imagine, Dayan queried, what Geula Cohen
would do “if we had made a mistake at Camp David and now had to
agree to the U.S. proposal. The summit agreements would be rejected
by the Knesset.” (sic)
12. Comment: As indicated in reftels, Dayan, since his return from
Washington, has been optimistic that he and others in the Cabinet
could prevail on Begin to modify his position on cessation of settlement
activity in a way that would be acceptable to the U.S. I cannot be sure
why Begin has stuck to his guns, but several possibilities come to mind.
He may simply be sure that his recollection of the meeting with the
President is the right one. If that is the case, Barak’s notes are a handy,
indeed indispensable, buttress for that position. Another explanation is
that Begin, emotional and exhausted, did not understand what he was
agreeing to at Camp David. Finally, Dayan’s remark about Geula
Cohen raises the possibility that Begin did understand the U.S. formu-
lation and accepted it, but in the cold light of day, and especially now
that he is in the midst of an agonizing domestic debate about the Sinai
settlements, decided that he had gone several steps too far and pro-
ceeded to backtrack. Whatever the reason for Begin’s rigidity on this
