Negotiating Channels 489 conflict versus emplacing U.S. forces at some point where the Soviets had not yet arrived. (TS) Clearly, detailed military analysis is in order in all of these nearterm options, however grim may be the prospects for a successful outcome.4 (TS) 4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line beside the last two paragraphs and wrote in the left margin: “What next steps? ZB.” 186. Memorandum Prepared by the Iran Task Force, Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, February 19, 1980 SUBJECT CIA Views on The Release Of The Hostages If President Bani-Sadr orders the militants occupying the US Embassy to release the hostages we believe the militants will refuse to do so. The militants have repeatedly stated that they do not believe he has the authority or the right to make decisions regarding the hostage issue. In our judgment, only a direct order from Ayatollah Khomeini— probably in public—will persuade the militants to give up the hostages. [portion marking not declassified] Even if Khomeini orders the hostages’ release, there is some chance—probably less than 50 percent—that some of the militants will refuse to obey. [less than 1 line not declassified] there are some leftists among the Islamic fundamentalists holding the hostages. Bani-Sadr reportedly told a visiting Algerian delegation this month that he is concerned that one or more of the “Communist” captors will take precipitous action if the government orders the hostages released. [portion marking not declassified] 1 Source: Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–07–0002, Records of J–3 DDSO, Box 2 Iranian Hostage Crisis 1979–1984, B184–188, Executive Information Package. Top Secret; [handling restriction not declassified] A February 20 covering memorandum from Major General James B. Vaught, attached to Tabs A–E, papers prepared in CIA, DIA, and JTF, states that these agencies had separately come to the same conclusion—that it is unlikely that the hostages would be transferred peacefully in the near future. Vaught stated that Carter should see the reports.
