1979 515 —The evidence this year strengthens these judgments. It indicates that some near-­term Soviet advances will be greater than we had foreseen. 2. During the year, the USSR has continued its steady modernization of both intercontinental and intermediate-­range offensive forces and has made additional progress in research and development to create more capable offensive and defensive systems. The most important recent developments, and their effects on our estimates about the USSR’s prospects and policies, are as follows: —The Soviets are flight-­testing modified ICBMs with MIRVs (multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles) that are considerably more accurate than currently deployed versions. Extensive and successful testing this year indicates that these modified systems probably will start to be deployed in 1979. We had expected such accuracy improvements, but not until the advent of new ICBMs several years later. We now estimate that the Soviet ICBM force will achieve the potential capability to destroy some four-­fifths of the US Minuteman silos in 1980–81, three to four years earlier than projected in last year’s estimate. —In their testing programs for both ICBMs and SLBMs, the Soviets have continued to stress MIRVed systems, two of which carry more RVs (reentry vehicles) than the initially deployed versions. In deployment programs, the Soviets have evidently decided to install MIRVed missiles in virtually all of their MIRV-­capable ICBM and SLBM launchers. Thus, the number of missile RVs in the USSR’s intercontinental striking forces will probably increase considerably more rapidly in the next few years than we had expected. At the same time, the United States now anticipates some slippages in its own new programs. We now estimate that for a few years in the early-­to-­mid-1980s, the USSR is likely to match or slightly surpass the United States in total online intercontinental offensive weapons—­that is, in online ICBM and SLBM reentry vehicles and bomber weapons combined. —In air defense research and development, the Soviets this year demonstrated low-­altitude intercept capabilities in a new lookdown/ shootdown fighter under test conditions. They made further progress in their R&D on an AWACS (airborne warning and control system) and a new low-­altitude SAM system. These developments, along with the great importance the Soviets assign to the damage-­limiting aspects of their strategic capabilities, lead us to believe that in the 1980s the Soviets will place increasing emphasis on improving their defenses, especially against bombers and cruise missiles at low altitudes. —The Soviets have now achieved initial operational deployments of MIRVed mobile IRBMs as part of an extensive program to modernize their strategic capabilities against European NATO, China, and other areas on the Eurasian periphery. Soviet strategic forces for peripheral attack are already superior in striking power to those of the comparable Western and Chinese forces combined. The modernization of these Soviet forces will increase the existing disparity. —[less than one line not declassified] the Soviets have continued to emphasize the launch of their strategic missiles upon receipt of tactical warning from early warning radars and other detection systems that
