846 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement meeting. If he nothing more on this this morning, I had another matter would like bring up. 16. Wang said he had stated his views regarding opening state­ ment I made this morning. In my opening statement this morning I had again repeated previous old tune. All arguments advanced by me in opening statement been refuted our previous meetings. 17. Wang said as he had stated, if I still thought we should make declaration at all then there were two drafts of their side and I entirely free determine on either them. Both these drafts contained reasonable principles for settlement our disputes. 18. Wang said if I not in position determine on one these drafts we would better leave it until next meeting when he hoped I would do so. If I had anything else bring up, he prepared listen. 19. I then read prepared statement on implementation: I have spo­ ken this morning of what appeared to me to be something like reverse trend in our discussions under second item of our agenda. It is hard to avoid drawing parallel between that situation and situation with respect to our first item, return of civilians desiring to do so. A. In order to dispose of matter of return of civilians, we worked out an agreed announcement recognizing right to civilians desiring to do so to return to their respective countries. It specified that measures would be or had been adopted to permit our respective civilians expe­ ditiously to exercise that right. We worked out third party arrangement, in order fully to meet your point of view, as an assurance in implemen­ tation of agreement. B. Our agreed announcement not only expressed subjective intent of our two governments to allow civilians to return freely and expedi­ tiously when they desired to do so; it also provided third party arrange­ ment as means of making objective test of whether this intent was in fact being carried out. For while, our agreement seemed to be producing some results. Apparent intent of your government to allow Americans to depart seemed to be evidenced by announcement of release of num­ bers of Americans formerly detained. C. Then, gradually, your country started to behave as though your agreed announcement had never been issued. First, as regards Americans in your country, you began to ignore plain fact that you were responsible, under agreed announcement, to adopt measures permit­ ting them expeditiously to exercise their right to return. You ignored, or turned aside with flimsy excuses, objective and reasonable statements of U.K. Charge when he pointed out that return of these Americans was being obstructed. D. Then as regards Chinese in United States, you started to revert to same position you held in our early meetings in August. You alleged
