20 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX need to fend off the Soviets in the post-Tito period. Belgrade believes it must, for reasons of internal stability, be tough on dissidents, but at the same time it has given signals that it may free some well-known dissidents, clearly to strengthen its standing in the West as a “different” Communist state. Ceausescu had some very harsh things to say in public about the human rights statements of “certain politicians,” but the Romanians, too, need the US, and the fact is, for all of Ceausescu’s fulminations, the handful of Romanian dissidents have been treated with a light hand. The problem is different for Gierek and Kadar, both of whom favor a more tolerant approach to the dissidents. If President Carter’s statements, and the internal situation in the USSR, causes Moscow to impose a tougher line on dissidents across the board in Eastern Europe, then Kadar and Gierek will have trouble—particularly Gierek, who is up against a highly volatile and unpredictable situation in Poland. Eurocommunism There is an important relationship between Eurocommunism and the current unrest in Eastern Europe. Support from the West European Communist parties, which espouse those ideas that have come to be called “Eurocommunism,” has helped the dissidents by enabling them to argue that there is no necessary contradiction between Marxism and Western-type political freedoms. Some of the dissidents may well believe that Communism with a “human face” is possible, although others are probably using Eurocommunism opportunistically, perhaps as a cover for the more profound changes they want. TheEastEuropeanregimescouldhandlethis,butwhatgivesthem— and Moscow—real concern is that Eurocommunist ideas, particularly as they relate to autonomy from the USSR, have attraction for people inside the apparat. In a sense, Eurocommunism threatens to bridge the conceptual gap between the dissidents and the establishment. The European Communist party conference in Berlin last June, during which Eurocommunism proponents forcefully put forward their views, evidently caused considerable ferment within some of the WarsawPactcountries.AttheDecemberWarsawPactideologicalconference it was, reportedly, noted that the Berlin document has led to confusion, sympathy for Eurocommunist ideas, andthe need to combat the “spread of a deviant concept of proletarian internationalism.”6 Eurocommunism was high on the agenda at last month’s Warsaw Pact ideological meeting in Sofia. We do not know what, if anything, was decided. [less than 1 line not declassified] at an earlier meeting the 6 See CIA/OPR Research paper, Soviet Policy and European Communism, October 1976, [classification and handling restriction not declassified]. [Footnote is in the original.]
