Special Session on Disarmament
1195
483.
Memorandum from Secretary of Defense Brown to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 31, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Position on Cut-Off in Production and Transfer of Fissionable Materials for
Use in Nuclear Weapons
Yesterday, I was informed that a memorandum for the President
had been sent to the National Security Council staff asking that an in-
teragency study be conducted on the desirability of proposing at the
UN Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD) negotiations on a cut-off
of fissionable materials for nuclear weapons and the transfer of en-
riched uranium from stockpiled weapons to non-aligned nations for
peaceful purposes.2 I agree that a thorough analysis of these important
issues may be useful. However, I do not believe that it would be in our
best interest at this time to initiate a chain of events that is implicitly as-
sumed to lead to a reaffirmation of a cut-off or transfer proposal of the
sort we first made in 1963, at the upcoming SSOD. Rather, we should
await the outcomes of the current CTB and SALT negotiations before
we consider proposals to further constrain our freedom of action in the
nuclear weapons area. Only when these negotiations are completed
will we have a firm understanding of our future weapons needs and be
in a position to address a cut-off of production of fissionable materials.
The strategic situation has changed since the United States first ad-
vanced a cut-off proposal in 1963.3 At this time, we enjoyed a signifi-
cant advantage over the Soviet Union in terms of nuclear weapons ma-
terials. [6½ lines not declassified] The potential political advantages of
reaffirmation of the cut-off and transfer proposal must be weighed
against current and projected U.S. need. The projections of require-
ments may have to be modified based on SALT outcomes. We must
avoid being constrained on future weapons decisions because of a lack
of availability of weapons grade materials.
To meet the fissionable material requirements of the FY 78–80 Nu-
clear Weapons Stockpile Plan approved by the President in PD/
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Brzezinski Office
File, Subject Chron File, Box 118, Special Session on Disarmament: 2–5/78. Secret; Re-
stricted Data.
2 See Document 482.
3 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. VII, Arms Control and Disarmament, Docu-
ment 313.
