390 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —Only the President can overcome bureaucratic forces that are working against adopting a solution that would not be land-­based. While Bundy may be right, I think we are going to have to publicly establish a very strong case for whatever course of action we decide on. That case should involve not only an examination of the small submersible concept that Bundy mentions, but also a re-­examination of some Air Force concepts such as air mobile ICBMs which were discarded back when the deficiencies of the trench and MAP schemes were less well understood. Further, given the rapidly building concerns about the Minuteman vulnerability problem, the impact such concerns are having on SALT, and the corresponding interest in getting started on a solution, we may have to buy the time required to complete our search for an acceptable solution. This may involve starting a common missile, or accelerating the cruise missile carrier, or some other program. The Minuteman vulnerability is probably the biggest defense issue you will face this year; it will be the main focus of your upcoming mid-­ term review of the Defense budget.

Tab A

Memorandum From McGeorge Bundy to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)2 August 21, 1978 SUBJECT The Next Strategic Nuclear Weapons System In the last month or two, partly as a member of the President’s General Advisory Committee and partly as a foundation executive attending the annual summer seminar run by experts from the arms control centers that the Ford Foundation helps to pay for, I have had some exposure to the bothersome question of Minuteman vulnerability, and what to do about it. I have reached the conclusion that if I had your job again I would want to be sure that the President is fully caught up on some of the troubles that seem to be brewing. It looks to me as if both our basic deterrent posture and SALT are headed for a lot of trouble unless there can be a better solution than is currently favored by any uniformed service. To put it another way, I believe that we are headed for a dilemma which can be resolved only by the President as 2 No classification marking.
