188 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 make Congressional approval of a Trident sale problematic. This aspect was not discussed in the SCC. D. Aaron]2 (TS) Mr. Solomon urged a full presentation of this complex issue be made to the President at the first of next week. In the meantime, letters to heads of state are being prepared on a contingency basis for option (1); the political and legal implications of option (2) are being examined by Treasury, Justice and State; and a draft message to Mrs. Thatcher is being prepared by the NSC. (C) Political-Military Issues: 1. Espionage Charges. In light of the announcement by the “students” that one American has confessed to CIA activities, the SCC agreed that our public posture for the moment should be limited to “no comment,” with emphasis on the fact that these individuals have been held under duress for a month. The final draft of a guidance statement on this issue will be circulated today for final approval. (C) 2. Embassy Security. State will coordinate with Defense about payment for security items now being airlifted to embassies in the Middle East. (C) 3. AWACS Deployment. Two C–141s are scheduled to fly into Cairo West (which is where U.S. aircraft normally land). Equipment will be offloaded and sent overland or in Egyptian air transport to the isolated base where the AWACS will operate. Eight additional C–141 flights are planned. Flights will be spaced to avoid drawing undue attention. (S) 4. Naval Deployments. A Soviet ship is trailing the Midway, but the Kitty Hawk has not been surveilled as yet. The Iranians launched a P–3 reconnaissance flight this morning for the first time. (S) 5. Egyptian Comments on U.S. Military Action. Roy Atherton has reported on the secure line from Cairo3 that Prime Minister Khalil is very concerned that any U.S. military action involving Egypt against Iran could appear to be part of a US-Egyptian alliance. He made clear that whatever President Sadat has promised would be done, but we should be sensitive to the need not to associate Egypt directly with any military attack. If some form of military action is required, he felt that a blockade would avoid the worst reaction. (TS) 2 Brackets are in the original. 3 Atherton called Saunders on a secure telephone line, November 30. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 17, SCC Meeting #216 held 12/1/79)
