Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 435 keeping with the requirements Long-Term Defense Program10 is posed by the Soviet arms a tangible expression, as is the buildup. reinforcement of the U.S. commitment. III. Four Likely Problem Areas The legislators are likely to be most concerned with the state of U.S.-Soviet relations; our African policy; the Middle East; and perhaps China. I would suggest the following comments: 1. U.S.-Soviet relations: Our long-term objective remains constant: to prevent the spread of Soviet influence, to reduce the risk of nuclear confrontation with the Soviet Union, and to increasingly assimilate the Soviet Union in wider international cooperation. The recent public exchanges were necessary to convince the Soviets that we are serious about our concerns, namely that the Soviet Union is overly inclined to use its growing military power to exert political pressure and particularly to exploit Third World turbulence, thereby preventing moderate solutions to international problems. We have repeatedly tried through private correspondence to convince Brezhnev that we are serious. Your speech reaffirmed our commitment to a detente based increasingly on mutual restraint and on reciprocity.11 We want to draw the Soviet Union into a wider fabric of international cooperation. Africa: Our central objective is the creation of majority rule governments and elimination of racial oppression. At the same time, we want to avoid a situation in which East-West and North-South conflicts intersect. This is precisely why we object so strongly to the Soviet/ Cuban intrusion. It makes moderate solutions more difficult to achieve and it runs the risk of transforming difficult regional problems into graver international conflicts. We would like the Africans, particularly acting through the OAU, to resolve African problems themselves. Middle East: You might express cautiously your disappointment at the recent Israeli response. Any peaceful solution must be based on the complete application of UN Resolution 242. I would suggest you simply ask the legislators for their advice, without being too specific on what we might do next. China: You might make the point that we remain committed to normalization, and that in the meantime it is in our mutual benefit to 10 NATO members attending the North Atlantic Alliance Washington summit (see footnote 9 above) agreed to a 15-year plan designed to modernize and improve military forces. (Kenneth H. Bacon, “NATO Members Agree on Defense Plan, Differ on Approach to African Situation,” The Wall Street Journal, June 1, 1978, p. 5) 11 See Document 87.
