123 M 221/129: Telegram
[Document 473]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 13, 1925—3 p.m.
[Received May 13—12:46 p.m.]
186. 1. Department’s 93, May 9, 8 p.m. and previous correspondence interpreted to
mean that new American Minister will present letters of credence thereby evidencing
recognition by United States of Tuan regime as de jure Government of China.
I respectfully submit preferable not to accord such recognition.
2. Tuan regime has been from beginning and continues to be avowedly transitional,
designed to function only pending establishment of formal government, and it has been
so scrupulously treated by all Legations, with exception noted in my 174, April 27, 1
p.m. Despite Lincheng payment51 and gold franc settlement, Tuan regime has not
actually advanced toward permanency, continuing to exist not through any inherent
strength but solely because neither Chang52 nor Feng53 has cared to displace it; an
affair of day-by-day compromise. On April 24th by mandate Chief Executive
promulgated regulations for citizens’ conference, first article reading in part “The
Provisional Government for the purpose of making a constitution hereby convenes a
conference of the representatives of the people”; thus form of future de jure
Government as well as date of its establishment conjectural. Quite probable citizens’
conference will prove ineffectual as was reorganization conference but its convocation
is further evidence that even Tuan and Chinese themselves consider his regime only
provisional.
3. In the circumstances I respectfully suggest advisable to treat this anomalous state of
affairs accordingly, consonant with interpretation of Department’s point of view
expressed in paragraph 2 of my 181, May 6, 4 p.m., and to address new Minister’s
letters of credence to Chief Executive of Provisional Chinese Government who actually
exists rather than to President of the Republic of China who does not exist thus
squaring our action with the facts and avoiding recognition of unstable transitional
Tuan regime as de jure Government of China.
4. I respectfully request to be informed by telegraph of Department’s decision in above
regard and authorized to acquaint colleagues concerned therewith. Responsive to
courteous cooperation of French and Belgian Ministers in question at issue, I suggest
likewise that French and Belgian Embassies at Washington be so informed.
