Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 439 argument that we must not link anything to SALT, but that we must also not do some things—on human rights, China, Africa, etc.—because the Soviets might link that to SALT.)7 Your credibility on human rights is now at stake, and Cy should tell Gromyko in no uncertain terms that your Administration intends to speak up.8 Moreover, it would be good if State was instructed to do so—because if you alone do so the newspapers will be full of stories, attributed to State Department officials, critical of your position on human rights. On detente and Africa, I remain of the view that the position you stated at Annapolis9 should be the basic guideline—and not the twist put on it by subsequent testimony before Congress and by the McHenry trip.10 Unless both we and the Soviets come to exercise restraint in the injection of force into Third World disputes, the situation will become more tense, with negative consequences for all. I believe your Annapolis formulations on detente should be reiterated publicly—and perhaps the Congressional meeting Monday11 night might be a good place for such initial restatement (with Cy then echoing you). In addition, we should give serious consideration to the possibility of limiting either some exchanges with the Soviets or the flow of U.S. technology to the Soviet Union. Words alone cannot successfully convey to the Soviet Union that we are seriously concerned about some of the above-mentioned matters. Some moderate but deliberate action is also necessary, and exchanges and the technology flow provide the most obvious avenues. Ultimately, detente is not an end in itself but a means of achieving a more cooperative world. If we let detente be defined primarily by Soviet actions, we will pay a high price internationally and also domestically (and the latter is becoming evident already). D. Africa We plunged heavily into African problems—which, alas, the British created. But should we be so heavily engaged? And should we really lean towards Nkomo, Neto, etc.—and not Muzorewa, Savimbi, 7 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote: “I agree” 8 Reference is to Vance’s meetings with Gromyko in Geneva July 12–13; see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Documents 132–137. 9 See Document 87. 10 Reference is to the administration’s late June decision to send McHenry to Angola to meet with Neto and other Angolan officials. (Walter Pincus and Robert G. Kaiser, “U.S. Envoy Dispatched to Angola: Talks With Neto To Focus on Calming Tensions With Zaire,” The Washington Post, June 22, 1978, pp. A–1, A–22) 11 July 10. The briefing took place in the State Dining Room at the White House from 6:56 to 10:05 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No record of the briefing has been found.
