868
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
That guidance will provide the basis for Executive Office review of
1979 aid budget requests and for the planning of later aid programs.
This memorandum draws on studies of alternative strategies,
funding levels, and organizational arrangements prepared by the De-
velopment Coordination Committee and the Brookings Institution.
Summaries of these studies are at Annexes A and B. This memorandum
deals only with concessional assistance. It does not deal with the capital
replenishment of the World Bank and other hard lending agencies—a
replenishment which, although largely without impact on federal
outlays, will require substantial appropriations under present Con-
gressional procedures. Nor does it deal with military assistance.
I. Introduction
In the last twenty-five years, considerable progress has been made
by the developing countries. With substantial external assistance, many
of these countries have achieved sufficient growth so that they no
longer fall into the category of poor countries as defined by the World
Bank, i.e., countries with less than $520 per capita annual income in
1975 dollars. These middle-income developing countries, most of
which are in Latin America and East Asia, can now rely mainly on ex-
port earnings, hard loans from the World Bank and other private and
public lending institutions, and private investment. Their growth rates
do not depend on further large-scale concessional aid.
Nonetheless, over a billion people in the developing world still
live in degrading poverty. Many of them are in the middle-income
countries; these countries often lack the technical expertise and re-
sources, and more importantly the political will, to improve the lot of
their poor. Most of the world’s poor, however, are in poor countries—
largely in South Asia and Africa. US policy should seek to help these
countries achieve faster growth with equity, so that their peoples can
overcome poverty and so that their governments can reduce their reli-
ance on concessional aid. In addition to the strong moral and humani-
tarian considerations involved, we have a powerful interest in helping
to bring about the increased food output and the reduction in rates of
population growth that would attend more rapid growth in the devel-
oping world.
The main prerequisite to achieving these goals, apart from open
markets and expanding economies in the industrial countries, is more
effective domestic policies in the LDCs. Although external resources
are only a small part of the total resources available to LDCs, they can
be important in bringing about needed policy reforms. To secure these
external resources, the poorer LDCs need increased concessional aid;
they cannot rely wholly on export proceeds.
