1978  433
point of adapting some of our Minutemen for retargeting [1 line not 
declassified] They have a high penetration probability, and their accu-
racy limits collateral damage. SLBMs are much less well adapted to 
warfighting: communications tend to be slower, and launch of a single 
missile tends to expose the position of the SSBN. Penetrating bombers 
are not well-­adapted to such missions: flight time is long, and—­since 
such raids are likely to be small—­penetration is problematical, partic-
ularly if attacks on Soviet defenses were to be restricted in an effort to 
limit collateral damage. On the other hand, aside from their long flight 
time, ALCMs carried on bombers offer good penetration probability, 
accurate delivery, and the likelihood of low collateral damage.
In summary, by giving up silo- or MAP-­based ICBMs, we would 
lose the part of the Triad that provides our best warfighting capability 
and has our most reliable C3. [1 line not declassified] the best prospects 
for endurance of both the system and our ability to communicate with 
it, and a system that does not rely on either strategic or tactical warning. 
Some of these capabilities can be preserved with some of the alternative 
mobile ICBMs.
LOSS OF DIVERSITY
The other kind of loss entailed in moving to a dyad has to do with 
diversity, which relates to our confidence in our strategic forces in spite 
of an uncertain future. Diversity benefits us in three ways:
• It protects us against things the Soviets might do—“solve” the 
ASW problem, deploy a very effective air defense, face us with an ABM 
breakout, etc.
• It protects us against failures on our own part—­physical failures 
of equipment (such as in our SLBMs in the early ’70s), unsuspected vul-
nerabilities (such as the EMP problem we discovered in the late ’60s), 
shortcomings in our war planning (such as the fratricide problem we 
recognized in the mid-’60s), etc.
• It tends to complicate enemy planning—­for example, Soviet 
attacks timed to catch our bombers will warn our ICBMs, and vice 
versa.
Eliminating the ICBM leg would eliminate one of our hedges 
against marked Soviet progress in ASW (which could jeopardize the 
SLBM leg), but not the other—­our bomber force. It could also elimi-
nate one of our hedges against Soviet development of a successful tactic 
against our bomber bases—­possibly a barrage attack—­or a much stron-
ger Soviet air defense (either of which could jeopardize the bomber 
leg), but not the other—­our SLBM force. Thus, failures of a single leg 
of a dyad of SLBMs and bombers would be extremely serious but need 
not be catastrophic. Failure of both—­unlike failure of two parts of the 
triad—­would be a total disaster.
