Chapter 2, January–June 1989  125
are parallel sublimits on warheads on submarine launched ballistic 
missiles and ALCMs. The United States, in turn, has refused to accept 
SLBM or ALCM sublimits on the grounds that (a) such sublimits dis-
courage, rather than encourage, movement to a more stabilizing force 
structure and (b) such sublimits unduly constrain the U.S. post-START 
force mix.
Some believe that current Soviet non-­heavy ICBMs have little 
capability to threaten U.S. silos and that the Soviet SLBM force will gain 
such a capability as soon, or nearly as soon, as the non-­heavy ICBM 
force. In this view an ICBM warhead sublimit adds little to our security; 
it will not restore the survivability of fixed silos and is far less import-
ant than the ballistic missile sublimit in limiting Soviet capability to 
barrage mobile ICBM deployment areas. If the United States elects to 
deploy mobile ICBMs and to allow such deployment under START, the 
need for such a sublimit may be further reduced.
Thus some believe it may be appropriate to drop the sublimit in 
return for an appropriate Soviet concession, for example looser restric-
tions on air-­breathing systems or tighter restrictions on heavy ICBMs. 
From the negotiability perspective, pressing the argument for this sub-
limit to constrain Soviet hard target kill could lead to counterpressure 
to constrain Trident II (D-5) which also has the capability to destroy 
hardened silos. The United States has consistently opposed such SLBM 
sublimits.
Others note that any Soviet ICBM deployments above 3000 would 
probably be useful only as part of a Soviet first strike strategy and 
thus would be threatening. They note that seeking numerical limits 
on Soviet ICBM warheads has been part of the U.S. START position 
since 1982.
Options—Issue 2. All agencies agree that the initial U.S. posi-
tion when talks resume should be to retain the existing 3,000 - 3,300 
sublimit. There is disagreement over whether the Negotiator should 
encourage the Soviets in the belief that we have flexibility with 
regard to this sublimit. State, ACDA, the JCS and the PCI’s represen-
tative would have the Negotiator seek appropriate tradeoffs, with the 
understanding that the specific quid would be referred to Washington 
for approval. OSD, DOE, and Ambassador Rowny would direct the 
Negotiator not to indicate any U.S. flexibility with regard to this sub-
limit, at least for now.
Issue 3—Heavy ICBMs. A major goal of the U.S. START position 
has been to reduce the threat from Soviet heavy ICBMs. From the U.S. 
standpoint Soviet SS-18s, which could not survive a U.S. attack in 
any substantial numbers, exist only to provide a first strike capability 
against hardened targets or for barrage attack.
