818  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
which the GOH, and particularly the Army, are not in a position to 
meet without severe sacrifice. There is insufficient trained personnel 
to meet the managerial and technical requirements of this operation. 
In short, the project is a difficult one, and in case of incomplete success, 
U.S. prestige will be involved. I therefore expect that the DOD and ICA 
will give immediate favorable attention to the recent requests for man-
power for this operation.
With respect to coordination between U.S. agencies and non-U.S. 
programs in the achievement of common objectives, the following 
observations may be made. In the field of credit and other economic 
policies, there has been good coordination with the local representative 
of the IBRD, and, through him, with the other international lending 
agencies. Cooperation with the Development Loan Fund has been less 
effective because of lack of information and clearly defined responsi-
bility as to its activities in the field. Both CARE and UNICEF are active 
in Honduras, and there are no complaints as to coordination. Relations 
with WHO/PAHO in public health have been excellent. FAO generally 
works well with the agricultural division of USOM. Certain basic differ-
ences in philosophy and approach have been noted between UNESCO 
and the educational division of the USOM, although there has been 
recent improvement in relationships. UNTAA activity has been con-
fined to public administration and social welfare; the USOM has no 
activities in the latter field, and, in public administration, the projects of 
the two agencies thus far have been complementary.
The welfare agencies food programs are now being carefully con-
trolled for efficient operation, after a period of rather loose manage-
ment. During the last two years UNICEF was responsible for the loss 
of over 90 tons of dried milk due to incorrect handling. USOM is now 
instituting a close surveillance of this program, as well as the CARE 
program, which has been operating successfully under its own super-
visory personnel.
A commentary of this nature would be incomplete without some 
general remarks on the problems of obtaining satisfactory cooperation 
from the host country. Honduras has a history of political instability. 
Changes of Government have been very frequent, and, of course, there 
is nothing resembling a civil service system. Under these circumstances, 
national agencies and institutions are notorious for their changes of 
personnel.
Top and middle-­level officers of the Government have character-
istically been solidly behind U.S. efforts to improve local conditions 
through cooperative efforts. This is true of all political parties. They 
frankly recognize the usefulness of aid, as well as the instability of their 
own institutions. The result of this situation is that such activities as are
