Chemical and Biological Weapons 251 Senator Baker asked if there was any connection between this issue and the allegations of gas warfare in Afghanistan. I replied that the two were completely separate questions and involved different international agreements. Senator Baker asked whether there was anything he could do to help. I expressed the hope that the Congress would be restrained in its reaction and permit us time to review and assess the Soviet response and consider next steps. Senator Javits said that we should insist on a Soviet response prior to the close of the Review Conference and I said that we had indicated to them that the nature of their response would determine the character of our plenary statement at the Conference. Congressman Rhodes said that we had enough difficulties of this type at this time and it was too bad we had another problem. Speaker O’Neill and Congressmen Wright and Broomfield listened closely and expressed appreciation for the briefing. 116. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1 Moscow, March 20, 1980, 1054Z 4496. Department repeat Geneva. Subj: Soviet Reply to De´marche on Sverdlovsk BW Incident. Refs: (A) Moscow 4225,2 (B) State 68654.3 1. (S—Entire text.) 2. In replying to our de´march on the Sverdlovsk incident, the Foreign Ministry confirmed that an outbreak of anthrax occurred in Sverdlovsk in March/April 1979 but said this was due to natural causes, denied that it had anything to do with the Biological Weapons Convention and charged that the raising of the issue by the United States creates the impression that someone is trying to cast a shadow on the efficacy of the Biological Weapons Convention. The reply was given to the acting DCM in the form of an oral statement this morning (March 20) by Viktor Komplektov, Chief of the Foreign Ministry USA Department, because Komplektov insisted that the appointment take 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 83, USSR: 3/20–31/80. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. 2 See Document 114. 3 See Document 113.
