International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1117
333.
Memorandum From the Director of the International
Development Cooperation Agency (Ehrlich) to the Special
Representative for Economic Summits (Owen)1
Washington, March 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Summit Discussions on Population
Henry2
As we discussed, I think it would be helpful if the importance of
family planning is discussed, at least informally, at the Summit. I as-
sume that the issue would not be included in the communique. But it
would be a major step forward if, in informal discussions, the need for
population control were expressly linked to the issue of food security.
The link is obvious: no amount of additional food will solve the world’s
hunger problem unless population growth is brought under control.
We can urge, as suggested in a note last month from Guy Erb to
you,3 increased resources for family planning. (A paper I sent to the
North-South group yesterday spells out a specific proposal in some de-
tail.) In my judgment, family planning is probably the most cost effec-
tive area of assistance. The United States, by a wide margin, is the
leading bilateral donor, and more support from the other summit coun-
tries would be of major benefit.
Even without additional funds, however, explicit recognition of
the issue in discussions with developing countries would be useful.
This issue, more than others, requires leadership from the heads of
state of developing countries, and that leadership is most likely to
emerge if they conclude that industrial countries are serious about the
point.
Ideally, in my view, we would suggest we are considering giving
priority in assistance allocations to developing countries with opera-
tional population plans. We could also emphasize that support for food
security measures might depend in part on a demonstrated commit-
ment in the population field.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects—
Hazel Denton, Box 63, Population: 3–5/80. No classification marking.
2 Ehrlich handwrote Owen’s name.
3 An unknown hand underlined the phrase “Guy Erb to you,” and placed a check
mark in the margin. The note is attached below.
