284 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II would not be a workable solution. It would strain our political relations with recipient countries, overburden the administrative systems of countries which do not have human rights problems, and could threaten the continuation of large and important programs such as Egypt.3 At the same time, AID recognizes HA’s argument that it would be difficult to limit the application of Section 112 to governments that are found to be consistent violators without establishing a “hit list”. The Administration could therefore reasonably apply Section 112 more broadly to governments about whose record there is a serious question. This is the standard now being applied by AID in its review of Development Assistance programs. AID therefore proposes that when the Christopher Committee reviews PL 480 allocations at the beginning of each year it determine which governments are in the questionable category. PL 480 Title I sales agreements with those governments will then be written to include the conditions required by Section 112. Their wording would be carefully drafted to avoid accusations and yet make clear the intent of the legislation.4 Section 112 requires much more than reports from purchasing governments with human rights problems: the commodities or local currency proceeds must be used for specific identified projects and programs which directly benefit needy people, and the agreements must say how the projects and programs will do that. This directive is substantially different from current legal requirements and policy relating to Title I sales in general. Under that policy, as laid down by Congress, “emphasis” is to be placed on reaching needy people. We have not insisted that transactions be identified with specific programs or projects where a direct benefit to needy people can be shown. This approach allows an important degree of flexibility in programming for various purposes, within the basic stipulation that there be a needy people emphasis. With the new Section 112, Congress clearly had the new requirements in mind only for governments where serious human rights 3 Christopher bracketed this paragraph. 4 Following the October 14 meeting of the Interagency Group, at which the members discussed the P.L. 480 Title I reporting procedures, AID officials began drafting the AID response to the new reporting requirements. (Meeting minutes of the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance; National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 17, Human Rights—II) Shakow sent Schneider an undated memorandum entitled “PL–480 Title I—Human Rights Reporting Requirements” under an October 16 covering memorandum. The AID Food for Peace Office sent Oxman a copy of Shakow’s memorandum under an October 26 note. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 18, Human Rights— PL 480 II)
