Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II studied and programs developed to ensure maximum coordination to minimize the possibility of untoward health hazards. —Primary emphasis of the US effort will be on supplying initial foreign exchange costs (for example chlorination machinery and supplies) and assisting in the development of national and local planning and management capability. This might include, for example: —Scholarships for Environmental and Public Works Engineers. —Support for local educational and training institutions in the fields of environmental planning, sanitation, public health and hygiene, etc. —Foreign exchange costs of necessary equipment. —Support of programs aimed at preventing and cleaning up polluted surface and ground waters used for community purposes. (Part of such an effort would be the early detection of such pollution and identification of possible solutions.) —Establishment of local laboratories for the analysis of water samples to assist in preventing contamination and to warn of possible dangers to human and animal health. —Assistance in the installation, development and research associated with low-cost waste water treatment facilities or alternative acceptable economic uses of waste which would protect community water supplies. —To up-grade the local capability of the public health and other relevant institutions to deal with water borne diseases particularly prevention techniques. —Promote regional cooperation in specific areas where such cooperation would increase community water quality and quantity and prevent the spread of diseases. —In addition, the US with other concerned countries would consider supporting global and regional research and studies required to deal with specific high priority community water problems especially those affecting the spread of diseases through the aquatic environment. —The US is prepared to work with other countries and international organizations to deal more effectively with community waste problems including specifically to increase the amount of total resources devoted to this sector and the development of international uniform methods and standards for assessing and monitoring water quality and the control of waste borne diseases. We will urge international development lending institutions to increase their efforts and to specifically assist where long-term and large scale efforts are required. In addition, multilateral institutions can promote regional cooperation in this area.
