982
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
studied and programs developed to ensure maximum coordination to
minimize the possibility of untoward health hazards.
—Primary emphasis of the US effort will be on supplying initial for-
eign exchange costs (for example chlorination machinery and supplies)
and assisting in the development of national and local planning and
management capability. This might include, for example:
—Scholarships for Environmental and Public Works Engineers.
—Support for local educational and training institutions in the
fields of environmental planning, sanitation, public health and hy-
giene, etc.
—Foreign exchange costs of necessary equipment.
—Support of programs aimed at preventing and cleaning up pol-
luted surface and ground waters used for community purposes. (Part
of such an effort would be the early detection of such pollution and
identification of possible solutions.)
—Establishment of local laboratories for the analysis of water
samples to assist in preventing contamination and to warn of possible
dangers to human and animal health.
—Assistance in the installation, development and research associ-
ated with low-cost waste water treatment facilities or alternative ac-
ceptable economic uses of waste which would protect community
water supplies.
—To up-grade the local capability of the public health and other
relevant institutions to deal with water borne diseases particularly pre-
vention techniques.
—Promote regional cooperation in specific areas where such coop-
eration would increase community water quality and quantity and pre-
vent the spread of diseases.
—In addition, the US with other concerned countries would con-
sider supporting global and regional research and studies required to
deal with specific high priority community water problems especially
those affecting the spread of diseases through the aquatic environment.
—The US is prepared to work with other countries and interna-
tional organizations to deal more effectively with community waste
problems including specifically to increase the amount of total re-
sources devoted to this sector and the development of international
uniform methods and standards for assessing and monitoring water
quality and the control of waste borne diseases. We will urge interna-
tional development lending institutions to increase their efforts and to
specifically assist where long-term and large scale efforts are required.
In addition, multilateral institutions can promote regional cooperation
in this area.
