Options Identified
263
3. Economic Steps. We still do not have detailed reporting on the
talks conducted in Europe by Vance and Cooper.2 Cooper delayed
another day for further talks with the British Foreign Office and will
not return until late this afternoon. The fragmentary reporting which
we have received indicates that the four foreign ministers agreed that
they would support a U.S. move to invoke Chapter Seven sanctions
as well as a number of lesser independent actions. Our understanding
of the nature of these independent actions is sketchy. However, we
know that they stop short of cross-default or freeze of Iranian assets.
If our understanding is correct, they would be effective in supporting
the dollar (by insisting on oil payment in dollars, refusing to accept
non-dollar deposits by Iran, etc.) but would not apply significant new
pressure on the Iranian government and economy. It is unclear whether
these ideas merely constitute a European counter-proposal to our more
ambitious request or whether they were accepted as an agreed package.
Dr. Brzezinski strongly reiterated the urgent need for an options paper
from Treasury outlining the maximum and minimum strategies avail-
able to us and how those strategies might fit together with a request
for Chapter Seven sanctions. Treasury has delayed examination of
the options pending Cooper’s return, but Dr. Brzezinski argued that
regardless of what was accomplished in Europe, the President must
be informed on what actions are available to him at this point and
what kind of pressure might be required. Mr. Solomon therefore will
prepare an analysis of the various economic options.3 An SCC meeting
will be held tomorrow morning to discuss the options with Vance and
Cooper after their return. The SCC was informed that the press stories
indicating a decision to go for Chapter Seven sanctions remain as one
option among several that are under serious consideration. (S)
4. Circumvention. [less than 1 line not declassified] certain banks in
Germany, France, Canada and Switzerland have been actively assisting
Iran in circumventing the effects of the freeze. [2½ lines not declassified]
Treasury and CIA will work out the details and proceed immedi-
ately.4 (S)
2 See Document 95. Cooper’s reports on his discussions with German and Swiss
officials are in telegrams 6981 and 6984 both from Bern, December 7. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, N79009–0709 and P840140–1513, N790009–0715)
3 Memorandum from Solomon to Brzezinski, December 14. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 35, Institutional File, 1000s–1300s 2/79–
3/79, 12/79)
4 Carter approved the item with a checkmark and initialed in the margin. On
December 12, the CIA requested and received NSC staff concurrence, provided by Gary
Sick, that a proposed propaganda campaign [text not declassified] to seize Iranian assets
was consistent with the November 24 Presidential Finding. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 64, Outside the System File, Iran Non-
Meetings Hostage Crisis 11/79–12/79)
