2 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Of all the increased monitoring difficulties mentioned in our first paragraph monitoring non-­deployed missiles and mobile ICBMs will be the most difficult. We would like in the following paragraphs to summarize the various monitoring approaches being considered. First, the task is to develop methods to detect and monitor limits on legal missiles and launchers, deny illegal ones access to legal test and maintenance facilities; detect illegal missiles and launchers; and barring this, make it much more difficult and costly for the Soviets to cheat (by manufacturing, maintaining, flight testing, transporting and manning them). Simply put, the combination of approaches would be designed to capture Soviet systems from “cradle to grave.” Several approaches are emerging to accomplish this: — Initial Data Exchange of numbers, locations and performance characteristics of treaty limited items (TLI). — Periodic Updates of information. — Baseline Inspections at entry into force. — Accountability: provisions to determine changes of accountability during manufacturing, testing, if damaged, or if destroyed. — Tagging: Each treaty limited item would have a tag (a fragile piece of plastic with randomly distributed colored plastic chips embedded in it) glued to it. An optical reader would read the tag anytime a TLI moved thus accounting for the item. This is a unique and high tech proposal that is still in development by Sandia National Laboratory. — Suspect Site Inspections: Each side would conduct short-­notice inspections at locations where they suspect covert production, deployment, storage or repair of TLI. This concept was discarded in the INF Treaty but will certainly be essential if START is to be ratified. Given the open and closed nature of our societies, our problem is to strike a balance between effective verification and protecting sensitive U.S. facilities. As you can imagine, this will probably be the most controversial START provision within the USG—­as it is in the chemical weapons negotiations. — Restricted Deployment Areas: Missiles and launchers would be limited to a specific geographic area (such as their Main Operating Bases—MOBs, training areas, and maintenance facilities). Provisions for dispersal areas will be problematic: we need effective verification and operational flexibility. — Perimeter/Portal Monitoring: Entry and exit of garrison areas will be through special portals that weigh, measure, photograph, and count rail-­launcher cars. As the data would be transmitted to a remote facility, there would be no routine presence of inspectors at the garrison site. — National Technical Means: Backing all the above techniques up would be our NTM. Cooperative Measures (such as openair display of TLI) would be sought. — Notification: Sides would notify each other of movements in advance, and of the routes upon completion.
