Afghanistan 765 2. Your broad agreement that in preparing for Venice, we seek to encourage the Europeans to focus their efforts on the Islamic Conference Committee rather than push competing proposals of their own in their contacts with the Soviets. 3. Your consideration of a recommendation to instruct Swiss Ambassador Lang to convey to Ghotbzadeh in more general terms the thrust of our approach to the Soviets. BACKGROUND There are several initiatives, contemplated or underway, designed to advance a political solution for the Afghan problem. Tom Watson will shortly be delivering your letter to Gromyko.3 The Islamic Conference Committee (Pakistan, Iran and Islamic Conference Secretary General Chatti) has been meeting in Tehran to formulate their approach. Schmidt will be going to Moscow and will be discussing Afghanistan. The British are continuing their dialogue in Moscow despite public Soviet rebuffs and could be slightly softening their position. The Soviets are evidently not prepared at this time seriously to consider a solution which involves their early and total withdrawal from Afghanistan. On the contrary, the Soviets are seeking to turn the notion of a political solution to their own advantage in an effort to gain recognition of the Kabul regime, to divide the allies and soften Third World condemnation. Nevertheless, there is value in keeping alive the idea of an acceptable political solution in order to keep the door open should the Soviets wish to withdraw from Afghanistan and in the meantime keep them on the defensive politically. The allies place particular importance on this tactic. notified the Soviet Union of the latest U.S. views on the Afghanistan issue. The Department instructed the Ambassadors to convey the following points: 1) a viable settlement in Afghanistan required the withdrawal of the Soviet military, after which the United States would be prepared to help “establish a truly independent and non-aligned Afghanistan;” 2) the United States “has no interest in interfering with Afghanistan’s internal affairs;” 3) the United States is “prepared to explore some transitional arrangement, to be implemented along with the prompt withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Afghanistan, for the purpose of ensuring that peace and tranquility are restored in Afghanistan;” and 4) a settlement in Afghanistan would “facilitate the restoration of more cooperative relations between the U.S. and USSR.” 3 See Document 284.
