210
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
alism and great shrewdness has played his politics to break up this mo-
nolithic force, first cloaking with nationalist emotions his real ambi-
tions to break the power of old-line politicians in Government, then
defeating conservative elements in the Court and Majlis, and then com-
mencing a direct attack upon the electoral strongholds of the land-
owners and merchants. The wealthy families who have left or are pre-
pared to leave Iran to live abroad show their fears of National Front
antagonism or of the chaos and the communism which many think
inevitable.
Truce Dr. Mosadeq is a wealthy landowner and an aristocrat. His
son’s luxurious house in town is placed on a crossroad with three royal
palaces. Despite his oratory about social reform, most Persians consider
Mosadeq a member of the wealthy ruling class.
When emotions were aroused about the oil dispute, Persians of all
classes were swept with nationalistic fervor. The angriest pro-Mosadeq
speeches heard by westerners at private parties came from the scions of
important Persian families. The antagonism which would have been
expected from the entrenched interests to any politician calling for sub-
stantial change in the existing system was not forthcoming because the
entrenched interests were dominated, in early 1951, by the emotions of
Mosadeq’s oil nationalization program.
It is also true, unfortunately, that the class which in England pro-
duces dedicated and courageous leaders seems generally to produce in
Persia a selfish and weak-willed group of men. When this class can
crush reform without fear of much opposition, it is a potent force.
When Mosadeq appeared on the political scene he was too dangerous a
quantity for either the Shah or entrenched interests to oppose. These
“leaders” mostly spent their efforts to persuade someone else to re-
move Mosadeq.
Piecemeal Defeats Mosadeq’s treatment of the Shah and Court and
his capture and suppression of the Majlis has been described. In these
victories Mosadeq defeated representatives of Iran’s entrenched in-
terests. It is quite possible that a coordinated opposition from the Court
and Majlis, based on contributions and other influence from the land-
owners and great merchants, could have defeated Mosadeq. By per-
suading the Shah against cooperation with the Majlis opposition dep-
uties, by labeling as British agents any courtiers or deputies who were
courageous or aware enough to speak against the National Front, Mo-
sadeq prevented much concerted opposition from the entrenched
interests.
Direct Attack Mosadeq’s timing has been excellent. By the time
elections started for the 17th Majlis he had terrorized the 16th Majlis
and had nullified, to a great extent, the influence of the Shah and of the
Army. When he began to change officials in the provinces, draw up
