Human Rights 461 It is not unlikely that the amendment will be accepted by the full Committee and ultimately on the House floor.9 The Administration, which already has the authority to do what the Tsongas amendment directs, opposed the amendment on foreign policy flexibility grounds. What position the Administration should now take is under review. IV. Views of Other Nations on the Propriety and Legality of our Actions Other nations have commented on U.S. human rights actions in the IFIs during normal diplomatic contacts, as well as during special consultations on this issue that we have conducted with the governments of Canada, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, Sweden, Denmark, France, Belgium, Japan, Australia, and India, and with the European Commission. We hope to have consultations of this kind in the near future with other governments, including Senegal, Kenya, Venezuela, Costa Rica, and others. IFI donors have reiterated several themes when discussing human rights and the IFIs with us. There is agreement among those consulted thus far that human rights concerns should be taken into account in the IFIs. They place the same high value on human rights as we do. With different foreign policy agendas, however, no two countries will always make the same choices between human rights and other pressing concerns. There is also agreement that the manner in which human rights concerns are taken into account in the IFIs should not endanger the integrity or viability of the institutions. There is concern that unless the human rights issue is handled carefully, it could cause the IFIs to become highly politicized and to lose their effectiveness in promoting development. There is also concern that human rights not become a North/South issue. Towards this end, we and other donors agree that it would be desirable to have consultations with LDCs such as those we have held with the donor countries. As noted above, we plan to have consultations on this subject with certain LDC’s in the near future. Other donors have also suggested that discussions on human rights among executive directors in the IFIs should be held outside of the IFI board meetings in order to minimize confrontations. Several countries with whom we have consulted noted the desirability of not letting the IFIs become the “cutting edge” of human rights 9 Tsongas’ amendment was retained in the versions of the Ex-Im extension legislation passed in the House on May 4 (H.R. 12157) and the Senate on May 15 (S. 3077). Owing to veto threats by the administration, the House and Senate leadership opted to jettison H.R. 12157 and S. 3077 and add “non-controversial” Ex-Im provisions, including Tsongas’ prohibition against lending to South Africa, to a more-encompassing international financial institutions bill (H.R. 14279), cleared by Congress for the White House on October 15. (Congress and the Nation, Volume V, 1977–1980, pp. 63 and 256–258)
