Memorandum of December 24, 1924. Maintaining the claim of the Federal
Company to establish radio stations in China in disregard of the exclusive
right previously granted by the Chinese Government to the Mitsui Company,
the American counter-project proceeds to divide radio business between the
two companies. The plan formulated by the American Government is simply
an operating arrangement and it assumes the complete abandonment by the
Mitsui Company of its legal position relative to the establishment of radio
stations in China, without any corresponding concession on the part of the
Federal Company.
5. It would appear further that the American counter-project is intended to
secure for the Federal Company the exclusive control of all radio stations to
be constructed by the company as well as a monopoly of the radio service
between the United States and China. Upon careful review of the whole
question, the Japanese Government have now reached the conclusion that
such an arrangement would not make for the maintenance of China’s
administrative integrity or for the extension of fair and impartial treatment of
the other Powers equally interested in the question. On the contrary, it seems
likely to revive the international rivalry and misunderstanding that in the past
have proved so harmful to the stabilization of China.
6. Again, the Japanese Government are not convinced of the immediate need
for China, in the present state of her economic and financial conditions, for
two or more high power radio stations for external communications. The
expenditure to be charged to China under the Federal contract can not fail to
intensify the strain on her already overburdened treasury. Experience in many
countries has shown that, as purely commercial undertaking, radio
communication is not financially profitable, at least for a number of years
after its initiation.
7. In the memorandum of the State Department of February 28, 1925, the
American Government reserved discussion on the arrangement proposed by
the Japanese Government, unless and until its acceptability to China shall
have been reasonably assured. It will be recalled that the Japanese project is a
measure of mutual promise [compromise] calculated to remove from the field
of radio communication all features of foreign control and of monopoly, and
also to relieve China of what seems to be an unnecessary addition to her
financial burden. Considering that these terms are more favourable to China
and in fuller accord with her true interests than are those of the American
counter-project, the Japanese Government have indulged the confident hope
that their proposal will eventually be found acceptable to the Chinese
Government.
