Chile  291
nor its Congress will take any unilateral action which might affect 
Cuba’s interests. This is manifestly impossible, given the independence 
of the Legislative Branch under our governmental system. Moreover, 
our sugar legislation expires this year and even should the Congress 
renew the sugar legislation in its present form, this would be definable 
as a unilateral act affecting Cuba’s interests.
The Secretary noted that a good deal of opinion is arising in the 
United States to the effect that some action is needed with respect to 
Cuba. One suggestion which seems to be gaining ground is that we buy 
Cuban sugar at the world market price and put the difference between 
that price and the price paid to Cuba under the quota system in escrow 
to be used to pay damages for expropriation or other actions of the 
GOC against United States interests in Cuba.
The problem of the moment, however, the Secretary went on, 
is the question of whether to send our Ambassador back to Havana 
or to keep him in Washington. There are pros as well as cons on this 
question. Those who advocate the Ambassador’s return say that he 
is needed in Havana in order to provide access to Castro and thus to 
enable us to have official contact with him. On the other hand, however, 
the Ambassador has often had to wait for three weeks or longer to see 
Castro and has on occasion had great difficulty in seeing him at all.
The Secretary emphasized that we do not consider the Cuban prob-
lem as peculiar to the United States but feel that it is a Latin American 
problem, inasmuch as the Castro mystique is beginning to appear in 
other countries. Feeling, therefore, that this is a Latin American prob-
lem, we would like to consult thereon in order to insure that in deal-
ing with it we avoid mistakes which might affect the interests of other 
American countries, the Secretary added. He mentioned parentheti-
cally that the status of the Guantanamo Naval Base has not been raised 
at any time by the GOC.
The Foreign Minister replied that President Alessandri’s sympathy 
for the United States position in the Cuban situation was shown by 
his recent statement to Senator Smathers, when the latter asked what 
the Chilean attitude would be if the United States Congress should 
take strong action against Cuba. In order to give President Alessandri 
a moment to collect his thoughts and reply to this unexpected ques-
tion, the Foreign Minister said, he himself had asked the Senator what 
such action would be and what economic effects would be anticipated 
therefrom. Before the Senator could answer, President Alessandri had 
said: “All of our sympathies and those of most of the officials of the 
Government of Chile are with the United States Government, because 
we understand the damage which United States interests and the 
United States itself have suffered in Cuba; but there is a great mass in 
this country and that mass is more numerous than we are.” The Foreign 
Minister went on to explain that by this comment the President had
