1020 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 312. Memorandum From the Ambassador to Egypt (Eilts) to President Carter1 Washington, November 21, 1979 This supplements my series of reports from the field (attached). INTRODUCTION At your request, I visited Cairo, Jidda and again Cairo during the period November 13–November 20. While in Cairo, I met twice with President Sadat and also with Vice President Mubarak, Prime Minister Khalil and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Boutros Ghali. In Jidda, I met first with Islamic Conference Secretary-General Chatti and, subsequently, had a four-hour conversation with Prince Fahd. In both capitals, I briefed the ambassadors on my mission and the results of my talks. Both Sadat and Fahd asked that I pass on to you their warm regards and best wishes. You had asked that I take up with Sadat and Fahd (a) the Iranian hostage situation, (b) the need for a thaw in Egyptian/Saudi relations in the interest of progress on the Middle East peace process, and (c) any other matters that they might wish to raise. With Chatti, you asked that I take up the Iranian hostage problem. This report is divided into three sections: (a) Iranian hostage problem, (b) Egyptian/Saudi relations, and (c) other matters. [Omitted here are the portions of Eilts’s report relating to the Iranian hostage situation.] EGYPTIAN/SAUDI RELATIONS First Talk With Sadat (November 14) During my first meeting, I told Sadat that you had asked me to visit Cairo and Jidda in order to transmit to the Saudis Sadat’s letter to Fahd.2 You had been very appreciative of Sadat’s quick and positive response. I planned to leave for Jidda the following day in order to meet 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 54, Middle East: Eilts Report, 11/79. Top Secret; Eyes Only for the President. In the upper right-hand corner of the document, Carter wrote: “Good report—Also had long talk w/Eilts by telephone (secure). J.” The memorandum was found attached to a one-page summary of the report to which was attached a November 21 hand-written note by Brzezinski to Carter, proposing that the report be forwarded to Vance. The portions of the memorandum pertaining to the Iran hostage crisis are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XI, Part 1, Iran: Hostage Crisis, November 1979— September 1980. 2 Not found.
