Venezuela  1213
10. In Venezuela strong popular feeling holds the United States 
accountable for undue intimacy with the detested Pérez Jiménez dicta-
torship and for a supposed general preference for dictatorships in the 
Caribbean area. Any foreseeable government, however, will desire to 
maintain friendly relations with the United States, though remaining 
highly sensitive to any apparent U.S. lack of regard for Venezuelan 
democracy and sovereignty. (Para. 54)
11. A democratic Venezuela will continue to side generally with the 
West against the Soviet Bloc, in the UN and elsewhere, but this support 
will not be dependable in situations in which Western imperialism in 
underdeveloped countries is alleged. (Para. 53)
DISCUSSION
ESSENTIAL BACKGROUND
12. Venezuela’s present political situation reflects the strains inher-
ent in a transition, in one generation, from a tradition of dictatorship 
and an oligarchic social order toward a democratic welfare state. Until 
as recently as 1935 the country was ruled by a succession of long-­term 
dictators. When the 27-­year dictatorship of Juan Vicente Gómez ended 
with his natural death in 1935, the Army was the only organized body 
available to assume the direction of public affairs. Gómez’ immedi-
ate successors, Generals Lopez Contreras (1935–1941) and Medina 
Angarita (1941–1945), were not radical reformers, but they did desire 
to liberalize political and social institutions. This liberalization released 
forces demanding more radical political and social change.
13. In 1945 the Medina government was overthrown by a group 
of younger officers impatient to succeed their elders, acting in combi-
nation with Acción Democrática (AD), a civilian group advocating more 
rapid and extensive social and political reforms. Under the leadership 
of Rómulo Betancourt (AD), the ensuing provisional government initi-
ated sweeping constitutional and electoral changes. In the subsequent 
presidential election (in 1947), the AD candidate, Rómulo Gallegos, was 
credited with 75 percent of the apparently free popular vote.
14. The social democratic program of Acción Democrática was gen-
erally comparable to that of the British Labor Party—­but, against the 
Venezuelan background, that seemed radical indeed to conservative 
business and landholding interests which denounced AD as commu-
nistic. On the other hand, the Communists, tolerated by AD as a mat-
ter of democratic principle and as allies against conservative reaction, 
regarded AD as their principal rival for popular support and for the con-
trol of mass organizations. Acción Democrática withstood these antago-
nisms, but was undone when, emboldened by its popular mandate, it 
undertook to subordinate the military to the civil power. Foreseeing the 
loss of its special privileges, concerned by the radical tendencies of AD,
