Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
467
agreements that hold out the possibility of resolving issues that history
had taught us could not be resolved.
The first of these documents is entitled, “A Framework for Peace in
the Middle East Agreed at Camp David.” It deals with a comprehen-
sive settlement, comprehensive agreement, between Israel and all her
neighbors, as well as the difficult question of the Palestinian people and
the future of the West Bank and the Gaza area.
The agreement provides a basis for the resolution of issues in-
volving the West Bank and Gaza during the next 5 years. It outlines a
process of change which is in keeping with Arab hopes, while also care-
fully respecting Israel’s vital security.
The Israeli military government over these areas will be with-
drawn and will be replaced with a self-government of the Palestinians
who live there. And Israel has committed that this government will
have full autonomy. Prime Minister Begin said to me several times, not
partial autonomy, but full autonomy.
Israeli forces will be withdrawn and redeployed into specified lo-
cations to protect Israel’s security. The Palestinians will further partici-
pate in determining their own future through talks in which their own
elected representatives, the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza, will
negotiate with Egypt and Israel and Jordan to determine the final status
of the West Bank and Gaza.
Israel has agreed, has committed themselves, that the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people will be recognized. After the signing of
this framework last night, and during the negotiations concerning the
establishment of the Palestinian self-government, no new Israeli settle-
ments will be established in this area. The future settlements issue will
be decided among the negotiating parties.
The final status of the West Bank and Gaza will be decided before
the end of the 5-year transitional period during which the Palestinian
Arabs will have their own government, as part of a negotiation which
will produce a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan specifying
borders, withdrawal, all those very crucial issues.
These negotiations will be based on all the provisions and the prin-
ciples of Security Council Resolution 242, with which you all are so fa-
miliar. The agreement on the final status of these areas will then be sub-
mitted to a vote by the representatives of the inhabitants of the West
Bank and Gaza, and they will have the right for the first time in their
history, the Palestinian people, to decide how they will govern them-
selves permanently.
We also believe, of course, all of us, that there should be a just set-
tlement of the problems of displaced persons and refugees, which takes
into account appropriate United Nations resolutions.
