234вҖғ Foreign Relations, 1958вҖ“1960, Volume III, Supplement
Cooperation Administration; the Special Assistants to the President for 
National Security Affairs, for Science and Technology, and for Security 
Operations Coordination; the White House Staff Secretary; Assistant 
Secretary of State Gerard Smith; Assistant Secretary of Defense 
Mansfield Sprague; the Naval Aide to the President; the Executive 
Secretary; NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY
(NSC Action No. 1903; NSC 5810/l; Memo for NSC from Executive 
Secretary, same subject, dated May 26, 1958)
General Cutler explained that the President would be delayed for 
a few minutes and he would accordingly change the order of items on 
the agenda, dealing first with the question of U.S. policy with respect to 
international commodity agreements which had been unresolved when 
the Council last discussed it in connection with Paragraph 27вҖ“Вӯd of our 
new Basic National Security Policy (NSC 5810/1), at the ВӯCouncil meetВӯ
ing on May 1, 1958. He pointed out that on this occasion the issue had 
been referred to the Council on Foreign Economic Policy. On MayВ 22, 
1958 the Chairman of the CFEP, Mr. Randall, had filed a report with the 
Council giving the text of existing CFEP policy on international comВӯ
modity agreements and also the consensus of the CFEP that this policy 
remained valid and should be continued in effect. (A copy of General 
CutlerвҖҷs briefing note is filed in the Minutes of the Meeting and another 
copy is attached to this memorandum).
At the conclusion of General CutlerвҖҷs briefing, Secretary Dulles 
stated that he had an observation to make with respect to the text of 
our policy in the matter of commodity agreements. He pointed out that 
the text of our policy as formulated by the CFEP revealed two different 
emphases. The first paragraph which reads as follows:
вҖңThe United States shares the concern of other nations about the 
problems arising from commodity price and market instability and 
is prepared to discuss and explore with other governments possible 
approaches to these problemsвҖқ
according to Secretary Dulles emphasized the willingness of the 
United States at least to discuss and explore approaches to these 
problems. On the other hand, the last paragraph of our policy readВӯ
ing as follows:
вҖңRepresentatives of the United States will not participate in any 
discussion or meeting with respect to an international commodity 
agreement and will make no commitment as to U.S. participation 
in such an agreement until approved at the interagency policy level 
within the Executive Branch.вҖқ
