264
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
7. Gotsev stressed Bulgarian interest in obtaining MFN treatment
from the US. He expressed the hope which the Bulgarian leadership
has that with SALT II and the development of American-Chinese politi-
cal and now economic ties it would prove possible for Bulgaria to
acquire MFN status. He stated that Bulgaria wishes to gain MFN before
Czechoslovakia or the German Democratic Republic. Moreover, he
commented, Bulgaria in fact had no emigration problem with a Jewish
minority or other group. Such essentially minor differences as divided
family cases could rapidly be resolved.
8. Gotsev noted (as had Mladenov) that the Bulgarians had taken
a number of concrete steps suggested by the American side, such as
the settlement of the claims of American bondholders, and there were
none of the other obstacles that might stand in the way: no Bulgarian
gold in the US, no unsatisfied claims, or other such issues. Yet the
American side had made clear last year that it was not prepared at
that time to move on MFN.3
9. The Ambassador noted that Romania and Hungary had qualified
for MFN on the basis of existing legislation. He agreed with Gotsev
that there were no specific intrinsic obstacles in the way of reaching
agreement. Was Bulgaria prepared and interested to seek an MFN
solution on the Hungarian pattern?4 The Ambassador noted that he
was of course aware that after the Morse report, and the visit by Deputy
Foreign Minister Tsvetkov and Gotsev himself to Washington last fall,
there had been a distinct falling off of Bulgarian private expressions
of interest in taking steps toward MFN. The Ambassador then stated
that he wished to ask directly an undiplomatic question: had Bulgaria
consulted with the Soviet Union in 1978 before hiring an American
law firm to investigate MFN prospects, and before expressing the inter-
est which Gotsev himself and other Bulgarian officials had expressed
to the Ambassador with respect to the “Hungarian solution” and Bul-
garian interest in MFN?
10.GotsevrepliedthattheexpressionsofinterestinMFNwerebased
on the judgment of the Bulgarian leadership that obtaining MFN status
from the US, for economic and political reasons, would serve Bulgarian
interests. At the same time, they wished to proceed discreetly and delib-
erately. While prepared to justify their interest, they did not want to dis-
play this interest and then have it rebuffed by the US, in front of the
otherSocialistcountries.GotsevemphasizedthatBulgariaalsocouldnot
3 See Document 89.
4 PD–21 established the yardstick by which improved relations, including extension
of MFN, would be either an independent foreign policy from the Soviet Union (i.e.
Romania and Yugoslavia) or a policy of internal liberalization (the Hungarian model).
See Document 16.
