Dominican Republic  491
line of succession and indication he was not even in line avoided main 
point Senator was making—­namely Trujillo alone has run GODR for 
30 years and it was time arrange for democratic succession. Trujillo’s 
straight-­faced reference to his invitation to opposition to form political 
parties must have been based on assumption Senator entirely ignorant 
of history Trujillo regime. Trujillo has cut down his opposition ruth-
lessly throughout his regime and this largely explains why thousands 
of Dominicans live in exile and why thousands to Embassy’s certain 
knowledge have applied (without success) for passports to leave. 
DR. Embassy does not in least agree with Pawley’s observation that 
not possible to form opposition party here because everyone wants 
Generalissimo. Fear of economic and physical reprisals alone prevent 
formation of opposition parties especially among business and profes-
sional classes and Embassy knows this from those who would form 
such parties. Entirely possible if all heads in DR voted today peasant 
vote would still return Generalissimo to office. However, this by no 
means certain if free opposition political campaigns were allowed, 
including use of press, radio and television.
Trujillo’s indication of fairness of Dominican juridical system can 
only be justified by technical explanation. This system may be mag-
nificent on the books. Operationally when measured against judicial 
practices in civilized western nations it is an outrage abounding in 
trumped-­up charges, arbitrary arrests, search without warrant, and 
inhumane treatment of prisoners.
Embassy believes policy question posed in penultimate para-
graph Embassy telegram 431 comes down to decision whether we need 
Trujillo’s help against international Communism sufficiently to support 
regime characterized by such unsavory practices. In Embassy view it 
will not be possible guide Trujillo to abandon the practices. Example is 
that even day after Smathers visit he gave press conference stating pas-
toral letter of Catholic Church was brought about as reprisal of Church 
against GODR for allowing freedom for Protestant groups to operate 
in DR. This is so ridiculous one can only marvel at Trujillo’s courage 
in making the charge. Already evident from this insofor as Smathers 
approach was invitation toward enlightened government practices, 
Generalissimmo has not yet been converted.
Dearborn
