758
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
continues to give full support and encouragement to IFAD which will
channel additional resources to priority agricultural projects. In the fu-
ture, the US may want to give added priority to international activities
dealing specifically with new measures to protect and sustain the nat-
ural resource base on which food production depends over the longer
term.
Focus on Malnutrition
An attack on malnutrition is one possible focus for a new world
hunger initiative. While not entrirely new, higher priority and em-
phasis on malnutrition would be consistent with our aid strategy of ad-
dressing basic human needs in all countries and should enjoy popular
support in the United States. Following are some elements which might
be included under a malnutrition focus:
1) Involving recipient governments to a greater extent in nutrition in-
tervention programs, with the objective of having these governments
eventually take over entirely these programs. There might be especially
promising prospects of the US acting as this sort of catalyst in middle-
income LDCs with pockets of malnutrition (e.g., Brazil; and its north-
east states) where governments could be expected to take over their
own feeding programs in the near future.
2) Expanding the delivery of high protein blended foods to target groups.
(The U.S. now provides nearly one million tons per year of grain and
other foods for nutrition intervention programs as part of its Food for
Peace Title II program). This would require greater cooperation with
private voluntary agencies which now manage most of U.S. supported
nutrition intervention programs abroad. It would also lend itself to
training and utilizing locally available labor, thus minimizing the
American presence in the field.
3) Developing targets for the improvement of nutritional levels. As a
pilot project of this sort, we might want to concentrate on particular
countries and especially vulnerable groups (pregnant and lactating
mothers and children under 4) in those countries.
4) Transferring available technology and providing necessary financing
to LDCs for developing their own high protein blended foods, based on
locally available grains and other agricultural products. These coun-
tries would then avoid having to rely totally on importing such foods
(often at relatively high unit prices and costly in foreign exchange)
from the US.
5) Ensuring that the necessary infrastructure for nutrition intervention
programs—particularly in remote areas—is adequate. Required are trans-
port facilities, vehicles, storage, and distribution and cooking facilities.
6) Combining nutrition intervention programs with education in family
planning. (This is already done to some extent; any expansion in nutri-
