1955 379 2. Should have noted in Mytel 833 that during course of complaints our implementation to effect we have not given him names of Chinese departing from US for Far East he stated they were going to ask Indians investigate matter. Presumption was were going request Indians obtain from US names of Chinese departing for Far East “so that they could check.” I did not pick up this obvious effort enlarge Indian functions beyond scope agreed announcement as I thought it preferable to see whether GOI attempts to act on request. If GOI acts believe we should be prepared immediately and categorically point out to GOI request for such info beyond agreed scope GOI functions. If feasible would believe it preferable informally intimate this to GOI before any request received and attempt encourage GOI turn down request on own responsibility. 3. As far as next meeting is concerned believe my tactic must be to do everything possible keep issue focused on renunciation of force as first and essential question. If his reply to my statement today shows any flicker of constructive response I would endeavor pin down and clarify by questions but avoid any substantive reply. If he repeats old line on Taiwan I would propose point to today’s statement that renun­ ciation of force essential foundation and preliminary to success discus­ sion this or any other his matters under item two. 4. Handling of implementation will depend on what if anything has developed in Peiping by time next meeting. 5. I do not for time being propose use statement on missing mili­ tary personnel but will be alert immediately do so if it appears could not safely be further postponed. Gowen Note: Copy to Mr. Carwell (FE:DO) 2:50 p.m., 10/7/CWO–JRL 277. Telegram 837 from Geneva1 Geneva, October 8, 1955, 7 p.m. 837. From Johnson. 1. I opened 20th meeting today with a prepared statement saying I was anxious for our discussions to move ahead. I regretted as much 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–855. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution.
