Chapter 4, February–April 1990 531 7. As the U.S. had maintained all along, it was simply impossible to verify adequately SLCM’s limits. Thus, any attempt to impose treaty constraints on SLCM’s would jeopardize the treaty itself. Ambassador Burt added that the U.S. would declare its deployment plans as laid out in the five-­year defense program (FYDP). That information, given the transparency of the U.S. political system, would already be in the public domain. The U.S. also intended to provide some information regarding the categories of ships and submarines on which SLCM’s would be deployed. This approach would contribute to both transparency of force structure and predictability of intentions. ALCM’s 8. German Permrep von Ploetz asked how the subject of conventional strategic bombers had been handled. He also wanted to know whether the counting rules on ALCM’s differed for different types of aircraft. Ambassador Burt answered that the U.S. opposed including conventional bombers under the 1600 strategic nuclear delivery vehicle limit. The two sides were not far apart on the issue, however. The U.S. proposed excluding 115 conventional bombers from the limit, while the Soviets wanted only 100 excluded. But there was still a problem over whether the right to exclude conventional bombers would be a continuous one. French Permrep Robin asked whether the Soviets would have the right to inspect U.S. bomber bases outside U.S. territory. Burt replied that the U.S. had no strategic bomber bases outside U.S. territory, so this was not an issue. He added that the Soviets wanted inspection rights at Holy Loch, Scotland, since U.S. submarines deployed there; however, the U.S. opposed this position. 9. On ALCM counting rules, Ambassador Burt said that both B–52’s and B–1’s would be attributed with 10 ALCMs, but would be permitted to carry up to 20. Soviet bears and blackjacks would be attributed with 8 ALCM’s and be permitted to carry up to 12. In return for these counting rules the Soviets were permitted 40 percent more bombers than the U.S. This was merely a cosmetic U.S. concession, however, since the additional aircraft would be counted against the 1600 SNDV limit. Ambassador Burt also confirmed that range was the only remaining unresolved ALCM issue. The U.S. had come down from 1500 to 1000 kilometers, but the Soviets were holding firm at 600. Burt indicated that the U.S. objective was to protect its options for deploying conventionally-­armed ALCM’s with ranges up to 1000 km especially if distinguishing nuclear ALCMs from conventional ALCMs proved difficult. Mobile ICBM’s 10. In response to a question from German Permrep von Ploetz, Ambassador Burt said there had been no agreement on mobile ICBM
