Arms Control and Disarmament  1637
of March 10 to the Secretary of State. He emphasized particularly the 
way in which the proposed terms of reference for the surprise attack 
study broadened out into basic disarmament issues and the need for 
a review of present U.S. disarmament policy. He stressed also the spe­
cial interest of the Departments of State and Defense in disarmament 
matters.
Mr. Herter said that he personally had come to the conclusion that 
it was important to have a review of U.S. disarmament policy. A very 
practical problem was that it was difficult for the State Department to 
release the type of officer needed for such a fundamental policy review 
in view of the existing demands on the personnel of the Department and 
the limitations of funds. For this reason, among others, the Department 
had been eager to take advantage of the interest shown by Mr. William 
Foster in pursuing the avenues of study opened up during the surprise 
attack conference with the Soviet Union and the preceding period of 
preparation. Mr. Farley pointed out that the Department’s proposal for 
a study specifically directed at the surprise attack problem was moti­
vated by the considerations that the surprise attack talks with the Soviet 
Union were formally in recess rather than broken off and that we needed 
to be prepared in event there was occasion to resume them; in addition, 
the study would be useful since it bore on many of the problems now 
being considered in connection with the European security aspects of 
forthcoming negotiations.
Mr. Quarles expressed appreciation for the staffing problem for 
any broad disarmament review. He thought that the Department of 
Defense might be able to help in finding the funds for outside con­
sultants or participants and that studies which the State Department 
desired might be placed with such organizations as the Rand Corpora­
tion if State Department funds for this purpose were not available. With 
regard to Mr. Farley’s point, he raised the possibility that, in the broad 
disarmament policy review, special early attention might be given to 
the surprise attack aspects.
Mr. Herter suggested that as a next steps a draft terms of reference 
be drawn up for a broad disarmament policy review.
