1980  839
Administration watered it down. (General Lew Allen has been work-
ing hard to defuse this opposition. Enclosure 2 is a letter he wrote about 
three months ago on these issues. The same letter also anticipated the 
design change to the non-­integral transporter.)
—Last, and perhaps most important, the sincerely concerned cit-
izens of Nevada and Utah. These residents have a long tradition of 
suspicion of federal activities in their areas. Most people in impacted 
areas are defense-­minded and, to some extent, reluctant to fight defense 
programs. They are, however, very much concerned about the possible 
impact of M–X on their lives. They are most worried about the influx 
of people into their isolated communities; the inevitable change in life-­
style that will result; the possibility of boom-­bust problems; and the 
impact on local mining and agriculture. Understandably, they tend to 
resolve their dilemma by adopting the arguments of the second and 
third groups.
I am taking every step possible to alleviate the real adverse effects 
and to inform the local people honestly of the scope and character of 
those problems we can’t completely eliminate. (The facts are frequently 
a lot less worrisome than rumors.) (U)
One major activity we are involved in, which you will hear more 
about in the future, is the “split basing” study to assess the additional 
costs and problems in locating one half of the system in Nevada and 
Utah and the other in New Mexico and Texas. I have already stated in 
some hearings that the extra cost of split basing may be prohibitive (per-
haps $3–4 billion), but the members and Governors from Nevada and 
Utah insist that a thorough study be made. I recognize that Nevada/
Utah elected officials must question this project with sufficient rigor to 
demonstrate to their constituencies that their interests are being cared 
for. I have promised an objective and complete analysis. (U)
We have found frequent visits out West by senior civilian officials 
and Air Force people, who are working there continuously, extremely 
helpful. A few weeks ago Bill Perry and David Aaron were on a two 
hour panel debate on M–X that was broadcast nationally on public TV. 
Since then, Bill has spent additional time in the Southwest, including 
attending some meetings in very small towns, getting to know the peo-
ple and hearing their concerns first hand. (U)
I believe that all these activities are paying off. We have developed 
considerable feel for those actions we might have taken which would 
be totally unacceptable, and for areas where reasonable accommoda-
tions and compromises can be made. We have found, too, that some 
opposition melts away when our representatives describe to small cit-
izen groups in situ the need for M–X, and the extensive analyses lead-
ing us to this particular design. We will continue to seek and accept 
all such educational opportunities as we forthrightly address citizen 
concerns. (U)
