Negotiating Channels
423
i.e., to arrest the Shah and to initiate the extradition process, Lewis
said he would call back in three hours as he had to locate Royo. He
asked Ghotbzadeh that, if Royo were to agree, would this help in the
release of the hostages, and Ghotbzadeh replied affirmatively.
4. Following this call, Col. Noriega spoke with the PN Ambassador
in Paris, who had been in communication with Tehran and had been
told that such steps were necessary “to prepare the Revolutionary
Council” (ie, for release of hostages). He also reported that Ghotbzadeh
was sending an “intermediary” to Paris early Wednesday morning,3
who could then travel to Panama at the right moment.
5. Following this conversation, the PN Ambassador to Paris called
Ghotbzadeh and said that Royo was presently in a meeting with his
top advisers considering the matter.
6. Royo called Ghotbzadeh at approximately 6 p.m. (I heard the
tape which was made of the conversation, held in English; Ghotbza-
deh’s voice was not always intelligible.) Royo said he agreed to receive
the request for extradition of the ex-Shah. He said the GOP would
initiate procedures for extradition when it received the formal docu-
ments required by Panamanian law, i.e., copy of the Iranian order
for arrest, documents evidencing crimes, and applicable laws of Iran.
Ghotbzadeh asked repeatedly whether Shah would be arrested,
whether he could say order for arrest was issued, etc., and Royo ducked
the question each time. Royo stated only that the Shah was “in a safe
place,” that he was “well protected by our security forces,” etc. He
promised to send Ghotbzadeh a telex early Wednesday a.m. confirming
the agreement. Ghotbzadeh indicated he would make such communica-
tion public and said: “I believe what you are doing (word missed)
toward a peaceful solution to the problem.” Royo said: “I hope our
response under international law can be a help.”
7. Royo and Torrijos discussed the telex Royo should send early
Wednesday (Royo promised Ghotbzadeh it would be sent by 7:30 a.m.).
He said that it would consist of three paragraphs: in the first he would
state that the Shah was under the “protection and care” of the GOP
and that “his movements were subject to previous authorization of the
security forces of the country.” The second para would state that the
GOP was prepared to receive the formal extradition request, and would
describe the documents required under PN law. The third paragraph
would appeal to the GOI to release the hostages and say, in effect, that
he hoped the example of Panama’s fulfilment of the law would help
the GOI take measures to free the hostages and bring about respect
for international law. The implication at least would be that the GOI’s
3 January 23.
