1066  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
254.	 Memorandum for the Record of Meeting Between Sprague 
and Merchant1
Washington, May 25, 1960
Manny Sprague came in to see me yesterday afternoon for about 
half an hour to ask my unvarnished comments on the OCB and its oper­
ation. He has similarly privately and alone interviewed every other 
member of the OCB.
In sum, I told him that I thought the OCB was a necessary coor­
dinating mechanism, given the complexity and size of our government 
and its responsibilities. I said that with officers in the Department con­
cerned with its functioning I emphasized that they should give it their 
best efforts and not resent the time demands of chairing working groups 
since, if the OCB did not exist, their lives would be far more difficult.
I said that I thought OCB by reason of its wide membership and 
cumbersomeness had the potential of slowing up and making more 
difficult the function of coordination. However, I said, under Gordon 
Gray’s chairmanship this had not been the case because he was open­
minded and reasonable and not seeking to bring into the OCB orbit 
problems involving two or more members of the Board which were 
already being adequately coordinated by direct informal procedures.
I made three suggestions. First, I thought the weekly activity 
report insofar as it comprised summaries of Departmental telegrams 
on various problems not under current OCB scrutiny provoked need­
less and time-­wasting discussions on matters on which few, if any, of 
the members were currently informed. These extracts I thought could 
be usefully dropped from the weekly agenda. Secondly, I said I thought 
that the OCB luncheons were probably the most valuable aspect of the 
entire organization and that I would favor seeking to establish a ratio 
of two luncheons to one full-­dress meeting rather than the present one 
to one ratio. Thirdly, I said that I thought the luncheons would be even 
more stimulating and useful if they were agendaless and if members 
did not try to use them for quick clearances, particularly where only a 
fraction of those present were directly concerned. In other words, I said, 
I thought the opportunity for unguided, unrecorded discussion of the 
major problems in the forefront of our minds was the best way to gen­
erate ideas or suggestions which could then be worked out and refined 
or rejected in staff channels.
Finally, we discussed the “P” factor. I reiterated my basic point, 
which is that good policy makes good propaganda. Hence I believe 
1 Source: Operations Coordinating Board. Confidential. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central 
Files, 100.4–OCB/5–2560.
