Eastern Europe Region
21
Soviets raised the idea of supporting splinter groups within the offend-
ing parties. That Moscow would even talk about such a major step
suggests the depth of its concern. We do know that the Soviets tried
to prevent the Madrid meeting of the three leading Western European
Communist parties last month, evidently because they feared that it
would produce more outspoken criticism of the repression of Soviet
and other dissidents. The communique of the Madrid meeting was soft
on the human rights issue, perhaps as a consequence of Soviet
pressures.
United Leaderships?
Except for Poland, the dissident problem has led to little or no
observed political fallout within the East European leaderships. A num-
ber of personnel changes were made in Warsaw last December, and it
looks as though Premier Jaroszewicz will lose his job sometime this year.
Even the Polish problem is not strictly one of “dissidence,” but rather
concerns fundamentals of economic and political mismanagement.
With the possible exception of Romania, where Ceausescu runs
something close to a one-man show, there are divisions or differing
tendencies along a “liberal-conservative” continuum. One would
expect to see some exacerbation of these differences as a consequence
of the dissident activity. But the evidence to support that expectation
is not very strong. We know that there have been longstanding and
deep divisions in Yugoslavia over internal security policies, including
the way to handle dissidents, but it is not clear how, or if, the divisions
have come into play during the recent flare-up.
In Czechoslovakia, the leadership is divided between hard liners
and more pragmatic conservatives led by party leader Husak, but
these differences do not appear to have affected in any major way
the regime’s handling of the Chartists. Both factions, whatever their
inclinations at the outset, must have realized the implications of
Charter 77, and neither would be inclined to pursue a soft policy like
that of Gierek in Poland. Although Husak successfully resisted hard-
line pressure for trials of people responsible for the “Prague Spring,”
he has also shown an ability to pursue a conservative tack when neces-
sary. The hard liners probably prefer a decisive crackdown on the
Chartists, but if so they have not yet had their way. Moscow has a
good deal to say about tactics on such problems in Czechoslovakia,
and the chances are good that it has supported the tough, but not
harsh, stand taken by Husak.
In East Germany, the regime is not completely united on how to
deal with dissidents; for example, in the Biermann case7 there is evi-
7 Wolf Biermann, a popular dissident singer and poet, who was in trouble with the
regime for many years, was not permitted to return to the GDR following a tour to West
Germany last fall. [Footnote is in the original.]
