338
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
122.
Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, December 31, 1979
SUBJECT
Pakistan and Afghanistan (U)
The attached cable from Hummel makes some very important
points.2 They are similar to the ones that I made in my memo to you
for last week’s PRC3 and need to be borne in mind. I would restate
the situation as follows: (C)
1. Whether we like it or not, the Paks do not see the situation as
we do. They think that they are doing us a favor in helping with covert
action or criticizing the Soviets about Afghanistan. In their view, we
are conducting superpower rivalry and they don’t think that we really
care about them. (S)
2. Certainly up until now, the only way that we could get them
mobilized in directions that we think are important has been by provid-
ing military equipment and (probably) security guarantees at a level
far beyond anything that I think is feasible here. That is why I had
hoped the PRC would look very hard at what would be involved. It
didn’t, and neither, apparently, did the NSC. What Vance offered—
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Brzezinski Collection, Brzezin-
ski’s Subject Files, Box 36, Serial Xs—(10/79—12/79). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for informa-
tion. In the top right corner, Brzezinski wrote to Thornton: “TT, we need to know what
Pakistan will need in terms of aid—and what it will take to get them to do what is
needed. ZB”
2 Telegram 15326 from Islamabad, December 30, is attached but not printed. In the
telegram, Hummel relayed the substance of his discussion with Shahi, December 29.
Shahi again rejected an immediate visit by Christopher (see footnote 3, Document 111)
and told Hummel that, in light of the Soviet intervention, Pakistan “needs indication”
of the extent to which the United States was willing to support Pakistan through political,
economic, and military means. Hummel reported Shahi was “very anxious” that the
United States not publicize the Pakistani response to Soviet troops in Afghanistan, and
was upset that Carter’s conversation with Zia (see Document 111) was publicized. (For
example, the conversation was reported by Don Oberdorfer in his article, “U.S. Affirms
Commitment to Pakistan,” Washington Post, December 31, 1979, p. A1.) Hummel com-
mented that the amount of support Shahi would consider sufficient to mitigate risks
associated with perceived “collusion” with the United States would be too high; still,
Hummel advocated, “I hope we can have Wash decisions that put us in position of
offering substantial assistance so that we are seen to have offered support rather than
ignored Pak needs.”
3 See Document 102.
