780  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
months, then we should be prepared to support the Haitian budget to 
the extent of some $6 to $8 million during the coming Haitian fiscal year 
and be prepared for the possibility that in addition Haiti will demand a 
large amount of development funds “without strings”.
In its most recent communication the Embassy has advised:
“Accordingly consider most productive immediate action would 
be priority shipment to Haiti of weapons and equipment programmed 
for army’s mobile light infantry battalion, specifically including in ini-
tial increment, as means of dramatizing our support and tightening 
Merceron’s control over outlying units, at least one of helicopters for 
battalions helicopter platoon. While initial increment weapons and 
equipment should be sent with minimum delay, phasing in of sub-
sequent shipments should be on call by and under positive control 
MAAG acting with Embassy concurrence, not only to avoid glutting 
but to assure maximum leverage all times. If this recommendation 
approved, MAAG will initiate immediate request for weapons, train-
ing, ammunition, and equipment to be included in initial increment.
“As related matter, of importance only secondary to support of 
army infantry battalion, consider that immediate grant to Haiti under 
MAP of C-47 aircraft for air corps, to be used for military airlift and by 
Cohata, would have important impact on army generally, on air corps 
specifically, and would be widely recognized as tangible evidence our 
support.”
We strongly recommend the Department accept views of officials 
on the ground, namely, that the United States (1) not provide any bud-
get support for Haitian FY 1960–1961, and (2) provide military weap-
ons and equipment and C–47’s mentioned above.2
L. J. Saccio
2 In a letter to Acting Director Saccio of July 22, Under Secretary Merchant acknowl-
edged the unsatisfactory conditions that existed in Haiti but advised: “I remain of the 
opinion that on foreign policy grounds directly related to the Cuban situation we should 
make available to the Government of Haiti $1 million for budgetary support during the 
next two months. This should be done without any commitment whatsoever, in our own 
minds or implied, otherwise to continue budgetary support thereafter. I ask, therefore, 
that on this understanding ICA proceed to make the necessary arrangements in collab-
oration with Assistant Secretary Rubottom.” In regard to Saccio’s recommendation con-
cerning military equipment, Merchant offered his support and stated that the Department 
of State was working closely and urgently on the matter with the Department of Defense. 
(738.5–MSP/7–2060)
On July 29, the Embassy at Port-­au-Prince was informed of the decision to make 
available $1,000,000 to the Haitian Government for budgetary support during the fol-
lowing two months in ICATO 34, and Department of State telegram 29, filed respectively 
under 838.10/7–760 and 738.5–MSP/7–2960.
Ambassador Bonhomme during a meeting with Ambassador Turkel on August 12 
to discuss the United States offer of budgetary assistance, stated that President Duvalier 
considered the sum of $1,000,000 to be inadequate and needed an additional $1,500,000 
immediately. Turkel told Bonhomme that he saw no possibility of increasing the amount 
offered. (Telegram 47 to Port-­au-Prince, August 12; 738.5–MSP/8–1260).
