3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
321
1. In a two-hour private meeting with Gromyko this morning, we
covered the following ground.2
2. On the new ICBM types issue, he did not give a substantive reac-
tion, but suggested the definition be handled in Geneva. He said the So-
viet Union is prepared to include the ban on new ICBM types in the
treaty, but only if the exempt type is required to be non-MIRVed. I re-
peated that any exception and any settlement of the ICBM new types
issue depends on satisfactory resolution of the definition issue, and that
our proposal for an exception required that each side have a choice of
whether the new ICBM would be MIRVed or not.
3. I reviewed our position on an SLBM new types ban and we
agreed to refer the issue (including exceptions from the ban) to Geneva.
4. On aggregates, he reiterated his offer of yesterday to accept
2250/1320/1200/820. On the related issue of duration of the protocol,
they continued to object to the principle of a fixed date.
5. On timing for reductions, Gromyko stressed again the practical
obstacles to completing dismantling and destruction in less than 18
months. He said, however, that they will offer us specifics on his con-
cept, first advanced yesterday, of measures to increase confidence that
launchers on which dismantling and destruction has been started will
be ruled out for combat use.
6. He reaffirmed our agreement on the non-circumvention fall-
back language.
7. We agreed that the Statement of Principles will be handled ur-
gently in Geneva, within the agreed concept of a more general ap-
proach. (While I was meeting with Gromyko, Korniyenko and Ogarkov
took up this issue with Warnke and others, and agreed to proceed in
Geneva; the Soviets declined to discuss principles language in Moscow,
and reiterated their desire for a reference to GBS.)
8. On Backfire, Gromyko was slightly more forthcoming than yes-
terday, agreeing to give a flight profile for their radius claim and to con-
sider modifying the phrase “for your information” which they inserted
into their production rate statement yesterday.
9. On procedure, we agreed that the remaining issues would be ad-
dressed urgently in Geneva, with the objective of resolving as many as
possible prior to Gromyko’s SSOD visit. As many as possible of those
still unresolved then will be settled at that time in Washington, with the
goal of positioning us for a summit to settle one or two remaining
questions.
2 The memorandum of conversation prepared following this meeting is in Depart-
ment of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on
Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 8, Vance to
Moscow, 4/20–22, 1978.
