me the impression that he felt that the matter could be adjusted with a little patience. A copy of the note dispatched in accordance with this interview, dated May 28, is herewith enclosed marked Annex 2.70 It incorporates, as will be perceived, statements contained in Department circular instruction of April 2, 1925. I have recently—a formal reply from the Foreign Office being still outstanding,—taken occasion to bring up the matter again orally. The official with whom I talked after a little hesitation told me in confidence that while it was true that the formal replies from the Departments of Finance and Commerce had not been received, the greatest obstacle now was a political one. It had been brought to the attention of the Austrian Government that other nations were raising serious objections to the diplomatic recognition of American Customs Representatives. England, Italy, Switzerland, Spain, and the Scan-dinavian States, I recall among others whom he specifically mentioned in this connection. Germany, he said, was hesitating and uncertain as to what answer it would return. He gave me the distinct impression that some of the resident Chiefs of Missions, at least here in Vienna, had discussed the matter at the Austrian Foreign Office, probably in the interest of uniformity of action. As a case in point, Italy was mentioned, where it was said that it was found impossible to invest American Treasury representatives with powers and functions which, it was alleged, no corresponding Italian official had. It was of course recognized that an American Treasury official or Customs Representative would have no power to enforce his requests, but the mere fact that he was dignified with diplomatic status would put him in a place of vantage and be misunderstood by Italian manufacturers, who in many cases would assume that they must comply with requests made under such circumstances. I mention this merely as an illustration to show that some communication has passed between Vienna and Rome, whether the intermediary was the resident Italian Minister or the Austrian Minister at Rome I do not, of course, know. Austria, my informant said, was a small country, and wished to avoid being put in the position of being perhaps the only country to accord such recognition. He particularly inquired whether any other country had acted favorably upon a similar request. I assume that I might have mentioned Canada, but it did not seem to me, under the circumstances, that such an example would especially help. Finally, I was begged to regard the information given me as strictly confidential. The official with whom I talked has the rank of Minister Plenipotentiary. I took occasion to allude casually to the fact that in Vienna and Berlin, as well as in Paris and London, many obscure Soviet commercial representatives were carried on the diplomatic list. The force of this was frankly recognized. Apart from the fact that it might be conspicuous as presenting an isolated instance, the Minister thought that the diplomatic recognition of American Customs Representatives was not, in and of itself, so objectionable. Their functions and duties under diplomatic protection presented, however, a more serious question. So long as these Representatives acted without formal recognition, here at least their presence would be winked at and ignored. To accord them formal recognition might be embarrassing.
