350 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 105. Memorandum Prepared by the Office of the President’s Special Assistant for Science and Technology1 Washington, undated SELECTED ISSUES IN THE FY ’60 DEFENSE BUDGET (As of November 1, 1958) Limitations and Approach of this Memorandum 1. It collects and classifies current questions about specific budg­ etary items; it does not seek to answer these questions. The questions selected deal primarily with the development and procurement of weapons systems. It does not, for example, cover military construction. 2. It reflects the methods and approach of scientists and engineers; it does not express or assume military judgment and experience. It does not attempt to evaluate the military risks entailed in making changes in the military program. It does not deal with factors arising from national domestic policy. 3. It does not assume that the total defense budget is too large, too small, or just right. The objective is to suggest those detailed questions which can help in answering this general question: “How much military capability do we need and how much more or less will it cost?” 4. It does not exclude the possibility that our military capability may be substantially increased by a small increase in the total military budget. It is based on the conviction that expenditures for some weap­ ons systems need to be increased, while expenditures for others can be cut back. It has not sought to determine whether the net effect of increases and reductions will be a reduction or an increase. 5. It reflects the strong conviction that questions about the effec­ tiveness of weapon systems require a combination of technical evalua­ tion and military value judgments, and that this combined evaluation is so complex that it warrants continuous effort by highly skilled analysts. It reflects the belief that increasing benefit can be derived from increas­ ing the input of technical analyses. It recognizes that evaluation of the effectiveness of a particular military budget depends upon interaction between weapons systems, the nature of the threat, the strategic con­ cept and consideration of relative costs. 1 Source: Selected issues in the FY ’60 Defense budget (As of November 1, 1958). Top Secret. 21 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Offensive and Defensive Weapons.
