International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 317 To begin to integrate these policies, I recommend that you talk to the President and send out the memorandum at Tab A.2 I have talked at length to Treasury, State, and CEA. They would welcome such a memorandum. It is possible that DOE will protest. Accordingly, it is essential that the President know why he is being asked to send out this memorandum.3 Henry Owen agrees. 2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated and unsigned draft memorandum from Brzezinski to the Secretaries of State, Treasury, and Energy, the CEA Chairman, the OMB Director, and the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy entitled “The Dollar.” 3 A handwritten notation at the bottom of the page reads: “A memo to the President is being prepared in response to your request.” According to the NSC Correspondence Profile, the memorandum was subsequently redrafted. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 8, Balance of Payments: 12/77–2/79) The final version is printed as Document 105. 101. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, February 4, 1978 SUBJECT Germany and the Summit 1. In the wake of German Economics Minister Lambsdorff’s visit last week, we are developing what may be a promising strategy to get a higher rate of German growth. This strategy is similar to the one we adopted in dealing with Japan. That strategy had two key elements: a. Offering the Japanese something they wanted: an across-theboard agreement that would relieve both the tension in US-Japanese relations and upward pressure on the yen. b. Making clear to the Japanese that they could only get this outcome by making specified concessions—particularly a higher (7%) growth target. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Republic: 4/77–3/78. Confidential. Sent for information. An attached note from Brzezinski to Owen reads: “The P[resident] & Mike spoke at the last Cabinet meeting in this general vein.” At the bottom of the same note, Brzezinski wrote: “OBE or call me.” (Ibid.)
