Human Rights 605 —A more creative human rights approach at the United Nations including a more forthcoming position on apartheid and racial discrimination in Southern Africa. We need a major review of our human rights policy towards South Africa in which HA, IO, AF, and S/P would participate. We must avoid a repeat of the incomprehensible decision to support seating Pol Pot’s representative.8 —Fuller integration of human rights considerations in our economic decision making (Ex-Im, CCC, etc.) —A re-examination of our arms transfer policy with special attention to the human rights factor. Restructuring of the Arms Export Control Board (AECB) so that participants express their bureau or agency views, make proposals, vote on them and provide a record of votes and arguments to the decision makers. It is now a rubber stamp operation. There is no logical forum for all policy points to be openly discussed and considered. —Closely related to the study of arms transfers is a special study of how to promote human rights most effectively in violating countries with which we have a security relationship (e.g., Korea, Philippines. Our record here is poor). This could be independent of the country strategy papers or incorporated in them. —OAS. Full funding of the Inter-American Court. —CSCE. Systematic preparation for the Madrid Review Conference requires the immediate appointment of a full-time Ambassador and staff to coordinate the process. It also will require your and Mr. Christopher’s attention to the problem of how we deal with the CSCE Commission. —Interagency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. Notification time between decisions and votes is variably inadequate, not providing time for explaining our position, or garnering the support of like minded states. The inevitable conclusion is that we are not serious about this human rights tool. Overview We have done more in human rights than any other administration and have some positive results to show for the policy. We have done less than we could or should have. Our policy is erratic and confusing. We send a mixed message; in the past we sent a consistent one, (e.g., it’s business as usual), so a mixed message is an improvement. But we should be striving for a consistent message. We could achieve that 8 The UN General Assembly voted on September 21 to allow the Pol Pot regime to take the seat of Kampuchea in the United Nations. (Bernard Rossiter, “U.N. Assembly, Rebuffing Soviet, Seats Cambodia Regime of Pol Pot,” The New York Times, September 22, 1979, p. 1)
