World Hunger and Food Policy 223. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne) to President Carter1 Washington, August 26, 1977 SUBJECT Bergland Memorandum dated August 15, 1977, re Report on International Food and Agriculture The comments contained in this memo were coordinated with the NSC, DC, OMB, OSTP, CEA, and the Cabinet Secretary.2 I. Summary Analysis Secretary Bergland’s excellent report is encouraging in that he proposes that the Department of Agriculture become a full collaborator on international food policy governmentwide, and expresses a concern for food policies which address the basic human needs of the poor in the world. The key step to take now is to establish, where possible, specific Administration goals to achieve by 1980 which will dictate the policies to pursue. The flaws in the report are the absence of specifics concerning a procedure to arrive at an Administration position, a temporary coordinating mechanism, and lack of emphasis on particular aspects of the needs of the poor in the developing world. However, this can be resolved through a deliberative forum where the views of primary departments and agencies (State, Agriculture, AID, Treasury, the Peace Corps, etc.) and the private sector (in particular, farmers, businessmen) are taken into consideration in molding Administration food policy. II. Key Proposals of Importance —A UN speech by the President. It was felt that the UN speech should be considerably broader than simply a discussion of the world 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 324, World Hunger [2]. No classification marking. A notation in Carter’s handwriting reads: “Stu, advise. J.” A stamped notation at the top of the page reads: “The President has seen.” An earlier version of the memorandum, prepared by Bourne on August 17; an undated draft response to Bergland; and covering memoranda attached to Bergland’s report, attached below, are ibid. 2 Comments on Bergland’s proposal are contained in an August 17 memorandum from Cutter to Hutchenson; an August 17 memorandum from Schultze to Carter; an August 17 memorandum from Eizenstat and Daft to the President; and an August 19 memorandum from Hormats to Dodson. All are ibid. In their memorandum to the President, Eizenstat and Daft noted that the proposal “represents an excellent first-cut at framing the Administration’s policy on international food and agriculture. It does a particularly nice job of tying together the several loose ends, including commercial trade policy, food assistance, and research.”
