September 18–December 16, 1978 357 in letting me say that the US believes it is important to proceed deliberately in organizing the West Bank/Gaza negotiations.10 Newlin 10 On October 24, Begin wrote a brief letter to Carter to which he attached the minutes of his October 20 meeting with Saunders, requesting that the President read them “personally.” “I feel compelled to add, Mr. President,” Begin wrote, “that it is difficult for me to find the proper words to express the depth of feeling of pain and sadness in which I spoke to Mr. Saunders.” The letter was found attached to a covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, bearing a handwritten date of October 26, upon which Carter wrote “No answer. J.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 9, Israel: Prime Minister Menachem Begin, 7–12/78) Begin’s minutes of the meeting were, however, not found attached. Brzezinski provided Carter with a summary record of the meeting in an October 25 memorandum in which he described Begin’s objections to the answers provided to Hussein as “legalistic, even obscure.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 22, Israel: 7–10/78) 98. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, October 21, 1978, 6:50–8:20 a.m. SUBJECT Summary of President’s Meeting with Egyptian Delegation PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Mr. David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Mr. Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President Hon. Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff Mr. Hebert Hansell, Legal Adviser, Department of State H.E. Boutros Boutros Ghali, Acting Foreign Minister H.E. Abdallah el-Erian, Legal Adviser to the Foreign Ministry 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 15, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 10/21–25/78. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room.
