Negotiating Channels
473
the Commission as a fact-finding mission (not a tribunal) to help end the
crisis and (b) recommend the membership of 5–7 for the Commission.
In proposing the membership, the Secretary-General would propose
Aguilar as Chairman plus 4–6 members, including (1) M’Bow
(UNESCO Director), (2) Bedjaoui (Algerian PermRep at UN), (3) Petitti
(former head of Paris Bar Association and Association of Catholic
Jurists), (4) Martin Ennals (Amnesty International Secretary-General),
(5) Abu Sayeed Chowdhury (former President of Bangladesh), (6)
Daoudi (Advisor to President Assad of Syria) or Sabah el Rikabi (Head
of Union of Syrian Bar Associations). If any of the proposed members
is not acceptable to Iran, Iran could suggest that one or two be dropped.9
6. Between Tuesday and Friday: Either Bani-Sadr himself would
confirm by phone to the Secretary-General or the Imam would issue
a statement that he has authorized the Revolutionary Council to resolve
the crisis.10 The Secretary-General would not proceed until he has
received confirmation in one of these forms from Iran.
7. Friday at 1600 hours: The Secretary-General would announce
establishment of the Commission and its purposes, including Iran’s
desire to have the Commission speak to each of the hostages.11
8. After SYG Waldheim’s announcement: The President of Iran
would publicly present the establishment of the Commission of Inquiry
as a success of Iranian diplomacy, would interpret the visit to the
hostages as one of the elements in the investigation into Iranian griev-
ances, and would state the desire of the Imam to see the Commission
conclude its work rapidly. The Iranian President would instruct govern-
ment administrations to place their documents at the disposal of the
Commission.12
9. After the Iranian statement: The U.S. would state that the Com-
mission is going on a fact-finding mission to Tehran, to hear the griev-
ances of both sides, to meet with each of the hostages, and to report
to the Secretary-General. The U.S. would object publicly to having the
9 In the right margin, an unknown hand wrote “D’Quello.”
10 February 11–15. Waldheim received this confirmation on February 13 for the
initial go-ahead and also announced publicly on February 19 that Khomeini and the
Revolutionary Council had approved the Commission and invited it to Tehran. (Vance,
Hard Choices, p. 403–404)
11 Waldheim made this required announcement at 12:30 p.m. on February 20. (Tele-
gram Tosec 45792/10049 to Vance, February 20; Department of State, Records of David
D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot
81D154, Box 1, Iran NODIS Cables Feb 1980) The announcement and Waldheim’s press
briefing were reported in Michael Weisskopf, “U.N. Commission Plans Interviews With
All Hostages,” Washington Post, February 21, 1980, p. A1.
12 See Document 189.
