August 8–September 17, 1978
75
which could be developed to protect infiltration. Secretary Vance stated
that Dayan had agreed that most internal security problems could be
dealt with by a local Palestinian Arab government, and that Israel
would not have to be involved in any significant way. Ambassador
Lewis added that Dayan had sometimes thought of mobile patrols in
the Jordan Valley in order to deal with the problem of terrorism.
Secretary Brown then turned to a possible American role in connec-
tion with security arrangements. He noted that military assistance
would be one means of assuring the security of the parties. The United
States could provide Israel with early warning technology, and acceler-
ated delivery of equipment, as well as access to high technology. Con-
sideration might be given to adding Israel to the list of countries ex-
empt from the arms ceiling limitations. Dr. Brzezinski thought that this
was not a good idea and Secretary Brown agreed that this would open
the door to many other requests for exemptions. Discussion then
turned to the possibility of a mutual security treaty between the United
States and Israel, and it was generally felt that anything less than a
NATO-type treaty would not be worth much to the Israelis. Secretary
Vance and Ambassador Lewis agreed that a NATO-type treaty would
be important to Israel. Ambassador Lewis also felt that some physical
American presence would be welcome in the area, such as Haifa or in
the Sinai but not in the West Bank.
Secretary Brown stated that an American presence in the Sinai
would pose fewer risks than a presence in the West Bank or in Golan or
at Haifa or Alexandria. A naval presence in the area is probably more of
a problem than it is worth. In times of tension, we would want the ships
to get out of the area. The base in Sinai would cause fewer problems.
One might think of additional port visits and use of repair facilities in
Haifa and Alexandria, although this would be less reassuring to the
parties. The JCS has also developed the idea of an air training facility at
Eitam air field. If this were useful, it should be raised with the Egyp-
tians, not with the Israelis initially, since the base would be on Egyptian
territory. Such an arrangement should only be considered as a cap to an
agreement, otherwise it will look as if they are doing a favor to us. In
fact there are problems in doing this and Americans could be held hos-
tage and pressures would build on us to offer other quid pro quos.
Therefore, Secretary Brown concluded, such arrangements should only
be seen as a capstone to the peace agreements if it offers additional
reassurances.
The President asked if any consideration had been given to a
U.S.-Egyptian neutral8 defense pact. Secretary Brown said that this was
8 An unknown hand circled the word “neutral”and wrote “mutual?” in the margin
adjacent it.
