736 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —Support for the vital functions of worldwide intelligence collection and diplomatic affairs. —Continuity of government during and after a nuclear war or natural disaster. —Recovery of the nation during and after a nuclear war or natural disaster. In order to achieve adequate capabilities for these objectives, the following principles are established as national security telecommunications policy: —National security and continuity of government telecommunications requirements have priority in restoration of services and facilities in national emergencies. —To the maximum extent feasible, interstate common carrier networks, including specialized common carriers and domestic satellite carriers, should be interconnected and capable of interoperation in emergencies at breakout points outside of likely target areas. —The National Communications System will make available information necessary to allow interstate common carriers to locate backbone facilities, where possible, outside of likely target areas. —Functionally similar government telecommunications networks shall be capable of interchange of traffic in emergencies. —The Federal Emergency Management Agency, in coordination with the National Communications System, shall plan for emergency use of industry private line communications that have significant capabilities (e.g., pipeline, railroad, and airline). —There must be a capability to manage the restoration and reconstitution of the national telecommunications system following an emergency. —The National Communications System will consult with the Federal Communications Commission on implementing these principles and will place substantial reliance upon the private sector for advice and assistance in achieving national security and preparedness goals. The National Communications System will amend and revise these principles as security needs dictate and submit them to the Special Coordination Committee for approval, as required by E.O. 12046. Nothing in this directive amends or contravenes Presidential Directive/NSC–24.3 Jimmy Carter 3 See Document 40.
