256
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
(C) Cabinet headed by and composed of elder statesmen. Qavam,
of course, ranked as most prominent of elder statesmen but Hakimi
had almost as great prestige and had perhaps better reputation. Elder
statesman like Qavam or Hakimi could form Cabinet outstanding men
of country who might help tide country over present crisis. He was
worried, however, lest such government might be entirely devoid pro-
gressive ideas. It might be charged such government was pushing Iran
back to 1945 or 1946. On other hand situation during those years prefer-
able to that at present. National Front and Tudeh should, of course, join
in opposing such government which might be compelled take rather
repressive measures during first days its existence to maintain law and
order.
10. I said I could see both advantages and disadvantages in Na-
tional Front government. No (rpt no) doubt there were strong nation-
alist feelings in country which might become positive constructive
force. Six months ago National Front leaders had magnificent opportu-
nity mold Iranian nationalist feelings into form which would be benefi-
cial to country. It seemed to me they had missed this opportunity. They
had played on Iranian nationalism merely to fan flames hatred and
promote prejudice. They had resorted to demagoguery and cheap
tricks. I wondered if so-called National Front has the leadership or vi-
sion to forge new nationalist progressive Iran. In National Front we re-
member intelligent, progressive men who not (rpt not) pleased with di-
rection present government was taking country. I doubted any these
men had experience and prestige to lead Iran out of its present diffi-
culties. I had studied Saleh’s record carefully and was convinced he un-
stable and lacking in judgment. He was at same time so stubborn that if
he once in power he might refuse take advice of Shah or anyone else.
It might be impossible remove him until he had already led
country to ruin. So far as oil dispute was concerned Saleh had on
number occasions indicated himself to be even more irreconcilable than
Mosadeq. He had only lately spoken against presence foreign advisers
in Iran. He was potentially dangerous demagogue in my opinion. Shah
said during his talks with Saleh latter had shown moderation and
common sense. Saleh had, for instance, seemed to be willing to be con-
ciliatory regarding oil problem. I remarked it might be mistake to judge
Saleh on what he might have said for purpose pleasing Shah. Shah
agreed and said certainly he would not (rpt not) be appointed before
very careful examination had been made of his past record and present
tendencies.
11. Continuing my comments I told Shah that members of present
National Front did not (rpt not) necessarily have monopoly on Iranian
nationalism. Perhaps some other groups composed of leaders of na-
tional stature had learned some lessons during last year. Perhaps if
