1430 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 835. Despatch unnumbered from Geneva1 Geneva, October 9, 1957 SUBJECT China Talks—71st Meeting 1. I opened 71st with following statement: a. “Mr. Ambassador, in our last meeting you made the allega­ tion that while your government has been the one which has always worked to remove the obstacles in the path of improvement of rela­ tions between our two countries, the United States Government was always creating such obstacles. I expressed my astonishment that you should feel it ­possible to make such a statement. It seems to me that the record of our 70 meetings since August 1, 1955 has demonstrated very clearly that it has been the attitude adopted by your authorities which has placed serious obstacles in the way of the improvement of relations. b. When our talks first began I emphasized the vital importance attached by my government, and by the American people, to the ques­ tion of the release of Americans imprisoned in your country. The first six weeks of our negotiations were taken up entirely with this subject and were culminated in the issuance of the Agreed Announcement of September 10. It was, as I have repeatedly pointed out, the under­ standing of my government that this Announcement applied to all Americans in the territory controlled by your authorities, including those who were imprisoned. No other interpretation can logically be placed either on the wording of the announcement, or on the negotia­ tions which led up to its issuance. c. It was our sincere hope that, with the issuance of the Agreed Announcement, a solemn commitment had been made by your author­ ities to eliminate one of the major sources of friction between our coun­ tries. Unfortunately, we were to be disappointed in this hope. Hardly had the Agreed Announcement been issued than you began to inter­ pret it in such a way as to distort the clear meaning of the words used, and thus to try to excuse the failure of your authorities to implement the Announcement. You lost no time in making the specious argu­ ment that the term “expeditiously” must be interpreted in the light of the behaviour of the prisoners and of the seriousness of their alleged crimes, and so forth. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–957. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Johnson. Received on October 17.
