20
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
vakia and the USSR),4 but said that the President specifically told Soviet
Ambassador Dobrynin last week that the US would be raising such
issues again in the future.5
2. After lengthy discussion, summarized below, the following
major points emerged:
—A Presidential Review Memorandum concerning human rights
probably will be issued this week. It will direct an examination of im-
mediate actions the Administration can take to signal its intentions to
the Congress and foreign states with respect to human rights and for-
eign policy, and will call for a longer range study reviewing all the
issues, complications and options relating to human rights consider-
ations and measures in framing US foreign policy. The first part of the
study will have a very short deadline, probably next week. The second
will be due in March or April.
—No tasks were assigned at the meeting pending issuance of the
PRM. While State, Commerce and Treasury will have the leading role
in responding to both parts of the PRM, CIA probably will have a part
to play primarily in the longer range study.
—Following the meeting, Dr. Tuchman indicated to me that, at the
outset, the Agency might give attention in its reporting to human rights
problems and conditions abroad and probably will have a role in the
PRM and other interagency forums in analyzing the effectiveness of
measures under consideration or already taken. She admitted that a
clearer role probably will emerge as the Administration’s policy
develops.
—Tuchman said that the importance the White House attaches to
the human rights question abroad is demonstrated by the President’s
designation of Brzezinski as the White House contact on foreign human
rights questions, a position filled in recent years by domestic advisers
such as David Lissy, Myron Kuropas and Leonard Garment.
—Brzezinski
told
the
participants
that
similar
interagency
meetings are likely to be called in the future for discussion of human
rights issues and US policy. (It would seem appropriate for CIA to designate
4 On January 27 the Department released a statement regarding Soviet treatment of
Nobel laureate Andrei Sakharov, concluding that “any attempts by the Soviet authorities
to intimidate Mr. Sakharov will not silence legitimate criticism in the Soviet Union and
will conflict with accepted international standards in the field of human rights.” The pre-
vious day, the Department had issued a statement regarding the harassment of Czecho-
slovakian citizens following their petition to the government to guarantee their rights
under the ICCPR, ICESCR, and Helsinki Final Act, which reads in part: “All signatories
of the Helsinki Final Act are pledged to promote, respect, and observe human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all. We must strongly deplore the violation of such rights and
freedoms wherever they occur.” See Department of State Bulletin, February 21, 1977,
pp. 138 and 154.
5 Carter and Dobrynin met on February 1; see footnote 3, Document 18.
