conclude that excessive quantities are accumulating in any country to ask for explanations and in the case of no explanations or an unsatisfactory explanation to call the attention of the governments and the Council of the League to the matter and to recommend that no further exports be made to the country in question until the board reports that it is satisfied with the situation [in?] the country concerned and any exporting country has the right to appeal to the Council of the League against any decision of the board. A government not prepared to act on the recommendation shall notify the board; the board may publish a report on the matter and communicate it to the Council which shall forward it to the governments. Any decision by the board with respect to complaints shall be by an absolute majority. The right of making representations to the board is to be given to any signatory power. The board has been granted certain limited powers to make regulations principally regarding the furnishing of information but it has been impossible to obtain consent that the board be granted power” to make sufficient regulations to carry out its duties, it being generally believed that such authority should be exercised jointly by board and Council of the League. The board is so closely connected with the organization of the League of Nations as to make it practically subservient to the Council of the League, as [a?] result which if it will not defeat ratification certainly will provoke a bitter fight in the Senate. In striving to preserve the full independence of the board I have been repeatedly advised that unless the board tied up with the League the object for which the board was created could not be accomplished. Any further attempt to preserve the independence of the board seems futile. 3. There is no prospect of obtaining a control [of] opium and cocaleaf derivatives extensive as that provided by our own legislation. No agreement can be obtained which would immediately include as dangerous drugs any derivative of opium other than those specified in the Hague Conference although coca leaves and ecgonine and possibly Indian hemp may be added. Some additional restrictions are to be placed upon the sale of heroin but no agreement to prevent manufacture is possible. Machinery for the determination of dangerous drugs under article 14 is proposed.
