893.5045/183: Telegram [Document 544] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State LONDON, August 15, 1925—3 p.m. [Received 5:25 p.m.14 ] 257. Your 254, August 10, 5 [4] p.m.15 was made the subject of an informal note to the Foreign Office to which the following reply has been received: “As regards Colonel McEuen, as has already been pointed out by us to the Japanese Government, we still feel that acceptance of his resignation before the inquiry would be a mistake since if he is censured by the inquiry the Chinese, who are likely to criticise us whatever we do, may complain that justice has been defeated by allowing him to resign beforehand and thus escape dismissal. This objection is increased if consular or diplomatic representatives are concerned instead of its being a matter entirely between the Municipal Council and their servant. Suspension without prejudice therefore seems to us to be the proper course in fairness to all parties concerned and we think it must surely be precisely the course which the United States Government would themselves adopt if any similar inquiry were held in America. It seems, moreover, to be in accordance with the idea underlying the remarks of your Minister mentioned in (c) of your letter and to meet the view with which we agree that Colonel McEuen should not remain in active occupation of his office while the inquiry is being held. You will also appreciate that His Majesty’s Government cannot insist on a matter which lies between the Municipal Council and their own servant. We now learn that Colonel McEuen’s offer to resign has lapsed and that he is not now prepared to resign. We cannot insist that his offer be renewed, as though he were an official in our own employ; and if the diplomatic body as a whole were to try to do so this would probably mean a conflict with the Municipal Council. Is the game worth the candle? And can the diplomatic body afford to risk a fresh breach with Shanghai at the present moment and on an issue in which they would be acting contrary to established ideas of justice? But we have already declared our readiness to recommend that McEuen be suspended by the Municipal Council. This will entail his disappearance from office pending the inquiry upon the result of which his ultimate fate will depend. This is fair and reasonable and we do not think the Municipal Council can refuse.
