322
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
lution constituting a “revaluation” of UN work in the human rights
area has been deleted. Thus, the resolution does not merely deal with
“mass” human rights but supports individual human rights as well.
The priority to be accorded in paragraph 1 (E) would be to “the
search for solutions to the mass and flagrant violations of human rights
of peoples and persons affected by situations such as . . .” The operative
term is mass and flagrant violations of human rights. The priority provision
need not be read as being limited to the situations listed and thus, in the
view of those who support this option, does not necessarily preclude
other situations such as genocide or torture. It also should not be read
as being confined to collective rights since the reference is to the human
rights of “peoples and of persons.” In fact, it may be maintained that
paragraph 1(E) essentially recognizes the existing situation in the
United Nations human rights fora where the principal attention has
been repeatedly given to the mass and flagrant violations of human
rights such as those resulting from apartheid, racial discrimination, and
colonialism. The United States itself has supported priority to this kind
of human rights violation in its strong support for the so-called 1503
procedures, under which the Human Rights Commission has a special
competence to study or investigate situations revealing a consistent
pattern of gross violations of human rights. This, IO and HA maintain,
is the same standard used by Congress in barring security assistance on
human rights grounds in the Foreign Assistance Act.
Paragraph 1(F) would accord priority to the realization of the New
International Economic Order as an essential element for the effective
promotion of human rights. This paragraph does not elevate a partic-
ular category of rights over another, and merely reflects the overriding
concern of the LDCs for economic development. Any problem we may
have with this paragraph could be handled by an explanation of vote.
The references to the exercise of full sovereignty over its wealth
and resources says nothing about the international law pertaining to
expropriation situations. They can, therefore, easily be understood as
being intended to apply in conformity with existing international law.
A negative vote or abstention on the resolution could prejudice the
possibilities of establishing a High Commissioner for Human Rights
and could displease those countries which have argued for amend-
ments to the Iranian text to meet our concerns.
HA believes, with IO, that we can safely join in a consensus adop-
tion of the Iranian text, which has been modified significantly to meet
U.S. concerns. We can cover our remaining reservations in a statement
after the resolution has been adopted. HA notes that the Iranian resolu-
tion will be adopted in any case, with the support of most countries
which share our human rights positions and concerns. It need not be
read as constituting the mandate for the future High Commissioner.
