March 27–December 31, 1979
901
(C) Entire text
1. Please deliver2 as soon as possible the following message from
President Carter to President Sarkis in response to the latter’s hand-
written letter to President Carter of July 4.3 (There will not be a signed
original to deliver.)
2. Begin text: Dear Mr. President:
I was deeply touched by your confidential and handwritten letter
to me on July 4. I appreciate fully the friendship and concern which led
you to write to me with such candor.
I want you to know, Mr. President, that I have been deeply trou-
bled by the many tragedies which have befallen your country and your
people, including the bombing attacks last Sunday afternoon.4 I grieve
over the terrible toll in innocent human lives, and the suffering im-
posed on your nation. Like you, I am also very much concerned over
the risk of further confrontations in the air between Israeli and Syrian
aircraft, and about the situation on the ground in southern Lebanon. I
agree with you that these dangerous trends must be reversed, and that
the integrity of Lebanon must be restored and respected.
Mr. President, as I work to help bring about a permanent and com-
prehensive peace throughout the Middle East, the special tragedy of
Lebanon is very much on my mind. I believe it is imperative to build
upon the foundation that was laid at Camp David and which has con-
tinued with the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty and the negotiations on au-
tonomy for the West Bank and Gaza. In the coming months, I will re-
double my efforts to see that effort through to a successful conclusion.
It is in that context that I foresee the best chance also for bringing
an end to strife and bloodshed in Lebanon, and for making possible
the reestablishment of your government’s authority over your entire
country.
While the best hope for a final end to conflict in Lebanon may lie in
the success of efforts to build a broader peace, so too these efforts them-
selves depend upon doing whatever is possible to reduce the spillover
of conflict into your country. Since I received your letter, I have given
new thought about the best means for achieving this vital goal. As a re-
sult, we will again approach Israel to stress the human suffering, the
dangers of wider conflict, and the risks to the peace process posed by its
continuing military actions. We will again do what we can to gain its
restraint. At the same time, we will work even more intensely with the
2 Dean delivered Carter’s letter to Sarkis while attending a dinner at Baadba Palace
the evening of July 27 (Telegram 4215 from Beirut, July 30; National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P850029–2476)
3 See footnote 13, Document 277.
4 See footnote 10, Document 276.
