Afghanistan
623
230.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, March 11, 1980, 1613Z
3989. Subj: (C) Ambassador’s Discussion With Arbatov on Afghani-
stan and U.S.-Soviet Relations.
1. (S—Entire text.)
2. Summary: I had a lengthy discussion yesterday with USA Insti-
tute Director Arbatov, who provided no fresh insights into how the
Afghan problem might be solved other than to stress that the Soviets
would never accept an outcome which made it appear that they were
being “punished.” He said the Soviets were convinced that the U.S.
had been providing significant support to the Afghan insurgents, but
he also described the excesses of the Amin regime as one reason for
the Soviet action. He thought stability could be brought about within
a few months if outside interference stopped.
In blaming the U.S. for the deterioration in Soviet/American
relations, Arbatov said that after almost all the other aspects of the
détente relationship had been dismantled SALT II was left in an
exposed position and therefore was also vulnerable. He was not opti-
mistic that a relationship could be rebuilt on arms control alone, though
he agreed on the urgency of getting the SALT process started again.
While he had no specific suggestions on how this might be done, he
mentioned the possibility of a Vance/Gromyko meeting in Vienna as
a desirable beginning. End summary.
3. Mr. Arbatov came to lunch at Spaso House March 10 with his
associate Mr. Zhurkin. The Acting DCM and I represented the Ameri-
can side. Lunch started on an exchange of pleasantries. I had met
Zhurkin at an Airlie House conference which I attended with Marshall
Shulman, so the atmosphere was easy and relaxed. Shortly after sitting
down at the table, we began to get into matters of substance. I men-
tioned that we were trying to find means of changing the present very
low level of Soviet-American relations and getting the relationship
back on track, moving ahead, and improving again. Arbatov expressed
the same general sentiments and indicated his clear understanding that
if we stayed in the present mode very long, an uncontrolled arms race
in the future would be impossible to avoid. He said he thought our
relations could not remain even in their present very bad state for long.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0597,
N800004–0400. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. The telegram is printed in full in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 266.
