852 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX to sort out the common ground as well as to define the issues of controversy which must be bridged. Vance 257. Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the Department of State, Secretary of State Vance in Rome, and the Embassies in Israel, Egypt, and the People’s Republic of China1 Jerusalem, May 28, 1979, 1436Z 1753. Pass White House for Brzezinski, Beijing for Ambassador Strauss from Saunders. Subject: El Arish-Beersheva Ceremonies— May 27. 1. (S) Entire text 2. Since the Secretary left directly from the Negev for Rome,2 this has not been cleared with him. Nevertheless, I want you to have a report promptly on the assumption that he will add whatever he wishes on his own talks with Begin, Sadat, and others during the day. 3. Sunday’s3 kaleidoscope events unfolded on three levels—the symbolism of the events themselves, the substance of the public speeches, and the private exchanges among the U.S., Egyptian, and Israeli principals and delegations. 4. The symbolism lay in the dramatization of the first major steps implementing the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty. The actual military turnover of El Arish had taken place Friday—the day in which the West Bank/Gaza negotiations began in Beersheva, the Egyptians alone had 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Middle East, Box 49, 5/16–31/79. Secret; Sensitive; Immediate; Exdis Handle as Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Vance was in Rome for meetings with Italian President Pertini and Prime Minister Andreotti, as well as Pope John Paul II. 2 Vance departed for Rome on May 27. Arriving in The Hague for a NATO Ministerial Meeting on May 29, Vance discussed with the Foreign Ministers of France, West Germany, and the United Kingdom the present state of Middle East situation, including prospects for the autonomy talks, the political situations in Egypt and Israel, and civilian and military aid programs for both countries. The memorandum of conversation for this meeting, held at the French Embassy, is in the Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, NEA Front Office Subject File 1978–1984, Lot 85D251, Box 3, 1979 Memcons—Secretary. 3 May 27.
