United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 99 Mr. Bell, Mr. Saccio (ICA), Mr. Hart (DLF), and Dixon Donnelly. No representative of ARA had been invited. Mr. Dillon had read the rather voluminous briefing book prepared by the Mann task force. He noted that there was no firm agreement as between Mann, ICA and DLF on the administration of the new program. He invited Mann to speak. Administration of Fund Mann acknowledged that the task force had not been able to reach agreement on how the new fund should be administered: some preferred DLF, some the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), some ICA. He would advance a “revolutionary plan”—­the reactivation of the Institute of Inter-American Affairs,5 the appropriation of funds to the IIAA, and the administration of the new program by the IIAA through use of ICA, DLF, and especially IDB, as executive agencies. Mann stated his belief that we should rely on the IDB to the greatest extent possible. This proposal held certain advantages. First, the IIAA was popular in Latin America, had done fine and pioneer work in technical assistance under Nelson Rockefeller, was still associated with the Rockefeller name and was a “politically good thing” to reactivate (The IIAA lapsed as of June 30, but the consensus was that it could easily be reactivated by Congress during the August session, or next year). Second, since the Assistant Secretary for ARA chaired the IIAA, putting both the funds and the power to act at his disposal made sense administratively: it would permit ARA to marry political and programmatic considerations and to act quickly and decisively and would restore to ARA the power which had gradually eroded through Departmental reorganizations in the postwar period. Mann emphasized that, if ARA was to have the power to negotiate, it must have the power to administer the funds. Achilles strongly supported Mann’s proposal. (It was obvious that the two had concerted before the meeting, as the IIAA approach has been Ted’s since his return from Peru.6) Saccio, Hart and Bell then tried to shoot IIAA down. Their arguments boiled down to three: (1) existing agencies could do the job if given the money and the policy direction, (2) the executive agency concept was spurious since the agencies would be serving two masters 5 The Institute of Inter-American Affairs was originally incorporated in 1942 and became a U.S. Government corporation in 1947. It was established to aid governments in the Western Hemisphere by promoting technical programs and projects for health, sanitation and food supply.
