With best wishes [etc.]
F. A. STERLING
[Enclosure]
German Memorandum on the Subject of a Security Pact
BERLIN, 20 January, 1925.
The Disarmament and Evacuation questions which are now being discussed are often
regarded in France from the point of view of security against possible German
intentions of aggression. Therefore, they would possibly more easily find a solution, if
an agreement of a general kind could be brought about with the intention of
guaranteeing peace between Germany and France. Germany is entirely ready to accept
this point of view. She wishes to see all problems which may accrue between her and
France to be treated in no other way than by peaceful understanding and is therefore,
for her part, also interested in the formation of a special treaty-basis for such a peaceful
understanding.
 
When considering all the different methods which might at present be brought into
being for the formation of a pact of security, one might start from an idea similar to the
one which in December 1922 formed the basis of the suggestion made by the then
German Chancellor Cuno.35 Germany could, for instance, declare herself in agreement
with a pact, whereby the Powers interested on [in?] the Rhine, above all England,
France, Italy and Germany, could solemnly pledge themselves to the Government of
the United States of America as Trustees, to carry on no war with one another for a still
to be defined period of time. A far reaching treaty of arbitration could be connected
with such a pact between Germany and France in a similar way, as has already been
formed during the last few years between several European Powers. Germany is ready
to enter into such treaties of arbitration with all other States as well, in order to
guarantee a peaceful settlement of judicial and political conflicts.
Besides this a pact would also be acceptable to Germany which expressly guarantees
the territorial statics quo on the Rhine. The tenor of such a pact could eventually be that
the States which are interested in the Rhine should reciprocally agree fully to respect
the inviolability of the territorial status quo on the Rhine, that they furthermore, both
jointly and separately, guarantee the execution of this obligation and, finally, that they
will consider every action which tends to counteract the obligation as a matter of joint
or individual concern. In the same sense these Treaty States could guarantee in this pact
the execution of the obligation regarding the demilitarisation of the Rhineland which
Germany has undertaken in Articles 42 and 43 of the Treaty of Versailles. Included in
