Costa Rica 439 that they mutually know the history, the customs, the language and the aspirations of each other. In our cultural relations program we send art exhibitions, ballets, orchestras, basketball teams, etc., to Latin America, and all of these accomplish great good in the objectives of mutual understanding. Also we have a program of inter-­change of students through scholarships between Latin America and the United States and this also is a good thing. However, the size of this student exchange program, which is the most important one that I can think of in the realm of cultural relations, is totally inadequate to accomplish the kind of understanding we are attempting. It particularly fails in the quantity and quality of students from the United States that study in Latin America. My recommendations are: (A) At least 10,000 scholarships for Latin American students in the United States. At an average rate of $4,000 each this would total $40 million. (B) At least a thousand scholarships for North Americans to study or teach in Latin America. In this case I would allocate for each student the sum of $10,000 (or any sum required to be competitive) for a total cost of $10 million. I have suggested the higher allocation for North American students and teachers because I am certain that we ought to make it so attractive to them that they cannot refuse to go. I would hope that the experience of the first thousand students would prove so rewarding that the word would spread among the student bodies of the United States that Latin America is a place to seek out. (C) Costa Rica stands at or near the top in mass education of its population. It also has one of the highest ratings for sympathy towards U.S. policies and problems in the hemisphere. I submit that there is a large element of cause and effect in this coincidence. I submit for evaluation as to cost and feasibility a campaign aided by the U.S. to stamp out illiteracy in the hemisphere in ten years. I think if this goal could even be approximated it would pay us greater dividends than any other course of action in other fields which we might be contemplating. (D) Perhaps the U.S. Armed Forces could make greater use of the Latin American service schools. At present, to my knowledge, we are sending only one student per year to the Uruguayan Staff College. Several of the other countries have similar institutions, such as Chile and Argentina. The current reason given for not sending officers to these schools is that they are not as advanced as Leavenworth. Little consideration is given to the idea that these officers will gain a tremendous amount of knowledge from a year’s continuous and daily contact with Latin Americans under academic conditions. Recommendation No. 9 Public information Program—General I am generally satisfied with what we are doing to date [text not declassified]
