1955  513
more than two months have now passed since the issuance of our agreed 
announcement of September 10, 17 Americans still remain in jail.
F. It is my hope that Communist China will no longer delay in 
demonstrating its willingness fully to carry out its freely assumed 
commitments.
Gowen
370.	 Letter from Johnson to Sebald1
Geneva, November 11, 1955
Dear Bill:
Thank you very much for your thoughtful and generous letter of 
November 4. I know that you fully appreciate my problems, but I must 
say I could not ask for better support. As I have told McConaughy pre­
viously, and have repeated here to the Secretary and Herman, I feel my 
instructions have consistently been excellent and have enabled me to 
go to meetings with a feeling of confidence in having sufficient elbow 
room to meet any likely situation. However, as I also told Herman, I 
would be very happy if someone else were dealing with this renunci­
ation of force item. Prisoners was a subject upon which I could really 
get my hands and bulldog, but with renunciation of force I sometimes 
feel as if I am punching at clouds or grabbing at eels which slip out just 
when I think I have hold. However, I will try to do my best.
It is hard to tell what will happen in the next few weeks. As far as 
substance is concerned, there is quickly not going to be much more to talk 
about. It is going to simply come down to a refusal by them to renounce 
force against Taiwan and our insistence that they do so. I am convinced 
they are not going to do so unless they get something they want very 
badly. The Foreign Ministers’ meeting is obviously in this category but 
whether even this would be sufficient is somewhat doubtful in my mind.
It will then come down to whether they are willing to keep these 
talks going for their own sake. This might be the case, and the louder 
that Taiwan screams about their continuation, the more it serves to con­
vince Chou that it would be useful to keep them going.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; 
Official–Informal.
