National Security Policy 31 12. Memorandum From Kistiakowsky to Killian1 Washington, February 13, 1958 SUBJECT Technical progress and actions required in the Long Range Ballistic Missile Program FROM G. B. Kistiakowsky, Chairman, Ballistic Missiles Panel I. The technical progress in long-­range ballistic missiles has been faster than anticipated in 1953–54 when the large-­scale effort began. This progress can be summarized as follows: (a) there is now a high degree of confidence that both the liquid and the solid propellant engines of large thrust will perform satisfacto­ rily, although neither type will have 100% reliability in the early phases of operational use; (b) the airframes light enough for long-­range missiles have been shown to have satisfactory structural strength and aerodynamic properties; (c) self-­contained, “all-­inertial”, guidance has already exceeded initial expectations and CEP due to guidance alone at 5500 mile range of less than 1 mile is within sight; (d) the re-­entry of the nose-­cone into the atmosphere without burn­ ing up appears to be near solution, not only for the 1500 but also for the 5500 mile range missiles; (e) thermonuclear warheads of megaton yields and acceptably small weight, which were predicted but doubted four years ago, are now a reality. II. This rapid technological progress gives assurance that every major ballistic missile program can result in a prototype operational missile system within originally planned time scale or very shortly thereafter. The initial uncertainty of success led to a number of back-­up programs: Thor and Jupiter for the IRBM; and Atlas and Titan for the ICBM. Now that there is high confidence that each one of these programs will produce an operational missile within specified time requirements, the justification for continuation of all four missiles should be examined. Thor and Jupiter are technically and performance-­wise very simi­ lar, but they are sufficiently dissimilar to require two different ground support efforts, different training staff and manuals, and spare parts pipelines for each of these missiles. There seems to be very little 1 Source: Progress and recommendations in ballistic missile program. Secret. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology.
