International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 985 come aware in recent days. You are already heavily involved in this year’s budget submission. My suggestion is that you permanently direct this process. I frankly don’t see how else it can be rationally done. During the coming year other foreign assistance issues will arise as well, including devising a strategy to gain public and congressional support; a major review of the effectiveness of our programs (see attached draft); and the submission to Congress of a totally new foreign assistance act. 2. Energy: Again, this is a subject which is of critical importance to our security, our economy, and our foreign relations. Energy policy is spread throughout the Department and throughout the government. Your leadership in the building would insure that the State Department’s voice gets adequate hearing, especially vis-a`-vis the Department of Energy. And within the energy area you could drive many specific projects, including two of particular interest to us: a comprehensive policy towards Saudia Arabia, the pivotal actor in the world energy picture in the next several years; and a focus on energy development in the non-OPEC Third World, which is something the USG has talked about but has yet to move effectively on. S/P is working on papers on these subjects. 3. Agriculture: Few areas involve more voices in the government, or better illustrate the overlap between foreign and domestic policy. There is a major need to keep an overview focus on the many efforts that are now underway in the agricultural area. These include our efforts to establish an international system for grains reserves; a revamping of our food aid program; and Peter Bourne’s effort to develop a comprehensive policy to attack world hunger.2 S/P has in progress a paper which looks at all of these issues in the context of a strategy for the next year. Depending upon what the paper produces, you may wish to use it as a vehicle for coordinating at least the State Department’s voice on agricultural policy as well as influencing the development of agricultural policy generally in the US Government. 4. Technology Transfer: In this area we are long on participants and short on coherent policy. Technology transfer with regard to the developing countries is a particularly weak area in the Department and the government. Currently no set of objectives exists, nor does a strategy for meeting the diverse needs in the developing countries. I believe we should use the upcoming (1979) UN Science and Technology Conference to develop a coherent technology policy. At Ambassador Wilkowski’s request S/P is about to embark on a major review of science and technology policy towards LDCs with the idea of distilling objec- 2 See Document 213.
