Costa Rica 443 month ago I made a similar recommendation to Carl Migdail of the Pan American Union, who seemed exceedingly interested in the idea. (3) In addition to orienting State Department personnel, service Attachés and military mission members should also be checked out on the functions and operations of the OAS and UN. I am told that our War Colleges and the Strategic Intelligence School have overlooked this particular aspect of training. Recommendation No. 11 Economic: B–2—Inter-American Highway I have for several years now been recommending the creation of an Inter-American Highway authority to make possible sound maintenance and transportation practices on the Inter-American Highway when it is completed. This objective has been adopted by ARA and much successful work has been done. For reference of the OCB I attach Tab G.16 I have informally suggested to ARA ways and means to keep up the present impetus behind this idea. Recommendation No. 12 Military—General Recommendation I submit for further study and consideration a memorandum entitled “The Place of the Military in Latin American Affairs with Comments on the Movements towards ‘Dual Purpose’ Military Units” (Tab H).17 The OCB may not be aware of the fact that I was one of the first to take up the cudgels for the dual-­purpose military unit concept while I was in Honduras. It may be useful at this time to review some of my thinking on the place of the military and of the reasoning behind dual-­purpose military units as expressed in the attached Tab H. To the extent that the Board finds my ideas, or better ideas if they exist, valid, I think they should be widely disseminated in the field. I hope that some way of providing military assistance to “dual-­ purpose” military organizations can be developed that takes advantage of the resources offered by both the Defense Department and ICA without provoking a bureaucratic struggle at home over “empire building” rights. I should like to renew a previous suggestion to OCB that we get behind and support regional military schools in the hemisphere. So long as the military play the great part they now do in Latin American 16 At Tab G was “A Proposal for an Inter-American Highway Authority,” by Ambassador Willauer, not printed. 17 This undated memorandum by Ambassador Willauer, is not printed.
