International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 487 a bill extending the waiver would pass; moreover, he worried that such a “bill would serve as a target for the attachment of many protectionist amendments and with the mood of this country, we would end up doing more harm than good. Quite frankly, I am becoming convinced that the risk of regressive legislation is too great for us to gamble on introducing the extension.” Strauss offered a solution, asking “whether or not any possibility exists for us to make sufficient additional progress on subsidies by mid-September to encourage congressional support of the extension of the waiver. I presume that this is not a practical suggestion because of the time schedule with the August recess.” (Telegram 199311 to USEC Brussels, August 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780323–0662) On September 14, West German Minister for Economic Affairs Otto Graf Lambsdorff wrote to Strauss urging him “to use all means at your command to prevent” the imposition of countervailing duties on EC goods after the January 1979 expiration of the waiver. Such duties, Lambsdorff claimed, “would without shadow of doubt call forth a demand for incisive countermeasures on the part of the Community and impose a strain on the climate of world trade that would be diametrically opposite to our common objectives in the MTN.” Lambsdorff continued: “If the MTN are to be successful, I feel it is absolutely necessary that a fait accompli be avoided in the vital area of subsidies/countervailing duties. I fully recognise and very much appreciate all you have done in talks with the Congress to ward off this eventuality. However, I do not believe that the suggestion of additional progress on subsidies by mid-September is a realistic option because it amounts to one partner making unilateral concessions with a view to the final package.” While West Germany would do all it could “to ensure that the agreed 15th December 1978 deadline for a successful conclusion of the MTN is met,” Lambsdorff doubted that the EC would be “prepared to make unconditional concessions in the final phase now in progress unless there is some prior guarantee that a satisfactory solution can be found in the matter of the application of countervailing duties after 4th January 1979.” Lambsdorff encouraged Strauss to do what he could “to avert a situation in which the United States would inevitably be held responsible for endangering the GATT negotiations.” (National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Subject Files, 1977–1979, Box 2, Countervailing Duties 1977) In his reply to Lambsdorff, Strauss asserted that the administration would continue its efforts to secure the necessary legislation, despite the fact “that the negative position of some members of the Community at the Bonn Summit has complicated our present task.” (Telegram 234044 to USEC Brussels, September 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780375–0068)
