440  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
(A) However, I have long been dissatisfied that we are doing 
everything possible to help the U.S. press report Latin American news 
correctly. I believe that the impact of the New York Times, Time, Newsweek 
and Vision are much more important than what we put out ourselves, 
even though not usually attributed to us.
I believe that what we knew in the Embassies about current events 
in the field should be made available to the editorial writers of at least 
the aforementioned influential publications. Three or four years ago I 
suggested officially (recommendations to OCB from Honduras) that by 
arrangement with the editors their reporters ought to check with the 
Embassies for our version of the news.
I have discussed my suggestion with influential friends in the 
United States press, such as Time president Roy E. Larsen. I think he 
believes that something like this might be arranged. I have, however, 
found that USIA director, Ambassador Allen, is skeptical. The problem 
seems to boil down to a feeling that orders to reporters in the field might 
be interpreted, or twisted into something against freedom of the press. 
Since my suggestion is only that reporters in the field include on their 
“beat” as news gatherers the information available to the Embassy, I 
find it hard to accept this judgment. I am not suggesting that the United 
States Government attempt to influence how the reporters report the 
news. I simply say that there exists in the United States Embassies part 
of “the news.”
However, if the criticism that the United States Government is 
somehow or other trying to control the news cannot be overcome by 
having publishers require their reporters to check with Embassies, then 
I suggest a half-­way house. Could we not persuade the editors in the 
U.S. to advise the Department of major up-­coming stories (not what 
they are going to say, but simply the subject matter). At this point, on 
a priority basis, the Department could obtain the facts known in the 
Embassies and disseminate whatever material the Department thinks 
proper to the editorial writers.
My classic illustration in favor of my recommendation is the 1954 
general strike in Honduras just before the anti-­communist Honduran-­
based revolution against the communist-­dominated government of 
Guatemala. Time, basing its story of the strike solely on field reports 
from their left-­wing reporter, Harvey Rosenhouse, never mentioned 
that the Guatemalan communists supplied the leaders and $800,000 
for that strike. The Time story, as it appeared, spoke only of the iniq-
uities of United Fruit Company labor policies—­and indeed in that 
instance some of these were not good. I am sure the Time editors would 
have been interested in what I then knew about the situation. Maybe 
they would not have published it, maybe the Department would not 
have released it to them, but it was a part of “the news.” Also it was
