National Security Policy 549 apparatus is to prevent the hardening of these professional interests into self-­contained, autonomous groups which might ultimately have independent political importance. 36. It has been suggested by some Western observers that, as the Soviet economy matures and becomes more complex, as the needs of society come to be met by more specialized administrative skills, as edu­ cation is extended and diversified, the totalitarian character of the regime will be diluted. The dictator or the Party as the single focus of power, it has been argued, will give way to autonomy in areas of less immediate political significance. Even in the political field, institutional arrange­ ments will have to be found for representing many diverse interest groups: it was possible to see signs of such a tendency in the post-Stalin period of confusion occasioned by the succession struggle. On occasion, the Central Committee of the Party became an arena of political deci­ sion with factional and policy differences represented within it. In the post-Stalin period the rulers have also seemed to think it necessary to take account of public opinion generally in framing their policies. Such tendencies to dilute arbitrary power and to broaden participation in poli­ cymaking beyond the narrow circle of the Party Presidium may reappear at the time of Khrushchev’s death or at some other period of weakened authority. For the present, however, Khrushchev’s restoration of one-­man leadership, and his manner of achieving it through the Party apparatus, has maintained Soviet society firmly in the totalitarian mold. Issues in Soviet Politics 37. This development does not mean that there will not continue to be group pressures and much pulling and hauling over issues of policy. Even under one-­man leadership the normal play of politics is not adjourned, though it may become less visible. There are a number of issues over which lines are likely to be drawn behind the façade of unity. For example, whatever the degree of its practical success, the eco­ nomic reorganization scheme is laden with political significance. It calls for the removal of a host of bureaucrats from Moscow to the provinces, a fate little relished by the migrants. The reorganization could lead to a regionalism which would be a new source of tension, although the revi­ talized Party must, in Khrushchev’s calculation, serve as the cement which binds the periphery to the center. This reorganization, like the ideologically controversial measures Khrushchev has sponsored in agriculture, has yet to be fully proved in practice. Khrushchev may yet be driven to some agile maneuvering to defend his innovations. 38. Also among the issues likely to affect inner Party politics are those related to Soviet economic growth. The growth achieved may not be high enough to attain all the goals—­high rates of invest­ ment, increase in agricultural output, rising living standards, modern armaments—­which now have priority in Party programs. Cutting
