896 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX sense of not being party to yet another useless UN gang-up on Israel— while making our own position clear. Begin had wanted us to veto. (S) Begin. The latest (unconfirmed) report is that the blood clot in a brain artery has cost him 25% of his vision in one eye, 10% in the other. Strauss and the President have sent messages.6 (U) Palestinians. The UN Security Council is about to consider a resolution on Palestinian rights.7 Through the Kuwaitis, we have been told that the PLO is prepared to endorse 242 (our condition for talking with them). This subject will be the centerpiece of a “non-PRC” at 3 p.m. on Wednesday.8 Your attending would be of great benefit.9 (S) Lebanon. From June 27 until Sunday, the Israelis had not used aircraft to strike at PLO bases in Lebanon. The Sunday strike10 was particularly bloody. State has put out a statement of disapproval. There are also growing signs of a possible major Israeli military action in Lebanon, though no hard information. Strauss suggested to Begin that he consider a moratorium. Begin said he would talk about it further when Strauss next goes to Israel. This subject—in broad context—will also be discussed on Wednesday. (S) Autonomy Talks. Since Strauss’ visit, we have been working with the Egyptians and Israelis on the setting up of the two working groups (modalities of elections, and powers and responsibilities of the Self- Governing Authority). Each will have two members (Jim Leonard will be on both for us). Some Israeli members of the full talks wanted to attend, but we and the Egyptians have wanted to put the level down a notch, to give the groups a chance to work. We hope they can get to 6 The Department transmitted Carter’s message conveying wishes for Begin’s “quick recovery” following his hospitalization in telegram 189702 to Tel Aviv, July 21. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790333–0166) Vance sent a similar message on July 20. (Telegram 188605 to Tel Aviv, July 20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790331–0456) The text of Strauss’s message has not been found. 7 The draft resolution was developed in response to letters produced on March 13 and June 27 for the Security Council from the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People stating the centrality of the “question of Palestine” to the “problem” of the Middle East and the need for any solution to that problem to take into account the rights of Palestinians, the “full exercise” of which would “contribute to a solution.” Moreover, the Chairman reported, the participation of the PLO was “indispensable to all negotiations undertaken under United Nations auspices” and the “acquisition of territory by force was inadmissible and Israel must withdraw from any territory so occupied.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1979, p. 364) 8 See Document 277. 9 An unknown hand underlined this sentence. 10 On July 22, Israeli aircraft struck targets in Naimah, Damour, Sarafand, and other locations in Lebanon, resulting in numerous civilian casualties according to press estimates. (Telegram 4070 from Beirut, July 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790335–0988)
