Romania
631
The President said that this problem was also of concern to him,
but change in legislation would be necessary in order to extend MFN
for more than one year. This law was directed particularly against
Soviet restrictions on Jewish emigration. (He noted that in the past 4
or 5 months emigration of Jews from the USSR was double the figure for
the previous period.) Since the law was not directed against Romania
he hoped that Congress would be forthcoming in granting a new annual
extention for Romania. It would be better to do this on a longer-term
basis. There will be no problem of continuing MFN for Romania under
existing legislation, however, if the Congress and I feel that the human
rights situation in Romania gives no cause for concern. We have no
intention to interfere in Romania’s internal affairs, but we recognize
that there is a strong interest in this country in family reunification
and Jewish emigration which applies to countries seeking MFN. He
asked President Ceausescu to inform him if this created particular
difficulties.
President Ceausescu said that in practical terms there is no problem
with Jews leaving Romania. There are close contacts with the Israeli
government and it no longer considers this to be a problem. One cannot
speak of a “family reunification” problem since the war has been over
for some time and few cases exist of families separated by war. The
question is more one of mixed marriages, and such cases generally
receive favorable resolution. The wishes of the parents and other factors
occasionally make it impossible to grant permission, however. Perhaps
an interim solution to the MFN problem would be to have committee
discussion but avoid debates in the plenary sessions of Congress. It
appears that the sponsor of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment is also
thinking along this line.2
The President said it is the desire of this administration to continue
MFN for Romania and to enhance trade. If in any private communica-
tions you wish to provide information that will help in this regard, it
will be used for your country’s benefit. As in the past I will do every-
thing I can to inform the Congressional leaders of the good attitude
taken by Romania in order to continue receiving MFN treatment. I
believe that it is in our mutual interest to increase trade.
2 Vanik met with Ceausescu during his one-day stop in Bucharest, March 31. In
telegram 2148 from Bucharest, April 1, the Embassy reported that Vanik told Ceausescu
that “1978 was campaign year and 1979 would provide better opportunity to institute
different review process for Romania’s MFN renewal.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780142–0238) In telegram 2149 from Bucharest, April 1, the Embassy
reported Vanik’s conversation with Andrei, in which the Representative said that “single-
year renewal essential this year because there is no time to change procedures, especially
in election year, but he hoped change in law permitting committee decision on better
handling of renewal would be possible next year.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780143–0268)
