September 1953–December 1954
869
larly pleased that apparently there had been no important hostile
public reaction to this firman. The decision of the Shah and of the Gov-
ernment seemed to have been taken by the public as a matter of course.
The Shah said that if he had had his way this firman would have
been issued two months ago. He also was pleased with the way in
which it had been received by the public. There had been opposition in
certain circles to the dissolution of the Senate. It had been argued that
since the Senate would have a quorum when in due course the va-
cancies provided by law had been filled there was no reason to dissolve
it. He had considered it necessary to dissolve the Senate for two
reasons: (a) He himself had signed a firman under pressure from Mo-
sadeq and the Majlis in 1952 dissolving the Senate. He did not believe
that he could ignore his own firman without injuring the royal prestige.
This fact had influenced his decision to dissolve the Senate before it
would endeavor to enact any legislation. (b) The Senate had become ex-
tremely unpopular, partly as the result of propaganda carried on
against it and partly as the result of the incapacity or weakness of some
of its members. There was general feeling in the country to the effect
that the Senate was under British control. Undoubtedly there were cer-
tain members of the Senate who were more interested in pleasing the
British Government than in protecting the interests of Iran. He was of
the opinion that in general the members of the Senate were loyal and
capable. The dissolution of the Senate would, in his opinion, soften
some of the resentment among Iranian nationalists rising from the dis-
solution of Majlis. By including both houses in his firman he was
showing favoritism to neither. He thought that most of the former
members of the Senate would be re-elected or reappointed. Some
should be got rid of. He had noted with some satisfaction that appar-
ently Senator Nasser Khan, one of the leading Qashqai chieftains, had
already expressed concern at his loss of parliamentary immunity as a
result of the dissolution of the Senate. The Shah was not unhappy that
several of the Senators had lost their parliamentary immunity.
I asked the Shah how soon, in his opinion, elections would start.
He said as soon as possible; he hoped within the next two weeks. I in-
quired if he and the Prime Minister were in agreement with regard to
candidates. The Shah replied that he thought the Prime Minister was
cooperating in this matter quite satisfactorily. Both he and the Prime
Minister were in agreement that so far as possible the deputy from each
district in the country would be a well-known highly respected resi-
dent of that district—not someone imposed upon the district from
Tehran.
I inquired whether or not the Prime Minister was keeping him in-
formed regarding his lists of prospective candidates. The Shah again
replied in the affirmative. He said that the Prime Minister would not
