North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 893 (5) We should ensure that the relationship among the various elements of a common fund—deposit ratio, borrowing capacity, callable capital, stock warrants, and a possible contingency reserve—is consistent with our interests and the financial viability of the common fund. Issue 2: Measures Other Than Buffer Stocking The role of a common fund in financing commodity measures other than price stabilization will be one of the key issues at the conference. The LDCs want the common fund to allocate a portion of its resources to the financing of such measures as market promotion, product research and development, production expansion, up-grading of production efficiency and expansion of LDC processing and transportation activities. This objective is basic to LDC cohesion on the common fund because it would provide benefits to LDCs unable to benefit from buffer stocking. Developed countries regard nonstabilization measures as appropriate and necessary to deal with many of the commodity problems of developing countries and favor increased international attention to other measures. However, the major developed countries, including the US, believe that creation of a new central source of international financing for these measures is neither necessary nor desirable, and seek to restrict the common fund to financing of stabilization measures. The prospect of sharp confrontation at the conference on this issue calls for presentation by developed countries of as constructive and concrete alternatives as possible to the financing of other measures by the common fund. The principal elements of a developed country approach are outlined below. 1. Producer-consumer cooperation: International commodity organizations (ICAs) and other producer-consumer organizations must provide the foundation for effective international action on other measures. By virtue of their interest in and knowledge of particular commodities, participants in producer/consumer organizations are especially qualified to identify and evaluate the need for specific measures. ICAs, or other producer/consumer organizations, can be expected to play a major role in implementing market promotion and new product research and development programs. The International Institute for Cotton, for example, has a $6 million annual market promotion and product research program financed by producers and consumers. In addition to the projects they implement themselves, the ICAs and other producer/consumer organizations could also provide project proposals and coordinate recommendations to international development institutions such as the IBRD or the UNDP. To underline its support for strengthened producer/consumer cooperation on other measures, the US should confirm at the common fund negotiations that
