North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
893
(5) We should ensure that the relationship among the various ele-
ments of a common fund—deposit ratio, borrowing capacity, callable
capital, stock warrants, and a possible contingency reserve—is con-
sistent with our interests and the financial viability of the common
fund.
Issue 2: Measures Other Than Buffer Stocking
The role of a common fund in financing commodity measures
other than price stabilization will be one of the key issues at the confer-
ence. The LDCs want the common fund to allocate a portion of its re-
sources to the financing of such measures as market promotion,
product research and development, production expansion, up-grading
of production efficiency and expansion of LDC processing and trans-
portation activities. This objective is basic to LDC cohesion on the
common fund because it would provide benefits to LDCs unable to
benefit from buffer stocking. Developed countries regard non-
stabilization measures as appropriate and necessary to deal with many
of the commodity problems of developing countries and favor in-
creased international attention to other measures. However, the major
developed countries, including the US, believe that creation of a new
central source of international financing for these measures is neither
necessary nor desirable, and seek to restrict the common fund to fi-
nancing of stabilization measures. The prospect of sharp confrontation
at the conference on this issue calls for presentation by developed coun-
tries of as constructive and concrete alternatives as possible to the fi-
nancing of other measures by the common fund. The principal ele-
ments of a developed country approach are outlined below.
1. Producer-consumer cooperation: International commodity organi-
zations (ICAs) and other producer-consumer organizations must pro-
vide the foundation for effective international action on other meas-
ures. By virtue of their interest in and knowledge of particular
commodities, participants in producer/consumer organizations are es-
pecially qualified to identify and evaluate the need for specific meas-
ures. ICAs, or other producer/consumer organizations, can be ex-
pected to play a major role in implementing market promotion and
new product research and development programs. The International
Institute for Cotton, for example, has a $6 million annual market pro-
motion and product research program financed by producers and con-
sumers. In addition to the projects they implement themselves, the
ICAs and other producer/consumer organizations could also provide
project proposals and coordinate recommendations to international de-
velopment institutions such as the IBRD or the UNDP. To underline its
support for strengthened producer/consumer cooperation on other
measures, the US should confirm at the common fund negotiations that
