156
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
of non-compliance were far outweighed by the benefits of the treaty
both from the point of view of superpower activities, and to prevent
spread of biological warfare programs to other nations.
Duncan briefly reviewed the US-Soviet military imbalance in the
CW area. Compared to the Soviets we have virtually no CW offensive
capability and our defensive capability is far inferior to theirs. Bartho-
lomew raised the point that this was precisely why the Soviet interest
in CW is so important. They know that we have a very inadequate ca-
pability, and that congressional and allied opinion are strongly against
additional CW development, and yet, though the status quo is all in
their favor, they are the ones who have been pushing for a treaty. One
would have expected precisely the opposite. No one has the answer to
why they are so interested in a treaty, but it is important to note.
Duncan seconded this argument and made the additional point that
with our small capacity now, we are at risk already, and that trying for
a CW treaty can therefore only improve our position from the point of
view of national security.
On the type of treaty desired, there was unanimous agreement in
support of a comprehensive treaty. The proposed key elements of such
a treaty were then reviewed. All agencies approved the proposed ele-
ments as written. Keeny noted however that a ban on defensive activities
is not included in these elements. Such a ban has been studied in the
past and thought to be politically impossible. It was agreed that it
might be useful to look at this question again, but Christopher stipu-
lated that this should not hold up the negotiations in any way. Duncan,
Keeny and Smith strongly concurred.
Duncan opened the discussion of military options by saying that
Defense was badly split. The Joint Chiefs and DDR&E support Option
12 while Secretary Brown, Duncan and ISA all support Option 3.3 Gen-
eral Smith said that the Joint Chiefs believe that construction of a new
CW facility would provide us with additional negotiating leverage.
Also, the JCS is concerned over the size of the Soviet CW capability, and
believe that CW may play an important role in Soviet military doctrine.
In expressing State’s support for Option 3, Christopher noted that our
allies would be very upset if the US were to proceed with either of the
force improvement options (Options 1 and 2). ACDA and OMB also
support Option 3.
2 Option 1 called for the “modernizing” of the chemical retaliatory stockpile. See
“Talking Paper for the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
at the SCC Meeting, June 8, 1977,” undated, Washington National Records Center, OSD
Files: FRC 330–80–0017, 370.64 CBR (June) 1977.
3 Option 3 called for the retention of the current chemical weapons stockpile. (Ibid.)
