258  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
We have been concerned about insuring that the Americans in 
jail get word of the Agreed Announcement and can get in touch with 
O’Neill. We are of course caught in a box because we must avoid giving 
the Chinese Communists and the Indian Embassy access to Chinese in 
this country other than those who express a wish to return to the Main­
land. We are considering sending individual letters to each of the 18 
Americans still denied permission to leave, signed by Mr. Robertson, for 
delivery by Wang Ping-nan with the request that he effect their delivery 
to the addressees. The letter would read as follows: (attached).
We have some misgivings about this since it may give Wang an 
opening wedge for insisting that you accept undesirable communica­
tions from him for delivery in this country. Please give us your reaction 
to (1) the idea of direct Departmental communication with the detained 
Americans, (2) the proposed mode of transmittal through Wang Ping-
nan and (3) the content of the draft letter which is attached. If you do 
not like this proposal we would like your recommendations for alter­
native means of satisfying ourselves that all American have the word.
I have taken up your code clerk problem with senior adminis­
trative people in the Department. They asked me to tell you that two 
regular code clerks who have just been assigned to European posts 
are leaving Washington this week end for Geneva. They are assigned 
elsewhere but our instructions read that they should stay on detail 
at Geneva until further notice. The intention is to keep them there 
as long as your talks continue. They are due to arrive in Geneva on 
Monday. It is true that these two will merely take the place of two 
others who have been detailed to Geneva who are going back to their 
regular posts but the situation will be more stable since you can count 
on having these people as long as you are there. This will give Geneva 
a total of four people in the code room staff, and the specialists here 
say that this is enough to give you good service on Saturday and 
Sunday as well as some overtime on regular working days. The vol­
ume is down a lot since the Atomic Energy Conference ended. They 
think the problem is essentially one of overtime rather than heavy 
volume. They believe these four can handle the occasional peaks as 
well as the overtime. Bob Stufflebeam asked me to assure you that the 
Department has not dealt lightly with this problem. The seriousness 
of it is recognized and a special effort has been made to solve it. The 
administrative people are confronted with a chronic shortage of code 
clerks coincident with an increase in volume in all geographic areas. 
They feel that Gowen has chiefly been worried by the uncertainty of 
the temporary assignments. That problem is now solved. You may 
wish to pass the foregoing on to Gowen as coming from authoritative 
administrative sources here, if he has not already received it by tele­
gram. If your talks are still going on around mid-October, you will be
