have been realized. In exchange for this, the Japanese Government suggests the Federal Company shall surrender all its rights under its contracts. On further consideration the Japanese Government will doubtless agree that acceptance of this suggestion would result in the complete abandonment by the Federal Company of its legal position relative to the establishment of radio stations in China without any corresponding concession on the part of the Mitsui Company. Moreover the Japanese Government has perhaps not had opportunity correctly to estimate the difficulties of developing overseas wireless communication through the instrumentality of a consortium. The negotiation of entirely new arrangements with China, representatives of five nations participating in such negotiations; the construction of wireless installations when four interested parties would each strive with the others to furnish equipment; the hodgepodge construction resulting from the compromises inevitable in such situation; the operation of wireless stations by a management composed of representatives of five different nationalities each, controlled from a different world center; the poor quality and the high cost of service resulting from arrangements so made and stations so built and operated would apparently preclude such method furnishing the practical and helpful solution so much desired by the Japanese Government. In the opinion of the American interests concerned the best sort of consortium would be one of final results. Many grave difficulties would be avoided if the Japanese and the Americans would complete their respective projects, bring them up to date, thereafter separately manage them according to the provision of their several contracts but coordinate their efforts to obtain the best operating efficiency, then pool their gross receipts and divide them on an equitable basis. The American interests concerned would be disposed to enter such a consortium. They believe it would furnish an efficient wireless service and would provide revenues to pay for all the installations. Cooperation is normal in radio. Japanese and Americans successfully cooperate in maintaining the Japanese-American circuit. They could be mutually helpful in their wireless projects in China. 74 Copies of this memorandum and its enclosures were sent to the Ambassadors in Great Britain and France, Nov. 4, 1926.
