National Security Policy 37 positioning of IRBM’s in selected areas around the Sino-Soviet periph­ ery. Such positioning must be carefully planned to avoid pressing the Sino-Soviet bloc to the point that may incline it to miscalculate our objectives and conclude that our intentions have become aggressive, thereby making it feel obliged to react violently. [The implications of positioning IRBM’s around the Sino-Soviet periphery outside the NATO area are of such import that a decision to do so should be made through NSC procedures, only in light of the over-­all advan­ tages and disadvantages.]3 3. Western Mediterranean Pact. Statement of the Issue (Report, p. 45): Because experience to date with our various mutual security arrangements has demonstrated that they afford the most enduring cement for our overseas base complex, immediate and thorough consideration should be given to the feasibil­ ity of a Western Mediterranean defense arrangement embracing Spain, France, Italy, Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria, and Libya. Planning Board Comment: This idea is already an item of discus­ sion between State and Defense, and consideration should be given to including the United Kingdom in any such arrangement because of its position in Gibraltar and Malta. It is questionable, however, whether such a defense arrangement would be feasible so long as the Algerian situation remains critical. In addition, NATO countries which might become members of the pact might find that such an organization would entail the diversion of resources from the NATO area. Further, there is no current U.S. military requirement for such a pact except as additional means of ensuring adequate bases in the area. Planning Board Recommendations: Accordingly, the Planning Board recommends that the National Security Council note that: Consideration is being given by the Departments of State and Defense to the feasibility and desirability of a Western Mediterranean defense arrangement embracing Spain, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria, and Libya. 4. A New Base Chain in Central Africa. Statement of the Issue (Report, p. 25): In light of the exposed position of our bases to the north, the technological developments in the long-­ range plane and missile fields, and the objective of getting a political “foot-­in-­the-­door” in rapidly-­developing Central Africa, we should seriously consider, from both the political and military points of view, whether a line of “back bases” across the waist of Africa, with Ethiopia as its eastern terminus, would be worth the cost involved. 3 ODM-Treasury-Budget proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
