1216 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Committee. Ambassador Linowitz said that water was the most amenable for solution, with security next. He expects that there will be little or no movement on land and East Jerusalem voting rights (Secretary Vance thought the latter issue was dead). It might be possible to get something on private lands, since the Israelis have not so far made a point of this issue. He would try out a new formula on East Jerusalem, permitting Jordanian citizens, in general, to vote. He also hoped to skirt the issue of legislative authority. The object should be to get enough agreement to keep Sadat interested in continuing the process, and to deflect any European efforts. Ambassador Linowitz said that he doesn’t expect very much on this 10-day trip,3 since both parties are still testing one another. Begin, for example, was chided in Israel for giving away too much here in Washington, and therefore is not ready to make concessions. The Ambassador is worried that the Israelis might not make a security presentation on the first day. If so, the Egyptians might go home. But if this issue can be resolved early, other issues could be easier. Mr. Saunders pointed out that this would be particularly so with regard to land, because of the security implications tied up with land issues. Dr. Brzezinski asked what we should do if the parties prove too unyielding to get agreement before May 26. Secretary Vance said that then we would have to consider how to cut back our expectations, in order to get something to claim a partial victory. Ambassador Linowitz said that he might have at some point to go to Begin and indicate the risks of a breakdown unless Israel is forthcoming. Mr. Saunders said that a “pause” might be possible after May 26, if there are a few tough issues to be settled—as happened with the 1975 disengagement negotiations. Secretary Vance said that conditions are different: the press has made a lot of May 26, and the Europeans are waiting in the wings: that might not directly affect the situation in the area, but it would affect our interests. It is one thing to pass the date in a state of serious negotiations; it is another to have a pause. We should also not jump ahead too soon. Ambassador Linowitz said that in his first meeting with Begin, he would try to disabuse the Prime Minister of the notion that the “four points” tabled here in Washington are conditions for forward movement. He said that he would proceed on this trip by talking through issues for a couple of days, and then be prepared to table papers on in- 3 April 27–May 8.
