1956  653
5. You should repeat arguments used last meeting, again reviewing 
course of negotiations and emphasizing US initiative on renunciation of 
force issue, and its having met every legitimate Communist proposal.
6. Make strong statement on implementation, concentrating on 
Communist failure fulfill Agreed Announcement expeditiously. Expose 
absurdity of Communist allegations that US obstructing departure 
­Chinese by citing Baltimore Sun article on Liu An-­hua. Avoid implying 
that US has obligation or intention to investigate individuals named 
by Wang in absence any evidence that individuals in question being 
obstructed from going to Communist China. Wang’s inability produce 
such evidence proves hollowness his charges. Weakness of Wang’s posi­
tion provides you opportunity take offensive as you did last meeting.
7. If Wang should renew demand that substance of discussions be 
made public, you should state that progress to date made possible by 
private character of discussions and detailing them to public would 
only hinder success. US has nothing to hide but has no desire transform 
talks from serious discussion into propaganda contest.
8. FYI British learned on good authority in Peiping that Wang was 
there December 31.
Dulles
448.	 Airgram 173 to Geneva1
A–173
Washington, January 16, 1956
For Johnson.
Your 1369. No data on Wang Pao-­liu.
Lai Ya-­li has been Deputy Director of General Office of CHICOM 
Fonmin since October 1949, office headed by Wang Ping-­nan until 1955. 
Lai apparently social scientist, reportedly once was secretary to General 
Feng Yu-hsiang. CHICOMS publicly identify Lai as member ­Kuomintang 
Revolutionary Committee, but intelligence reports he Communist. In 
February 1949, reportedly arrived in Peiping as member delegation 
“democratic personages” from Manchuria. Same year, ­participated in 
first All-­China Youth Conference, elected to National Committee All-­
China Federation Democratic Youth. Apparently relinquished connection 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–1356. Confidential. Drafted 
by Nagoski.
