Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII (4) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) Feelings toward Karmal government: The guerrillas claim they no longer hate Karmal and in fact have begun to think favorably of him and sympathize with him. They feel that after he attempted suicide he came to his senses and will no longer execute Afghan citizens as Amin and Taraki did.3 The guerrillas predict that the two possible successors to Karmal are Asadora Sakuwari (phonetic) of the Haruku (phonetic) sect (correct spelling believed to be “Assadullah Sawari” of the “Khalq” group) or Maamaddo Haan (phonetic) (possibly “Mohamad Han”) of the Uzbeki sect. Either of these two men would be acceptable. The guerrillas feel that the current Afghan administration has adopted the same political policies as the prior administration and that agricultural reform will not be achieved. They feel that the Karmal administration would resist a U.N. peacekeeping force, attempting to delay it until after guerrilla resistance had collapsed. (5) ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) Tacit support provided by the Government of Pakistan: The refugee/ guerrillas are neither encouraged nor seriously discouraged from entering Pakistan by the Pakistani Government. Although Pakistani border patrols have been heavily increased, the refugee/guerrillas cross the border easily. The border near Tor Khan is only lightly guarded by the Pakistani Government and on the Afghan side is guarded by only two soldiers, one of whom is unarmed. Further, the border area in the vicinity of Tor Khan is only delineated by two strands of barbed wire and no fortifications or border patrols are observable. Thus, movement across the border is unimpeded and people and trade goods pass freely. According to the guerrillas, all Afghans become refugees upon entry into Pakistan. They become guerrillas when they return to Afghanistan. When Afghans reach receiving areas in Pakistan, they are processed and then bused to refugee camps. At the refugee camps, they are given four Pakistani rupees and an identification card with their photo on it. The refugees/guerrillas are permitted to move freely in and out of the refugee camps. Some refugee camps are also known as “guerrilla bases”. The term is used interchangeably for at least two “refugee camps” in Pakistan, one at Peshawar and one at Bajaur. Weapons are 3 The question of Karmal’s attempted suicide arose during a Department of State press conference, June 20, and again during a press background briefing conducted on Air Force One, June 25. During both exchanges, a reporter asked if rumors of Karmal’s attempted suicide were valid; in both cases the official response was that the United States could not verify the rumor. The Department summarized the first exchange in
