3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
18
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
6.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, February 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Luncheon with Minister Counselor Vorontsov, February 9, 1977
I had lunch at the Soviet Embassy with Yuli Vorontsov. Compared
to many previous encounters in which Vorontsov spent his time
probing me, this luncheon was almost entirely a monologue on the
problem of human rights. What he said at great length can be reduced
to two points he emphasized. First, he felt this would become a “Frank-
enstein”, that US policy would be dictated by the human rights mon-
ster rather than controlling it as the President had said. Second, that the
cumulative effect on Brezhnev would be disastrous. He was already
being told, according to Vorontsov, that after making a number of ges-
tures to President Carter, the response was a number of “insults”.
People around Brezhnev in the Politburo were saying, “Lenya, how can
you meet with such a man if he continues to interfere in our affairs and
make heroes out of people such as Ginzburg, Bukovsky, Solzhenitzen,
etc.” (Obviously, we must take much of this with more than a grain of
salt.) In elaborating on these themes he did acknowledge that the Soviet
leaders would ascribe a certain amount of human rights agitation to do-
mestic politics, but if a pattern emerged or a trend developed it would
have a deep impact on Soviet-American relations. There are those, he
alleged, who argued we can live without SALT. He constantly came
back to the point that what was being affected was not so much the
prospects for SALT or any other issue, but the “atmosphere”.
In reply I tried to make two points. First they should not interpret
our stand on human rights as being pointed solely toward the Soviet
Union. I assumed that they would see over time that this was a general
principle of the new Administration’s policy and that we would speak
out on matters concerning other countries. The fact that this was not
anti-Soviet in origin or focus was something the Soviet Embassy had to
impress on Moscow. Second, there was a change in approach and it
was reflected in the statements by the President and the State Depart-
ment. They ought to analyze very carefully what had happened in this
country over the past year or so. There was definitely a resurgence of
opinion that could be described as extremely conservative or hawkish.
This opinion had come quite close to nominating Ronald Reagan. It had
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Name File,
Hyland, William G., 2/77. Secret. Drafted by Hyland, who transmitted a copy to Brzez-
inski under a covering memorandum.
