825.00/386: Telegram
[Document 410]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, February 12, 1925—5 p.m.
[Received 8:40 p.m.]
19. Due to imminent fear of revolution and mob violence, the superior of a religious
order founded in Spain and composed almost wholly of Spanish monks has been here
and at the consulate general at Valparaiso asking protection for all its property in Chile
on the ground that the title is in the name of an American citizen who it seems is a
monk of this order.
[Paraphrase.] I replied that my personal opinion was that such an attempt to secure the
protection of the Government of the United States was improper. Please instruct me.
[End paraphrase.]
An order of nuns founded in Germany maintaining a school here in which there is one
American nun duly registered in our consulate general sent a delegation to me asking
for protection and for permission to hoist American flag on their building. Request was
denied but the American nun was assured personal protection if unlawfully attacked or
threatened.
Situation continues very critical. There is constant intrigue to overthrow present junta.
Labor leaders who have openly formed republican guard to help Army to sustain junta
and bring back Alessandri assembled several thousand enrolled members in front of
Moneda night before last ready to fight. Public meetings are being arranged by them in
all parts of the country for Saturday night. Country is seething with social unrest. Latest
development is organization of rent payers in all cities to demand lower rents and better
housing and resist landlord’s demands and even their appeals to police for help and
protection.
[Paraphrase.] A priest just called on behalf of the nuncio and asked if I would receive
the nuncio and secretary in case they were attacked. I told him there was no apparent
danger now and that if they were attacked the diplomatic corps would undoubtedly take
what action was expedient for its members. [End paraphrase.]
COLLIER
