1058
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
consensus was that the U.S. Delegation should support the UNDP pro-
posal in principle, provided that the new program focuses on training
and other S&T activities that do not duplicate or overlap with ISTC’s
programs. However, the PRC did not reach a decision on the level of
U.S. financial support for such a program. Hence, the U.S. delegation is
not now in a position to make a commitment at UNCSTD on a U.S. con-
tribution to the fund.
After further consideration of the funding issue, I believe that it
would be preferable for the U.S. delegation to be able to state at the
Conference that the U.S. would be prepared to contribute up to $25 mil-
lion to the fund annually for two years, provided certain conditions
were met and subject to the approval of our Congress. The U.S. contri-
bution would in any event not exceed 20% of whatever total was
agreed upon for the fund.
I recommend that you authorize the U.S. delegation to indicate at
UNCSTD that the U.S. would contribute up to $25 million annually for
two years to a UNDP special fund for science and technology provided
that the following conditions are met:
—The fund’s activities would not duplicate ISTC, UNDP or other
multilateral assistance efforts in science and technology, and would
meet a legitimate need.
—The other donor states, including members of OPEC, contribute
a fair and reasonable share; and
—Consultation with key members of the Appropriations Com-
mittees indicates a generally favorable Congressional reaction.
These provisos will ensure that the U.S. does not commit itself
until it is clear that the fund will be of genuine value to the LDC’s. At
the same time being able to support the initiative will greatly
strengthen the hand of the U.S. delegation in shaping the nature of the
fund and inducing other nations to contribute their full share. Father
Ted Hesburgh, who will lead the U.S. delegation at Vienna, strongly
agrees with supporting the UNDP initiative; he wants the U.S. delega-
tion to be well equipped to exercise real leadership at the Conference.
Clem Zablocki, who will be a member of the delegation (which in-
cludes 20 Congressmen and 1 Senator) favors a specific U.S. commit-
ment to the fund and also counsels prior consultations with the Appro-
priations Committees. With a favorable decision from you we can
consult with key members and go forward if the Congressional reac-
tion is receptive.3
2. The PRC consensus was that the U.S. should propose that the
UN Conference call, as the seven heads-of-government did at the
Tokyo Summit, for:
3 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
