Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 319 44. Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks (Burt) to Secretary of State Baker1 Washington, September 13, 1989 SUBJECT NST Issues in the Gorbachev Letter We now anticipate that Foreign Minister Shevardnadze will deliver Chairman Gorbachev’s letter to the President before going out to Wyoming. Although we do not know specifically what the letter will cover, Embassy Moscow has been told that it will focus in large part on NST. This memo outlines some of the kinds of NST initiatives that might be in the letter or that Shevardnadze could unveil in Wyoming. START Soviet options for initiatives in START include both procedural and substantive approaches. Procedurally, Gorbachev could try either of two gambits. He could challenge the President to accept a commitment to a negotiating timetable2 in START, similar to the President’s proposed 6–12 month timetable for CFE. A variation could link Soviet acceptance of the President’s CFE timetable with U.S. acceptance of a Soviet-­proposed timetable for START. Such a proposal would permit the Soviets to argue that it is they who are demonstrating the political will to complete the START treaty. It would be intended to put the U.S. on the defensive if we responded with our “no artificial deadlines”3 policy by contrasting it with our approach to CFE. Substantively, a Soviet initiative would reflect one of three possible schools of thought in Moscow: the first, advocating unilateral reductions; the second, advocating changes in specific START positions; and the third, advocating no Soviet moves in START without evidence of U.S. flexibility. I. The first approach, reflecting the perceived requirements of perestroyka, is that the Soviets move ahead unilaterally with reductions already contemplated in START, e.g., initiating SS–18 reductions before the treaty enters into force.4 This course would parallel Soviet announcements regarding conventional forces in Europe and might 1 Source: Department of State, STARS, Document Number 198921085-0. Secret. Sent through Bartholomew. 2 Baker underlined “a negotiating timetable.” 3 Baker underlined “no artificial deadlines” and emphasized the quotation marks. 4 Baker underlined “initiating SS-18 reductions before the treaty enters into force.”
