Chapter 6, June–December 1990  897
effect on Soviet programs of PPCM at solid rocket motor plants, and 
suggested instead that PPCM be established at final assembly facilities. 
We have expressed concerns about verification of the constraints on 
mobile ICBMs, especially those with multiple warheads.
— In order to resolve the PPCM issue, the United States is willing 
to agree that PPCM will be established at all solid rocket motor plants 
producing the first stage motor of MIRVed ICBMs with mobile variants. 
For single-­warhead ICBMs with mobile variants, PPCM will be estab-
lished at final assembly facilities. As you see, this proposal incorporates 
ideas from previous US and Soviet proposals.
— Let me make two additional points to supplement this proposal:
— Under this approach, the US is prepared to drop its proposal for 
unique identifiers, or tags. This would substantially simplify con-
clusion of the START treaty. We would instead use existing factory 
markings or other agreed means to identify solid rocket motors.
— To verify that production of MIRVed NDM-­limited systems is 
not taking place at other locations, all solid rocket motor plants 
which are not subject to PPCM but are capable of producing the 
smallest accountable stage of a MIRVed mobile ICBM will be 
subject to mandatory short-­notice inspection. Solid rocket motor 
plants which are not capable of producing the smallest accountable 
stage of a MIRVed mobile ICBM will be subject to periodic sched-
uled tours.
— There would be reciprocity in the number of PPCM sites in the 
US and the Soviet Union when START enters into force. We can pursue 
ideas to minimize the number on both sides.
— The number of facilities subject to PPCM in the Soviet Union 
would depend on the number of plants producing first stages for 
MIRVed missiles with mobile variants, and the number of final assem-
bly facilities for single-­warhead missiles with mobile variants. The 
number of PPCM sites could be reduced by reducing the number of 
plants that produce the first stage of the SS–24.
— The number of PPCM sites in the Soviet Union could be further 
reduced by ceasing production of MIRVed mobile ICBMs and their silo-­
based variants. In this case no PPCM of solid rocket motor plants would 
be necessary. You have told me that production of the SS–24 for mobile 
launchers will cease in January. If you agree to cut off production of 
SS–24s for silo launchers by the date of entry into force of START, then it 
would not be necessary to establish PPCM at solid rocket motor plants, 
unless or until you resume production of MIRVed mobile ICBMs or 
their silo-­based variants.
— No US ICBM has yet been tested in a mobile mode. Nevertheless, 
in the context of PPCM at the solid rocket motor plants for the first 
stage of the SS–24 and as part of an overall package ensuring effec-
tive verification of mobile ICBMs, the United States will accept PPCM 
at the solid rocket motor plant for the first stage of the peacekeeper.
