3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 728 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI able by OMB. Worldwide diplomatic demarches and ICA actions will be increased to publicize the Soviet role in Afghanistan. 7) Our posture toward the Afghan Government will be not to conduct any formal business for the time being. The number of American personnel at the Embassy will be reduced to ten. The question of recognition of the Babrak regime does not arise. 8) The Consular Review Talks which are now in a state of suspension will not be resumed. 9) On a case-by-case basis, The Department of State will reject and delay visas for official visits to the United States. 10) Soviet media representation in the United States will be reduced to the same level as U.S. media representation in the Soviet Union. 11) Shipment by C5A aircraft of the MHD channel will be deferred indefinitely. 12) Negotiations with the Soviet Union on the General Exchange Agreement will not be resumed. 13) We will cancel the following: —The Agriculture Joint Committee Meeting scheduled for January in the USSR. —The Health Joint Committee Meeting scheduled for February in Moscow. —Representative Green4 will be urged to cancel his Congressional Delegation visit to the Soviet Union scheduled for January 11–18. 14) Any meetings at the level of Assistant Secretary or above will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis with the presumption that they will be cancelled unless there are overriding reasons not to do so. 15) On the Olympics, we will take the following position which may be used publicly: “Our European Allies have questioned whether we should proceed to participate in the Olympic games in Moscow. We will assess this question and review the position taken by other countries in reaching our decision.” 16) U.S. travel controls on Soviet officials and the enforcement of these controls will be reviewed to ensure greater reciprocity with the treatment accorded our officials in the Soviet Union. 17) We should postpone the following meetings: the Joint Commercial Committee Meeting scheduled for April 14–15 in Washington; the Business Facilitation Talks scheduled for January 9 in Moscow; and the Civil Aviation Talks scheduled for February 13. In addition, Aeroflot’s scheduled service will be limited to the two weekly flights currently authorized. 4 Sedgwick William Green (R-New York).
