970
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
3. Waiver Authority.
You have authority under section 614(a) of the Foreign Assistance
Act to waive most limitations contained in the Foreign Assistance Act
and in acts appropriating funds for Foreign Assistance Act programs.
However, this waiver authority does not apply to constraints unless
they are in the Foreign Assistance Act or an appropriations act. Thus,
country specific prohibitions in the annual appropriation acts may be
waived to allow assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act, but not
under any other law. (Had Zaire not paid its delinquent debt, assist-
ance would have been prohibited by the appropriations act. This prohi-
bition could have been waived to provide economic assistance under
the Foreign Assistance Act, but not military credits under the Arms Ex-
port Control Act.) We should attempt by consultation to determine
whether a broadened waiver authority would be supported in
Congress, in view of the likely opposition to what would be widely
seen as an erosion of hard won Congressional powers.11
IV. Long-Range Recommendations
Together with Congressional Committees, we are beginning an ex-
tensive revision of the foreign assistance legislation for the next session
that will simplify and restructure the applicable legal requirements. In
this process we will strive for a better balance between Congressional
oversight needs and Executive requirements for flexible authority, in-
cluding sufficient authority to be able to deploy foreign assistance re-
sources rapidly to serve priority foreign policy needs. This effort will be
coordinated with other agencies. We plan intensive consultations with
a view to developing legislative revisions that both the Administration
and the Congress can endorse. We hope that the new legislation will be
ready for the new Congress.
In addition, I have asked the Department to study the effect of
these constraints on the ability of American companies to sell their
goods and services abroad.12
11 Carter highlighted the portion of this paragraph that begins with “but not mili-
tary credits” through the end of the paragraph. He indicated his approval of the
recommendation.
12 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation.
