Honduras 803 in Tegucigalpa. The Nationalist Party, including the very large number of government workers (virtually the entire personnel of the Honduran Government) who were replaced en masse by Liberal Party members, can be expected to seize upon every opportunity to embarrass the new administration by drawing attention to the disparity between Liberal promises and Liberal performance. There are persistent rumors of dissension within the liberal Party itself; some of the radical Liberals have no feeling of loyalty toward Villeda and might well turn against him at an opportune moment. The military would probably abandon him in the face of any serious deterioration of his popularity. Finally there is already some indication that conservative elements in control of neighboring states are not well disposed toward Villeda’s brand of liberalism. As I see it, the only possibility of averting the threat of a political crisis in Honduras lies in assisting Villeda to make good on at least some of his campaign promises by improving the economic situation in Honduras. This would involve prompt and fairly large scale participation in economic development programs in Honduras. Some efforts along these lines (i.e., the Smather’s Amendment Loan program3 and the Engineering Construction Unit project) are already underway, but these will not be adequate to deal with the present situation. Also, as you know, several applications from Honduras for DLF and IBRD loans are being processed. It is my understanding that these are being pressed forward as rapidly as possible. Whether these will be approved soon enough to avert a dangerous political situation remains to be seen. Summary: 1. The Villeda government in Honduras will shortly be facing serious political difficulties which are likely to result in its downfall, unless it can do something to improve the economic situation in Honduras. 2. The only possibility of averting this threat lies in prompt and fairly large scale U.S. participation in economic development programs in Honduras. 3. It would seem essential, in trying to implement the objective outlined in the NSC paper4 to strengthen representative democracy, that we do what we can to strengthen the Villeda administration and help it to promote the sound development of Honduras and thus strengthen confidence in Honduran democratic institutions. 3 The amendment to the Mutual Security Act of 1956 named after Sen. George A. Smathers (D-Fla.), provided for the use of a portion of the defense support funds authorized in the Act for health, education, and sanitation projects, and for land resettlement programs in Latin America. For the text of the Mutual Security Act of 1956 (Public Law
