Arms Control and Disarmament  1405
would agree on. Probably that is over-­optimistic and is due to the Pres’ 
being here.
H said nothing too exciting is going on there. He is going up at 2 
on EURATOM. It looks as though they have two reasonable bills if we 
could get them to report them out.
At 4 there will be another discussion on cessation of atomic tests. 
The Sec though H could push that along without waiting for him to 
come back. H said the Sec has to make the decision. Someone notified 
the man in Geneva re the difference and they have expressed them­
selves in a telegram which the Sec said he has not seen. H summarized 
it. It did not come from State—AEC or IAEA. He will try to find out 
shortly. The Sec is concerned about the French here and notices this 
formulation talks about parties to the agreement. Who are they? H said 
so far they are talking in bilateral terms. H replied he assumes it would 
not include the UK unless they want to join. They agreed they would 
want to join. The Sec said as you envision it just the UK, US and USSR 
make an agreement to suspend and the French would be free. H said 
there has been no real discussion with the French. The Sec said Couve 
will probably be here Monday and it might be useful to talk then. H 
will arrange this p.m. to move on it. The Sec said the area would not 
be limited to the 3 and H said it would be all the world. The Sec said 
that would require agreements with them. The consent of the others 
would be second-­stage agreements. Agreed. The Sec said you don’t 
know if the French will agree to set it up in the Sahara or the Chinese 
Communists—­that would all be later on. The Sec mentioned our mak­
ing a unilateral declaration and then will that be a treaty at first? H is 
not sure of it. The Sec thinks first there would be an Executive Agree­
ment. The Sec mentioned again H’s pushing it—if he gets into trouble 
he could come there for an hour or so if H wanted him to,—at the WH 
tomorrow or Friday. The Pres said the Columbine would stand by to 
get him. The Sec said the preliminary thinking along the lines he has 
indicated should be thought through.
H said at NSC tomorrow Gray has questions for discussion that 
may bring on discussion re Taiwan. H said he did not see the Sec’s 
memo of conv with the Pres about that. The Sec referred to what he said 
and added he does not think what the Pres said re a statement before 
a press conf was his final considered opinion. H said they are drafting 
something to come here tonight for consideration and will send a copy 
to the WH. The Sec is reluctant to see it dealt with by a formal decision 
at NSC and H does not think it can be. The Sec said it is all right the 
way it stands.
