Chapter 4, February–April 1990 473 didn’t think we had a problem since Wyoming. He just wanted to make clear that we could not accept a common understanding. Karpov said that it was the Soviet preference to have such a common understanding. The Secretary asked whether it was a precondition to signing the treaty. If so, we could not sign or implement the treaty. This was a key question. Under Secretary Bartholomew said he wanted to try out one sentence on the Soviet side. Did we understand correctly that a common understanding regarding ABM violation being a grounds for withdrawal from START was a Soviet preference, but not a precondition for signing and implementing a START treaty? Karpov said he had just said this. Bartholomew said that, in this case, the issue was closed. Shevardnadze asked whether the Secretary was satisfied. The Secretary said he was. Shevardnadze said he understood the U.S. did not find it easy after Wyoming because there were some in the U.S., including some very knowledgeable people, alleging that there was nothing new in the Soviet position. In fact, that position contained fundamental new elements. Nevertheless, the Soviets would still like to clarify what the ABM Treaty was all about. The Secretary said he had always felt in Wyoming that there had been a significant change in the Soviet position. He had asked whether the Soviets were delinking and had received a positive answer. Some had suggested the Soviets had not delinked; thus he was glad that the two of them had had this conversation so that we could clarify our understanding that START and ABM were not linked, but rather would stand on their own two feet. This had been a very useful and productive exchange. He asked whether they should turn to another subject. Shevardnadze said that perhaps the working group should have more discussion of this language in order to lay the groundwork for subsequent efforts on strategic stability. Krasnoyarsk Radar/Visits to Radars The Secretary said he wanted to raise the Krasnoyarsk radar which he had spoken about briefly the previous night. In Wyoming we had understood that the Soviets, in offering to eliminate the Krasnoyarsk radar, would take the buildings down in their entirety. Yet in Geneva there had been suggestions that the Soviets would only destroy half of each building. This was a very important issue for the ratification of a START treaty. It was important that we be able to say that agreements made would be agreements kept. We hoped there was no
