Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX freeze was in effect. Neither of these possibilities can be realized unless we are prepared through words and actions in Washington to prove our steadfastness and seriousness to Israel on this issue. Suggested below are two possible alternative strategies for achieving this purpose. 8. The options: A. Such an approach could include inter alia, the following measures: —Slow down or suspension of treaty negotiations with Egypt —Delay of discussions concerning U.S. commitment to assist Israel in building two Negev airfields —Indefinite suspension of Matmon C consultations —Conspicuous footdragging on already committed aid deliveries —Publicized recall of the Ambassador to Washington to discuss the settlements issue with the President —Consideration of having the President not visit Israel (or Egypt) in conjunction with the signing of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty —Plus measures outlined in option B. Pro —Could shock Israeli body politic into realization that unlimited continuation of settlement activity is incompatible with attainment of peace, even with Egypt, and immediately jeopardizes Israel’s allimportant relationship with the United States —Would demonstrate to the Arabs the seriousness of our commitment to minimizing further Israeli settlement activity —Recalling the Ambassador would be almost uniquely strong demonstration of our displeasure with Israel (Note: we do not believe this step has ever been taken during any previous confrontations with Israeli Governments.) Con —Such a massive response is much more likely to trigger a backlash against the United States and Egypt and be seen as attacks on Israel rather than as directed at the Begin government’s policies. Result could be rallying of support behind Begin and further acts of defiance in the settlement area, rather than the desired result of internal pressure on Begin and his government to desist from such activities. —Suspension of negotiations by Egypt because of the linkage issue would convince many Israelis of Sadat’s bad faith, lead to renewed accusations of Egyptian-American collusion, and run grave risk of aborting Israeli/Egyptian treaty, despite fact that agreed text is within reach.
