Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
535
time highs. The ratification of the Panama Canal treaties was an histor-
ical milestone.
• We have significantly improved the nature of our relations with
black African countries.
• Our relations with India have never been better; and we are re-
taining our ties of friendship with Pakistan.
• In East Asia, a delicate balance of power exists favorable to our
interests. We have normalized relations with China, in part, to consoli-
date the balance.
• Such regional organizations as ASEAN and the Organization of
African Unity are playing an increasingly positive role in bringing sta-
bility to their regions.
• In recognition of the growing conventional military capability of
the Soviet Union, we are increasing our military expenditures—as are
our NATO allies—to make sure our European defenses remain strong.
• While we have not yet managed to establish a more stable world
monetary and trading system, we have made progress in recent
months in stabilizing the dollar and in creating a more orderly and
growing world market through MTN.
• We will reach a SALT II agreement which will place a cap on the
deployment of new and more missiles and which introduces a note of
stability in the precarious strategic balance between the Soviet Union
and the United States.
Added to these favorable developments are those of the spirit.
After the debilitating decade of Vietnam and Watergate, our people are
returning to their social moorings and exhibiting their traditional will
and idealism. Worldwide, too, we have once again assumed the mantle
of moral leadership, with the importance we attach to human rights,
nuclear nonproliferation, and limitation of conventional arms sales.
Certainly as much as and probably more than any other major power,
the United States is addressing in a forthright manner the problems of
our age. We remain an innovative society and a worldwide source of
inspiration.
These positive developments are the result of the President’s com-
mitment—as he enunciated at Notre Dame more than a year ago—to a
policy of constructive global engagement, a policy of trying to influ-
ence the changes of our era in directions that are compatible with our
interests and values. Under that broad heading, we have crystallized
seven fundamental objectives for our foreign policy:
• To enhance our military security;
• To reinforce our ties with our key allies and promote a more co-
operative world system;
