World Hunger and Food Policy
857
bodia.2 I also know you are trying to complete your report on the larger
problem of world hunger.
However, I need the assistance of the Commission regarding Cam-
bodia. I would like to have you periodically report to me on the status
of major activities being carried out by government agencies and pri-
vate and international organizations to deal with the hunger situation
in Cambodia.3
I want to be assured that required actions are being expeditiously
carried out and that we identify any possible delays or other problems
which might hinder relief efforts.
Obviously, you will not substitute for those organizations under-
taking relief activities nor for any required Congressional oversight;
however, by identifying possible problem areas promptly and directly
to me, we will be able to assure that essential relief measures continue.
I hope the Commission can undertake this task with minimum dis-
ruption to its already important work and I look forward to your
assistance.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
2 The Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea (Cambodia) in December 1978 decimated
most of the rice crop, thus jeopardizing an already tenuous food supply. During 1979, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the United Nations Children’s
Emergency Fund (UNICEF) began coordinating a large-scale humanitarian assistance
program for Kampuchea on behalf of the United Nations and other concerned gov-
ernments. For background information on this effort, see Nimetz’ November 8 statement
before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee’s Subcommittee on Arms Control,
Oceans, International Operations, and Environment, printed in Department of State Bul-
letin, December 1979, pp. 1–4. In a statement released on October 15, the President an-
nounced a $7 million pledge, including $5 million worth of P.L. 480 food, to assist Kam-
puchea. (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 1924–1925) Following an ICRC/UNICEF
joint appeal for aid made on October 19, Carter, on October 24, directed the release of an-
other $3 million in refugee aid funds, requested that Congress enact a supplemental Food
for Peace appropriation totaling $20 million, committed $9 million in refugee funds to the
Government of Thailand to support its Khmer refugee program, indicated support for
Zablocki’s proposal to authorize an additional $30 million for relief efforts, and com-
mented that he had asked the PCWH to recommend the “next steps” in meeting hunger
needs. (Ibid., pp. 2011–2012)
3 See Document 266.
