States would be actually realized and has explicitly stated that there seems
to be in the draft treaty suggested by the United States no contradiction to
the League of Nations, adding that Germany is not hindered by any of her
treaties from becoming a party to a multilateral treaty of the kind proposed
by this Government. The French Government transmitted on April 20 to the
British, German, Italian and Japanese Governments and to the United States
a draft anti-war treaty apparently intended as an alternative to the draft
proposed by the United States.
A simple comparison of the two drafts discloses the extraordinary
difference not only between the French and American concepts but also
between the present French position and that illustrated by M. Briand’s
original proposal, for, as you are aware, the first two articles of the
American draft treaty are practically identical with the corresponding
articles of M. Briand’s treaty of last June. In its present form the French
draft treaty is wholly unacceptable to the United States since it cannot in
any respect be regarded as an effective instrument for the promotion of
world peace. It emphasizes war, not peace, and seems in effect to be a
justification rather than a renunciation of the use of armed force. The
United States will sign no treaty of the nature now under discussion which
cannot reasonably be expected to lessen the danger of an outbreak of war
and thus promote the cause of world peace.
In reserving the right to go to war in the many circumstances enumerated in
the French draft, France goes even farther than was to be expected from the
position taken in her correspondence with the United States during the past
few months, and if the present draft represents the limit to which the French
Government is prepared to go in renouncing war by treaty, it is idle for the
United States to endeavor to seek an agreement with France, the respective
positions of the two Governments in that event being totally irreconcilable.
The United States does not believe that world peace and national security
are best guaranteed by military alliances or by the threatened application of
military sanctions in certain previously defined circumstances, and the
United States will not become a party to any international agreement which,
while ostensibly devised for the preservation of peace, finds its ultimate
expression in a resort to arms and perpetuates a system of international
alliances. No treaty is an absolute guarantee against war and the United
