Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks 733 296. Telegram From the Department of State to All American Republic Diplomatic Posts1 Washington, August 25, 1978, 0038Z 216300. Subject: Conventional Arms Transfer Restraint: Debrief on US-Soviet Talks. 1. Department is briefing selected governments on third round of US-Soviet Conventional Arms Transfer (CAT) talks, held in Helsinki July 18–28. Action addressees should seek meeting at Senior ForMin level to brief confidentially on Helsinki talks, drawing on talking points in paragraph 3 below. If any posts recommend that department conduct supplementary debrief of embassies in Washington, please inform us immediately. 2. Purpose of debriefing is to keep other governments informed of progress we are making with suppliers on conventional arms restraint. Host governments would not be wrong to draw conclusions from briefing that we are seriously pursuing a major foreign policy goal and hence that recipient initiatives to help define restraint measures are timely and likely to influence supplier actions. But we do not want to convey impression of US, much less joint US-Soviet, desire to impose external limitations on Latin America. Further, although we support current Latin American initiatives toward self-restraint,2 and have been in touch with both Venezuela and Mexico with regard to their initiatives (para 4 below), we do not believe we should either assume too strong a public stance or too eager a private one. Please report reactions of host government to US-Soviet CAT talks, including any comments volunteered on current Latin American restraint initiatives or their relationships to supplier restraint as envisaged in US-Soviet talks. 3. Talking points for CAT III debrief. A. Background. —The US and Soviet sides have met three times to discuss conventional arms restraint. At the conclusion of second round of talks last May, the two sides issued a joint communique´ in which they agreed:3 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780347–0862. Secret; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Caracas, Mexico City, the Interests Section in Havana, and the Consulate in Belize. Not sent to Paramaribo. Drafted by Priscilla Clapp (PM); and approved by Jerome Kahan (PM), Luigi Einaudi (ARA), Alan Platt (ACDA), Lorna Watson (ACDA), and Andrew Thomas (PM/SSP). 2 Telegram 220400 to all American Republic diplomatic posts, August 30, transmitted a summary of the conference on the “limitation and/or prohibition of certain types of conventional weapons” held in Mexico City August 21–24. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780354–0696) 3 The text of the communique´ is printed in Documents on Disarmament, 1978, p. 286.
