Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 2) Inclusion of Domestic Human Rights—It was proposed that the Bill refer to domestic human rights. It was felt that either the Institute support domestic human rights programs or that reference be made to the fact that this problem was being handled elsewhere. Otherwise, the Bill would create the impression that the U.S. was interested in promoting human rights “in foreign countries” but not at home, in contravention of its commitments under the UN Charter and the Helsinki Final Act. Frank Newman proposed that the Preamble refer to human rights and fundamental freedom “for all” so that the Bill could not be construed to focus exclusively on foreign countries. Alan Schwartz noted that because only limited funds were available ($5 million), it might be more appropriate to strengthen the Civil Rights Commission or create a new institution; however, reference should be made to domestic human rights in the Bill. If a larger appropriation were forthcoming, some of the funds could then be donated to organizations for domestic human rights purposes. Stephen Schlossberg concurred with this view. 3) Economic Rights—It was proposed that the promotion of economic rights (in particular health care, trade union rights, etc.) should receive adequate emphasis in the programs funded by the Institute; civil and political liberties should not be the sole focus. (This point was made by Stephen Schlossberg—UAW). 4) Creation of New Institutions and Procedures—Attention should be paid to the creation of national and international machinery and procedures (e.g., 1503 procedures) which would fill gaps in existing international human rights protection. Frank Newman2 said that much could be learned in this regard from the civil rights and civil liberties movements in the U.S. He criticized the State Department for placing insufficient emphasis on the creation of institutions. He objected to its treatment of human rights as “diplomacy” which bargained human rights away. The Department, he said, was focusing too heavily in its speeches on whether prisoners had been released. Warren Christopher’s clearinghouse proposal, he said, was a step in the right direction, but a very small one.3 5) Human Rights Awards—Jan Nowak proposed that the Institute make annual awards to individuals who made an outstanding contribution to international human rights or for the articles or books they published. This would protect individuals and also mitigate the effects of censorship. 2 An unknown hand underlined Frank Newman’s name.
