442
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2) Inclusion of Domestic Human Rights—It was proposed that the Bill
refer to domestic human rights. It was felt that either the Institute sup-
port domestic human rights programs or that reference be made to the
fact that this problem was being handled elsewhere. Otherwise, the Bill
would create the impression that the U.S. was interested in promoting
human rights “in foreign countries” but not at home, in contravention
of its commitments under the UN Charter and the Helsinki Final Act.
Frank Newman proposed that the Preamble refer to human rights
and fundamental freedom “for all” so that the Bill could not be con-
strued to focus exclusively on foreign countries.
Alan Schwartz noted that because only limited funds were avail-
able ($5 million), it might be more appropriate to strengthen the Civil
Rights Commission or create a new institution; however, reference
should be made to domestic human rights in the Bill. If a larger appro-
priation were forthcoming, some of the funds could then be donated to
organizations for domestic human rights purposes. Stephen Schloss-
berg concurred with this view.
3) Economic Rights—It was proposed that the promotion of eco-
nomic rights (in particular health care, trade union rights, etc.) should
receive adequate emphasis in the programs funded by the Institute;
civil and political liberties should not be the sole focus. (This point was
made by Stephen Schlossberg—UAW).
4) Creation of New Institutions and Procedures—Attention should be
paid to the creation of national and international machinery and proce-
dures (e.g., 1503 procedures) which would fill gaps in existing interna-
tional human rights protection. Frank Newman2 said that much could
be learned in this regard from the civil rights and civil liberties move-
ments in the U.S. He criticized the State Department for placing insuffi-
cient emphasis on the creation of institutions. He objected to its treat-
ment of human rights as “diplomacy” which bargained human rights
away. The Department, he said, was focusing too heavily in its
speeches on whether prisoners had been released. Warren Christo-
pher’s clearinghouse proposal, he said, was a step in the right direction,
but a very small one.3
5) Human Rights Awards—Jan Nowak proposed that the Institute
make annual awards to individuals who made an outstanding contri-
bution to international human rights or for the articles or books they
published. This would protect individuals and also mitigate the effects
of censorship.
2 An unknown hand underlined Frank Newman’s name.
3 See footnote 4, Document 117.
