1268  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
758.	 Letter 50 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 50
Geneva, November 30, 1956
Dear Walter:
I have just returned from the meeting and dictated my summary 
telegram. As you can see it was a sterile performance with absolutely 
nothing new except my ability to introduce Lew’s return and their 
reply to O’Neill. I debated also throwing in their refusal to let O’Neill 
take the initiative in seeing the other prisoners but decided to stick 
for today to the more basic points, particularly on the McCarthy case. 
My occasional stubborn streak came out in the last part of the meeting 
when I determined I was just not going to let him have the last word 
and kept it going until he cried uncle. I could hardly keep from smil­
ing toward the end when he got himself wound-­up in to the point he 
was just mixing up his words and at one point even stuttered. It was 
some emotional satisfaction and I hope might have some slight effect in 
demonstrating to them how weak their public case on implementation 
really is. Our release of Lew has immensely strengthened my hand. 
I also had debated refuting today their allegations on FBI interference 
with correspondence by counterattacking with their registration of 
families and “bringing of pressure” by their letter writing campaign. 
However, as the meeting went I feared this would sidetrack us from the 
main issue and saved it for possible use next time. I hope that Herman 
will concur in my little lecture on American jurisprudence.
After learning of Nehru’s prospective visit to the States I entirely 
concurred in your estimate that they would mark time today. However, 
I am still of the opinion that they consider they have now placed them­
selves in a position to break at a time of their choosing. I hope I have 
been able somewhat to shake their confidence on this but am not too 
sanguine I have done so.
I know that you will inform me of anything of significance to me 
during Nehru’s visit. I would be very surprised if with everything hap­
pening elsewhere he would do much carrying of the ball for Peking.
Thanks very much for your letters of November 23 and 26 which 
were both here when I arrived. I particularly appreciated the most inter­
esting report of Suhrawardy’s visit and am returning it to you. Don’t 
you feel it would be a good idea pretty thoroughly to brief such persons 
on the prisoner issue before they talk with the Chinese, not with the 
objective of having them take it up, but so that when Chou comes back 
with his torturous position they would be somewhat forewarned and 
not lead Chou to feel they are impressed with his position?
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The postscript is handwritten.
