Hungary 485 than empty rhetoric, and freedom loving people everywhere today feel the pain of this realization. Sincerely, Mary Rose Oakar 162. Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department of State1 Budapest, January 7, 1978, 1408Z 105. Subject: SecState Visit—Secretary-FonMin Meeting Jan 7. Uncleared Memcon of the Secretary’s Meeting With FonMin Puja. Begin summary: The Secretary and FonMin Puja discussed emigration assurances and MFN; the favorable effect the return of the Crown will have on bilateral relations; and other current topics in bilateral relations (property settlement and cultural exchanges). The Secretary also briefed Puja on the Middle East and the two exchanged views on the Belgrade CSCE meeting, MBFR, and East-West relations in general. The Secretary invited Puja to visit him in Washington if Puja comes to New York for the Special Session on Disarmament. Puja extended an invitation to the Secretary for an official visit to Budapest. End summary. 1. Secretary Vance and FonMin Puja met for one hour Jan 7. Additional Hungarian participants: Deputy Minister Nagy; Ambassador Esztergalyos; Office Director Bartha, and American Desk Officer Revesz. U.S.: Ambassador Kaiser, Counselor Nimetz, Luers, King, and Wilgis. 2. The Crown: Puja thanked the Secretary for the important role he had played in the President’s decision to return the Crown. He said that it was a courageous step which would give further momentum to U.S.-Hungarian relations in that it eliminated a long-standing obstacle. Hungary is ready to develop bilateral relations, and the fact that it is a small country while the U.S. is a world power does not exclude good relations. Cooperation is not only possible, but a necessity, and will 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780012–0202. Confidential; Exdis; Immediate. A summary of the return ceremonies was transmitted in telegram 228 from Budapest, January 13. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780021–1184)
