158 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 126. Telegram 594 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 23, 1955, 6 p.m. 594. From Johnson. Comments on 10th meeting. 1. Text handed Wang differed only as follows from Deptel 599: (A) Phrase “and the Government UK may also do so” restored in order avoid wording Wang could object to as “unequal”. (B) Word “residing” deleted accordance Deptel 602. (C) Full names of Ambassadors given in paragraph two. (D) Phrase “make investigation of” in paragraph two (A) both sec­ tions changed to “investigate”. 2. I assume requirement that “understanding” be public is appli­ cable only to type referred to paragraph 4 Deptel 602 and that “oral understanding” along lines paragraph 3 same telegram would not nec­ essarily have to be made public unless breached. Acting on authority Secretary’s 569 I had previously told Wang such understanding could be private. 3. Wang showed no inclination retreat from position that he could not state definite time limit within which all Americans could be released, since this would amount to submitting to coercion. Made only the slight concession of assuring me that number Americans to be released immediately “not small” and that cases of remainder could be considered favorably and quickly. However latter part of assurance questionable value since settlement remaining American cases linked to “improvement of relations between two countries”. This enables Peiping halt release of Americans whenever they feel we not “coop­ erating” sufficiently to improve relations. I will continue press Wang hard for firm commitment regarding time but foresee no early change in his attitude. 4. See no reason change assessment in my 457 that only with great difficulty and much time could we budge Wang from his position. Nev­ ertheless, I believe it still worthwhile hammering at him one or two more meetings, even though each of us has already reached a position from which it will become increasingly difficult to back down, should that become necessary to avoid complete deadlock. My tactics will be to hold a very firm line while watching carefully for any hint of com­ promise on his part. We should be fully aware, however, that these tac­ tics are risky, for they may result only in a corresponding stiffening of 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2355. Confidential; Priority.
