1002
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
limited production assistance to Egypt, it will have minimal impact in
satisfying Egyptian requirements for the foreseeable future.
The budgetary impact differential among these annual funding
levels is not great, assuming no “forgiveness” (grant aid) is involved.
For FMS credits extended by the Federal Financing Bank, the annual
appropriation must cover only the guarantee fees, which equal 10% of
the loans. Thus, the budget appropriation would range from $50 mil-
lion to $100 million a year. OMB already assumes, in its budget projec-
tions for FY 1982, credit funding at the $500 million a year level. (The
possibility of FY 1981 funding is discussed below).
We are sensitive to the “proportionality” of the annual funding
level to that of Israel. As it approaches Israel’s $1 billion, Israel will un-
doubtedly feel the case for additional security assistance it has sub-
mitted is even more justified. They have asked for an additional $800
million a year, but we do not believe the accelerated pace of military
equipment deliveries which this would imply is necessary, and we
have not encouraged them to think they will get it or even a portion of
it. An increase for Israel, assuming that it contained the usual 50% for-
giveness, would add greatly to the budget impact; e.g., an additional
$800 million a year for Israel would require an additional budget ap-
propriation of $440 million. If this initiative with Egypt did result in our
also increasing assistance for Israel, we would want to strongly resist
extending any forgiveness in that increase.
We do not recommend forgiveness for Egypt. Egypt’s external fi-
nancing deficit appears just about balanced by the external assistance
they receive. Egypt should be able to manage the interest and subse-
quently the principal repayments if we offer the same terms provided
for under Peace Treaty package—10 year grace period and 20-year re-
payment of principal thereafter. By the same token, however, we do not
recommend that Egypt directly fund a major portion of approved pur-
chases from their own resources. It would merely divert resources from
priority economic development. In our judgment, these recommenda-
tions would not lead to a requirement for an increase in currently pro-
jected U.S. economic aid levels to Egypt.
FY 1981 Funding
The original $1.5 billion treaty package was supposed to cover a
three-year period, but it is already committed and it satisfied only a
small portion of Egypt’s priority needs. If we do not begin the new
assistance program until FY 1982, we would face a politically difficult
two-year gap before we can even announce a new sale to Egypt, and a
three or four-year gap between completion of major deliveries from the
$1.5 billion program and the start of new deliveries. In the meantime,
Egypt’s Soviet equipment will be seriously deteriorating, with attend-
ant decline in Egyptian military morale.
