1955 593 is that of freedom of Chinese in U.S., who desire do so, return to your country. I, therefore, assume that by investigation of status you mean whether individuals do desire return to your country. This is, of course, something that can be determined only by each individual for himself, and any so-called “investigation of status” has no relation thereto. Our agreed announcement and steps taken by my government implement it fully and comprehensively deal with all aspects of this question. As I have many times pointed out, any Chinese in United States who desires return to your country is under no compulsion or requirement obtain permission from anyone or inform anyone. Neither is he prevented from informing or communicating with anyone. For example, if he feels that there is any obstruction to his departure, he is entirely free communicate with Indian Embassy. He does not have to submit such communication through anyone else, nor does anyone have right in any way interfere with his freedom of such communication. There is thus complete and firm guarantee that any Chinese in the U.S., who in fact desires to return to your country, is able do so, and no general investigation of status of Chinese in United States is required. U. Your third question related to rescinding by U.S. of any meas­ ures which you term would violate spirit of agreed announcement. I am not aware of any such measures, and it is rather your government which should rescind and correct measures which not only violate spirit but letter of our agreed announcement. There continues to be no obstruction to departure of any Chinese from U.S. for your country. As I have many times pointed out, there is not even any requirement for Chinese departing from U.S. obtain exit permit. Requirement of exit permit in itself entails delay and obstruction no matter how promptly it may be acted upon. Requirement of obtaining exit permit also pre-­ supposes ability of the agency to which application is made to deny permit. Therefore if one were to speak of rescinding of measures violat­ ing spirit of agreed announcement, reference would have to be made to exit permit requirements of your government. Only repeal of such requirement with respect to Americans in your country would place our two countries in position of equality and reciprocity in this regard. V. At our last meeting you referred to supposed requirement that Chinese in U.S. obtain entry permits into Taiwan. I have investigated this matter and preliminary statement, which I made to you at our last meeting, I find to be entirely correct. This relates only to general requirements under our immigration laws that aliens, admitted to the U.S. temporarily, desiring to extend their stay must present valid evi­ dence that upon expiration of their temporary stay, they will be able to proceed to another country. Thus matter relates entirely to Chinese desiring remain in U.S., rather than Chinese desiring return to your country, and in no way interferes with or hinders ability of Chinese in
