Afghanistan
543
for durable and permanent guarantees for its security; thus, they are
seeking clarification (assumedly of the U.S. commitment). The Soviets
resent the activities of which Pakistan is a focal point. The Indian
Foreign Minister demanded a regional discussion of the problem, but
Zia responded to him that the problem is global. The Islamic Conference
was indeed a victory for the United States and Pakistan, but it leads
to further Soviet hostility. Thus we need another superpower as an
antidote to the hostility of that superpower. The 1959 agreement must
be reconfirmed, especially in light of our experiences in 1965 and 1971.6
(Zia at this point went into a fairly lengthy discussion of assurances
from Ambassador Oehlert, George Ball, and the quotes in the Kissinger
autobiography about 1971.)7 In order to remove these lacunae, Pakistan
proposes that the 1959 agreement be turned into a treaty, or else give
it a Congressional cover, approval or reaffirmation. To write a new
treaty is, of course, lengthy and difficult. (S)
How does the U.S. see implementation of the 1959 agreement now?
In case of aggression from the West, will it stand committed to Pakistani
security? If the threat is agreed on, military assistance should be com-
mensurate with the appreciation of that threat. We have to assure our
own security and half-way measures will not be adequate. Certain
items will be needed urgently for dealing with hot pursuit, and these
will also help to boost army morale. We have to start development
activity in the West, and that means economic assistance. How are we
going to be able to overcome our problem in the East? Can the Indian
threat be neutralized? Can the U.S. approach China to give guarantees
to Pakistan? What if the USSR and India attack jointly? We are seeking
to improve our relations with India, but what if we fail? If there is
collusion and an attack from both sides will you stand by our side? (S)
Henry Kissinger, in the January 21st Wall Street Journal interview
said it is unlikely that the Soviets would attack Pakistan over an Indian
objection.8 The danger for us is being dismembered by India. We are
trying hard in our relations with India. But don’t forget that during
the 1970 visit (to Washington) Mrs. Gandhi talked about the congenital
6 The dates refer to the previous Indo-Pakistani wars.
7 The reference to U.S. assurances to Pakistan in 1971 is from Henry Kissinger,
White House Years, p. 892. On assurances made by George Ball and Ambassador to
Pakistan Benjamin Oehlert, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XXV, South Asia, Docu-
ments 112, 265, 470, and 524.
8 For the text of the interview, see Karen Elliot House and Thomas J. Bray, “An
Interview with Henry Kissinger,” The Wall Street Journal, January 21, 1980, p. 18. The
paraphrase of Kissinger’s remarks is accurate.
