German Democratic Republic ian cases, claims and Consular Convention. The Chairman raised the issue of the substantial US trade surplus with the GDR, alluded to Jackson-Vanik and expressed hope ways could be found to increase GDR exports to the US. Honecker was pleased about the Secretary’s willingness to meet with Foreign Minister Fischer at the UNGA and agreed that this meeting could be helpful in bringing about progress on a range of issues of interest to both countries. End summary. 1. I met with Chairman of State Council Honecker August 22 to present my letter of credence and letter of recall of Ambassador Cooper. In a brief formal ceremony I expressed appreciation for Honecker’s kindness in receiving me so soon after my arrival three days ago. I conveyed greetings from the people and Government of the United States. I expressed our hope and expectation that relations between the United States and the GDR will be broadened and deepened in the months and years to come. I told Honecker it would be my task and my pleasure to work toward that goal. I expressed appreciation for the warm welcome I had received and indicated my desire to work with him and other leaders to move our relations forward. 2. Honecker in a brief response welcomed me to the GDR and requested that I convey greetings to the people and Government of the United States. He said the GDR wanted to develop good relations with the United States. He wished me success in my missions. 3. After the formal ceremony, Honecker invited me to his office for a private chat which lasted about fifty minutes. Also present were Secretary of Council of State Eichler and Deputy Foreign Minister Grunert. Honecker began the meeting by reiterating the GDR desire to develop good relations with the United States. He noted that such relations would be mutually beneficial to our countries and would contribute to better overall East-West relations. He also commented on US-Soviet relations, CSCE, the GDR May 12 aide memoire on US– GDR bilateral relations, trade imbalance, and cultural cooperation.4 4. US-Soviet relations. Honecker emphasized repeatedly the need for good US-Soviet relations. He hoped a peaceful dialogue between the US and the Soviets on SALT and other matters would continue in the interest of peace. He said there was no point in debating the merits of capitalism vs. socialism. There was “simply no alternative to peaceful coexistence.” US–GDR relations would flourish better in an atmosphere of detente. He saw this as very important.
