1120 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 239. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Baker’s Delegation1 Washington, July 22, 1991, 2319Z 240167/TOSEC 140536. Subject: Bessmertnykh-Baker Message on START Problem 1. (S—Entire Text) 2. On July 22, Soviet Ambassador Komplektov delivered to Acting Secretary Eagleburger an “oral message” (text in para 4) from Soviet Foreign Minister Bessmertnykh to Secretary Baker. After Komplektov handed over the text, Eagleburger consulted with Undersecretary Bartholomew who told the acting Secretary that the dispute to which the letter alluded probably concerned the distinction between launchers and canisters. Bartholomew also confirmed that the hold-up in Geneva was in fact due to general Soviet footdragging. 3. Eagleburger told Komplektov that he would ensure Bessmertnykh’s message was transmitted to the Secretary immediately. 4. Begin text of message (Soviet Embassy translation corrected by EUR/SOV): Dear Jim, As a result of the agreement reached between the USSR and the U.S. Presidents in London, the work to prepare the START treaty has gone to the finishing stretch in the full sense of the word. Reports reaching us from Geneva indicate that, by and large, the two delegations are successfully moving ahead to translate into treaty language the understandings which had been reached in principle. We are doing everything to help the delegations successfully fulfill their instructions to complete the preparation of the documents for signing during the upcoming summit in the USSR. To this end, we have dispatched to Geneva an additional group of senior Soviet experts. Under these circumstances it is particularly important that in the process of finalizing the draft documents there emerge no artificial obstacles or hitches. I am speaking about this because, according to our information, the U.S. delegation in Geneva is attempting to re-open certain strictly technical issues which earlier had already been discussed in detail and resolved. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, N910005–0368. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent Immediate for information to Moscow and NST Geneva. Drafted by Ordway; cleared by Vershbow and Timbie, and in D, S/S, and S/S-O; approved by Kamman. Baker was in Jerusalem July 21–22 meeting with Israeli and Palestinian leaders in advance of a Middle East peace conference.
