International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1127
bassy Santiago); (B) by substituting “working dinners and luncheons
for men and women” to replace “stag” functions where these are still
practiced (Embassy Pretoria); and (C) inviting local women leaders to
Embassy functions “for serious discussions”, not merely for social oc-
casions (Embassy Brussels).
5. Arrange more exchanges between US and host country women
individually and in groups, emphasizing the selection (A) of more
women IVs (international visitors); (B) of more “top” US women as
“American participants” to come to speak on US political, social and
cultural issues to mixed, repeat, mixed audiences at universities,
unions and at Embassy luncheons/dinners.
6. Encourage greater exchange of information on women and on
women’s issues in all posts by: (A) having standard Embassy reporting
include data on the local situation of women and their material contri-
bution to host countries’ basic needs and GNP; (B) having the Ambas-
sador take the lead in using interviews, speeches and articles to discuss
US women’s status; (C) disseminating information on US women
through more USICA exhibits, seminars and enlarged library collec-
tions on women, including material on women’s civil/political/
economic rights, population control, child care, legal reforms, etc., and
(D) stimulating cross-cultural support by putting host country
women’s organizations in touch with US organizations, public and pri-
vate institutions, and individuals concerned with the advancement of
women.
C. Specific Embassy recommendations for developing countries.
1. Encourage host countries to arrange more training for women.
Use all possible means—AID, USICA, Peace Corps, local or foreign
PVOs, UN or third country agencies, private foundations. Lack of
training continues as the predominant factor in women’s continued
low status. Specifically, (A) expand training programs to non-
traditional areas, including administration, law, labor, cooperative
management; (B) make a major effort to see that women farm workers
are included in all training in agricultural extension and in new farm
technologies and processes; (C) to offset the frequent practice of
training already advantaged women, encourage more non-formal
training of low-income rural and urban women in income-producing
skills.
2. Support/encourage local governments’ collection of statistical
data on women—income, migration, employment/unemployment,
family patterns—for use in planning development projects and in Em-
bassy economic reports. Many LDC posts advise that lacking such data,
country and US planners can make serious mistakes in program design
and allocation of priorities.
