German Democratic Republic
363
and sports fields. I expressed regret that some of our proposals for
cultural presentations in the GDR in 1977 had not materialized. I hoped
we could implement these proposals in early 1978. In the meantime, our
officials could work toward a cultural agreement that would stimulate
future exchanges in the cultural field.
16. Secretary’s meeting with Foreign Minister Fischer. I informed
Honecker that Secretary Vance is prepared to meet with Foreign
Minister Fischer at the UNGA if this could be worked out on their
respective schedules. I stressed the importance of progress in the next
few weeks in developing our relations to insure a fruitful meeting
between the Secretary and Foreign Minister Fischer and to provide a
backdrop for further development of relations. Honecker agreed and
said he was pleased to have such a “dynamic Ambassador from the
United States.” He stressed his willingness to cooperate in developing
our relations. He wished me a successful mission and said his door
was always open. He concluded the meeting by reiterating the GDR
desire for good relations with the United States and the importance of
continuing the detente process between the Soviet Union and the
United States as a factor in the development of US–GDR relations.
Bolen
119.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Embassy in
the German Democratic Republic1
New York, October 1, 1977, 1948Z
Secto 10027. Subject: Fischer Bilateral With Secretary.
1. Centerpiece of 45-minute bilateral between GDR Foreign Minis-
ter and Secretary September 30 was a US–GDR Consular Convention,
with Fischer proposing a cultural agreement, too. They also touched
upon US-Soviet relations, which both agreed had improved over the
past ten days, and GDR–FRG relations, which Fischer, claimed were
“better than their reputation”.
2. Referring to the Consular Convention as “the rock that might
be moved from the road”, Fischer said that nationality was the key
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770359–0487.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to the Department of State and Bonn.
