14  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
Wang declared both our governments deeply concerned over fate 
nationals. On basis mutual conciliation and mutual respect both sides 
share desire safeguard interest of nationals in other country including 
right return home. In order that nationals each side who desire return 
may receive attention Chinese propose:
1. Each side advise other status latter’s nationals residing their 
territory in same way Wang had just done re US nationals in China. 
Expressed hope name list would include all Chinese nationals in US 
including students.
2. US revoke all prohibitions and measures preventing departure 
Chinese including time limit which adds to difficulty their return.
3. US supply Chinese with name list 76 persons granted exit per­
mits as reported April 8, 1955.
4. China and US each entrust third country of own choice take 
charge affairs of nationals each country, first of all, question their return. 
Chinese Government proposes India.
Wang expressed hope we would give his proposals due 
consideration.
I replied I wanted study his proposals carefully and would give 
him detailed reply later. In meantime however I wanted to state that 
concern his government regarding Chinese students in US appears 
largely on misunderstanding of true situation. I said I was authorized 
formally assure him US imposing no restraints on Chinese civilians in 
US desiring proceed territory under control his government. I repeated 
that I could formally and categorically say to him that no Chinese stu­
dent was being prevented from leaving US. I asked if he knew any Chi­
nese student prevented from departing he let me know and I would 
have case investigated at once. I expressed hope in such event he would 
give me as much data as possible on each case just as I had done regard­
ing cases of Americans detained in China.
Wang replied he would carefully study all I had said and reply 
at later meeting. He then proposed that since discussions had entered 
concrete stage meetings be held as a rule only every other day unless 
special reasons demanded more or less frequent meetings. I agreed to 
this proposal.
Referring to my proposal not to release information to press with­
out prior agreement Wang said he had given matter careful study and 
agreed in principle. Said if any statement considered necessary by 
either side agreement should be reached with other or prior notification 
given. In this way discussions could be completely frank and informal.
I told Wang I pleased he agreed with me that adoption this pro­
cedure would contribute to frankness and informality of discussions. 
I suggested that any prior notification give reasonable time say one or
