484
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
preponderant voice to the developing countries. Such a move in the
minds of many in the United States would represent a departure from
the objectivity and nonpolitical character of these institutions.
Technology Transfers. Developing countries today must often pay
very large amounts in order to obtain the rights to technology which
they feel important for their industrial development. They are seeking
to liberalize the transfer of technology believing that this would speed
up the closing of the gap between rich nations and poor nations. They
also seek support for expanding their indigenous capacity to develop
and adopt such technology.
There is, of course, a vast quantity of technology which is noncom-
mercially held, and we have ongoing programs which seek to make
that available to the developing countries. On the other hand, tech-
nology of commercial value held by firms in the investing nations has a
value which these firms, understandably, do not wish to relinquish
without a return on their investment. Various ways by which this pri-
vately owned technology can be more easily transferred are under con-
sideration. The matter remains a significant and controversial issue.
Foreign direct investments are an important source of economic
resources and technology for the developing countries. Differing views
exist, however, on whether such investments are beneficial to the de-
veloping nations. For more than a year the U.N. Commission on Trans-
national Corporations has sought to elaborate a code of conduct within
which such corporations could operate to the satisfaction of both sides.
In the view of the developed world, private foreign investment repre-
sents one of the best and least political means by which transfers of
both capital and technology can be effected. And while the corporate
investors are willing to accommodate to demands for sharing of owner-
ship and management which will provide greater benefits and oppor-
tunities for the people of the countries involved, they must ask and re-
ceive some kind of assurance that, once having invested their capital,
the rules of the game will not be changed in ways which result in the
loss of their investment.
Political Issues
I have dwelt today upon the economic issues which are under con-
stant discussion between the developed nations of the North and the
developing countries of the South. When nations gather, increasingly
these are the concerns that trouble them most. And these concerns have
a direct impact on political relations which in turn can affect the climate
in which the economic issues are resolved. One soon finds that there is
no distinction between political and economic affairs when the liveli-
hood and security of nations is involved.
The strong efforts of the United States to resolve the problems in
the Middle East have a direct bearing upon our access to the vital re-
