200 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement I want you to know how tremendously helpful your letters are for the background and suggestions that they have contained, and I enor­ mously appreciate the time that I know that they have taken in your extremely harried life. Tell Herman that I certainly have noted his hand, and a very wise one it is indeed. My only regret is that he was not there to make it man­ ifest sooner as I have had a feeling that I have been required to back-up to a degree that is very difficult, particularly at this stage. However, as I let myself go sufficiently to say in my summary telegram today, I feel that I have been fairly successful. Speaking very frankly, I feel that I have been required to back-up a long way from the line taken in the Department’s 466, as well as the Department’s 492, particularly with respect to this question of “nationals”. I also have a feeling that we are becoming increasingly reluctant to recognize the implications of having agreed to these talks. I am thor­ oughly in sympathy with doing everything possible to avoid all the apparent pitfalls but believe it hard to maintain the fiction that two Ambassadors can discuss and decide on matters without agreeing thereto. As far as our position is concerned, I have tried to make my opinion very clear in my telegrams. I came here hoping and expect­ ing, particularly in view of Chou En-lai’s statement, that we were going to be able to obtain the reasonably prompt release of all Amer­ icans. I am now inclined to believe that we probably read more into Chou’s statement than we should have and that this never was their real intention. I am inclined to think that what Chou was saying was that the number of Americans is small and their problem is relatively easy to settle compared with the problem of the large number of Chi­ nese in the United States. Just as in the Korean armistice negotiations, they find it entirely impossible clearly to admit that any Chinese does not want to return to their Communist paradise. I also believe that there is a genuine inability to really understand the lack of restric­ tions upon return of Chinese from the United States. I therefore now believe that there has from the beginning and still continues to be a linkage between return of Chinese from the United States and our response to other efforts to “improve relations”. However, as I have previously said, I also believe they recognize that prisoners have reached the point of diminishing returns and that they cannot play this line too far. I would certainly not go so far as to say that they would never under any circumstances release all Americans simultaneously. (I believe that Wang was probably right in saying today that they regard a definite time period on the release of the remainder as being approximately
