United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  109
ETA–45.	
Memorandum of Conference With the President, by His 
Staff Secretary (Goodpaster)1

Washington, August 1, 1960.
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretaries Herter, Dillon, Anderson, Dr. Ralph Reid, General Goodpaster
Mr. Herter said he first wished to put before the President a memo-
randum2 concerning the proposed Latin American program setting out 
specific details more fully. The President read through the memoran-
dum. He then asked why the request was being made for $600 million. 
He had thought that the work of the program might, in large measure, 
be accomplished through use of the IADB, and that funds would go to 
expand the capital of the IADB. Mr. Dillon said that the other American 
countries would prefer not to have this program handled out of normal 
bank capital if it were handled through the bank, but would keep the 
money in a special fund. If the money is authorized, this is the kind of 
specific arrangement that would be worked out through the discus-
sions soon to be initiated.
Mr. Reid said that from the standpoint of the Director of the Bureau 
of the Budget,3 a simple resolution giving the sense and support of the 
Congress would be preferable to an authorization. He is concerned 
over the idea of the Administration submitting new proposals at a time 
when the Congress has taken actions impairing the President’s FY-1961 
budget surplus. Congress has already added about $1.6 billion to the 
budget. Losses of revenues, together with other costs foreseen, amount 
to an estimated $2.4 billion, bringing the total to about $4 billion out of 
an anticipated $4.2 billion surplus. He pointed out that the $600 million 
figure is no more than a guess, and will be very hard to justify before the 
Congress, lacking any documentation. He added that the Development 
Loan Fund has available substantial authorizations for which appro-
priations have not been sought. Mr. Dillon commented that he is not 
proposing that the Administration ask for appropriations at this time, 
but rather limit its request to an authorization.
Secretary Anderson said he would prefer not to have a spe-
cial Presidential message. He suggested that the State Department 
try to have this provision tacked on to a pending bill. The President 
suggested the possibility that he might send a letter to the State 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman Files, DDE Diaries. Secret. This memoran-
dum was prepared on August 10.
2 See Document ETA–44.
3 Maurice H. Stans.
