576
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Our humanitarian commitment is reinforced by the recognition
that it also serves our national self-interest to assist the process of equi-
table growth within the developing nations. We need to help shape an
international economic system which will support and stimulate that
growth.
Here on this Pacific rim, you know well a fact that is true for our
entire nation: that your prosperity and well-being depend on the in-
creasing prosperity and well-being of others throughout the world.
Some 75% of the Northwest’s wheat crop is sold on world markets.
Fully one-third of western Washington’s forest products economy is
dependent on those markets, and that dependence is increasing.
One dollar in eight in this State’s economy comes directly from in-
ternational trade. More than a quarter of a million jobs in Washington
and Oregon alone depend on exports.
Much of this trade, as you know, is with developing countries.
Four of the State’s 10 biggest export customers are developing coun-
tries. Seven of the State’s biggest sources of imports—imports without
which your economy could not function—are developing countries.
These countries of the Third World are increasingly involved in
our daily lives. We know how oil from these countries affects us. As a
nation, we also get more than 50% of the tin, rubber, and manganese we
need from less developed countries and substantial amounts of our
tungsten and cobalt. We now export more to the developing countries,
including the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, than to
the Common Market, Japan, and the Communist countries combined.
For example, almost one-half of our commercial aircraft sales abroad
are to developing nations.
So, as we survey and address questions of the evolving interna-
tional economic order, we do not do so on some abstract basis. We do
so as a matter of economic self-interest and, for some sectors of our
economy, of survival.
The participation of the developing countries is also essential to
solving pressing global problems that will shape the character of our
future. Inefficient and wasteful use of the Earth’s resources, pollution
of the oceans and atmosphere, nuclear proliferation, unchecked arms
competition, all of these involve the well-being and safety of the human
race. None can be solved without the involvement of the developing
nations.
Most countries of the Third World have too little food and rapidly
growing populations. We face the prospect of a population increase in
the final quarter of this century which will equal the entire growth of
world population from the birth of Christ to 1950. Roughly 90% of this
increase will be in developing countries. And perhaps more troubling,
