872
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
it had now come to an end in a nonsensational manner. I hoped that
Mosadeq’s appeal could be disposed of without too much attendant
publicity.
The Shah agreed with my optimism. He said his chief concern at
the moment related to charges of corruption. He thought in general that
the rumors of corruption were grossly exaggerated. Nevertheless, it
seemed to him that the Prime Minister should show a greater interest in
investigating charges of graft. General Guilanshah, who had been
acting informally as an inspector for the Prime Minister, had recently
informed the Shah that he had found evidences of corruption in the
Customs Department and in the Ministry of Roads but had been in-
structed by the Prime Minister not to press investigations just now. The
Prime Minister had taken the position that investigations of graft
charges at this particular moment might divert the public mind from
thinking of constructive measures which must be taken. The Shah on
his part thought that the disclosure and prosecution of graft would
strengthen the prestige of the Government and obtain for it a wider
measure of public support. The Shah said that it was his understanding
that the corruption which Guilanshah thought he had discovered had
been in existence for more than two years. I suggested that it might be a
good idea to set up some kind of administration headed by prominent
men of of unquestioned integrity whose duty it would be to check and
approve every important governmental transaction involving an ex-
penditure of considerable sums. The Shah agreed and said that he
thought a person such as Ebtahaj or Allah-Yar Saleh might be useful at
the head of an administration of this kind.
354.
Monthly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated.
IRAN
December 1953
A. General Developments
1. Relations between the Shah and Prime Minister Zahedi appear
to have improved during this month and opposition forces continue to
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO–IMS Files, Job 81–01061R, Box 3, Folder
2, The Current Report—December 1953. Top Secret.
