Arms Control and Disarmament  1427
getting it for ourselves? If you tell me that I am justified in making that 
assumption, I can rest assured that the essential defence interests of my 
country are sufficiently safeguarded.
I am sending you a separate message on the political consider­
ations which seem to me to arise on the timing and nature of any public 
statement on the results of the Geneva conference.
With warm regards,
Yours ever,
(Sgd.) Harold Macmillan
367.	 Message From Macmillan to Eisenhower1
London, August 20, 1958
My dear Friend,
My first reaction to your proposed statement was one of grave con­
cern. I will not pretend that I was not influenced to some extent by the 
technical side of the problem, to which I have referred. My concern on 
that account has now been dispelled. But I should like to make it plain to 
you that I was influenced almost as much by the political consideration 
which I set out in my second message. Two factors, in particular, weighed 
heavily with me. First, I thought it would be a profound mistake to con­
cede suspension without securing Russian acceptance of an international 
control system. Secondly, I was seriously apprehensive about de Gaulle’s 
reaction. On both these points I have been reassured by your messages 
of today. On the first, I think that Foster’s new draft is a great improve­
ment. Though, even now, I am not sure whether the Russians will accept 
a truly international system of control. If they should take the line that 
each country should man the control posts within its own territory, we 
shall not have achieved our essential purpose. I hope we shall both keep 
a careful eye on this. On the second, I would feel happier if I knew what 
de Gaulle himself was thinking. But I am relieved to know that Couve, at 
any rate, seems to be taking this quite quietly. I think that I must send the 
General a personal message about this just before the announcement is 
made. Perhaps you would consider whether you could do so too.
1 Source: Agrees to statement on cessation of nuclear testing. Secret. 2 pp. NARA, 
RG 59, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, Macmillan to Eisenhower.
