606
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
economy might spill into the social and political arena. This he is clearly
determined for now to avoid.
Ceausescu’s claim to pursue an independent policy is well founded.
In 1968, he publicly condemned the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslo-
vakia, thereby acquiring perhaps his greatest measure of personal pop-
ularity at home. He chose to maintain diplomatic relations with Israel
after the 1967 war when even Yugoslavia, following the Soviet lead
and Arab pressure, broke them off. And even more vigorously than
Tito, Ceausescu has pursued economic and political relations with most
of the world’s countries.
In substance, Ceausescu’s brand of foreign policy is the same as
Tito’s. Huddled across the Soviet Union’s land route to the Eastern
Mediterranean and the Adriatic, Romania and Yugoslavia are each
other’s most essential partners in foreign affairs. Both are intermittently
gripped by alternating fears of Yalta and the Cold War, of U.S.-Soviet
collusion and U.S.-Soviet collision.
Both countries therefore work for “participatory diplomacy” on a
global scale, for negotiations involving all states, great and small, in
peaceful settlement of disputes and especially in disarmament. They
are currently embarked, almost in tandem, on exchanges of high-level
visits with the U.S. and the PRC in recognition of the fact that the post-
Watergate and post-Mao period is over and that the preparation for
the post-Brezhnev period has begun in earnest. Their anxiety about
the direction the USSR might take after Brezhnev accounts for the
special efforts both have been making to shore up the bilateral and
multilateral framework of their independence in the European context.
At the very least, Ceausescu will come to Washington seeking
continuation of U.S. support for Romanian foreign policy independ-
ence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity, which has been consistent
through three Administrations. He will also bring a heavily economic
agenda, partly because Romania sees economic ties as a way of anchor-
ing political ties.2 However, his economic agenda also has a genuine
importance of its own in U.S.-Romanian relations, especially given his
drive to turn Romania into a more modern, competitive economy.
Ceausescu sees the U.S. as an enormously promising Western trading
partner, a rich source of modern technology, agricultural products,
industrial raw materials, as well as advanced management techniques.
There is bound to be a gap between what Ceausescu wants and
what we can give in the economic realm. He will be pressing for credits
at near-concessionary rates; multi-year most-favored-nation tariff sta-
tus (MFN); liberalization of U.S. export controls; and a stronger Admin-
2 Brzezinski highlighted the previous two sentences in the margin.
