Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Vance: At this time Congress will not raise any objections if we can claim that we will be stabilizing the area. Aaron: What exactly does the non-proliferation problem preclude? Vance: We can make no military credit sales, no economic assistance except for PL–480.5 Let’s now discuss the options for Pakistan. We can negotiate promptly with the PL–480 and I think we should. Vice President: Do we need to open up a fundamental dialogue with Pakistan? Vance: We did that last fall. Vice President: But our bag was empty then. Vance: We could go back with more offers, particularly in the area of military sales. That way we could engage them. Claytor: Their military was very interested when we talked to them. Aaron: Is there nothing we can do on nuclear policy? Brown: We can make a distinction between their present program and testing. Vance: We tried this. We were told that Zia would not test—at least for six months—that he cannot bind a successor. They also told us that they would continue developing their facilities. They did agree not to transfer sensitive technology or to develop a weapon. Aaron: Does that relate to India somehow? If they made a commitment would the Indians? Vance: Bilateral exchanges have always fallen through on this. Newsom: We haven’t asked each side not to test as long as the other didn’t. Anyway the legislation, absent of waiver, demands a stop to the enrichment program, not just testing. Some of us have thought about the “Dimona formula.” (I.e. not testing but purely having the capability to do so.) Turner: My Chief of Station in Pakistan says that in all of his discussions with the military they suggest a quiet deal to turn off the enrichment facility. It would be unpopular however if that leaked. We could however justify to Congress moving ahead in cooperation with Pakistan on grounds of the Afghan problem. Vance: We could also ask for a revision of the Symington Amendment but the President wouldn’t want to. 5 Public Law 480, signed into law by President Eisenhower as the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, provides U.S. Government financing of sales or donation of U.S. agricultural products to developing countries and/or private entities though congressional credits. Title I of the law provides for government-togovernment sales to developing countries on a grant program. Title II provides for direct donation of food by the U.S. Government. Title III provides for government-togovernment grants through the sales of donated food in the recipient country.
