themselves and that under influence of South American public good will
there would be no difficulty about the government’s local administration.
The government’s local expenses, he said, would be small; they could be
met, in part, no doubt, by the payment of some revenue by Bolivia as an
exchange for certain port facilities, and the local expenses would be
adequately taken care of by the regular port dues, which would be greatly
increased under independent administration.
The President stated that when the provinces were freed Tacna Province
would again become agriculturally productive, as it had been formerly, and
that its products would find a ready market. This production had decreased
greatly under present regime but would reappear once the provinces were
independent. I myself perceive no insurmountable difficulties in way of
such internationalization; in some respects it would be happiest solution. I
explained to President, however, that no matter how attractive such a
program might be, practical difficulties existed which might be
insurmountable in view of Chile’s refusal to accept that sort of plan.
President Leguía intimated that he was willing to enter into a compact of
peace, of demilitarization of the provinces, and trade or tariff reciprocity,
but from way he spoke of that feature of the matter it did not seem as
though he regarded it as of paramount importance. He suggested that an
international memorial should be made of the Morro, and he repeated that,
in spite of his earnest desire to see question settled, it would not be possible
to obtain consent of Peruvian people to assignment of city of Arica to Chile.
[End paraphrase.]
I urged the President, in view of the paramount importance of the matter
and of his profound knowledge of the situation, to give it his most earnest
attention and give me the benefit of any suggestions which might occur to
him as a basis of a practical settlement. He said that he would most gladly
do so at once and after thinking it over for a few days would call me to talk
it over with him again and added that he thought that we might work out
some settlement of the problem.
[Paraphrase.] In reply to your inquiry about amount Bolivia ought to pay for
a free port at Arica and possession of, or at least use of, a railroad corridor
to the Pacific, that is matter which necessarily must be subject to more or
