First Responses
113
incident. They employed such interrogation techniques as playing one
hostage against another, and telling them the U.S. had abandoned
them. While the hostages could not discern all the leaders or a chain
of command or fixed command post, there appeared to be a firm
leadership within the compound. The students would not identify who
was in charge when asked, but the Iranian who appeared to be the
chief interrogator claimed to have been trained by the PLO. He gave
his name as “Mehdi.” He claimed to have operated in the U.S. for the
PLO and also claimed to have been incarcerated in an Israeli jail for
three years for PLO activities. He claimed to be from the Isfahan area
and gave his PLO name as Abu Ali.
6. There were several religious leaders in the compound but none
appeared to play a leadership role. Khomeini’s son however played a
major part and reportedly visited the compound often; he had much
authority and was responsible for having Joan Walsh released from 36
hours of solitary confinement. The students stated firmly that they
would do whatever Khomeini told them.
7. The hostages believe that the remaining hostages will be freed
when Khomeini orders it.
8. All cryptographic equipment was reportedly destroyed in the
communication center. All files of the following offices were not repeat
not destroyed: DAO, Embassy Political Office, Ambassador’s suite, and
MAAG offices. The students highlighted the following documents:
—Precht/Laingen letter dated August 2, 1979, Secret “Eyes Only”
concerning ramifications of Shah’s entry into U.S.
—Airgram drafted by Mike Metrinko re sabotage of oil fields.
—RSO Golacinski’s report of counterfeit money in Iran which a
walk-in provided to RSO and was under investigation. The students
convoluted this report into a plot by the United States to destroy the
economy of Iran.
—Metrinko memcon with a relative of General Bolibzan, a figure
in Kurdistan whom the students feel is fomenting revolt there. [5 lines
not declassified] The students were extremely intent on identifying intel-
ligence personnel and claimed that those so identified would be
executed.
9. The students were defensive about being labeled terrorists. Dur-
ing the press conference at the Tehran airport, the Iranians appeared
concerned that the students were being portrayed as abusing the hos-
tages. The Iranians took pictures the first week, asking the hostages to
smile and look comfortable. The day the Pope’s emissary arrived was
the only day the women were untied all day and given a snack. When
