Chapter 6, June–December 1990 821 Baker: That’s what President Gorbachev said and I recall that. Shevardnadze: Yes, he said it that way and in a more general way at the end of the year at the press conference, I think he said that. Baker: In one of the private conversations, I know that Gorbachev said that it might take place at the end of the year or the beginning of the next. That’s what the President’s position is and the key is that he just doesn’t want us to be locked into a particular date right now. And I think we do want to say, as I said, that the meeting should be tied to the progress that we’re making on key issues. Anyway, let’s come up with something that we both can be satisfied with. Shevardnadze: Okay, let’s not complicate this. Let’s just say that our task here was not to set a date. And the time will depend upon the progress of concluding our agreements. Baker: Yes, that’s right. Now, why don’t we focus on Baker and Shevardnadze meetings. Shevardnadze: Yeah, that lends itself to better and more immediate solutions. Baker: We’ll see each other on September 12 in Moscow, that’s certain, that’s a Two-Plus-Four meeting. And I’d be available to meet with you all day on September 13, if you think that would be productive. On September 11, it’s my hope that the businessmen will have fifteen minutes with President Gorbachev and maybe with you and that we can come up with something concrete so that this is not just another meeting. I have some ideas, but they are not firmed up yet, and I think one of them we want to think about is be in a position where people are left behind to be able to work on specific problems. The next date I have is September 24th. And I thought you’ll be in New York for the UNGA, perhaps you can come down to Washington and we can work on some of the remaining START issues. In any case, we would meet in New York. The next date would be October 1 and 2 which is the CSCE ministerial that we’re hosting. Then I have a question mark in my own mind about when and where our next full blown ministerial ought to be. Shevardnadze: Well, first regarding the Moscow meeting. We can agree to the dates of September 11 and 13. We welcome the fact that you’ll be accompanied by Mosbacher and a couple of businessmen. But also we feel there ought to be some preparation before that meeting. I know that the President looks very much forward to that meeting and I just hope that it will be well-­prepared. Baker: Well, we will have two separate meetings with the businessmen and between us. Shevardnadze: Yes, I think with regard to the businessmen, they would meet with the President, you’d be a part of that meeting, and
