380
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
violations of human rights such as Chile, Nicaragua, South Africa, and
other countries (Ms. Derian added Argentina to the list), and these
cases violate concrete provisions of the UN Charter, the Human Rights
Declaration and other documents, and it is a vital concern for other
nations to take joint actions to insure that human rights are protected.
10. Ms. Derian stated that she finds the remarks of Mr. Nier very
interesting. On the question of peace, she stated that technology had
made our world very small and that we must all strive for peace. We
need good communications and understanding among nations and
that is why we are pleased to be able to discuss an important aspect
of our policy, one about which there is misunderstanding. Ms. Derian
stated that human rights is not the only policy of the United States, it
would be naive and arrogant if a country should base its policy on a
single concept. It would also be arrogant for a nation to believe that
it alone had the knowledge and ability to discuss issues relating to
human rights. That would mean that such a country had no right at
all. Such a policy would be suspect and dangerous. The world has
grown so small, people move so much today and ideas flow from one
country to another, that all nations are bound together through trade,
marriage, etc. We must consequently talk about human problems as
well as those relating to commercial, political and military issues. We
now have the framework in which we can discuss these problems
without anger or rancor.
11. Nier replied that he could agree with many of the points Ms.
Derian had made, it is a small world and because of technological,
economic and other developments, countries cannot exist by them-
selves and cooperation is necessary. Just because of the close intercon-
nection of nations, it is especially important to exercise the utmost
caution in relations among peoples. It is necessary to take into consider-
ation national differences and the rules that govern relations between
governments and peoples. We must be able to discuss these points
without giving offense to one another. We wish to be able to live
with nations with different systems. So long as there are nations with
different systems, we must try to live with one another.
12. Ms. Derian replied that this had nothing to do with human
rights: The GDR has its system, the US its own. Nier responded that
it is not sufficient only to take note of different systems but also to
respect them. We must take into account that each nation has a right
to self-determination.
13. Ms. Derian noted that in preparing to come to East Berlin, she
had been informed that the constitutions of the US and the GDR contain
many of the same provisions. She noted that she had become somewhat
of an expert on aspects of the Argentine constitution and this provides
for more rights than the constitution of either the GDR or the US. Nier
