692 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III In September, the Tripartite Advisory Committee, established in December 1977 pursuant to the report of the Steel Task Force (see Document 79), submitted its recommendations on the U.S. steel industry. On September 28, the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy, Stuart Eizenstat, and Domestic Policy Staff member Joshua Gotbaum sent Carter a draft response to the committee’s recommendations for his comments. Carter wrote on the draft response: “Basically ok—proceed—check any changes with me.” At the bottom of the first page of the response, he added: “Emphasize need to control inflation.” (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 283, Steel (CF, O/A 731) (3)) On September 30, Carter announced a revitalization program for the U.S. steel industry that reflected the recommendations of the Tripartite Advisory Committee. The program included provisions encouraging investment in industrial modernization, technological research and development, and compliance with environmental regulations, as well as assistance for dislocated workers and communities and the continuation of the Tripartite Advisory Committee. It also established a revised trigger price mechanism that would bring about the “expeditious investigation of unfair trade practices.” In his statement, Carter also announced that U.S. Steel would drop its anti-dumping suits. For the text of Carter’s statement on the steel revitalization program, as well as his remarks announcing the program, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book III, pages 1959–1969. 239. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, March 29, 1980 SUBJECT Possible French Proposal on Monetary Reform at the Venice Summit Giscard announced in November and again in January that he would offer a major proposal on monetary reform at the Venice 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 23, France: 4–5/80. Confidential. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page. The memorandum was sent to Carter under cover of an April 2 memorandum from Owen, who commented: “I agree with Cy’s conclusion: The French probably won’t have a proposal; and if they do it will probably be of a kind that will fit into our present plans. Art
