388 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement budget and what should not be in the budget, and at the same time put tight limits on the budget. However, I was shut up twice before I got the words out—­once by the President and once by Mr. McElroy, they each wanted to speak at that time. The end result was that the NSC meeting for today was called off and was established for 8:30 or 9:00 on Saturday. The Department of Defense is to reexamine the budget, complete. The Joint Chiefs, I sus­ pect, will be required to go over the other Services’ programs. Arleigh Burke 114. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, December 8, 1958, 11:15 a.m. The following items were discussed with the President: 1. I raised with him the question of a “debriefing” for the Planning Board members with respect to the NSC meeting on December 6 involv­ ing the Defense budget. I indicated to the President that I had a feeling that the regular debriefing process should not be followed in this case. He agreed. 2. I then took up with the President the Record of Actions of the meeting of the National Security Council on December 3. He approved it with the amendment suggested by Mr. Dillon and agreed to by Defense and the JCS. 3. I then took up the Record of Actions of the meeting of December 6. The President read it carefully and initialed it. I then pointed out to the President that even the language he had approved would per­ haps not be adequate guidance in the premises. I reported to him that there was not a clear and general agreement as a result of the Saturday meeting and that his statement in the Council perhaps would mean one thing to Defense and another thing to the Bureau of the Budget. I informed him that Defense and the BOB as far as I knew had not gotten together following the meeting on December 6 and that on the basis of a conversation with Mr. McElroy and Mr. Quarles I believed 1 Source: Department of Defense budget; detection of underground testing. Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up. Drafted on December 9.
