1026 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Summit in Jamaica (see Tab A).3 The Embassy clearly feels that the announcement of a four-power Summit to take place so soon after the Jamaica meeting will have an adverse effect on our bilateral ties with Jamaica and on the President’s relationship with Manley. In addition, we are concerned that, unless we take steps to alter the first impressions in Third World capitals of the Guadeloupe meeting, the fourpower Summit will affect negatively international perceptions of our North-South policies. (C) US-Jamaican relations have several aspects. Seen from one perspective, we could easily endure a worsening of relations with a small, developing island state. On the other hand, Jamaica exercises a weight in Third World forums out of proportion to its size. Although Henry Owen feels that, “We do not want to make Manley our chosen instrument for North-South dialogue,”4 we would argue that we will never be able to choose an entirely satisfactory interlocuter on North-South issues. The differences of perspective and real economic interests are too great between rich and poor countries for us to be entirely satisfied with anyone who emerges as a Third World spokesman. Manley, for all the drawbacks that his activism entails, does lead a democratic and progressive regime. He is, moreover, the only Caribbean leader with any prospect of competing for regional leadership with Fidel Castro, and his influence on events in the Caribbean could be substantial. Aesop’s fable of the stork-king5 should be borne in mind when we contemplate who else might come forward as a proponent of Third World interests. (C) 3 Not attached. When Manley invited Carter to a North-South summit in Jamaica (see Document 319), the Embassy in Kingston argued in favor of Carter’s attendance “on the grounds that: (1) only by attending can the U.S. affect the outcome of the meeting; (2) he could use the meeting to express U.S. concern for African issues; (3) he might be able to move Manley toward a more moderate stance in the North/South dialogue; and (4) the breakdown of the Committee of the Whole requires some action to improve the atmosphere of the North/South dialogue.” (Memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski, October 14; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Jamaica: Prime Minister Michael
