Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Senate action in light of the Soviet invasion and occupation of Afghanistan. I did not withdraw the treaty because I believe its ratification would be in the interest of the West, and I hope that circumstances will, in time, make it possible for me to request that the Senate proceed with action on the treaty. Further, I believe that it is important to continue our efforts in MBFR to reach agreement with the East which will lower military forces and tensions in Europe and to pursue vigorously our TNF arms control proposal. In my judgment we should also continue to participate in the CSCE process which if carefully managed promotes Western interests. However, I feel strongly that we would be making a grave error should we, in the interest of preserving an atmosphere of détente, attempt to separate developments in Southwest Asia involving the Soviet Union from the bilateral or multilateral relations which we have with the USSR. The process of détente can continue only if we, collectively and individually, make clear to the Soviet Union that actions such as its invasion and occupation of Afghanistan must have serious consequences for the Soviet Union in other areas of the world, including Europe. The Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan is simply not consistent with détente in Europe, and this must be made clear to the Soviet leadership. If Moscow does wish to pursue détente, then in the wake of Afghanistan it must give us evidence of such a desire. The most convincing confirmation of Moscow’s desire to retrace its steps back to policies consistent with the principles of détente would be an early and total withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. To this point, I regret to say that we have seen no evidence that that is Moscow’s intention and the continually growing USSR deployment in Afghanistan appears to us to suggest that the Soviet Army went to that small and defenseless country to stay. And in the light of other Soviet activities in the region—especially in Ethiopia and the Yemens—we would have to regard a prolonged Soviet occupation of Afghanistan as part of a calculated strategic thrust against the West’s vital interests. We have already noted a predictable tendency in the Soviet Union’s propaganda to try to divide the United States and Western Europe over the matter of Afghanistan. Indeed, I think we can expect the Soviets to launch a “peace offensive” in Europe in the near future. Moscow will undoubtedly hope that by offering various inducements to West European countries they can secure a “business-as-usual” approach by these countries, a tacit agreement to let concern about the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan fade away. I know that you will be particularly sensitive to this Soviet objective and will work with me and our colleagues from the other Western European countries to ensure that this Soviet aim is not realized.
