were not conducting an inquiry aimed to ascertain in advance how far each of us could go without war being brought on; instead, by agreeing to renounce war we were making possible thereafter the solution of actual difficulties, as they arose, along peaceful lines. War was still possible. Any nation knew how to bring war about, if it wanted war. We held the belief that if we signed the treaty we meant to maintain it, not break it; that a finespun investigation of all the ways by which it could or could not be broken was not helpful or advisable. To all this Chamberlain had no response to make except by manifesting an evident sense of uncertainty. He again referred to the commission of jurists, and said that by bringing them together he thought he was really forwarding the acceptance of the treaty. I inquired what on earth there was for the jurists to decide. The question was not juridical but political. No doubt each nation would examine its treaty obligations to ascertain whether or not the proposed treaty ran counter to them, just in the way Germany had done. Unless he had some questions of interpretation, I said, besides those that the French and Germans had raised, I frankly was unable to see what there was left to discuss. Chamberlain then said that he did not think that the German reply indicated that Government’s unconditional acceptance of the proposal. He had sent a cable to Stresemann asking him to hold back his answer until Chamberlain could discuss it with him, but that Stresemann had answered that the Government’s reply had been accepted by the German Cabinet and could not be delayed. Chamberlain added that in this reply he had been relieved to note that the position of the German Government was very much like that of the British. He disagreed completely with the modifications proposed by the French. He said that the whole situation had been cleared materially by your Washington speech. I then asked him what he thought the net result of your treaty, if it were accepted, would be in Europe. Would it turn out to be an additional bulwark to the work that had been accomplished at Locarno as well as to what the League of Nations had done in a more general way for safe-guarding the peace, or would it damage in some way what had been accomplished? Chamberlain unhesitatingly replied that of course it would strengthen what had been accomplished. I said that if that were true, I could not think of any nation with more to gain by coming out quickly and
