September 1953–December 1954
861
Minister Lord Salisbury be again transmitted to the Secretary of State,
the President, and other appropriate officials attending the Bermuda
meeting.
2. It will be remembered that, prior to the U.S. decision to under-
take our recent operation, this Government required from the highest
level of the British Government an assurance that the British conscien-
tiously desired and intended to reach an equitable oil settlement with
the new Persian Government, and that H.M.G. understood well that
such a settlement would have to be very carefully drawn up with an
eye to giving as much support as possible to the prestige of any Persian
Government agreeing to it.4
3. Such an assurance was received and on the basis of it, I was au-
thorized to make various statements conveying this British intention to
the Shah and to General Zahedi. My assurances on this score were ea-
gerly received.
4. In passing through London on my way back to Washington, I
had conversations with a number of top British officials including the
Acting Foreign Minister (as well as other members of the Foreign Of-
fice) and with Sir Winston Churchill. In each one of these conversations
I repeated the assurances which I had given on behalf of the British
Government to the Shah and to Zahedi. In each case I was told that my
statements were justified and properly presented, that the British fully
understood the necessity of reaching an oil settlement as rapidly as
possible, and that they were fully prepared to do so. Lord Salisbury
was most explicit in his words to the above effect, and the Prime Min-
ister was the most outspoken of all. He received me in bed at 10
Downing Street. In the course of a most cordial conversation he empha-
sized his strong feelings that everything possible to help this new Gov-
ernment should be done. There was some discussion as to whether it
would be more convenient if diplomatic relations should be restored
between Iran and Great Britain prior to discussion of an oil settlement,
but Sir Winston indicated that he did not think this was an important
issue. He said further that he would be perfectly prepared to give a cer-
tain amount of economic aid to the new Iranian Government even be-
fore the reestablishment of diplomatic relations. He commented that
the AIOC had really fouled things up in the past few years and that he
was determined that they should not be allowed to foul things up any
further.
5. A very brief written report on the above-mentioned conversa-
tions was transmitted by the State Department to the President while
he was in Colorado. Oral reports have, as you know, been given to the
4 Reference is to the paper British Ambassador Sir Roger Makins gave to Under Sec-
retary Smith, dated July 23; see Document 250.
