776
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Sadat said Hussein wants the West Bank for his United
Kingdom. I will tell in my speech why did he not form a Palestinian
state when he had it. His grandfather, Abdullah, agreed against every
code of morals. Whenever we stand together, all will come together. I
anticipate a Syrian change. An important fact is that no one opposes me
who has strong ground to stand in their own country. If Israel had not
lost the last fifteen months, things would be much better. It is my
theory that the peace process starts after the signing, not like Begin who
wants to get everything. We will bring the Israelis to something you
cannot imagine. In Jerusalem I said that 75% of the problem is psycho-
logical. We will give all of them psychological satisfaction. Do not fear
the scarecrows.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if there was anything we could do to help.
President Sadat said the economic and military aid is important. We
need 200 tanks with crew maintenance. We need surface-to-air mis-
siles. That will change the situation there and around the Bab al-
Mandeb when we give them to Somalia. In my speech I will call on
Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine and tell them that I am ready to
receive them in Al-Arish, which has been liberated. Are they ready to
take the cause in their own hands and fight? Egypt did and made
peace.
Dr. Brzezinski said that is a good idea—to build popular pressures.
Prime Minister Khalil said that he agreed with Dr. Brzezinski that
the Saudis would not boycott the country, but can boycott individual
firms. This will not happen in the near future since it must wait for the
normalization of relations and that is not imminent. He felt that we can
neutralize the members of the Arab League. The most will depend on
the outcome of the negotiations with Israel on the West Bank.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we are with you as is world public opinion.
Israel is now talking about survival and people listen to that. But when
they are talking about Palestinian rights, their right to vote, water
rights and such issues, it will be a different matter.
Prime Minister Khalil said that if we succeed in the West Bank nego-
tiations, I think our position will be strong. But if it drags on more than
a year . . .
President Sadat said I think we will succeed. It is in the interest of
Israel.
Dr. Brzezinski said that Mr. Begin does not see it that way. He is
suspicious about Gaza. It is only with some effort that those suspicions
were overcome.
President Sadat said what about the military, looking at General
Jones. I shall choke you in the Pentagon.
