“To the masters of the Republic of China. I am certainly gratified for the
welcome accorded me by all you gentlemen on my arrival. This time I have
not come to fight for a position for myself nor for power. I have come
especially to save the country in cooperation with you gentlemen. Thirteen
years ago I with all you gentlemen overthrew the Manchu Government. This
was done in order to obtain freedom and equality for the people of China but
the freedom and equality of the people of China had already been sold to the
different nations by the Manchu Government through the unequal treaties. As
a result we still occupy the position of a secondary colony. Therefore we
must save the nation. The principles involved in saving the country are
numerous and there are many methods. It will be very easy to accomplish it. I
had the intention of speaking to you gentlemen about these things in detail
but as I am now sick it will be best to defer this until I am well. I wish to
thank you for your kindness. (Signed) Sun Wen.”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6. Chief Executive issued mandate December 24th promulgating regulations for the
reorganization conference whose purpose is stated to be the solution of the complicated
situation and the discussion of constructive plans including the organization of a
second citizens’ conference, reforms of the military system, financial liquidation, et
cetera. This reorganization conference will, it is believed, be composed of militarists
and politicians and the scheme receives little popular support and arouses little interest.
Sun Yat-sen has made political capital for himself by demanding a popular conference
and is sending emissaries to the provinces to explain his views.
7. It is expected that Sun will now hold conferences directly or indirectly not only with
Chief Executive but also with Feng and the other leaders of the coup d’état and also
with Karakhan. Sun will want to be foremost and will not be particular about platform.
He would find great opposition if he should attempt to return to Canton.
 
Consul at Swatow telegraphed December 30th:
“December 30th, 9 a.m. Referring to my telegram of December 5, 3 p.m.
General Chen Chiung-ming resumed office on December 27 as commander
in chief [of] the Kwangtung armies promising to take field at once against
Red troops in Canton. Chen alleges he has been promised strong financial
support by the Cantonese merchants and has raised $400,000 locally. General
Lin Fu has apparently finally agreed to support campaign against Sun Wen
but it is believed his allegiance to Chen remains very doubtful. General Lin
reported to be opening hostilities against Sun forces in Kiangsi.”
