414 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Summary United States assistance in Costa Rica under the Mutual Security Program, in both its military and civilian phases, is primarily directed toward technical assistance. There is no grant aid program. There is at present only one loan project, which was provided under the “Smathers Amendment” appropriation. Most of the technical assistance is given under the auspices of the International Cooperation Administration and is civilian in nature, which is entirely in keeping with both our own objectives in Costa Rica as well as coinciding with Costa Rica’s own traditional boast of being a country “with more school teachers than soldiers”. Our civilian and military assistance programs are especially directed toward the U.S. objectives of (1) encouraging the growth of a healthy progressive economy based on the free enterprise system and (2) contributing to the maintenance of internal security and stability. The achievement of those objectives will, we believe, best serve to assure a close friendship and cooperation between our two countries in meeting and resolving the economic and political problems facing the United States in this Hemisphere and in the rest of the World. Special Objectives in Costa Rica Ambassador Willauer wishes to emphasize the following special aspects of our objectives in Costa Rica, which while of special significance in an evaluation of our MSA program in this country, still fall well within the general U.S. policy objectives. 1. Costa Rica: A “Pilot” Operation. Because of its demonstrated adherence to democratic principles and practices and because of the relatively high educational and cultural standards of its people, Costa Rica enjoys a prestige in Latin America out of all proportion to its diminutive size. What happens in Costa Rica has a special exemplary significance to other Latin American peoples who are striving toward a more democratic social and political system. Therefore, Costa Rica offers an excellent opportunity as the stage of a “pilot operation” which could well serve as the example and inspiration for a much broader scale application elsewhere in Latin America. Furthermore, its small size makes it possible for experimental and demonstration work to be done in Costa Rica at much less cost than in larger countries. Thus, our objective in Costa Rica goes much beyond the actual contribution we may make just to Costa Rica. The implications of our successes - or our failures - on this small stage will be immediately observed by a much larger audience in this Hemisphere who have their eyes trained on this little country. It should be our purpose to make the
