424 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 22. He stated that as he had previously pointed out, China has always advocated peaceful solutions of international disputes rather than recourse to force and that China is opposed threat or use of force to undermine sovereignty and territorial integrity of any state. He said that I had stated that US as member of UN agreed to refrain from threat or use of force in international relations. He stated that US by using force against China’s Taiwan has already broken principle of non-­ employment of force in international relations. 23. At approximately this point Wang abandoned his manuscript and continued extemporaneously. He said that mere statement of prin­ ciple cannot resolve tension in Taiwan area. Practical question is how US is going to implement principle by actual deeds. 24. He could not accept the way I had raised question of status of Taiwan. Taiwan is Chinese territory and this cannot be disputed. That question has been settled long ago. Taiwan is as much Chinese territory as New York is American territory and cannot be separated from China. 25. He said that I had on one hand proposed to make announce­ ment regarding renunciation of use of force. On other hand, I had openly made a statement this morning concerning justice of use of force by US in Taiwan area. If such American use of force is justifiable one is bound to question significance of Cairo Declaration, of Potsdam Agree­ ment on which signature of US President is affixed, of public statements by American Presidents, and of UN Charter stipulations. If American use of force against Taiwan is justified, what was meaning of resistance against Japanese aggression. If American use of force against Taiwan is termed justified we are bound to say it is making farce of normally accepted standards of international law. 26. Wang stated that he also wished to say frankly that US armed occupation of Taiwan is not merely threat to security of China but also threat to security and peace in Far East. Chinese people consistently advocated peaceful settlement of international disputes and opposed settlement by force, but they will never yield to threat of force and will never recognize status quo. 27. He said that examples of divided nations that I had cited can never explain or justify American armed occupation of Taiwan. 28. He said that chief cause of tension lies in fact that US used force in the area. Such use of force greatly threatens China and other con­ tries in that area. That was why it was necessary to carry on talks here. Purpose of talks is to improve relations between China and US and to ease tense situation in Far East. He said that if as proposed by China US applies principle of non-­recourse to force and withdraws its armed forces from Taiwan area, then it would not only improve relations between our two countries, but at same time greatly reduce tension in that part of world.
