Afghanistan 417 145. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State and the White House1 Islamabad, January 5, 1980, 1615Z 79. Dept pls repeat to New Delhi and others as desired. Dept Subject: (S) Afghanistan Reaction: President Zia’s 5 Jan. Discussion With Ambassador. 1. (S) Entire text; strictly protect foreign government information. This is an action message. 2. President Zia ul-Haq called me in to his residence at 1730 on 5 January for a chat; with him were Foreign Advisor Agha Shahi, Foreign Secretary Shahnawaz (both of whom I had seen earlier in the day), and MFA notetaker Farooq Rana. A/DCM Hagerty accompanied me. 3. Subject was Afghanistan, which Zia said he and his advisors had been discussing and would be examining further in next few days when Pak Ambs in Moscow and Kabul would be back in town for meetings. Events of 27 January [December], he said, constitute a fateful “moment in history as far as Pakistan is concerned.” And Pakistan faces “decision which direction to take.” He recapped other major decisions Pakistan had taken during last 32 years, touching on decision to sign 1954 agreement with us,2 to enter Baghdad Pact/CENTO, to join SEATO, then to leave those alliances, and to join with the Non- Aligned Movement. Most of these decisions related to Pakistan security considerations, and Pakistan took its decisions to suit its perception of what circumstances and its best security interests required. 4. Now, he said, Pakistan “stands at threshold of decision with only two options: it can either toe the Soviet line, or it can again line up with the Free World. And if the latter, the question is who will support Pakistan and in what magnitude?” 5. He said he “had been pleasantly surprised” by President Carter’s very timely telephone call.3 He said he had told Carter that Pakistan had come to feel that U.S. did not “care for this region . . . that you’d written us off.” He appreciated President Carter’s assessment that a 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Daily CIA Brief File, Box 24, 1/1/80–1/6/80. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room. In the upper right corner, Carter wrote: “Cy, Zbig: Pak←U.S. Commitments should be spelled out clearly & approved personally by me. C.” 2 The United States-Pakistan Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement was signed in Karachi, May 19, 1954. (Department of State Bulletin, May 31, 1954, pp. 850–851) 3 See Document 111.
