Eastern Europe Region 107 37. More recently, Zhivkov has traveled to Africa and promoted Bulgarian relations with selected African countries in an effort to further Soviet aims in Africa. Finally, there are indications that the Bulgarians have sought to improve their relations with Albania—again acting as a Soviet proxy. 38. Party leader Zhivkov’s long tenure in office and his close relationship with the Kremlin have been accompanied by the appearance of a stable regime—perhaps in some respects the most stable in Eastern Europe over the past 20 years. Intellectual dissidence—in contrast to Czechoslovakia, Poland, GDR, and, even, Romania—has been minimal and easily controlled. There has been no worker unrest of significance and political factionalism has not threatened Zhivkov’s position. However, Zhivkov has recently carried out changes in the Party and State leaderships which might have been motivated in part by real or potential opposition to his policies. More likely, these changes were carried out to improve economic performance and efficiency and to install younger, more vigorous leaders. Until recently, the Bulgarian leadership was one of the oldest in Eastern Europe. CZECHOSLOVAKIA 39. Since 1969, in order to accommodate Moscow, the Czechoslovak regime has been one of the most internally repressive and externally sycophantic in Eastern Europe. Under the close aegis of Moscow, Czechoslovak leaders have been carrying out the most widespread purges in Czechoslovak Party history and maintained tight controls over all aspects of Czechoslovak life—including punitive measures against political/human rights dissidents who sought to have the regime honor its commitments to the CSCE Final Act. The Prague regime’s domestic repressions at times seem to be an embarrassment to other East European regimes and even the Soviets in their relations with the West. Although both the Soviet and Czechoslovak leaderships reportedly have considered alternative courses of action to present hardline policies in Czechoslovakia, there are no indications that these policies will be modified. Realization of its vast unpopularity has made the Czechoslovak regime even more unimaginative and reluctant to undertake independent action (such as meaningful reform to improve the economy). It has, as a result, followed the Soviet foreign policy line wherever possible in order to prove its loyalty to Moscow. Perhaps more than any other regime in Eastern Europe, Prague has tried to buy political apathy through outright concessions to material wants (e.g., weekend cottages, travel abroad, automobiles). 40. Soviet domination of Czechoslovakia appears virtually complete, with the Prague leadership at times more subservient in following Soviet foreign policy than even Moscow would seem to wish.
