164
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and reliability of information) in each country under consideration by
the Inter-Agency Group so that all of its members can participate with
full knowledge in arriving at decisions on each proposed loan. Knowl-
edge of the specific human rights situation in each country is also im-
portant for our Executive Directors in the IFIs so that they can intelli-
gently discuss the reasons for the U.S. positions with EDs of other
countries, and with the managements of the Banks. (Our ED in the
World Bank was placed in a difficult situation when other Directors
questioned the validity of our view on Benin.) We should also have
written copies of the proposed instructions for demarches to countries
being approached in connection with human rights matters.3
On (2) above, we need a specific set of human rights criteria
against which to formulate decisions on proposed loans to violating
countries and to measure changes in their human rights situations. In
this connection, Secretary Vance’s speech of April 30, on human rights
policy4—while useful—was too broad in scope for the purposes of the
Inter-Agency Group. It seems to me we need to have specific criteria so
that we can be absolutely clear on the type of actions to which we ob-
ject, and on specific corrective measures we want to see taken before we
alter our position on a particular IFI loan or loans.
On the matter of systematic and timely consultation with other
countries, we found at the IDB Annual Meeting in Guatemala that a
number of IFI donor countries were receptive to our general human
rights position; they felt, however, that in applying our human rights
policy to IFI loans we were taking a unilateral approach and were
3 In telegram 117008 to Cotonou, May 20, the Department indicated that the U.S.
Executive Director of the IBRD would be instructed to refrain from the May 24 vote on
the IDA loans for Benin “because of our concern for human rights conditions in that
country, particularly arbitrary arrests and imprisonment.” The Department instructed
the Embassy to de´marche the Beninese prior to the May 24 action. (National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770180–1025) In telegram 916 from Cotonou, May 25, the
Embassy reported that the Charge´ made the de´marche. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D770186–1008) In telegram 920 from Cotonou, May 26, the
Charge´ expressed frustration that the Embassy had not been consulted or allowed to con-
tribute to the IGHRFA decision concerning the abstention, adding that while “Benin’s
record on human rights is far from laudable,” many of the political arrests had been
linked to a January 16 mercenary attack on Cotonou. He concluded, “I believe that Benin
should indeed be taken to task for its violations of human rights but I think the timing
and the nature of the measures involved will greatly determine whether our actions will
have the desired or the opposite effect. Even if our views on the subject were rejected we
would at least have appreciated the opportunity to have our voice heard.” (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770189–0444) In telegram 998 from Cotonou,
June 9, the Embassy reported that it was in the process of revising telegram 926, the “tone
and content of which were heavily influenced by the fact that it was written 10 days after
mercenary attack and at time when post-coup security measures were at their most strin-
gent. Situation showing some signs of improvement.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770205–1186)
4 See Document 39.
