1204 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI Defense AID Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan Governor John Gilligan Mr. David McGiffert Mr. Alexander Shakow Assistant Secretary for Assistant Administrator for International Security Affairs Program and Policy Coordination JCS Lt. General William Smith White House Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski CIA Admiral Stansfield Turner NSC [name not declassified] Mr. Reginald Bartholomew Acting Assistant NIO for Dr. Samuel Huntington Special Studies Mr. Robert Putnam Energy Dr. Donald Kerr Acting Assistant Secretary for Defense Programs It would be desirable to develop for a possible Presidential address at SSOD a generalized statement of ten-year disarmament goals, particularly stressing a gradual scaling down of Soviet and American strategic forces, with provision for participation by other nuclear powers in the later phases of this process. However, it is not appropriate at this point to include specific numerical targets, because there is not time to complete the necessary staffing and consultations before SSOD. The SALT Interagency Working Group is asked to develop over the next several months a series of specific targets as a framework for considering future steps in strategic arms control. This Administration has compiled a strong record in the field of arms control, and some participants thought it possible that a Presidential address could be crafted that would recount this record and add some new elements or initiatives, without outlining a full-fledged Ten- Year Program. It was agreed that any US address at SSOD should refer to NATO and to the complementarity between arms control and defense policy, both contributing to national security. The meeting considered six specific possible US initiatives at SSOD.2 The proposal on stabilizing measures was approved. The proposal on ACIS was disapproved. The proposal on peaceful nuclear cooperation was approved, subject to consultations with OMB and Congress. (It will be necessary to resolve a few details involving the funding of fuel cycle services and the working of Ex-Im preference for NPT parties.) 2 The six initiatives are summarized in a May 4 memorandum from Huntington and Putnam to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 118, Special Session on Disarmament:
