1204
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Defense
AID
Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan
Governor John Gilligan
Mr. David McGiffert
Mr. Alexander Shakow
Assistant Secretary for
Assistant Administrator for
International Security Affairs
Program and Policy
Coordination
JCS
Lt. General William Smith
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
CIA
Admiral Stansfield Turner
NSC
[name not declassified]
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
Acting Assistant NIO for
Dr. Samuel Huntington
Special Studies
Mr. Robert Putnam
Energy
Dr. Donald Kerr
Acting Assistant Secretary
for Defense Programs
It would be desirable to develop for a possible Presidential address
at SSOD a generalized statement of ten-year disarmament goals, partic-
ularly stressing a gradual scaling down of Soviet and American stra-
tegic forces, with provision for participation by other nuclear powers in
the later phases of this process. However, it is not appropriate at this
point to include specific numerical targets, because there is not time to
complete the necessary staffing and consultations before SSOD. The
SALT Interagency Working Group is asked to develop over the next
several months a series of specific targets as a framework for consid-
ering future steps in strategic arms control.
This Administration has compiled a strong record in the field of
arms control, and some participants thought it possible that a Presiden-
tial address could be crafted that would recount this record and add
some new elements or initiatives, without outlining a full-fledged Ten-
Year Program. It was agreed that any US address at SSOD should refer
to NATO and to the complementarity between arms control and de-
fense policy, both contributing to national security.
The meeting considered six specific possible US initiatives at
SSOD.2 The proposal on stabilizing measures was approved. The pro-
posal on ACIS was disapproved. The proposal on peaceful nuclear co-
operation was approved, subject to consultations with OMB and
Congress. (It will be necessary to resolve a few details involving the
funding of fuel cycle services and the working of Ex-Im preference for
NPT parties.)
2 The six initiatives are summarized in a May 4 memorandum from Huntington
and Putnam to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 118, Special Session on Disarmament:
2–5/78)
