September 18–December 16, 1978
251
selves but as beginning of a process which I was convinced would lead
ultimately to a solution which would meet Arab objectives.
Vance
67.
Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat1
Washington, September 25, 1978
Dear Mr. President:
I have asked Ambassador Eilts to convey to you my warmest
greetings.2 Once again, let me express my deep admiration for the
courage and statesmanship you showed at Camp David.
The task we now face is to translate the Framework documents
into a negotiating process which can quickly resolve the remaining
issues in Sinai, while also setting in motion the first stages of the agree-
ment on the West Bank and Gaza. Ambassador Eilts will discuss with
you my views on how some of the contentious issues in Sinai might be
best resolved. You can be assured that I remain ready to lend my full
support to the successful conclusion of the Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty.
To this end, I would like to emphasize my strong belief that the
talks on Sinai should begin without delay following the Knesset vote.
Immediately after the Knesset has approved3 the Camp David agree-
ments, it might be desirable for General Gamasy to meet with Minister
Weizman in Washington to discuss with me the Sinai security arrange-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 11, Egypt: 9–12/78. No classification marking. At the
end of the letter, Carter added the handwritten notation: “Best wishes. I would like to see
a peace treaty in a few days of negotiations—not a few weeks. J.”
2 Eilts delivered the letter to Sadat on September 28. At Carter’s request, Eilts raised
three additional points with the Egyptian President during their meeting. First, Eilts sug-
gested that Gamasy be sent to Washington for the upcoming Sinai negotiations. Second,
he asked Sadat to appoint some Palestinian representatives to serve as “advisers” to the
Egyptian delegation. Third, Eilts raised the possibility of granting Israel overflight rights
in Sinai. (Telegram 21796 from Cairo, September 28; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P850067–2151)
3 The Knesset voted to approve the Camp David Accords and the dismantling of Is-
raeli settlements in the Sinai Peninsula on September 28, 1978. The vote was 84 in favor,
19 against and 17 abstentions. (Dial Torgerson, “Knesset Approves Begin’s Mideast Peace
Agreement,” Los Angeles Times, September 29, 1978, p. B1)
