616 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Ambassador Owen Mr. Prime Minister, I would like to say a word of appreciation for Mr. Miyazaki6 who helped us draft the communique, as well as Mr. Owada who has been of great assistance in our progress on the procurement issue. I turn now to the Summit. First, I’ll deal with energy. The recent energy pre-Summit group dealt with two issues: 1) whether the Summit countries could go beyond the IEA pledges and seek further restraint beyond 1980; 2) increase production of alternative forms of energy. We discussed increased cooperation in research and development. Second, we discussed a proposal of Mr. Solomon’s to create an international corporation to finance efforts beyond research; 3) to create a Coal Advisory Board which would advise governments in efforts to develop a world coal system. On macro-economic policy. While you were meeting with the President, a group chaired by Charlie Schultze was meeting in London.7 They are focusing their efforts on: 1) short term policies, particularly growth and inflation. There the focus is on inflation in the U.S. and growth in Germany and Japan. 2) deepseated structural problems such as investment problems in the U.S. and productivity in all developed countries. The third and final subject is North/South relations. 1) increased cooperation among Summit nations and developing nations in research and development for economic progress; 2) to help LDC’s develop alternative energy sources 3) in regard to food, we will seek: a) to conclude successful negotiations for an international wheat reserve agreement supported by a concurrent buildup of national stocks; b) emphasis on fulfilling obligations under the food aid convention; c) use of IBRD consortium to expand R&D in world production; d) attention to how we can expand the flow of developmentfinancing resources to offset the increased reflow of repayments from earlier assistance. 6 Japanese Deputy Foreign Minister for Economic Affairs Hiromichi Miyazaki. 7 Telegram 116432 to Tokyo, Bonn, London, Ottawa, Rome, Paris, and Brussels, May 8, summarized the May 2–3 meeting in London, called “to prepare an economic overview paper for the Tokyo Summit.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790169–1907)
