Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
205
For example, Moscow provides petroleum to Havana at a substantial
discount and pays the Cubans five times the world price for sugar.
The net effect is a direct lowering of the standard of living of Soviet
citizens.2 (C)
I believe that for foreign policy reasons it is very important to get
this message across to your many VOA listeners, and would therefore
appreciate receiving, by c.o.b. October 5, assurances from ICA that this
theme is being given the attention it deserves in your broadcasts. (U)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 On October 12, Brement notified Brzezinski that Reinhardt had not yet responded
to his October 1 memorandum and suggested a follow-up reminder. In an October 15
memorandum to Reinhardt, Aaron added that the NSC had received “a reliable intelli-
gence report stating that many Soviet citizens in high positions within the Party were
‘griping about Soviet foreign aid and foreign involvement’” and “resent it for what they
see as its negative impact on the quality of life in the USSR.” (Ibid.)
67.
Editorial Note
On November 14, 1979, the Department of State sent telegrams
to Bonn, Moscow, and all Eastern European posts regarding recent
discussion on Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty asset relocation
from Europe to the United States. The Board for International
Broadcasting authorization bill for fiscal year 1980 had been amended
in the Senate to require the Board to study possible relocation of
staff from Munich to the United States under 50, 25, and 10 percent
scenarios. The Department informed the posts of the conclusions of
the Board’s study. The 50 percent scenario, the Board concluded,
would be “severely damaging to the unique character of RFE/RL”
and would be particularly true for the Eastern European language
services. The Board found even a 25 percent scenario, in which the
Eastern European services would be moved to the United States,
prohibitively damaging to the quality of programming, as “these
services are most dependant on close interaction with their audi-
ences.” A 25 percent scenario in which Radio Liberty would be
moved to the United States was found to undo programmatic gains
achieved by the ongoing consolidation of the two Radios. Finally,
a 10 percent scenario in which part of Radio Liberty—either the
