1018 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI We do not yet have an account of the Vice President’s discussions with Schmidt.) We wish to discuss with you a range of possibilities for meeting Brazil’s legitimate energy needs, without incurring proliferation risks. One possibility we would be prepared to consider is a guarantee, within the context of FRG supply of nuclear reactors, of the nuclear fuel needed for Brazil’s full economic development, if this would help defer indefinitely the enrichment and reprocessing elements of the contract. —This approach would not require abrogation of your contract with the FRG, but would be based on joint agreement between the parties concerned. —This is not a concern focused on Brazil; it is a global issue. We recognize that we both share a strong non-proliferation interest and we support Brazil in its desire to expand and diversify its energy sources. Our concern is rather with the global implications of any precedentsetting transfer of sensitive nuclear technology. As you will recognize, the approach we suggest would meet both your economic and our mutual non-proliferation interests. —As you know, this administration is approaching the proliferation question in all its aspects including the need for greater efforts on the part of nuclear weapons states. This balanced view is the context in which we are seeking indefinite deferral of the enrichment and reprocessing projects. (If asked: We will pursue our concerns about the Pakistani reprocessing project with both France and Pakistan.4 The Administration views all such transfers in the same light, and attaches the highest importance to finding acceptable alternatives.) —On the broader question of our relationships, we would welcome the GOB’s views on how and when we might move ahead on consultations covering the full range of issues of mutual interest. I am inclined to believe that it might be useful to begin promptly with at least some of the existing sub-groups, but I do hope to meet with you when our respective calendars can be clarified. —I would have no objection if the GOB wished to convey the flavor of my written message above to the press. I would prefer that any public references to the nuclear issue be confined to our willingness to consult at an authoritative level in an effort to acquaint the GOB with our perspectives and to seek better understanding of the Brazilian position. 4 In April 1974, France agreed to supply a nuclear fuel reprocessing plant in Pakistan.
