1018
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
We do not yet have an account of the Vice President’s discussions with
Schmidt.)
We wish to discuss with you a range of possibilities for meeting
Brazil’s legitimate energy needs, without incurring proliferation risks.
One possibility we would be prepared to consider is a guarantee,
within the context of FRG supply of nuclear reactors, of the nuclear fuel
needed for Brazil’s full economic development, if this would help defer
indefinitely the enrichment and reprocessing elements of the contract.
—This approach would not require abrogation of your contract
with the FRG, but would be based on joint agreement between the
parties concerned.
—This is not a concern focused on Brazil; it is a global issue. We
recognize that we both share a strong non-proliferation interest and we
support Brazil in its desire to expand and diversify its energy sources.
Our concern is rather with the global implications of any precedent-
setting transfer of sensitive nuclear technology. As you will recognize,
the approach we suggest would meet both your economic and our mu-
tual non-proliferation interests.
—As you know, this administration is approaching the prolifera-
tion question in all its aspects including the need for greater efforts on
the part of nuclear weapons states. This balanced view is the context in
which we are seeking indefinite deferral of the enrichment and repro-
cessing projects.
(If asked: We will pursue our concerns about the Pakistani repro-
cessing project with both France and Pakistan.4 The Administration
views all such transfers in the same light, and attaches the highest im-
portance to finding acceptable alternatives.)
—On the broader question of our relationships, we would wel-
come the GOB’s views on how and when we might move ahead on con-
sultations covering the full range of issues of mutual interest. I am in-
clined to believe that it might be useful to begin promptly with at least
some of the existing sub-groups, but I do hope to meet with you when
our respective calendars can be clarified.
—I would have no objection if the GOB wished to convey the
flavor of my written message above to the press. I would prefer that
any public references to the nuclear issue be confined to our will-
ingness to consult at an authoritative level in an effort to acquaint the
GOB with our perspectives and to seek better understanding of the Bra-
zilian position.
4 In April 1974, France agreed to supply a nuclear fuel reprocessing plant in
Pakistan.
