1955  609
of no further releases prisoners until “relations improved” by at least 
resumption discussion under agenda item two.
3. It therefore seems to me one question we face is whether on one 
hand we attempt enlarge area of maneuver or respond any attempt by 
Wang do so, or on other hand whether we desire push them further into 
corner even at risk full deadlock. Full repetition my line last meeting 
with emphasis on their failure implement will push them further into 
corner. On other hand it may be possible maintain and enlarge area of 
maneuver by putting emphasis my regret on damage atmosphere talks 
their public statement and impediment to confidence created by their 
hidden reservations on September 10 announcement.
4. I am inclined think that if meeting held December 22 Wang may 
attempt force my hand on discussion renunciation force draft in effort 
better establish basis for public position of charging us with “stalling”. 
In response I could follow either foregoing lines but believe latter line 
would be more productive.
Gowen
421.	 Letter 19 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 19
Geneva, December 16, 1955
Dear Walter:
I have neglected writing you the past few weeks, on the one hand, 
because I felt that I have covered matters very thoroughly in my tele­
grams, and, on the other, since the necessity of my returning to Prague 
each week because of the negotiations I have going on up there has left 
me little time after getting out my telegrams.
I know that in some of my messages I posed some really hard 
and possibly unanswerable questions at this time, but I, nevertheless, 
wanted you all to know what was worrying me and that I did appreci­
ate answers to the extent that they could be made.
As I have indicated in my telegrams, I have had serious doubts 
about the efficacy of the course I have been asked to pursue the past 
two meetings, but I have, nevertheless, tried to do my best in carrying 
out the instructions I have received. Very frankly, while we have been 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
