Chapter 2, January–June 1989 145 Option 1. is supported by: State, ACDA, OSD, Amb. Rowny and the Defense & Space Negotiator. (S) 2. Negotiate a new space-­testing proposal. This would entail negotiating an agreement with the Soviets based on the space testing initiative described above. However, it would apply to testing of all space-­based weapons systems whether or not they are OPP: In order to ensure that the testing of space-­based ABM interceptor missiles or components capable of substituting for ABM interceptor missiles does not represent the deployment of such components, the United States proposes that the Parties confine such testing to designated ABM test satellites. Any platform based in space from which an ABM interceptor missile or a component capable of substituting for an ABM interceptor missile is tested to counter a strategic ballistic missile or its elements in flight trajectory, shall be designated an an ABM test satellite. Further, the number of designated ABM test satellites orbited simultaneously by either side shall not exceed X. (S) Those who support this option argue that despite some progress on the Predictability Protocol and hints of maneuver room on the sensor proposal, a unilateral testing assurance does not provide a common U.S.-Soviet understanding of what is and is not allowed during the non-­withdrawal period, and would constrain the U.S. without constraining the Soviets. They argue that this lack of understanding is a product of the still ambiguous Washington Summit Joint Statement phrase “ . . . while conducting their research, development, and testing as required, which are permitted by the ABM Treaty.” They believe that negotiating reciprocal space-­based testing constraints and allowances is the best mechanism for clarifying that ambiguity. They also argue that reaching agreement on the text of the current Defense & Space Treaty including the testing assurance would merely constitute Soviet recognition of unilateral U.S. space testing constraints and would in no way impose similar constraints on the Soviets. Without a negotiated space-­ based testing limit, they argue, the Soviets could abide by the proposed reciprocal notification provisions while conducting unconstrained testing and still perhaps deploy under the guise of that testing. Finally, they argue that such an approach would obviate the OPP vs. non-OPP dilemma, likely enhance the probability for Congressional ratification and allay Allied concerns about potential strategic imbalances. (S) This option is supported by the JCS (S) Future Work. Additional options for assuring U.S. testing rights during a specified period of non-­withdrawal (e.g. differentiated periods of testing restrictions during the non-­withdrawal period under restrictive, broad, or broader-­than-­broad interpretations of the ABM Treaty or pursuit of the Soviet “list” proposal) were considered, but not included in the paper because no agency believes that such options would be possible to analyze thoroughly before we return to the negotiations
