Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976 35 reduced in a manner that impairs the security of neither.7 The requirement of balanced reductions complicates negotiations, but it is an important requirement for the maintenance of security in Europe. Similarly, in the SALT talks, we must seek significant nuclear disarmament that safeguards the basic interests of both sides. Let me say something I have often said in recent months. East- West relations will be both cooperative and competitive for a long time to come. We want the competition to be peaceful, and we want the cooperation to increase. But we will never seek accommodation at the expense of our own national interests or the interests of our allies. Our potential adversaries are intelligent people. They respect strength; they respect constancy; they respect candor. They will understand our commitment to our allies. They will listen even more carefully if we and our allies speak with a common resolve. We must remember, too, that a genuine spirit of cooperation between the democracies and the Soviet Union should extend beyond a negative cessation of hostilities and reach toward joint efforts in dealing with such world problems as agricultural development and the population crisis. The great challenge we Americans confront is to demonstrate to the Soviet Union that our good will is as great as our strength until, despite all the obstacles, our two nations can achieve new attitudes and new trust, and until, in time, the terrible burden of the arms race can be lifted from our peoples. One realistic step would be to recognize that thus far, while we have had certain progress on a bilateral basis, we have continued to confront each other by proxy in various trouble spots. These indirect challenges may be potentially more dangerous than face to face disagreements, and at best they make mockery of the very concept of de´tente. If we want genuine progress, it must be at every level. Our democracies must also work together more closely in a joint effort to help the hundreds of millions of people on this planet who are living in poverty and despair. We have all seen the growth of North-South tensions in world affairs, tensions that are often based on legitimate economic grievances. We have seen in the Middle East the juncture of East-West and North- South conflicts and the resultant threat to world peace. The democratic nations must respond to the challenge of human needs on three levels. 7 Nixon and Brezhnev first proposed the desirability of mutual and balanced force reductions (MBFR) during the SALT negotiations in 1972. The first meeting took place in Vienna in October 1973. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIX, European Security, Documents 340–371.
