Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
35
reduced in a manner that impairs the security of neither.7 The require-
ment of balanced reductions complicates negotiations, but it is an im-
portant requirement for the maintenance of security in Europe.
Similarly, in the SALT talks, we must seek significant nuclear dis-
armament that safeguards the basic interests of both sides.
Let me say something I have often said in recent months. East-
West relations will be both cooperative and competitive for a long time
to come. We want the competition to be peaceful, and we want the co-
operation to increase. But we will never seek accommodation at the expense
of our own national interests or the interests of our allies.
Our potential adversaries are intelligent people. They respect
strength; they respect constancy; they respect candor. They will under-
stand our commitment to our allies. They will listen even more care-
fully if we and our allies speak with a common resolve.
We must remember, too, that a genuine spirit of cooperation be-
tween the democracies and the Soviet Union should extend beyond a
negative cessation of hostilities and reach toward joint efforts in
dealing with such world problems as agricultural development and the
population crisis.
The great challenge we Americans confront is to demonstrate to
the Soviet Union that our good will is as great as our strength until, de-
spite all the obstacles, our two nations can achieve new attitudes and
new trust, and until, in time, the terrible burden of the arms race can be
lifted from our peoples.
One realistic step would be to recognize that thus far, while we
have had certain progress on a bilateral basis, we have continued to
confront each other by proxy in various trouble spots. These indirect
challenges may be potentially more dangerous than face to face dis-
agreements, and at best they make mockery of the very concept of
de´tente. If we want genuine progress, it must be at every level.
Our democracies must also work together more closely in a joint
effort to help the hundreds of millions of people on this planet who are
living in poverty and despair.
We have all seen the growth of North-South tensions in world af-
fairs, tensions that are often based on legitimate economic grievances.
We have seen in the Middle East the juncture of East-West and North-
South conflicts and the resultant threat to world peace.
The democratic nations must respond to the challenge of human
needs on three levels.
7 Nixon and Brezhnev first proposed the desirability of mutual and balanced force
reductions (MBFR) during the SALT negotiations in 1972. The first meeting took place in
Vienna in October 1973. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIX, European Security,
Documents 340–371.
