500.A15/646: Telegram
[Document 202]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 28, 1928—1 p.m.
23. Your No. 14, February 27, 4 p.m. The suggestions contained in your
despatch No. 202 [209?] and in letters to Marriner10 on the subject of the
course to be followed by the American delegation at the forthcoming
meeting of the Preparatory Commission have been carefully considered by
me with the result that it appears wiser, by reason of developments which
have taken place since the writing of the letters above mentioned, with
special reference to the changes recommended by the House Committee on
Naval Affairs in the naval program, not to assume the offensive at the
opening of the meeting, either with a statement issued in the United States,
which you might find it necessary to defend, or by an opening statement in
any form to be made by you at the first meeting. The Preparatory
Commission has met four times previously with practically the same
personnel at every meeting and is a continuing body; preliminary
statements of policy do not therefore appear necessary. Any such effort on
our part moreover would, in my opinion, be likely to give the impression
that this Government felt it necessary to apologize for its past attitude or to
defend itself against attacks on the subject of disarmament. It seems to me,
furthermore, that there is not the slightest danger of a gratuitous attack on
the naval question by Great Britain, and the opportunity for making such an
attack would not be offered to any power before the Commission reaches
the naval sections of the second reading of the draft convention.
In considering the Russian proposal, the whole idea is so impractical that no
detailed discussion appears to be called for, and you might well content
yourself, in my opinion, with agreeing with the delegates of those powers
more immediately interested that a better ground for some hope of tangible
and concrete results in disarmament is offered by the methods embodied in
