Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Plans should be made for future expansion of radio transmitters to counter continued Soviet increases in transmitter power and efforts to jam our transmissions. The long lead-time required for building transmitters makes this essential. (C) • Expansion of publication and distribution operations should also be undertaken. Even modest increments of funds enable existing publication and distribution projects to perform at a much higher level of efficiency. E.g., publishing 6,000 rather than 3,000 copies of a Ukrainian dissident book costs much less than the initial cost of the original • A tape-cassette distribution program should be developed to augment existing book and magazine programs; there is increasing evidence that cassettes are popular and effective in the Communist Substantively, areas and peoples who are poorly served by current or even planned publication and distribution programs include: —The Baltic States, especially the Lithuanians. —The Ukrainians. —The Caucasus, including the Georgians, Armenians and Muslim peoples. (C) Religion, not only Islam, should be given higher priority for planning new operations. E.g., the potential of persistent Orthodox tradition in the Ukraine and among Russians as a focal point for anti- Communist nationalism (or nationalism that regards Communism as irrelevant) needs to be examined. (C) Editorial Note The Polish economic situation grew dire over the course of 1980. On July 1, the Polish regime raised food prices nationwide, sparking a series of strikes that quickly swept the country and forced the Polish Government into crisis mode. The Embassy in Warsaw reported on July 31 that “the labor unrest which has now persisted in Poland for more than four weeks—strikes, stoppages, and slow-downs—may already have cost the Polish Government as much as 50 billion Zlotys ($1.7 billion) in yearly pay increases in addition to a three to four percent increase in domestic inflation.” Ad hoc committees, the Embassy reported, “have been formed in many individual plants and have bargained with management and governmental representatives,
