570 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 202. Letter From Secretary of State Vance to Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko1 Washington, February 8, 1980 Dear Mr. Minister: I have carefully studied Ambassador Watson’s detailed report of his January 30 meeting with you and reflected on my discussions with Ambassador Dobrynin since his return from Moscow.2 Clearly there is a high risk of miscalculation between us. In order to avoid this danger, I am writing you privately and personally to make clear our actions and policies. As the President stressed in his State of the Union message, the relationship between our two countries is the most critical factor in determining whether the world will live in peace or be engulfed in conflict. A series of events culminating in the Soviet actions in Afghanistan have brought us to a critical juncture in our relations. It is vital that both of us give sober and dispassionate consideration to the implications of the current situation for each side’s interests and the maintenance of world peace. Despite the differing political convictions of our two countries, and because of the inherent competition between us, we have sought to establish common rules of behavior which would reduce the risk of conflict, and to search for areas of cooperation which would help produce a more stable world. I have hoped and believed that this might be possible. This will not be possible, however, unless both of us recognize the need to act with restraint in troubled areas across the globe. As events following your actions in Afghanistan make clear, unrestrained actions in any one area inevitably have an impact on our relations as a whole. Our most serious concern at present centers in Southwest Asia. The presence of Soviet military forces in Afghanistan creates a new and more dangerous situation in that region. We do not know your ultimate aims in sending your forces into Afghanistan. We do know, 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet Affairs, 1977–1981, Lot 81D109, CV-Gromyko Letters, 2/8/80. No classification marking. 2 For Watson’s report, see Document 186. Vance’s most recent meeting with Dobrynin, January 22, was outlined in telegram 21582 to Moscow, January 25. The Department noted that Dobrynin had no new official messages to communicate to Vance, but underscored that the Soviet leadership felt its Afghanistan policy was “justified” and was “aggrieved” by the negative worldwide reaction to the intervention. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880029–0990)
