3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 460 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI “color” stories—scenes in Munich beer halls, the quaint beauties of Innsbruck, Canadian folk dancing, etc., etc. There will be an even greater incentive to do such coverage of a country that is of such great interest to Americans about which they know so little. Should we be offering NBC any help in these negotiations and in their subsequent planning? For example, if they do a piece on Soviet ballet, should they also have film (taped in advance) on the stories of Nureyev,2 the Panovs,3 etc.? The same with music, science, etc. —What will be our policy if RFE/RL are denied press credentials? What about other individual press? Should we quietly encourage the media to send a few of their Soviet experts—perhaps including individuals who were earlier asked to leave the USSR? What about denials of visas to individual spectators? In short, should we push the USSR to the maximum extent to live up to the spirit in which the Games are supposed to be held and to the promises they must have made to the International Olympic Committee, or should we just accept the fact that these Olympics will be different from those held in the West? I think we should push. —What will be our policy if the Israeli team or the South African team is banned from the Games—especially if the Soviets announce the decision at the last minute? —What will we do during the Games if an American or other participant gets into trouble of some kind that relates to human rights (e.g., press interview with a forbidden dissident) and gets deported? If we can develop an answer should we inform the Soviets in advance so that they will have no doubt as to how we would react? —Should we do anything in the way of informing American participants about this issue—perhaps briefings made available to those who are interested? Or perhaps that is going too far. —[1 paragraph (5½ lines) not declassified] RECOMMENDATION: That you give me some guidance on this. Do you feel these issues should be pursued? What about a PRM? Other?4 2 Reference is to Rudolf Nureyev, a Soviet ballet dancer, who defected in 1961 while on tour. 3 Reference is to Valery and Galina Panov, both of the Kirov Ballet, who were dismissed and demoted, respectively, when Valery, a Soviet Jew, applied for emigration to Israel for the pair in 1972. 4 Aaron added the following handwritten note: “I say unleash Tuchman! Play the Olympic card! DA.”
