726 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 229. Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department of State1 Bucharest, June 16, 1980, 1415Z 4940. Budapest for Counselor Ridgway. Department please pass— upon concurrence of Counselor, who has not seen message and may wish to comment further—to AmEmbassies Amman, Belgrade, Berlin, Cairo, Damascus, Kabul, Madrid, Moscow, Prague, Sofia, Tel Aviv, Warsaw, USMission USNATO. Subject: Counselor Ridgway’s Meeting With Foreign Minister Andrei. 1. (C-entire text) 2. Summary. Counselor Ridgway’s meeting with Foreign Minister Andrei reviewed issues in the Middle East, Afghanistan, Iran, European security and CSCE, East-West relations and general bilateral matters. Andrei informed Ridgway of the Islamic Conference committee’s desire to meet with anti-government forces in Afghanistan to work out a ceasefire with condition that Soviet troops withdraw and that a provisional government be formed from members of current government and insurgents. Little substantive change in Romania’s positions was indicated on any issue discussed. Meeting was cordial and candid.2 End summary. 3. On June 13 Counselor Ridgway met for 90 minutes with Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei. Accompanying the Counselor were the Ambassador and Special Assistant John King. With the Minister were Constantin Oancea, Deputy Foreign Minister; Nicolae Turturea, Acting Director, Inter-American Affairs; Mircea Raceanu, OIC, North American Affairs; and Radu Matescu, interpreter. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800299–0016. Confidential; Immediate. Sent Immediate to Budapest. In telegram 4941 from Bucharest, June 16, the Embassy summarized the remainder of Ridgway’s visit to Romania, and described the atmosphere of the meetings and receptions. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800294–1042) 2 In preparation for the visit to Bucharest, the Embassy submitted in telegram 4506 from Bucharest, June 3, a draft of the “substantive toast” Ridgway was to deliver at a reception on June 13, marking 100 years of diplomatic relations. The draft contained language celebrating “continued positive development of our bilateral relationship, to our common effort to see the spirit of human genius used for the betterment of mankind.” In reviewing the text, Ridgway highlighted this passage and wrote her Special Assistant, John King: “John—Check with someone other than [Romanian desk officer] Frank Tumminia about this. . . I’d hardly say that an essentially Stalinist society is one to which we ought to join our efforts to find something ‘common’ for the betterment of mankind. We somehow keep forgetting what we’re dealing with. R.” (National Archives, RG 59, Counselor to the Department, Subject Country Files and 1980 Briefing Books, Box 3, Pol 2—Romania)
