National Security Policy 265 Laos, we cannot exclude the possibility that the Communists would respond in kind, possibly including nuclear attacks against US bases in the area selected to minimize the additional risk of general war. 5. Many Free World governments and countries would be impressed and encouraged by the prompt US resistance to Communist aggression, but the US use of nuclear weapons would arouse wide­ spread fear of general war and would tend to obscure Communist responsibility for initiating hostilities. The US would be widely con­ demned by popular opinion, especially in Asia, for the use of nuclear weapons. We believe that the adverse reactions would overshadow the favorable effects in most countries. 6. The adverse reaction would be mitigated if the US response quickly halted the fighting without causing large civilian casualties, and respect for US power would be enhanced. Even so, the stigma resulting from the US initiation of the use of nuclear weapons would not be removed. On the other hand, if the Communists responded with nuclear weapons and hostilities were prolonged and expanded, fears of general war would rise even higher, and great pressure would be exerted on the US to reach a settlement.2 2 The Deputy Director for Intelligence, the Joint Staff, agrees with the principal con­ clusions that: a. US nuclear response to Communist aggression would be likely to result in Bloc response with nuclear attacks in the first two cases examined and less likely in the second two cases. b. Considerable adverse political and psychological reaction, particularly in Asia, would initially result from US nuclear attacks. The DDI, Joint Staff, disagrees, however, with certain lesser estimative judgments and estimative yardsticks applied in these conclusions and in the supporting discussion. He believes: a. The paper fails to recognize adequately the meaning of selective US use of nuclear weapons: specifically, it tends to equate “selectivity’’ to geographical limitations on target areas. “Selectivity” also applies to weapons yield, precise target choice, and accuracy of delivery. Given these factors, references to “heavy civilian casualties” appear incompati­ ble with the basic assumption. b. The paper reaches certain qualitative judgments as to the relative weights of adverse popular reaction and favorable popular reaction to US nuclear attacks: these relative meas­ urements are largely conjectural. Such judgments also appear to fail to give due weight to many factors which would influence popular reactions in addition to the fact that the United States employed nuclear weapons. Some of these additional factors would be the initial success achieved by US military forces, the public statements of US governmental leaders concerning US objectives and intentions, and the extent to which popular opinion clearly recognized the military action as resulting from Communist aggression. There would certainly be both applause and boos; to say that in most countries the boos would drown out the applause—­as in the words “. . . would overshadow . . .”—­is to attempt a precision of estimating not considered feasible for the hypothetical situations being analyzed. [Footnote is in the original.]
