September 18–December 16, 1978
525
Prime Minister to the Cabinet Room where they were joined by Vice
President Walter Mondale, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, Assistant to
the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski, and
White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan. The meeting continued
from 2:06 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No
formal record of this meeting has been found, though three sets of
handwritten notes from the meeting were made by Carter; two sets are
in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Policy
File, Box 1, Egypt, 11/77–11/81, while the third is in the Carter Library,
Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Policy File, Box 2, Israel, 11/77–
2/79. William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff subse-
quently wrote that during the meeting Khalil “pressed hard on the im-
portance of the simultaneity of Israeli withdrawal to the interim line
and the establishment of the [Palestinian] self-governing authority.”
Moreover, Quandt wrote, Khalil wanted to “revise article 6 of the
treaty. Carter objected to the idea of revising the treaty, but did suggest
that interpretive notes could be appended to it.” (Quandt, Camp David,
page 285)
Following the meeting, Vance announced to reporters that “[i]t
was emphasized [in the meeting] that the negotiations will continue in
fulfillment of the accords reached at Camp David.” Moreover, Vance
acknowledged Khalil had given Carter a letter with Egyptian President
Anwar al-Sadat’s latest proposals. (See Document 145) On continued
Israeli participation in negotiations, the Secretary of State stated that Is-
rael had informed the United States that it would resume the negotia-
tions “at such time as will be useful.” (Bernard Gwertzman, “Egypt and
Israelis Will Resume Talks, U.S. Aides Disclose,” The New York Times,
December 2, page 1) The Department transmitted a full, unofficial tran-
script of the remarks Vance and Khalil made to the press in telegram
304945 to Cairo, Tel Aviv, Amman, Jidda, Jerusalem, and Damascus,
December 2. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780497–0103)
Khalil again met with Vance and Mondale on the morning of De-
cember 2, joined by Quandt, Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton,
Jr. and Egyptian Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs Osama al-Baz. Ac-
cording to a summary of the meeting transmitted in telegram 305342 to
Tel Aviv and Cairo, December 3, the meeting focused “largely” on
Egypt’s proposed changes to Article VI of the draft peace treaty and the
Egyptian “desire” for a side letter on the “relationship between [the]
Egyptian-Israeli treaty and West Bank/Gaza steps.” On Article VI, de-
spite the U.S. delegation’s continued urging of the Egyptians not to re-
open negotiations on treaty language, it was “clear” from the “strength
and tenacity of Khalil’s instructions that Sadat has serious problems
with paras 2 and 5 of Article VI—not so much with the concepts under-
