835.34/421: Telegram
[Document 308]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Argentina (Cable)
WASHINGTON, March 1, 1927—3 p.m.
9. Bethlehem Steel Company states that further difficulties are being
encountered in getting contracts for Argentine naval construction. It appears
that contracts are to be awarded to Italy for cruisers, to England for fast
destroyers and to France for submarines. It is stated that although the bids
of the Bethlehem Steel Company were higher than those of foreign
competitors the Argentine Government has hitherto always found this
added expense justified by superior workmanship. If contracts were
awarded to lowest bidder all would go to Italy whereas company considers
that they are evidently to be divided for political reasons between Italy,
England, and France. It seems to be the intention nevertheless to finance
this construction in the United States. The Company points out that other
countries have taken the position that when they make loans in similar
circumstances their nationals must receive the contracts.
If you are satisfied that the foregoing information regarding the allocation
of the construction in question is substantially correct, and that there has
been in fact an unwarranted discrimination against American interests,
particularly if margin by which British and French bids exceed Italian bid is
comparable to margin by which American bid exceeds the Italian bid, you
may express to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the hope of this
Government that an equitable share will be accorded to American firms.
You may add that if it is contemplated to arrange for the necessary
financing in this market it would undoubtedly give rise to difficulties unless
at least a fair share of the construction should be placed here. See the next
to the last sentence of the Department’s cablegram 41, October 18, 1 p.m.,
and instruction 117 of January 25.8 In the event that all construction should
go to Europe it would be a matter of keen regret to this Government.
GREW
