1240 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Secretary Muskie’s talks in Europe;5 —Sol Linowitz’ talks in Europe;6 —a speech on autonomy7 (where Muskie is preferable); —low-keying the importance of May 26 in our public presentations. (S) In addition, we need some form of presentation for the moderate Arab states,8 and especially Saudi Arabia. Perhaps Sol should go to Riyadh—or a message could be sent to the Crown Prince. (S) I also believe that both Linowitz—and the speech—should get at the security question, by reassuring the bulk of Israelis and reducing the capacity of Begin to wrap himself in the flag on issue after issue because of their “security” implications. (S) I remain convinced that we need to intensify the talks in some way. Holding a Blair House or Rhodes-type9 set of talks may be impractical at this point. But I do believe that Sol should spend longer at a time in 5 Muskie traveled to Brussels for a meeting of the NATO Defense Planning Committee May 13–15, before proceeding to Vienna for ceremonies commemorating the 25th anniversary of the Austrian State Treaty. In his May 15 meeting with Kreisky, Muskie stressed the need to allow the autonomy negotiations to continue beyond May 26. Kreisky stated he was “very pessimistic” about the negotiations, citing Begin as one who “is not yet ready for a solution.” He also emphasized that peace was “impossible” without PLO participation. Kreiske continued that he “saw Begin’s continuation in power as bringing only ‘disaster and a new worldwide wave of anti-Semitism.’ Fortunately, he said, more and more Israelis recognize this fact. To demonstrate this latter point, Kreisky passed on very confidentially the news that 15 Knesset deputies recently asked him whether he could arrange a private meeting for them with Arafat.” (Telegram 6145 from Vienna, May 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800242–0011) 6 No memoranda of conversation from Linowitz’s talks in Europe have been found. In his memoirs, Linowitz wrote: “I met with the Foreign Ministers of Britain, Germany, and France in an effort to deflect, or at least delay, the “European initiative” that gave the Saudis, Hussein, and the West Bank Palestinians additional reasons not to play in what was—and still is—the only game in town.” (Linowitz, Making of a Public Man, p. 232) 7 The planned speech focused on the “critical issues” remaining in the negotiations (security, land, water, the powers of the SGA, and SGA elections) and emphasized the need for uninterrupted talks, the impediments created by Israeli settlements, U.S. support for an undivided Jerusalem, the need for all participants in the talks to accept Resolution 242 and the Camp David accord, and U.S. opposition to the use of the talks to “lay the foundation” for an independent Palestinian state. It was not delivered by Muskie until he spoke before the Washington Press Club on June 9. The text of the speech is printed in the Department of State Bulletin, July 1980, pp. 3–5. However, a draft of the speech had been prepared by the Department of State and passed to Carter for his review on May 16 and conveyed to Muskie, who was in Vienna, in telegram Tosec 30088/129047 to USDEL Secretary, May 16. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800242–0533) Following revisions, a later version was conveyed in telegram 145299 to Paris, June 4. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800272–0224) 8 See Document 375. 9 Reference is to the talks held by Israeli and Egyptian delegations in February and March 1949, on the Greek island of Rhodes after the first Arab-Iraeli war. The delegations met separately with UN mediator Ralph Bunche of the United States, where both indirect and direct negotiations took place.
