1154 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II For tactical reasons, we probably should not mention the specific target of doubling resources because this will raise technical questions of why double (rather than some other multiple, for what, for where). Instead the emphasis should be on the unmet demand, the opportunities, and the current low level of support from Summit countries. Suggested goals could be along the lines of a minimum contribution of $25 million each per year, reaching $100 million each by 1985. 2. Appoint Population Coordinators To support the call for increased resources it is important to increase awareness of the need. This awareness can be stimulated and maintained by a high-level flow of information to embassies, and by increased pressure from donors on the international organizations. The embassies are important in that population planning is still a sensitive subject and the establishment and/or expansion of programs is effected by good communication on needs and supplies. Promotion of an international consensus will facilitate the efforts of national leaders to support population planning. The international organizations currently place little emphasis on population. (The World Bank is lending less than 1% for family planning and related activities.) The coordinators could inform and support their representatives in pressing for more.3 International organization funding is as follows: 1979 (million) UNFPA $ 112 (using contributions mainly from DAC countries) World Bank Group IPPF IDB ADB AFDB The coordinators would also be tasked with follow-up on the population issues in Brandt Commission Report4 and Global 2000. Because some of the major donors to population assistance are not Summit countries (i.e., Sweden $28 million, Norway $31 million, Netherlands $15 million), the coordinators would work with them to encourage their efforts and increase cooperation among the group. 3 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Owen wrote: “Better phone McN.”
