1978 317 hard facilities (ICBM silos, for example) or highly mobile units can a nuclear target maintain a chance of survival. Protection of some critical economic equipment and supplies might be feasible and might aid in postwar recovery. However, such efforts would be effective only in peripheral areas, not in areas directly attacked. Combined analytical results for a massive nuclear exchange occurring after the current US and Soviet civil defense programs are projected into the mid-80s and implemented as planned (i.e., Soviet evacuated and US in-­place, with 10% spontaneous evacuation) are summarized below in Table S–2. A US evacuation scheme is expected to increase initial survivors to 60–90%. Spontaneous evacuation out of risk areas in excess of 10% would lower US in-­place casualty figures. Table S–2 MID-80s CIVIL DEFENSE PROGRAM EFFECTIVENESS Population Survival US (In-Place) USSR (Evacuated) Initial Survivors (%) 35–65% 80–90% Immediate Fatalities (106) 75–145 25–55 Leadership Survival Personnel Uninjured Low Probably high Facilities Undamaged Low Probably high Economic Survival Low Low C. What civil defense measures appear to be most useful? Can these measures be countered by altering the attack? Civil defense measures that attempt to reduce vulnerability through in-­place hardening (rather than by redistribution, which proliferates potential targets and increases the cost, in terms of weapons required, significantly for attaining a given level of damage) tend to be less effective and more sensitive to changes in the attack lay-­down. For example, in-­place sheltering and hardening measures can be overcome by changes in the type and/or number of weapons used against a given target, changes in weapon height-­of-­burst, etc., or by targeting such in-­ place hardened elements, if they were not already targeted. As noted previously, only through extreme hardening, concealment, or mobility can a resource remain a target and maintain a chance of survival. Civil defense measures that distribute leaders, people, and industrial resources, as significantly to reduce the efficiency with which these elements can be targeted, are the most useful and less susceptible than other measures to being overcome by alternatives in the attack laydown. For example, population evacuation that significantly reduces the number of people at risk to a given nuclear weapons not only enhances population survival against an economic attack, but also
