Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II broad array of issues—ranging from how to distribute foreign assistance to changes recommended in trade and investment policies. We believe some areas, which the Commission did not emphasize, should be stressed in such an effort. For example, the Commission mentions, but we would stress, the need for health and family planning programs to accompany food production lest population outstrip gains made by increasing food supply. We also believe attention to energy use and supply is vital—both to reducing world poverty generally and to food production. Some agencies believe the Commission should have stressed more the importance of developing countries’ own domestic policies on food production and income distribution and the limits to U.S. ability to affect such policies. The Development Coordination Committee’s review of the Brandt Commission Report,8 on which you will be receiving a memorandum shortly, reviews the work of your Administration on a range of efforts to address world poverty. IDCA, in consultation with other agencies, is preparing a broad strategy for U.S. economic relations with Third World Countries—one designed to effectively reassert U.S. leadership in responding to the development needs of Third World countries. The following is brief summary of: key Hunger Commission recommendations; interagency reactions to those recommendations; and information on Administration action thus far. Development Assistance—One set of recommendations urges increasing development assistance and targeting it to those poor nations strongly committed to meeting basic human needs and human rights. These are, we know, your own goals, though budget constraints have limited your ability to urge the substantial increases in development assistance that you might otherwise have endorsed. We will propose in our 1982 budget submission a strategy to focus increased attention and resources, not only on meeting world hunger as the first priority, but also on targeting agricultural development assistance where it can be used with maximum effectiveness and efficiency, as the Hunger Commission proposed. This strategy will be consistent with the Hunger Commission’s finding that to relieve world hunger and malnutrition we must attack world poverty and build effective demand for food as well as increasing food production and supply. A key element of this strategy will be assisting developing countries to increase food production. It will also include complementary efforts in energy and health/ family planning which will permit us to address the broader poverty issue. Currently, we are taking a number of actions in the development assistance program that accord with Commission recommendations.
