practices of intimidation, fraud and oppression, but also if her existing
legislation was inadequate to provide punishment for aforesaid offenses,
Chile was required by award to enact such additional legislation as might be
needed to meet situation.
5. In defining conditions of the plebiscite, the Arbitrator provided for
constitution of Plebiscitary Commission for purpose of securing supervision
of plebiscite by competent and impartial authority. The powers of the
Commission are derived from the award, which provides that the
Commission “shall have in general complete control over the plebiscite.”
This general provision was not limited by subsequent particularization of
certain questions which Commission was authorized to determine. It is right
and duty of Commission to deal with any questions which relate to holding of
the plebiscite, and necessarily to deal with any questions arising from
attempts to interfere with plebiscite by coercion, intimidation, or fraud. The
Commission’s action in this regard must, of course, be consistent with terms
of the treaty. Commission could not require, any more than Arbitrator could
require, Chile to surrender her possession or her administrative authority
during plebiscite period, but Commission is entitled to require that Chile
exercise her authority in such a manner as to protect the plebiscite and take
all appropriate measures to prevent abuse of that authority by fostering or
permitting coercion, intimidation, or fraud.
6. You must determine, I think, the advisability of proposing this resolution.
It depends on state of the facts to which it is addressed; and, in view of your
knowledge of situation and in view of investigations which have been
conducted under your supervision, I assume that the conditions are as they
are reported and that the resolution is justified. I am of opinion that, subject
to reservations stated below, Plebiscitary Commission has authority to make
the requirements set forth in the resolution:
(a) I assume that army, carabineers, police, and secret service
personnel, referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, and 4 of the resolution,
are administrative officers within control of executive branch of
Chilean Government. I believe that such officials as those and other
administrative officers subject to executive control may properly be
subject of the resolution. I question whether resolution should be
made applicable to local judges or judicial officers who may have
status under Chilean Constitution which would make it impossible
for Chilean authorities to comply with resolution. I think care
should be taken not to introduce into resolution any officers who
are not subject to control of the Government of Chile under the
Constitution. I have had no opportunity to examine carefully new
