Human Rights First, the Department’s view on current human rights practices of foreign assistance recipients does provide the Congress with data to evaluate our budget requests. Second, the preparation of the report stimulates within the Department a disciplined and regular fact-finding and analysis process which might not otherwise be present. Third, the reports enumerate human rights practices in considerable detail, communicating to those governments our concerns with a degree of specificity which generally is lacking in bilateral consultations. Also, by being mandated by law, some of the onus for raising these specific abuses is removed from the executive branch. Fourth, the publication of the reports at times permits information about the human rights conditions to make its way into the host country’s media encouraging human rights constituencies. Fifth, the reports themselves provide an impetus for bilateral discussions with host governments concerning the specific abuses cited. Sixth, the American public is better informed regarding these conditions as a result of the publication of the reports. Finally, the reports have come to symbolize the continuing importance of human rights concerns to our foreign policy decision-making. Any Administration effort to see them removed as a requirement would be read as a lessening of that concern. With regard to costs, the initial dire predictions of irreparable harm have not been realized. Nevertheless, the following disadvantages have been argued to exist. First, the preparation of the reports involves a considerable expenditure of time and resources, at embassies, within regional bureaus and most particularly, within our Bureau. Second, by limiting the countries covered to those receiving aid, as specified by statute, many countries with poor human rights records, particularly the eastern bloc governments, are not covered. Third, we cannot control the timing of the public release of the reports and therefore the publication of the reports can conflict either with the timing of other bilateral pursuits or with the timing of the human rights strategy itself in a particular country. Finally, the public release of the reports produces some friction in bilateral relations with some countries although the attached summary of host country reactions to this year’s submission demonstrates that they are becoming accustomed to this mid-winter ritual. It is noteworthy that all but one of the countries which initially stated they could not participate in assistance programs if reports were to be submitted on them have reversed that position. Modifications which have been suggested include the following:
