1979  681
Turner: [2 lines not declassified]
Brown: They can go straight mobile deployment.
Turner: [2 lines not declassified]
Brzezinski: On the contrary, they’ll claim M–X is unverifiable and 
use that to justify building their preferred mobile deployment scheme 
as they wish without reference to our verification concerns.
Brown: I am convinced we have a good case on verification.
Brzezinski: That may be, but we cannot enforce it. Their incentive 
to cheat is high.
Keeny: DOD has clearly made heroic efforts to make our scheme 
verifiable. Our topography in the West helps, especially the separated 
valleys. What about Soviet topography? How do we stand with the size 
of the port holes required? How about the problem of using an image to 
fake the bottom of the shelter?
Stoertz: Stereo and other image enhancements help.
Brown: Faking images is a problem in other areas too, e.g., making 
SSBNs look like SSNs.
Jones: Different sensors will be used, e.g., radar, to ease this problem.
Perry: The observation ports have to be big enough to allow stereo 
imagery of the floor, to measure real depth.
Vance: I take it, Stan, you’re satisfied we can verify [1 line not 
declassified]
Turner: [3 lines not declassified]
Vance: [less than one line not declassified]
Turner: [less than one line not declassified]
Stoertz: But it would not be definitive.
Brown: We need your position on this sooner. We are under pres-
sure to move quickly to a basing recommendation. The verification 
problem you raise will never be resolved definitely.
Brzezinski: We need a recommendation to the President by the end 
of the month when he returns. And we can hold an NSC on it in the first 
week of September.5
Brown: We have the following agenda of issues, then: Stan, you will 
complete your study [less than one line not declassified] by the end of the 
month. DOD will reconcile Bill’s draw-­down curves with official NIE 
data. And we shall look at the threat of Soviet abrogation of the SALT 
5 On August 17, President Carter and Mrs. Carter flew to Minneapolis to embark on 
a steamboat cruise down the Mississippi River, arriving in St. Louis on August 24. From 
St. Louis they flew aboard Air Force One to Camp David, where they stayed until August 
30, when they departed for Plains, Georgia. They returned to the White House the eve-
ning of September 3. (Carter Library, Presidential Material, President’s Daily Diary)
