1978 341 Brzezinski: Two points: 1) we have to make measured responses to the Soviets on the defense level; 2) politically, we are in one of those periods of friction with the Soviets which in the past have tended to produce new rules governing the relationship. The Soviets may learn from the costs they are now incurring, e.g., developments in the non-­ aligned movement and the Chinese move into Africa and now Europe. So we need to exercise considerable caution in how we handle the Soviets in this period of friction. We should insulate SALT and other arms control matters as much as we can. But we should be wary of initiatives that invite the Soviets to forget what has happened (the difficulties they have created) and make sure we make them reflect on the political costs of their actions. If we do this it may result, as it has in the past, in greater restraint in their future behavior. We must let them know that Third World turbulence will be with us for a long time and that their relations with us will be affected by how the Soviets behave. I think we are on the right course and we should keep on it. The President: Other than increasing the defense budget, what else should we do to improve relations with the Soviets? Vance: The key still is SALT. I think nothing will improve the relationship unless we have a SALT agreement. Brzezinski: SALT may no longer be so decisive in the overall political and military relationship. Brown: The relationship may get somewhat worse without SALT. But will it get better with SALT? I doubt it. The Vice President: We have pursued human rights for more than a year. Is it a net plus or what? By pouring it on the Soviets on human rights, do we strengthen the people we don’t want to come to power? U.S. opinion thinks we have overdone it with the Soviets on human rights. Brzezinski: What actually have we done? We have been restrained in terms of government acts and have not talked much about human rights in the Soviet Union, after the gestures at the beginning of the Administration. The Vice President: But are we strengthening the Soviet elements we don’t like. Suslov must be arguing that Helsinki5 got them in a lot of trouble and encouraged centrifugal tendencies in Eastern Europe and in the Soviet Union. Now the U.S. is exploiting these tendencies to weaken the Soviet Union. The Soviet reaction may be that we have to get tough, we need leaders who will stand up to the United States. The President: Our human rights stance aggravated the Soviets. Some Allies think we did too much. 5 Reference is to the Helsinki Final Act, signed on August 1, 1975.
