September 18–December 16, 1978
497
President Carter: I understand and we will also encourage him to
not insist upon any change in Article VI of the treaty. I think you know
that there will still remain one outstanding issue that needs to be re-
solved and that is the commitment by the parties to negotiate on the
West Bank and Gaza.
Prime Minister Begin: This is what I want to explain. We also de-
cided that the latest proposal by Secretary Vance3 and agreed by Egypt
are inconsistent with the Camp David Agreements. As far as the nego-
tiations about the autonomy, we have decided that we want after the
signing and ratification of the peace treaty with Egypt to start negotia-
tions in order to reach an agreement on Judea, Samaria and Gaza in ac-
cordance with the Camp David agreement. What we did not accept is a
timetable. We cannot agree. If you agree, Mr. President, I will tell you
something. It is very bad for us in order to really justify this timetable.
We cannot accept. Yesterday was the horrible terrorist attack4 of which
your spokesman, Mr. President, apologized to us. We are grateful. But
we are aware that there are people who want to build on the bodies of
the Israeli people, they want only the destruction of the Israeli race.
And this is why we cannot go. Of course, nobody can force it upon us.
We want an early agreement, a real agreement. Therefore, we cannot
accept the timetable. There was not a timetable. As far as this goes, we
are prepared to say that in three weeks or five weeks, that doesn’t
matter, after the signing and the ratification of the peace treaty, we are
prepared to start the negotiations with Egypt. What we cannot accept is
a timetable for the elections, for finishing the negotiations. There are
many problems to arrange after the timetable with Egypt. We want to
find out if Egypt intends to start. After a while, the negotiations with
Egypt alone or with Jordan should take place. We should sit around the
table and negotiate. If we reach an agreement, then there will be even-
tually established the autonomy.
Mr. President, you know there are two different problems. One is
about the oil. This is the most serious problem for us. Therefore, we
would like to have a document as an annex to the peace treaty. You can
be sure that we will pay for the oil. The second point, and believe me,
Mr. President, is very unpleasant for me to mention it, but I have to ful-
fill my duty. After all the inquiries I have made personally, it is now
clear that we cannot bear all the burden of moving all the armies from
Sinai to the Negev without help. We will have bankruptcy. I am not an
3 Not further identified.
4 On November 19, a bomb exploded on a bus near the West Bank settlement of
Mizpe Jericho killing four passengers and wounding sixteen. (Telegram 3146 from Jeru-
salem, November 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780477–
0382)
