Human Rights 347 —Guinea: The new provision has been accepted, an agreement has been signed, and shipments can be scheduled. —Zaire: Negotiations are still underway, but the GOZ has not objected to the new provision. In view of significant congressional and farm state interest in expediting this year’s Title I program, we will continue to seek maximum progress in implementing the program. Christopher 104. Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1 Washington, January 11, 1978 Progress and Retrogression in Human Rights in 1977 Near East and South Asia India. Following a free and fair election, the new government of Morarji Desai restored fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution and freedom of the press. It has yet to repeal other measures designed to maintain internal security, however. Iran. The military justice and penal codes were revised to provide for open civil court trials of political prisoners (formerly tried in camera by military courts). The government also liberalized restrictions on public expression and recognized the distinction between dissidents and terrorists, although demonstrators continued to be dealt with severely. In 1977, almost 500 political prisoners were released from prison, and some were pardoned. Pakistan. Despite the introduction of martial law following the coup last year, the Zia regime’s record on human rights has reflected improvement. Most political prisoners have been released, the press publishes more freely than has been allowed for years, the judiciary’s independence has been strengthened, and Amnesty International has 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850109–0129. Confidential. Prepared by David Carpenter (INR/DDR/GIS) and INR/DDR/GIS analysts. According to a January 11 covering memorandum from Carpenter to Oxman, INR prepared the paper in response to Christopher’s request to Saunders for material to be used in Christopher’s address to the American Bar Association, scheduled to meet in New Orleans, Louisiana, in February. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850109–0129) See footnote 4, Document 117.
