Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  283
destroy extra first stages of Minuteman or Poseidon missiles under the 
treaty, since the U.S. side has agreed orally and U.S. language implicitly 
provides for elimination of entire missiles. Thus, the U.S. side could be 
caught in the paradox of having to keep extra first stages on the books 
as non-­deployed missiles.
Inspection Protocol
12. I believe additional guidance on a more discriminating use of 
the term “inspection site” would enable us to describe our inspection 
procedures more clearly and deflect Soviet criticism.
13. In answering Soviet questions, it has become evident that the 
term “inspection site” has variable meanings depending on whether it 
relates to ICBM, SLBM, or heavy bomber-­related facilities. As a result, 
we cannot specify whether or not site diagrams define the boundaries 
of the “inspection site.” Our use of the term could also imply that heavy 
bomber bases are subject to inspection, which they are not. Only heavy 
bombers are inspectable under defined conditions.
14. In addition, the Soviets have also agreed conceptually to 
exchange lists of inspectors, monitors, etc. Before entry into force, 
thereby bringing us closer together on this point. However, they cannot 
agree to codify such a prior obligation in the treaty per se. I believe 
the problem could be bridged by a side agreement concluded simul-
taneously with the signing of the treaty to exchange lists before entry 
into force, while referring in the treaty to the exchange of lists as an 
accomplished fact (analogous to the data MOU). Washington approval 
of this suggested approach before the end of round XI would allow us 
to develop this convergence.
Verification and Stability
15. Material received from Washington thus far puts us in good 
shape to engage the Soviets on tagging, strategic exercise, RV inspec-
tions and telemetry encryption. As Washington is well aware, we are 
undercutting the presumed seriousness of the President’s proposal 
by our inability to say anything on data exchange or to provide any 
details on early PPM. On short-­time-­of-­flight (STOF), I continue to need 
answers to our earlier questions and recommendations. Of greatest 
value would be some indication of the form in which a STOF commit-
ment is to be recorded.
Burt
