1132  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
d. Noted the President’s request that the Attorney General, in 
the light of the discussion and pursuant to his advisory responsibili­
ties under Section 13 of Executive Order 10450, consider the methods 
and procedures, including reporting and follow-­up procedures, which 
should be instituted by the Departments and Agencies of the Executive 
Branch to ensure the continued strengthening and maintenance of 
employee security programs.
NOTE: The action in c above, as approved by the President, subse­
quently circulated to the National Security Council for information and 
guidance. The President approved the action in c above subject to the 
understanding that it did not authorize increases in personnel or funds 
for personnel security programs other than such increases as might 
result from the normal budgetary process.
The action in d above, as approved by the President, subsequently 
transmitted to the Attorney General for appropriate action.
[Omitted here are pages 6–9.]
Robert H. Johnson
272.	 Briefing Note for November 7 NSC Meeting1
Washington, November 4, 1960
OUTER SPACE [illegible in the original]
The first item this morning is a presentation by the Defense 
Department on the Outer Space program being planned or considered 
under the auspices of that Department.
At the Council meeting on May 31, 1960, Mr. President, you stated 
that you had reached some different [illegible in the original] that some 
of the Services were thinking along extremely [illegible in the original] 
lines with respect to [illegible in the original] military space programs. 
You expressed concern that there might be not only inadvertent dupli­
cation of outer space programs, but possibly also the initiation of some 
programs so advanced scientifically as to make a re-appraisal advis­
able. You accordingly requested that the “Department of Defense pres­
ent to the National Security Council a full report on all of the outer 
space programs being planned or conducted under the auspices of the 
Department of Defense.”
1 Source: Outer space programs under the auspices of the Department of Defense. 
Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
