Yugoslavia 761 for a socialist brother got the best of them.” Yugoslav position in the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) offered Belgrade the opportunity to expand “non-Soviet, ‘progressive’ influence” to Ethiopia. Another probable reason was the low state of relations between the United States and Yugoslavia prior to Vice President Walter Mondale’s visit in May. Eagleburger wrote: “Given their obligation to a non-aligned and socialist state, their irritation with us, and an estimate that they had little to lose” as military sales from the West were not forthcoming, Belgrade probably decided to transfer the tanks without regard if the transfer was discovered. (Telegram 4316 from Belgrade, June 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770229–0316) Minic met with Eagleburger on July 8 to confirm that the Yugoslav Government had, indeed, transferred 70 M–47 tanks to Ethiopia. Minic suggested that the equipment had been decommissioned by the Yugoslav military and was about to be sent to scrap yards when a decision was made to provide it to Ethiopia. He stressed that the Yugoslav and U.S. military authorities should establish direct contact to clarify responsibilities arising from the old agreements. According to Eagleburger, “Minic appealed for USG’s understanding,” expressed his government’s hope that Washington not allow the incident “to have a negative impact on all fields, including military cooperation,” and stressed that Yugoslavia takes very seriously its obligations under international agreements and has always lived up to them. (Telegram 4603 from Belgrade, July 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770243–0661) On a copy of the cable forwarded to him by Brzezinski, Carter noted “My inclination is not to embarrass the Yugoslavs.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 86, Yugoslavia: 1–9/1977) Visiting Belgrade in mid-July, Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher told Minic that U.S. law required the administration to notify Congress of the equipment diversion matter. However, Christopher informed the Yugoslav Foreign Minister, the administration had decided to do so in a classified letter so as to minimize the chances of the instance leaking to the press: “We attempting to handle problem with restraint, not because we do not consider it a very serious matter— as we do—but because we set great store by our relationship.” (Telegram 4930 from Belgrade, July 21; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770260–0639) Christopher informed Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Frank Church (Democrat-Idaho) and Speaker of the House Thomas O’Neill (Democrat-Massachusetts) of the Yugoslav diversion on August 6. (Telegram 184571 to Belgrade, August 6; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770282–0535)
