723.2515/1661: Telegram [Document 243] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)73 [Paraphrase] WASHINGTON, October 31, 1925—[2] p.m. For Pershing: The following is my view of the suggestions Chile has made for diplomatic settlement outside plebiscite, and the policy I propose to follow: The President should keep perfectly clear his position as Arbitrator. He has accepted a submission and is dealing with matter within terms of the submission and of his award. Difficulty of having a fair plebiscite will not be because he has failed to give proper attention to terms and condition of award. Arbitrator provided for a Plebiscitary Commission with complete control over terms and conditions of plebiscite subject to the award. He has appointed a citizen of outstanding ability and impartiality as the American member of the Commission. If it should now prove impossible to hold a fair plebiscite, it will be because of character and attitude of the population or because of failure of Chile, which under Treaty of Ancon has administrative authority over territory during plebiscitary period, to comply with the requirements of the award. It is necessary, for above reasons, that in every step taken responsibility for prevention of a fair plebiscite constantly be kept where it belongs. General Pershing will attend to requirements which are necessary to safeguard plebiscite. If any question arise regarding propriety of these requirements or of authority of Commission to impose them, the Arbitrator then, on his own initiative if it is necessary, can render an opinion construing the award which will settle any question of that sort. Responsibility will then rest upon Chile to comply and if her authority is not fairly and adequately exercised accordingly, and for that reason plebiscite fails, the responsibility will be hers. The danger existing in taking up measures for some outside solution in view of difficulty of obtaining fair plebiscite, is that positions of Chile and of this Government may be obscured or misconstrued. For that reason use of good offices of this Government will be granted only at request of both parties. I will not be bearer of Chilean proposal regarded as means of getting rid of the plebiscite. If negotiations between the Governments of Chile and Peru or any of their representatives, however informal or unauthorized technically these may be, reach point where both are ready to invite the helpful offices of the Government of the United States, there may be chance to perform great service in bringing those two Governments to an accord. In meantime
