1955 557 area. It was precisely desire of PRC side that disputes between us in Taiwan area be settled peacefully. 15. Wang said he wished point out that proposal made this morn­ ing was very important and put forward only after serious and careful consideration. He was glad to hear my preliminary views and com­ ments this draft. He hoped our side would give careful consideration to this latest offer. He hoped we would be able reach agreement on this draft. Adoption this draft would demonstrate that although we spent great deal of time in discussion, we able make progress and find text agreeable both of us. 16. I said I was still trying to get at heart of matter. I too hoped we can show progress to world. Important thing is we make sure it is genu­ ine progress. Our problem is not give appearance of progress by agree­ ing to form of words that means one thing to one side and another to other. Problems we face are too fundamental importance for that. I felt we would be doing disservice to both our people and cause of peace if we attempted agree on basis words which had different meanings. That is why I may be appearing so persistent. Purpose is not debate but to try to arrive at understanding. I agreed that problems should be dis­ cussed step-by-step. We both agreed the area in which policies confront each other most seriously is Taiwan area. 17. I said what I was trying to get at was this. In making statement such as he had proposed, US would be renewing what I had termed renunciation of force in international relations; Wang’s government would give appearance of doing same thing. However, in light of his remarks and fully expressed policy his government, would not his gov­ ernment in fact be saying it considered question of Taiwan area domes­ tic matter and hence reserved right initiate use of force any time it did? 18. I said perhaps I had not made myself clear. I would state my point in another way. While his side was willing make declaration of renunciation of force with US, did it still insist on right interpret situ­ ation Taiwan area to permit it to apply force at any time its desires not met? That is, would US have renounced force whereas Wang’s gov­ ernment would not have done so because of its reservations in regard to nature of dispute in Taiwan area? Would any further negotiation between us be subject to continuing threat of initiation of force by his government that area? 19. I said I hoped I was not right in this. What I had expressed frankly was my understanding of position Wang’s government. I wished he would tell me frankly if I was wrong. 20. Wang said he thought it important to note we were dealing with matters between China and US. If he were to raise matters or policies within scope internal affairs US or if he were to cause apprehensions concerning US policy of internal affairs, he would be guilty of going
