Non-Proliferation
981
5. Hermes asked what was the situation with regard to prior con-
sent before the NNPA. Smith said we do not have consent rights now,
and that in order to get such rights we might provide an “automatic
OK” for specified programs. Hermes asked whether the FRG would
“designate areas and the US would say yes or no”. Smith said the FRG
would initially designate the areas for programmatic consent.
6. Hermes noted that the US and FRG were now in a transitional
period through March 1981.2 Smith said that, if US–EURATOM negoti-
ations were underway, the US could extend the deadline. Smith noted
that we would have to cease exports to EURATOM unless the deadline
were extended.
7. Hermes then asked if the new procedure being suggested by
Smith would be tougher than the procedure that currently existed in
EURATOM: i.e., US-origin material could be used for peaceful, safe-
guarded uses. Smith said the new procedure was required to comply
with the NNPA. Hermes noted that the NNPA contravened the ex-
isting agreement with EURATOM countries. He asked what the impact
of our law was on international agreements which he thought were
“the supreme law of the land”. Smith noted that he believed that under
U.S. law legislation subsequent in time to a treaty superseded the treaty
for US domestic purposes.
8. Hermes said the FRG wanted development of an effective
IPS. He said the suggestions outlined by Smith constituted in effect
“a grand design”. Smith said we had to aim high to achieve
improvements.
9. Smith then reported on our bilaterals with the UK3 and France.4
The French told us it would be difficult to predict future needs, but did
not rule out in principle prior consent plus advance agreement on how
it would be exercised. The UK similarly did not rule this out in prin-
ciple, but were uncertain regarding their breeder program. Smith noted
2 Telegram 25455 to Paris, January 29, discussed Smith’s January 14 and 16 bilateral
discussions with the French on non-proliferation. Smith told the French Delegation “that
a recommendation for a one-year extension of the EURATOM deadline” set to expire in
March 1981 “to agree to US prior consent on reprocessing and plutonium use had been
forwarded to the White House.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800052–0771)
3 Telegram 14956 from London, July 15, reported that during the July 14 U.S.–UK
bilateral meeting on post-INFCE explorations, the UK government said “principle of
US-origin material and use of the derived plutonium not necessarily a problem, but pre-
dictability in exercise of such consent rights would be needed to prevent it becoming so.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P80029–1100)
4 No record of the U.S.-France bilateral talks has been found. Telegram 134778 to
Bonn, May 22, reported that during the May 13 U.S.–FRG bilateral meeting on
post-INFCE explorations, the FRG Delegation said “the FRG and France are united in
their opposition to U.S. prior consent rights.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800252–0605)
