International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 terest from the standpoint of increasing US exports and strengthening the dollar. If the opportunity arises, you may want to make this point in bilateral talks with Schmidt and Ohira. German and Japanese policies will be reviewed bilaterally in the OECD assessment of member countries’ macro-economic responses to higher oil prices this fall. (C) 2. Medium-Term. All agree this Summit should place more emphasis on medium-term policies to increase investment and productivity. This means such steps as deregulation, tax incentives for new investment, less protection and subsidy, and reducing the size of the public sector. The only question is how clearly this view should be stated, and how specifically these policies should be described. It would be helpful to the US—since we will want to move in this direction anyway—to have the Summit speak forcefully to this issue. Thatcher and Clark will likely take the same view. As on most issues, the Japanese will favor generalities. III. North-South All agree that the Summit should emphasize aid to developing countries for production of energy and food, and should stress technical assistance. Again, the need is for specificity: otherwise, the whole thing will be dismissed by the developing countries as a farce. Furthermore, only a clear call for specific action will produce that action. We do not want the Summit, in its preoccupation with energy, to become— or to be seen to have become—an ingrown rich man’s club. The other countries agree but would, for the most part, be content with bland generalities. (C) 1. Energy. The key points to make here are:5 a. The Summit should call on the World Bank and other multilateral banks to expand their programs to aid hydrocarbon exploration in LDCs, and on the Summit countries to improve their national programs to the same end. The French have proposed a joint mechanism (presumably managed by the World Bank) to guarantee developing countries and oil companies against the risks of fruitless exploration; the Summit could ask the World Bank to study this idea, which is too vague to be acted on. (C) b. The Summit countries should agree to give high priority, in their aid budgets, to renewable energy development in LDCs and should call on the World Bank to coordinate increased bilateral aid for this pur- 5 Documentation on the Tokyo G–7 Summit preparations on the issue of energy and oil pricing is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis,
