Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I If we do not obtain such a treaty, those rights will just as surely be in jeopardy. According to the best informed military opinion, we can’t defend the canal from a hostile Panama. It is too vulnerable to a sack of dynamite—or to a glove in the gears. Our relations with Latin America will deteriorate. We will be worse off without a reasonable revision of the existing treaty than with one. Accordingly, the real issue before us is whether we, as a party to the original treaty, have the imagination, the magnanimity, and the realism to recognize that a number of fundamental social and ethical conditions have changed and that it is in our self-interest to renegotiate the treaty. I believe we have those qualities and that on this issue, as on others, we can make progress in defusing what could otherwise become an explosive situation into which troublemakers might be drawn. Where longer term trends are concerned, the desirability of controling nuclear proliferation cannot be in question from the standpoint of national security. The President’s determination to conserve energy supplies and reduce our dependence on foreign oil makes equally good sense on the same grounds. So do efforts to review outstanding issues with old foes and former adversaries. The Role of Defense Finally, if we are to achieve a reasonable settlement of explosive current issues and have the time to affect longer run trends before they become explosive, we and our allies have work to do in the realm of defense. If we are to bring other and more constructive instruments to bear on international problems, our collective security system must be effective, reliable, and durable. Strength breeds the confidence not only to talk but also to institute constructive change. I regret, in this connection, that I cannot review in detail my trip to the Republic of Korea and Japan.4 First, I must report on it to the President. But this much I can say: The situation on the Korean Peninsula and in northeast Asia has changed greatly since 1950. 4 Brown attended the tenth annual Republic of Korea-United States Security Consultative Meeting in Seoul July 25–26. At the conclusion of the meeting, Brown and South Korean Defense Minister Suh Jong Chul issued a joint statement affirming that the ground combat force withdrawals did not signify a change in U.S. commitment to the security of South Korea. The statement also indicated that the majority of U.S. soldiers stationed in South Korea would remain there until the final year of the withdrawal. (Bernard Weintraub, “U.S. Will Keep Bulk of Combat Forces in Korea Until 1982: Response to
