1150 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement The following points were brought out: The NSTL and SIOP are good first efforts but there are quite a few things which had to be accepted without examination because of the compressed time scale for the development of the NSTL and SIOP. Further examination will be needed in quite a few areas so as to improve the next NSTL and SIOP. Many revisions and refinements will be essential. a. Minimum NSTL. The NSTL is probably bigger than necessary. When it is published, which we expect to take place sometime this week, the NSTL will com­ prise a “minimum NSTL”, additional targets considered to be of major importance, those defense targets which must be destroyed in order for attacking forces to reach their targets, plus those targets which the­ ater commanders must destroy in order to protect their own forces. A great deal of work will be necessary in order to make sure that the NSTL is really minimum because its size to a large extent will deter­ mine force levels in the future and also will have a great deal of impact on the types of weapons systems which will be procured. b. Intelligence. In general, the intelligence used for the preparation of the intel­ ligence annexes was agreed joint intelligence but owing to the time limitations, the operational intelligence was developed by SAC. There were no significant errors of commission or omission in this intelli­ gence insofar as could be determined in the very short time available for examination. One of the things that the JCS will have to develop will be how to get really joint intelligence into the plan and NSTL without undue delays. We can’t have long delays in arriving at an agreed intelligence solution and at the same time, neither should we permit raw intelli­ gence to be cranked in which may affect the plan significantly with­ out having that intelligence looked at by other people. The evaluation of intelligence data has very significant effects. We want to make sure that our intelligence upon which this plan is based is just as good as it possibly can be. It is for this reason we feel that there should be a joint intelligence center in Washington where all various intelligence agen­ cies can turn to and really crank out good intelligence using all the raw data that is available to anybody. c. Assurance. [text not declassified] There was great disagreement as to what the maximum assurance should be on any one target. For example, the most important targets should have greater assurance of a weapon arriving at BRL than on lesser targets. However, when you get up into
