1258  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Editorial and cartoon comment hall move EL NACIONAL com-
ments “if they really expel Perez Jimenez, welcome Mr. Nixon” EL 
INDEPENDIENTE editorial welcomes change of policy of support 
toward Perez Jimenez and other dictators although considering it 
overdue follow up stories report Perez Jimenez planning go Spain or 
Dominican Republic.
Sparks
VE–25.	
Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela,  
March 31, 19591
 
Caracas, March 31, 1959.
PARTICIPANTS
President Rómulo Betancourt
Minister of Mines Juan Pablo Pérez Alfonso
Mr. Thomas C. Mann, Asst. Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
Ambassador Edward J. Sparks
Minister-Counselor Charles R. Burrows
Economic Counselor Harlan P. Bramble
The conversation took place at a luncheon at Miraflores which 
President Betancourt offered for Mr. Mann.2
Mr. Mann spoke to the President of the reports which have reached 
Washington concerning the auspicious beginning of the President’s 
term of office. President Betancourt expressed his appreciation to 
Mr. Mann for these thoughts, indicating his obvious satisfaction and 
belief that his five-­year term will be a constructive one. The President 
spoke of the problems which Venezuela faces and of the demanding 
work which is required of him. He gave particular emphasis here to 
the problem of unemployment and said that the total number of unem-
ployed in the country is some 250,000. He spoke of his plans to attack 
the unemployment problem and to improve the basic economic posi-
tion of the country. Mr. Mann spoke of the importance of small industry 
to a country like Venezuela and the President agreed, saying that this 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.11/4–359. Confidential. Drafted by 
Burrows, and sent to the Department of State under cover of despatch 867 from Caracas, 
April 3, 1959.
2 Mann arrived in Caracas the evening of March 30, 1959, for consultations regard-
ing the U.S. oil imports system.
