696 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement new obstructions are set up and he is finally tried and sentenced four years imprisonment. K. I fail to see what your govt hopes or expects to gain by this con­ tinued delay and evasion in carrying out its freely entered into commit­ ment, and why it adopts course of action which if continued cannot but continue to cast increasing doubt on dependability of its pledged word. L. It cannot hope conceal these facts or obscure issue by repeti­ tion vague and unfounded charges of hypothetical nature against my government. M. Simple fact is my govt is not preventing any Chinese from leav­ ing US for your country or any other destination of his choice. Third power who you designated to confirm this assurance has not called to attention my govt single case to contrary. There has not to our knowl­ edge been single response to public statement made by Dept of State to which I referred at our last meeting inviting even anyone who knew of any Chinese being obstructed in departing to communicate either with Dept or Indian Embassy. N. No amount propaganda nor reiteration vague charges can obscure contrast between my government’s record and that of yours in this regard. 60. Wang said, in first place he wanted say he entirely could not accept false and unfounded charges against his govt on its carrying out agreed announcement Sept 10. Statement made by me was another attempt at distorting agreed announcement Sept 10. 61. Wang said he sure I would recall that, in discussions on first item agenda, clear distinction was made between those ordinary ­Americans in China and those who had committed crimes. 62. Wang said that as to ordinary American residents in China, pas­ sages of announcement of Sept 10 quoted by me were entirely correct. His govt has explicitly assumed commitment toward these ordinary American citizens. Along this line their side been consistently carrying out agreement concerning American residents in China. 63. Wang said that once any American civilian in China applied for departure, his govt never in any instance offered any obstruction to him. Even in cases those American civilians who had not yet settled personal affairs in China, policy his govt was assist them to enable them quickly depart. In this respect, no charges against his govt justified. 64. Wang said, as to those Americans who had committed offenses against laws China, they were precisely carrying out agreed announce­ ment as well as principles indicated in our discussions over their han­ dling of them. We had for very long time discussed question of those Americans who have committed offenses. Neither in conversations in course of discussions, nor in text agreement have they stated all those
