512
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
181.
Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Intelligence and
Research, Department of State1
No. 1378
Washington, March 31, 1953.
IRAN: POTENTIAL CHARACTER OF A KASHANI-DOMINATED
GOVERNMENT
The displacement of Prime Minister Mohammed Mosadeq of Iran
by his nearest political rival, Mullah Abol Qasem Kashani, would be
disadvantageous to Western interests. Both Kashani and Mosadeq are
political opportunists, but whereas Mosadeq, despite his passionate na-
tionalism, has an underlying respect for certain aspects of Western
liberalism, Kashani views contemporary problems from a narrowly
Moslem outlook, severely warped by many years of bitter conflict with
British authority.2
Kashani’s Potentialities for Gaining Power
Mosadeq’s prestige and political skill virtually preclude Kashani
from coming to power as long as the incumbent Prime Minister is alive
and politically active. Should Mosadeq retire or die, however, Kashani
would be the leading contender for his mantle, since he has the largest
bloc of votes (after Mosadeq) in the Majlis and controls the largest po-
tential force, except for Tudeh, for public demonstrations and physical
intimidation of his opposition. Power to choose the Prime Minister re-
sides in the Majlis, and it is very unlikely that the Shah would risk an-
other “Qavam incident” by appointing as Prime Minister anyone who
did not have controlling Majlis support.
Despite these initial elements of strength, the succession of
Kashani cannot be regarded as a cut-and-dried proposition. His elec-
1 Source: British National Archives, General Correspondence of the Foreign Office,
FO 371/104565. Secret; Security Information. The memorandum is attached to a covering
sheet in which A.K. Rothnie of the British Foreign Office, indicated that Joseph Palmer of
the U.S. Embassy in London had given the assessment to the Foreign Office on May 1.
Rothnie also commented that “neither we nor the Americans see any hope in Kashani as a
successor to Mussaddiq, nor, a fortiori, do we see any sense in assisting him to power.”
2 OIR prepared this assessment as a result of discussions between Eden and Smith
and Byroade in Washington on March 6. As recorded in Foreign Office telegram 526,
March 9, Eden raised the possibility of Kashani acting as a successor to Mosadeq. Smith
responded that as the danger of Mosadeq’s demanding Henderson’s recall from Tehran
had receded, the United States was “no longer thinking in terms of any urgent need to
find a successor to Musaddiq. The conclusion seemed to be that there was nothing we
could usefully do and that we must wait on events. We agreed, however, to examine the
possibilities of (a) dealing with Kashani as an alternative to Musaddiq and (b) using some
intermediary such as the Swiss or Camille Gutt.” (Ibid., FO 371/104614)
