Arms Control and Disarmament  1519
the Conference of Experts on the possibility of detecting and identify­
ing underground nuclear explosions require re-­examination.
In fact, early analysis of these data show that the detection capa­
bility of the system for underground explosions probably is much less 
than was thought to be the case last summer. Therefore, the United 
States position on controlled test cessation may require reshaping to fit 
the new facts and the consideration of this possibility is urgent since the 
treaty Articles and Annex I already tabled by the Western delegations 
may need serious revision.
Therefore, the Atomic Energy Commission concludes that in the 
light of:
(1) the seriously limited capability of the control system proposed 
by the Conference of Experts based on present knowledge as applied to 
underground and very high altitude nuclear explosions;
(2) the adequacy of the Conference of Experts’ proposals for con­
trol of atmospheric testing;
(3) the fact that radioactive fallout is caused principally by atmo­
spheric tests—the only type readily controllable at this time;
it should propose to you that the revised U.S. position should be:
(1) to adhere rigidly to the principle that control of any test cessa­
tion agreement is essential and that only those tests which are detect­
able and identifiable are to be prohibited by treaty. Under no conditions 
shall the relaxation of the requirements of the control system antecede 
policy changes regarding the scope of the tests being suspended.
(2) Negotiate as a first step, beginning at the appropriate time after 
the resumption of negotiations, a treaty for the cessation of atmospheric 
tests.
(3) To postpone for later negotiation a treaty applying to under­
ground and outer space tests after further investigation of the techni­
cal problems involved in their detection. The U.S. should be willing to 
discuss these problems to the extent desired by Russia during current 
negotiations.
(4) To propose meanwhile international cooperation (with the 
Control Commission if established) in this investigation to the extent of 
conducting for the Commission necessary experiments and in making 
available to the Commission or other appropriate authority the results 
of national nuclear experiments whose results bear upon the detection 
and identification problems at issue.
(5) To preserve the right to develop non-­military applications of 
nuclear explosives.
Sincerely yours,
/s/ H.S. Vance
Acting Chairman
