Options Identified 297 113. Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, December 24, 1979 SUBJECT Covert Action and U.S. Military Contingency Planning (S) The meeting with CIA, Defense, and State, on the compatibility of our military contingency planning and our covert action planning, took place on Saturday morning, December 22.2 David asked for the following options to be developed: [4 paragraphs (6 lines) not declassified] 5. Political consequences of seizing the oil region in the south, in particular, what would it take to hold the oil, denying its production and sale by Tehran and Khomeini’s government? 6. [less than 1 line not declassified] CIA is producing a paper on five of the six points. I and Defense were to produce something on the fifth point, holding the oil fields. (S) Putting the Khuzestan Oil Fields in “Trust.” Occupation of the oil producing region in the south could be done one of four ways: —Iraqi Invasion. This might take them away from Tehran, but the Iraqi hand on the oil spigot would not be easy to control. The other adverse political implications for the Persian Gulf littoral states makes this something to be prevented, not encouraged. —Admiral Madani Turns the Region Away from Tehran. If Admiral Madani, whose power in the Khuzestan region seems strong, were to abandon appearances of support for Khomeini’s regime, this would certainly take the oil away from Khomeini and give us some chance of influencing the internal developments in Iran. No one, however, seems to believe Madani can be brought to do this. —U.S. Invasion of the Khuzestan Region to Control the Oil. This, of course, is not remotely within our military capability, even if we drew 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 27, Iran 11/78–11/79. Secret; Sensitive; Outside the System. 2 Turner’s briefing material for the December 22 meeting is an untitled December 21 paper. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 13, Folder 1)
