Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Policy Considerations The decision on whether or not to submit reports on the five “OPIC only” countries ultimately depends upon a choice between competing policy interests. On the one hand, a failure to report would probably be criticized by some in Congress as being in violation of the law and evidence of a lack of sincerity and consistency in the Administration’s human rights policy. This could have broad undesirable consequences as further legislative proposals on human rights are considered. In particular, it might adversely affect the currently pending OPIC authorization bill. Legislation directed specifically against Brazil is also a possibility.12 On the other hand, the submission of a human rights report on Brazil would be strongly resented by the government of that country, which has already informed us that it will reject any security assistance which is conditioned upon the submission to Congress of such a report. Brazil’s denunciation of virtually all bilateral military cooperation agreements was a direct and emotional response to the FY 1978 human rights report on that country. We believe Brazil would respond similarly to a human rights report tied to any other program.13 OPIC is currently engaged only in a few projects in Brazil. Existing OPIC expropriation coverage in Brazil as of June 30, 1977, was around $200 million. Further, under present policy, OPIC would accept future applications concerning investments only in a few areas—energy and mineral resources, small business, and “exceptionally developmental” projects. The program is probably not of great importance to the Brazilian government and, therefore, might well be denounced if it became the cause for a further human rights report.14 Furthermore, the Brazilians could—and probably would—point out that OPIC’s programs in the first instance benefit U.S. investors in return for fees paid by them; the Brazilian Government would not consider OPIC programs as assistance to Brazil.15 Retaliatory action by Brazil in other fields is also possible.
