380
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Policy Considerations
The decision on whether or not to submit reports on the five “OPIC
only” countries ultimately depends upon a choice between competing
policy interests.
On the one hand, a failure to report would probably be criticized
by some in Congress as being in violation of the law and evidence of a
lack of sincerity and consistency in the Administration’s human rights
policy. This could have broad undesirable consequences as further leg-
islative proposals on human rights are considered. In particular, it
might adversely affect the currently pending OPIC authorization bill.
Legislation directed specifically against Brazil is also a possibility.12
On the other hand, the submission of a human rights report on
Brazil would be strongly resented by the government of that country,
which has already informed us that it will reject any security assistance
which is conditioned upon the submission to Congress of such a report.
Brazil’s denunciation of virtually all bilateral military cooperation
agreements was a direct and emotional response to the FY 1978 human
rights report on that country. We believe Brazil would respond simi-
larly to a human rights report tied to any other program.13
OPIC is currently engaged only in a few projects in Brazil. Existing
OPIC expropriation coverage in Brazil as of June 30, 1977, was around
$200 million. Further, under present policy, OPIC would accept future
applications concerning investments only in a few areas—energy and
mineral resources, small business, and “exceptionally developmental”
projects. The program is probably not of great importance to the Bra-
zilian government and, therefore, might well be denounced if it became
the cause for a further human rights report.14 Furthermore, the Bra-
zilians could—and probably would—point out that OPIC’s programs
in the first instance benefit U.S. investors in return for fees paid by
them; the Brazilian Government would not consider OPIC programs as
assistance to Brazil.15 Retaliatory action by Brazil in other fields is also
possible.
12 The FY 1979 Foreign Assistance Appropriation Act (P.L. 95–148) already pro-
hibits the use of funds for FMS credit to Brazil and other Latin American countries which
have rejected U.S. security assistance in whole or in part because of our human rights re-
ports. [Footnote in the original.]
13 An unknown hand bracketed this paragraph. For information regarding the Bra-
zilian rejection of bilateral military aid, see footnote 6, Document 42.
14 An unknown hand bracketed the portion of the paragraph that begins with “ ‘ex-
ceptionally developmental’ ” and ends with “became.”
15 An unknown hand bracketed the portion of the paragraph that begins with “in-
vestors” and ends with “assistance.”
