1955 401 be able to return without action, the Chinese would not have been able to return. Basic cause underlying failure of Chinese to return from US was existence of restricting order by US Government against them. Only after American Government rescinded restricting orders were basic difficulties involved in return resolved. Wang said that when the US rescinded these orders, his side expressed welcome to this action because those orders were unreasonable and because it was reasonable they should be rescinded. 27. Wang said that same is true in Taiwan area. Cause of tension in area is chiefly because US has used force in area. He stated that his side considered such action inconsistent with UN Charter and that if US would withdraw all its armed forces it would naturally change sit­ uation in area. Only by doing so would it convince people of practical significance of American proposal on renunciation of force. 28. I replied that I could not refrain from pointing out that we did not make agreed announcement until we were fully prepared imple­ ment it. I agreed to his thesis that mere statements do not solve prob­ lems. We did not make the statement that all Chinese were free to depart until they were in fact able to do so. This led me to my point in regard to remaining imprisoned Americans. I stated that only action by his government can permit them to leave. I had hoped and expected that they would be able to leave expeditiously. However, almost five weeks had passed since the announcement. I recalled that he had used many words in our discussion of time Americans would be able to leave, including “very quickly” and other such terms. I said “expedi­ tiously” had finally been decided upon, and yet in five weeks not one of nineteen has been able to leave. I stated that I failed to see how this can be termed expeditiously. 29. Wang replied that he had nothing more to say. 30. I stated that I had a suggestion to make on timing of the talks. I pointed out that we have been meeting at irregular intervals and that both of us had other responsibilities as well. I stated that talks were entering phase of utmost gravity and importance and that I and my government wanted time carefully to consider course of talks here. In light of this, I suggested that we normally meet once a week. I said Friday or any other day would suit me but did not exclude occasional more frequent meetings if we considered desirable. 31. Wang immediately concurred in my suggestion, requesting that meetings take place on Thursdays for time being. We agreed to release customary statement to press. 32. Next meeting Thursday, October 20, 10 am. Gowen Note: FE Message Center notified 10/15/55 10:40 a.m. EMB (CWO)
