590 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ES–14. Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1  Washington, April 12, 1960. SUBJECT Deterioration of Conditions in El Salvador Problem For some time we have been seeking an opportunity to impress upon President Lemus and upon the economic leaders of El Salvador our growing concern about the deterioration of political and social conditions in that country. The current visit to Washington of Minister of Economy Alfonso Rochac will provide a good channel to get our views across to both groups.2 Discussion Our Embassy’s reports over the past six months have become increasingly apprehensive over growing Cuban/Communist activating and greater social unrest in El Salvador (Tab A).3 Fidelismo is spreading like wildfire among the under privileged; there is growing lawlessness in the country, rape, murder, robbery and thievery. There are indications that some groups who have previously supported President Lemus are lukewarm or in opposition, either because the President has not moved energetically enough against communists, or because the President appeared to favor action which would limit their almost absolute economic control of the country. There are also reports of graft in the government and subversion of the courts. We have no reports to indicate that the government is taking any action to remedy the social and economic conditions in the country, which have recently been described publicly by church officials as the worst in Latin America (Tab B).4 The church statement observed that in El Salvador, the rich consider the poor as slaves. 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 64 D 16, “Political Local- General: El Salvador, 1960.” Secret. Drafted by Maxwell Chaplin. 2 A handwritten notation by Rubottom on the source text reads as follows: “Since I may not see him, I believe Messrs, Mallory and Mann might handle.” It is also noted on the source text that Mann saw this memorandum. 3 Not filed with source text. 4 Not filed with source text.
