International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues dren), catalyzing community organization and participation, and setting a basis for the development of cottage industry and community development, it would be the improvement of water supply.”4 In developing nations there is even less access to safe waste disposal systems than availability of safe drinking water. The contamination of food and water by human waste is the main reason for the dissemination of intestinal diseases carried by parasites and bacteria. For example, hookworm, which infects about 700 million individuals and causes severe anemia results from skin exposure to infected human waste deposited in surface soil. Further, there is a direct relationship between deaths due to diarrheal diseases in children under five and the availability of piped water systems. Water borne diseases also combine with other factors including induced fever which interfere with the body’s use of food energy which lowers nutritional value. More than five million people die every year from water-borne diseases. Another dimension of the community water problem is the scarcity of water for growing urban centers. Many cities in the Third World as they rapidly grow due to population increase are finding it increasingly difficult to supply their citizens with clean water. The result sometimes has been the increase in sickness, the drying up or pollution of wells and conflict over water ownership between communities. International Institutional Background The problem of potable water was examined in varying degrees at several UN conferences including those on the Environment, Population, Habitat and most recently at the UN Water Conference at Mar del Plata in March 1977. Specifically, both Habitat and the Water Conference passed resolutions or recommendations about community water with the main aim dealing with the problems of the least developed and most seriously affected countries. The Conferences called for increased financial contributions, multilaterally and bilaterally, for assisting community water supply and sanitation. Also emphasis was placed on improvement of domestic hygiene especially through education and motivation. The application of appropriate and low-cost technology was cited as key elements in dealing with this problem. Priority was also given to immediate national planning to give high priority to projects in this sector. Specifically the key UN Water Conference recommendations were “(a) That where human needs have not yet been satisfied, national development policies and plans should give priority to the supplying
