September 18–December 16, 1978
337
and that they had concluded that they could not settle such questions
as what might happen if Israel were engaged in a military conflict with
Syria and Egypt felt obliged to go to Syria’s defense under the provi-
sion of the U.N. Charter which provides for collective measures of
self-defense. Rosenne noted that some American treaties have contained
language similar to that suggested by the Israelis. He quoted the NATO
treaty4 and the 1953 treaties5 with Greece and Turkey. Israel’s concern
is that it is entering a treaty with Egypt in the full knowledge that Egypt
has fifty mutual defense pacts with adversaries of Israel.
The President asked if the Israelis could accept language similar to
that which we used in NATO and in our treaties with Turkey and
Greece. Rosenne said they could, provided there were an additional
statement on the priority of this treaty over all others. Barak said that
there were two ways of dealing with the issue. You could say that the
most recent treaty supercedes those that have preceded it; or you could
declare that there is no conflict between this treaty and any other. But
the latter solution can be misunderstood. Rosenne said that it is not
enough simply to state that there is no conflict. The President said that it
would be easier to convince Sadat if the language used was similar to
that in the NATO treaty. Barak noted that the problem with the NATO
formula is that it is not adequate because it simply states that there is no
conflict between the Egypt-Israel treaty and other obligations, and this
is not in fact true.
Dayan said that he would be returning to Israel, and that if he re-
ported that Barak and Rosenne had met with the highest legal author-
ities in the United States and that they were not satisfied with the lan-
guage, he could not expect the Cabinet to accept it. The President
bluntly asked if Dayan would prefer for us to withdraw from the nego-
tiations entirely. Dayan repeated that the legal experts had said that the
U.S. draft was not adequate. Barak said that Israel could not ask the
Egyptians to withdraw from their other treaties. The language Israel
has suggested is the best that they can hope for. This is a technical
problem of international law. Rosenne added that if the Egyptians
cannot accept this language, it will raise doubts in Israel about their
sincerity.
The President said that Sadat had insisted6 that the interim with-
drawal line be east of the settlement near al-Arish. The President had
4 The text of the North Atlantic Treaty, signed in Washington, D.C. on April 4, 1949,
is in Foreign Relations, 1949, vol. IV, Western Europe, pp. 281–285.
5 Reference is presumably to the “United States use of Defense Facilities: Agree-
ment between the United States and the Kingdom of Greece, October 12, 1953.” (American
Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1950–1955, pp. 2188–2189)
6 For Eilts’s conversation with Sadat on September 28, see footnote 2, Document 67.
