88 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Assumption: Afghanistan’s importance lies in the destabilizing effect its communist government could have on the region—particularly on Pakistan. Further afield, the Afghan situation is having an adverse psychological impact on many Third World countries. It tends to bolster the thesis that the Soviet way is the wave of the future, and that the U.S. will make no effort to stem Soviet encroachments in the Middle East. Therefore, it is in the U.S. interest to have the Taraki Government fall and be replaced by a non-communist regime. Currently the USG is seeking to influence Afghan policies by conventional diplomatic means, including the continuation of AID programs. Our ability to exercise economic and political leverage is limited, and efforts to date have been largely successful. Conversely, given its geographic proximity, existing close economic and military relationships, and common political philosophy, the USSR has been able to move quickly to consolidate and strengthen its already considerable influence.7 Nevertheless, an anti-communist coup d’etat is still possible, and the Soviets would probably feel obliged to accept such an event without resorting to military intervention, assuming it was carried out quickly and decisively. On the other hand, a gradually accelerated insurgency would carry a greater risk of countermeasures, both overt and covert. Our intelligence indicates the insurgency is going to continue, no matter what position the U.S. adopts in respect to it. We cannot at this time predict how it will develop, nor whether it will succeed. But we do see it hurting the Taraki Government and, in particular, having a divisive impact on the armed forces. The soldiers, mainly rural draftees, are being required to use their weapons against their fellows from the countryside. The officer corps, although purged of suspected anti- Taraki elements, could well become increasingly embarrassed and angry at being obliged to impose an unpopular regime on their own people. A possible scenario: the continuing insurgency would lead eventually to the active disaffection of a sufficient number of officers into blaming the country’s problems on Taraki, who would forcefully overthrow his regime. Finally, there is the fatigue factor. The Taraki Government is narrowly based and thinly staffed. A sustained insurgency would undoubtedly drain scarce managerial and leadership resources the government can ill afford. While it is possible that the government will fall very quickly (viz, in a lightning coup), it seems more likely that Taraki will be overthrown as a result of his continuing inability to deal with the insurgency. We also believe that the Afghan 7 Henze drew a line from the word “close” and wrote in the top margin: “unsuccessful!”
