146 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 42. Memorandum From Robert Hormats of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, July 8, 1977 SUBJECT PRC Meeting on Economic Aspects of the Schmidt Visit2 This meeting has two aspects: the first substantive, the second bureaucratic. From a substantive point of view, it provides an excellent opportunity to ensure that (a) economic issues are put to Schmidt in a political context, and there is a consistent approach among the various officials who will be seeing Schmidt. The results of the meeting will also be incorporated in the overview memo for the President.3 At Tab A is a paper I have prepared for these discussions. It provides background on the various issues and puts them in a political context. It also identifies the specific economic problems which are likely to be discussed during the Schmidt meeting. At Tab B are papers prepared primarily by Treasury with State input, except for the paper on EC enlargement which was prepared by State.4 Blumenthal will lead off on most issues; Vance on EC enlargement; and Strauss on MTN. From a procedural point of view, this meeting puts the NSC mechanism into the international economic picture on a key subject. I have prepared the background paper with this very much in mind—specifically to demonstrate the linkage between economics and politics. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 13, Germany F R: 7–9/77. Confidential. Sent for action. 2 In a July 2 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski indicated that he was “increasingly concerned about the erosion of political confidence in Europe, which is both resulting from and contributing to serious economic difficulties.” Noting that “the Schmidt visit provides an excellent opportunity to review these issues and consider possible actions that can be taken,” Brzezinski proposed a PRC meeting “on how to approach Schmidt on the economic issues.” Carter indicated his approval of the recommendation. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 63, PRC 023, 7/9/77, Schmidt Visit) No minutes of this PRC meeting were found. 3 Not found. 4 Attached but not printed are papers entitled “The Adequacy of International Financing Mechanisms,” “Estimate of Supply of IMF Resources Through Remainder of 1977,” “Follow-up to the Summit,” “Increased Protectionism,” “The Future of the International Monetary System,” “Adequacy of German Growth,” “EC Enlargement,” “Portuguese Economic Situation,” “Turkey,” “Spain—Economic Prospects,” and “Revitalizing the MTN.”
