Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
105
exposed to daily suffering and humiliation and are struggling to
survive.”7
Other conflicts in policy may arise when the security of the United
States is linked to that of a country whose human rights priorities are
deficient. It should be uppermost in our minds that security assistance
is rendered to maintain or enhance our own security, not to strengthen
the hand of a repressive regime, although we must face up to that as an
undesired and unintended consequence in certain cases.
We are working to fulfill both the letter and the spirit of current
legislation relating human rights concerns to foreign assistance. We can
best achieve this purpose through conscientious and systematic review
of assistance programs on a country-by-country basis, in each case bal-
ancing a political concern for human rights against economic or secu-
rity goals. In multilateral development banks the United States must
work to maintain a broad international consensus and to avoid destruc-
tive bloc politics that would impair the pursuit of the banks’ develop-
ment objectives. No formula can resolve the larger conflicts of these po-
sitions, but prudent and dedicated attention to both the basic objectives
and the day-to-day operations of our programs can make specific
problems more tractable.
We have been developing a series of questions by which to chart
the direction of our policy and our progress. Taken together as points
of reference, they will make us surer of our basic course and less likely
to be driven from it by the force of a particular circumstance. The ques-
tions we are considering include:
1. Will our action be useful in promoting the cause of human
rights? Will it actually improve the human rights situation at hand? Or
is it likely to make it worse?
2. What will be the most effective means of expressing our views?
Quiet diplomacy? A public pronouncement? Withdrawal of aid or
other tangible sanctions?
3. Even when there is only a remote chance that our action will be
influential, does our sense of values, our American ethic, prompt us to
speak out or take action?
4. Will others support us? Can we expect the aid of national and in-
ternational organizations dedicated to furthering human rights?
5. Have we steered away from the self-righteous and strident, re-
membering that our own record is not unblemished?
6. Finally, have we remembered national security interests and
kept our sense of perspective, realizing that human rights cannot
7 For a statement by Secretary Vance on Feb. 24, see BULLETIN of Mar. 14, 1977, p.
236. [Footnote in the original. See footnote 6 above.]
