Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I ask the Senate to ratify, Protocol I of the treaty, prohibiting the placement of nuclear weapons in Latin America.5 However, banning the spread of nuclear explosives does not require giving up the benefits of peaceful nuclear technology. We mean to work closely with all of you on new technologies to use the atom for peaceful purposes. To slow the costly buildup of conventional arms, we are seeking global policies of restraint. We are showing restraint in our own policies around the world, and we will be talking to supplier nations and to prospective buyers about ways to work out a common approach. We also believe that regional agreements among producers and purchasers of arms can further such a global effort. I spent most of this morning working on a new United States policy to reduce the sale of conventional arms around the world. Again, you in Latin America have taken the lead. The pledge of eight South American nations to limit the acquisition of offensive arms in their region is a striking example. If the eight nations can implement their pledge, their own people will not be the only ones to benefit. They will have set a standard for others throughout the world to follow. These are challenges that face us in the future. There are also problems that plague us from the past. And we must work together to solve them. One that addresses itself to us is the Panama Canal. In the first days of my own administration, just a few weeks ago, I directed a new approach to our negotiations with Panama on a new Canal treaty. In the light of the changes which I discussed before, the Treaty of 1903,6 which combines [defines] our relationship with Panama on the canal, is no longer appropriate or effective. I am firmly committed to negotiating in as timely a fashion as possible a new treaty which will take into account Panama’s legitimate needs as a sovereign nation and our own interests and yours in the efficient operation of a neutral canal, open on a nondiscriminatory basis to all users. Another problem which we must in a way address together is that of Cuba. We believe that normal conduct of international affairs and particularly the negotiation of differences require communication with all countries in the world. To these ends, we are seeking to determine 5 The President signed Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco at the White House on May 26. For his remarks at the signing ceremony, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, p. 1027. 6 Reference is the Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty, signed by officials of the United States and Panama on November 18, 1903.
