642 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 —Embargo on Food and Medicine. Cy supports Option A,4 which would limit our embargo to those items included in the UNSC sanctions vetoed by the USSR, but excluding food and medicine. Other members of the SCC have supported an extension of the sanctions to formalize what is already a de facto total embargo. (S) —Announced Purpose of Inventory of Claims. Cy supports Option A,5 which is a neutral statement, leaving all future options open. Other members of the SCC favored some indication in the statement that the inventory of claims would lay the basis for satisfying claims by the hostages and their families against the Government of Iran. Options B, C, and D6 provide increasingly explicit commitments to proceed with disposition of claims by the hostages and their families. Option D, which commits us to proceed with formal legislation, is opposed by State and Treasury as counterproductive, on the grounds that it highlights the likelihood of major claims by the hostages and that it may eliminate any flexibility in using the frozen Iranian assets as a negotiating lever in the final negotiations for release of the hostages. Stu Eizenstat proposed Option D as a means of underlining our commitment to use the Iranian assets to compensate the hostages and their families for the ordeal they have been through. (S) —“Refugees from Injustice.” This bracketed language in the fourth numbered paragraph7 is opposed by Cy on the grounds that it unduly draws attention to minority groups and will work to their disadvantage by focusing Iranian attention on them. All others supported this language as entirely consonant with U.S. policy and sufficiently general to avoid damaging minority group efforts to remain inconspicuous. (S) 4 Paragraph 1, option A, of the April 6 “Draft Announcement of Decisions on Iran” at Tab A reads: “The Secretary of the Treasury will implement (a) fully the U.S. sanctions as approved.” Paragraph 1, option B, reads: “The Secretary of the Treasury will implement (b) a total embargo on U.S. trade with Iran going beyond the economic sanctions approved.” 5 Paragraph 2 of the Draft Announcement begins: “The Secretary of the Treasury will make formal inventories of the outstanding claims of American citizens and corporations against the Government of Iran and of the substantial Iranian assets frozen by my previous order.” Option A continues: “This accounting will provide the factual basis for subsequent decisions on the handling of those claims.” 6 Paragraph 2, Option B states: “This accounting will provide the factual basis for subsequent decisions on the handling of those claims, including those which may be made by the hostages or their families, and on the disposition of those assets.” Option C states: “This accounting will aid in designing a claims program against Iran for the hostages, their families and other U.S. claimants.” Option D states: “This accounting will aid in designing a claims program against Iran for the hostages, their families and other U.S. claimants. Legislation to facilitate processing those claims is in preparation.” 7 That part of paragraph 4 of the Draft Announcement at Tab A reads: “Consular officers will reissue visas or issue new visas only to qualified Iranians who require visas for humanitarian reasons [who are refugees from injustice,] or whose entry has been determined to be in our national interest.” Brackets are in the original.
