Human Rights
563
179.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) and
the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and
Business Affairs (Hormats) to the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher)1
Washington, January 24, 1979
Human Rights and Multilateral Development Banks: Procedures for
Securing Support from Other Governments for U.S. Positions
Issue for Decision
Governments of several major countries acknowledge that human
rights are a legitimate concern in consideration of MDB projects, yet we
have had only partial success in securing their opposition to specific
projects we oppose on human rights grounds. The issue for decision is
whether, beyond notification of an intent to oppose a loan in a reason-
able number of instances, we should seek the support of like-minded
governments in opposing such loans.
Background/Analysis
Over the course of the past two years, we have opposed about 48
loans to 15 countries for human rights reasons. These actions are in ac-
cord with our Congressional mandate and with Administration policy.
In our Congressional presentations a year ago we asserted that the Ad-
ministration actively had pursued its human rights objectives, in-
cluding in the MDBs, and had made a start in attracting international
support.
Other countries have joined us in opposition on approximately 25
loans to five countries. In only one case, however, have we received
enough support to have a loan withdrawn by the African Development
Fund to Equatorial Guinea.2 With regard to assistance financed by the
Inter-American Development Banks’ Fund for Special Operations, over
which the U.S. holds a veto, the U.S. has been able to keep certain loans
from coming forward. Also, it is probable that loans to Chile have not
come forward in the World Bank because of the belief that U.S. and
other donors would disapprove them. To the degree that increased in-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P790022–0354. Con-
fidential. Drafted by Watson on January 22; cleared by Winder, Bushnell, Jennone
Walker, and Canner. Watson initialed for Winder and Bushnell; Schneider initialed for
Walker. An unknown hand initialed for Derian. Perry and John Spiegel also initialed the
memorandum.
2 An unknown hand placed parentheses around the phrase “by the African Devel-
opment Fund to Equatorial Guinea.”
