3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
539
is very important that we share a common view of the meaning of the
language so as to avoid disagreements on this issue in the future.
We both recognize that certain telemetric information is relevant to
verification of the agreement because such telemetry provides informa-
tion concerning compliance with the provisions of the agreement; and
that the deliberate denial of such telemetric information, such as by en-
cryption, is therefore prohibited.
We also both recognize that certain telemetric information is not
relevant to verification of compliance with the provisions of the agree-
ment and that the deliberate denial of that information which is not rel-
evant to verification of the provisions of the agreement, such as by en-
cryption, is therefore not prohibited.
It is my hope and expectation that the negotiating record on this
issue may be considered complete and that with the agreed common
understanding and this letter we can consider the telemetry issue as
resolved.
This is another indication that we continue to make progress in set-
tling the outstanding issues and that we can, in the near future, com-
plete the agreement and have our long delayed meeting.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
185.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
Washington, April 12, 1979, 2012Z.
91597. Subject: Secretary’s Demarche to Dobrynin on Afghanistan.
Ref:.
1. (S-Entire text)
2. During a meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin April 11, the Sec-
retary made the following demarche concerning Soviet accusations of
U.S. support for the insurgency in Afghanistan.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 9, Vance NODIS MemCons, 1979. Secret; Im-
mediate; Exdis. Drafted by Robert Perito (EUR/SOV); cleared by Gary Matthews (EUR/
SOV), James Collins (NEA), Ronald Lorton (NEA/PAB), Jack Perry (S), Jack Miklos
(NEA) and Curtis Kamman (S); approved by Barry. Sent for information Immediate to
London, Beijing, Jidda, New Delhi, Kabul, Islamabad, and Tehran.
