600
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
situation in your region. Recent trends make clear there is a tide run-
ning against the kind of stable and moderate Middle East we both seek.
Developments in Iran have contributed to this trend. I know they are of
great concern to you, not only because of their immediate impact on the
supply of oil to Israel, but also because of their broader implications for
the region and for Israel’s security. As I told Ambassador Evron re-
cently, we attach great value to the contribution a stable, strong and
democratic Israel can make to security in your region. It seems to me
self-evident that the single greatest contribution to stability in the
Middle East would be the early successful conclusion of the Egyptian-
Israeli peace negotiations. This would create a new reality with which
those forces that have been hostile to the Camp David Frameworks
would have to reckon. In the absence of early progress in the negotia-
tions, I fear this opportunity may be lost and the security of our friends
in the region as a whole will become more vulnerable.
Despite the difficulties that have prevented completion of the
Israeli-Egyptian negotiations, I continue to believe that we can achieve
the objectives we set for ourselves at Camp David. It is clear to me that
all of the remaining issues are closely interrelated and need to be dealt
with and resolved together. It is also clear that we must address our-
selves to this task as a matter of some urgency, before time begins to
work against us and in order to free our energies to deal with our
common strategic concerns in your region. The question is how best to
proceed. As you know, Mr. Prime Minister, I recently said that I would,
if necessary, be prepared to meet again with you and President Sadat. I
do not believe, however, that we have sufficiently tested whether such
a meeting is necessary or would be fruitful.
I want to suggest for your consideration, therefore, that the negoti-
ations be resumed at the Ministerial level in Washington among Prime
Minister Khalil, Foreign Minister Dayan and Secretary Vance. I would
be happy to make Camp David available for these talks, so that the
three Ministers and their aides would be able to work in private,
without interruption, and away from the pressures and glare of the
news media. If it is convenient, I suggest that the Ministerial talks begin
soon after Secretary Vance and I return from our forthcoming visit to
Mexico,6 specifically, on Wednesday, February 21. I am also communi-
cating this suggestion to President Sadat.
I recognize that Foreign Minister Dayan and Prime Minister Khalil
would need to consult closely with you and with President Sadat, re-
spectively, as the talks progress. For this reason, I would anticipate
6 Carter was in Mexico February 14–16, where he met with Mexican President
Lopez Portillo and addressed the Mexican Congress.
