Accordingly, questions relating to the points quoted above will presumably
arise at the forthcoming conference. The Department will address to you
separate instructions regarding the attitude you should take concerning
these points.
The Department considers it important that a suitable agreement be reached
for the abolition of import and export prohibitions and restrictions. Such
measures have caused material difficulty to American commerce in the
period since the war, by reason of the arbitrary and discriminatory manner
in which they have been applied. They have interfered with that stability of
conditions which is so essential to the development and progress of
international commerce. Moreover, their application has led to a number of
diplomatic controversies and has complicated the negotiation of the
commercial treaties which the United States has desired to conclude in
order to establish its commercial relations with foreign countries on a
mutually satisfactory and permanent basis.
During the negotiations of the Conference you will of course keep the
Department closely advised of important developments, including the
substance of any new proposals that may be seriously considered. The
Department will endeavor promptly to instruct you in relation to such points
as may develop.
It may be that certain of the governments participating in the Conference
will be disposed to extend in some directions the scope of the matters dealt
with. As indicated above, the Department is of the opinion that in view of
the declarations of the Economic Conference in relation to export duties,
the scope of the Conference may be extended to deal with them. But the
Department is inclined to the view that in principle it would not be
advisable to extend the scope of the Conference in other directions for
example in relation to questions affecting import duties and commercial
treaties. Apart from the fact that certain inquiries pertaining to these matters
are being conducted by the League of Nations pursuant to the conclusions
of the Economic Conference, the Department believes that no useful
purpose will be served by the injection of such controversial matters into
the present Conference. The Conference is more likely to succeed if its
objectives are definitely limited.
