Yugoslavia
979
President Mijatovic replied that the Yugoslav side would inform the
countries of the non-aligned movement about their talks with President
Carter. He assured him that they would report frankly and that the
picture of the talks would be realistic. He also assured him that the
Yugoslavs would do everything to interpret the results as favorable to
their friends in the non-aligned movement, and that this would have
a positive impact on the views of the non-aligned countries. (C)
Turning to relations with the Soviet Union, President Mijatovic noted
some interesting new developments had taken place. There had been
a greater Soviet interest in contacts with Yugoslavia than in the past.
Their views and criticisms had not changed, especially regarding
Afghanistan and Kampuchea. In Belgrade, in talks with Doronski and
Kolisevski, the Soviets had emphasized how they respected the non-
aligned principles and non-interference. Yugoslavia had been very sat-
isfied with this. In this connection, President Mijatovic noted that he
had given an interview about the Belgrade communique which the
Soviets had published. This was interesting and new. In the past the
Soviets had not shown much interest in this. All these were positive
signs. In the future he thought the Soviets would take a deep interest
in Yugoslav affairs. (S)
The President replied that this was good but he warned the Yugo-
slavs to be cautious. (C)
Mr. Doronski remarked that the Yugoslavs had had a lot of bitter
experience with the Soviets, and they had had a lot of good experience.
This had tended to make them careful. On the whole, however, he
pointed out, cooperation was developing well. (S)
The President stressed that the best deterrent was a strong and a
united people. (C)
Mr. Brzezinski added, “and the balance of power”. (C)
President Mijatovic then said he would like to say something about
their experience with the Soviets. He wanted to be frank and did not
want to be misunderstood. The Yugoslavs were aware that the Soviets
had not given up their goal of bringing Yugoslavia into the bloc and
taking away their independence. Some such tendencies existed in the
West, too, he noted, but not in the case of the United States. Yugoslavia’s
policies, domestic and foreign, would remain the same, and Yugoslavia
would continue its non-aligned policy. (S)
Mr. Doronski added that Yugoslavia was simply carrying out Tito’s
policy. (C)
