September 1953–December 1954
893
Significance to Neighboring States
11. The significance of the fall of Iran into communist hands has to
be measured in more than military terms. Friends of the West in the
Arab nations would undoubtedly be grievously discouraged by the in-
ability of Iran to maintain its independence within the community of
free nations. Friends of international communism would be greatly en-
couraged; while those who have sought to maintain a so-called neutral
attitude would undoubtedly have their fears of choosing sides empha-
sized. Of course, it is possible that Arab governments might draw a
lesson from the fall of Iran and take more active measures to resist com-
munist pressure. Even this however would not counterbalance the ad-
vantage to the Soviets of gaining additional territory from the free
world and of having a better base for propaganda and special political
action in the Middle East.
12. As to the effect upon Turkey and Pakistan, it is obvious that
these two nations would be prevented by a communist Iran from main-
taining effective military cooperation. Both nations would find them-
selves with newly exposed frontiers open to communist military action
or political subversion. It is probable that Turkey’s determination to re-
sist Russian aggression would not be lessened by this event, but the
question of Pakistan’s reaction is not so clear.
13. It would also be a shock to the whole community of free nations
should Iran become a satellite of the USSR. U.S. prestige throughout the
world would suffer and the concept of communal security would be
weakened.
Part 4
Support of Iranian Armed Forces
Current United States Military Assistance
1. There are two United States military advisory missions in Iran
(the U.S. Mission to the Iranian Army and the U.S. Mission to the Ira-
nian Gendarme´rie) in addition to the Military Assistance Advisory
Group (MAAG) which supervises the handling of U.S. military aid to
Iran. Since the program began in 1950, a total of 101.4 million in mili-
tary aid has been programmed for Iran, of which only 45.9 million has
been delivered (including the value of end-items shipped plus expendi-
tures for packaging, handling, crating, transportation, and training).
The Shah’s Request
2. The Shah has stressed the necessity for an early decision as to
whether his armed forces are to be treated merely as a police force to
maintain internal security or both as a police force and defense force,
capable of delaying the progress of an enemy if Iran should be invaded.
