Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX The extent to which the control mechanisms will be applied remains to be seen. Their very announcement, however, is a setback for Honecker, who had been noted for a degree of political flexibility and concern for popular demands. At the same time, though, the new hard line has been sequenced in such a way as to minimize disruption in FRG–GDR ties so that the basic framework of detente does not suffer. East Germany’s economic plight is not unique to Eastern Europe. But the SED has even less to fall back on than some of the other ruling communist parties in the region—either in foreign policy independence or in manipulation of traditional nationalism. Thus the political toll ultimately could be more severe. At the moment, the discontent is not overt and Honecker seems relatively secure. But should Honecker’s new hard line not forestall the emergence of mounting discontent within the GDR, Moscow will be forced to make hard choices on the GDR’s political leadership and Soviet underwriting of the country’s economy. Honecker’s Political Dilemmas (U) When Erich Honecker succeeded Walter Ulbricht in 1971, the new leader tried to reach an accommodation between the regime and the population. Honecker, while not weakening the SED’s monopoly of power, sought to modify some of Ulbricht’s more strident domestic policies. He did this by, inter alia: —reorienting economic policy toward a rapid improvement in the standard of living, in part by allowing citizens to have access to Western money and consumer goods; —tolerating a marginally more open intellectual and artistic expression, sometimes looking the other way when East Germans published critical works in the FRG; and —seeking, more recently, a rapprochement with the Evangelical (Lutheran) Church, the one major institution outside the SED. At the same time, Honecker made it quite clear, by maintenance of rigid security controls, that his regime was not engaged in political liberalization, that Western influences would be contained, and that travel to the West would remain restricted. (C) Honecker’s approach was not a panacea for the population, but it was a welcome respite that allowed individuals to indulge a bit in material values. By the late 1970s, however, it had become apparent that these policy shifts were quietly generating a new set of problems. —Consumerism, rooted in legalized access to West German currency, had begun to create a two-class system of “haves” and “havenots,” i.e., those with and those without Western money; this produced growing resentment among the latter because hard currency was often the only means of obtaining necessary goods and services.
