Special Session on Disarmament
1193
to which such constraints on the Soviets would reduce our own re-
quirements. A cut-off and transfer proposal would involve important
national security issues, but we believe this Administration’s commit-
ment to nuclear arms control requires that we give the most serious
consideration to reaffirming our previous proposals in this area.
A cut-off proposal has been advanced in various forms by four
previous US Administrations, beginning with that of President Eisen-
hower. We will have to face this issue in any event at the Special Ses-
sion, for it is part of the Program of Action of the non-aligned, and may
be advanced as a suggestion by some of our allies as well.
A cut-off and transfer would be complementary to SALT TWO and
a Comprehensive Test Ban, and could be presented as a logical follow-
on to those treaties. Together with these ongoing efforts, it is regarded
by non-nuclear weapon states as one of the primary requirements to
maintain and strengthen the NPT and the overall non-proliferation re-
gime. Proposing such negotiations would demonstrate our intention to
deal ultimately with a central issue of nuclear disarmament—halting
the continued production and stockpiling of nuclear weapons. As such,
it directly addresses the concerns expressed by Prime Minister Desai
and hence would improve the prospects for obtaining Indian accept-
ance of full scope safeguards—one of our priority non-proliferation
objectives.
It is not clear that reaffirming a cut-off and transfer proposal
would lead to productive negotiations with the Soviets. They have in
the past rejected the cut-off, and Brezhnev’s November 2 proposal for a
halt in the production of nuclear weapons,3 beginning with a ban on
“neutron weapons,” carries obvious difficulties for the US. The likely
Soviet rejoinder would be a call for negotiation of a production ban on
nuclear weapons as well as on fissionable materials. They have infor-
mally indicated to us in New York during the Special Session Prepara-
tory Committee meetings that a cut-off could be a corollary to a
weapons production ban. We could counter that such a ban applicable
to all nuclear weapons states appears unattainable now, but as evi-
dence of our desire for progress, the US stands ready to initiate discus-
sions now on materials cut-off.
We could also consider transferring an agreed quantity of highly
enriched uranium from our special nuclear weapons material stockpile,
diluted to lower enrichments, to applications supporting US non-
proliferation objectives (e.g. research on more proliferation-resistant
fuel cycles). This offer could be conditioned on Soviet willingness to do
3 The “Address by President Brezhnev Before the Central Committee of the CPSU:
Halting the Production and Testing of Nuclear Weapons [Extract],” November 2, 1977, is
in Documents on Disarmament, 1977, pp. 679–680.
