1056 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said he had noticed. Minister Weizman said he called it the Muddle East. The President said that you have the situation well in hand. We appreciate how you control the situation. Minister Weizman said that Lebanon is quiet. The President said that this is good news. Minister Weizman said he would try to keep it that way. The President asked about the Iranian troops in Lebanon.3 Minister Weizman said that they are still in Damascus. Neither the PLO, Syria, or Lebanon want them in Lebanon. They are doing their best to keep the troops from moving there. He personally is not particularly worried about them. The President asked how Israel is getting on with Egypt in the peace discussions. Minister Weizman said that they could and should do better. He is not active in them, and thinks that this is a good tactic. Eventually he will probably get into them.4 The next Sadat and Begin Summit is very important. The President mentioned the 7th of January. Minister Weizman said it would be in Aswan. He will go to Egypt afterwards, at the end of January, to see Minister Ali and Sadat. Sadat is a great fellow, courageous and clever. Last month he had a half hour alone with Sadat, and two hours with other Egyptian leaders. Sadat said to try something on Gaza first, and to see if a solution is possible on Jerusalem. There is nothing new about that. He (Weizman) hopes at Aswan they will find a way to carry on. Afterwards he will see what he should do. What has been done, despite pitfalls, and less than the President would have liked to see done, he thinks is so strong that nothing can change the course, even though there are ups and downs. Between the two militaries, there are no problems. The interim line will be reached at the end of January. It is working out nicely. There will be no UN, and no US troops. It is a neat and clean withdrawal to the interim line. 3 Following a conversation with Syrian Presidential Advisor Daoudi on December 22, Seelye reported that 125–150 Iranian volunteers had arrived in Damascus with the aim of traveling on to Lebanon to aid the PLO. (Telegram 8471 from Damascus, December 22; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790589–1135) 4 During a series of conversations with Linowitz while in Washington, Weizman reiterated his intent to become involved in the autonomy negotiations “at some point.” Weizman “said he planned to go to Egypt after the summit and then would try to find the appropriate time to get involved.” (Telegram 334907 to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem, December 31; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State Department Out, Box 119, 12/25–31/79)
