The expression “measured at the intakes”, used to designate the places where the total
actual flow should not exceed that specified in the permit, is hypothetical as it is
impracticable to measure the diversion at the numerous intakes with accuracy. For this
reason, the practical enforcement of the limitation placed upon the diversion will be
carried out at Lockport. Measurements taken there will determine the gross diversion,
sanitary and domestic, and, as accurate information is available in regard to the amount
of water pumped by the City of Chicago for domestic purposes, the sanitary diversion
may be computed by subtracting the domestic diversion from the gross flow at
Lockport.
The term “diversion” as used in the permit is construed to include the discharge of the
Chicago and Calumet Rivers. In view of the methods employed in computing the
amount of the diversion the discharge of these streams will be included within the
8,500 cubic feet per second authorized by the permit of March 3, 1925.
With reference to the permit issued on April 29, 1925, by the Acting Secretary of War,
authorizing the dredging of the Little Calumet River, attention is invited to the
following special condition attached thereto: “That this permit does not authorize and
should not be construed as authorizing or allowing any increase whatever in the
diversion of water from Lake Michigan authorized by permit issued to the Sanitary
District of Chicago by the Secretary of War March 3, 1925, nor as modifying in any
respect the conditions of that permit.”
The deepening of the Little Calumet River will give the Sanitary District of Chicago
better control over river reversals, for it will increase the discharge capacity of the
system at intermediate stages and insure protection of the water supply during these
critical periods. Since the total sanitary diversion is limited to an average of 8,500
cubic feet per second and an instantaneous maximum of 11,000 cubic feet per second,
if the Sanitary District chooses to pass 2,000 cubic feet per second through the Calumet
River and Sag Channel it will be required to reduce the amount diverted through its
other intakes to keep within the limitations placed by the permit of March 3, 1925.
The Canadian Government is correct in concluding that no immediate reduction in
diversions has been provided, but its conclusion that no definite reduction is assured
and that the effect of the permits will actually be to authorize a greater diversion than is
now being made cannot be confirmed. The gross flow at Lockport will not exceed an
average of 9,700 cubic feet per second, and by the time the permit of March 3, 1925,
has expired the gross flow may be reduced to 8,000 cubic feet per second and probably
to 6,700 cubic feet per second. The sewage treatment program of the Sanitary District
has been arranged, so as to make it possible to effect a reduction to a gross flow of
4,167 cubic feet per second by the year 1935 or before.
