National Security Policy  1209
identification of BW agents. However, the Director of OCDM had indi­
cated his belief that current research programs of the Department of 
Defense and the Department of Health, Education and Welfare are 
related to the problem and concluded that it would be difficult to justify 
a special request by OCDM for funds for the purpose recommended 
by ICIS.
It is understood that Defense is not optimistic that its research and 
development in this field will prove successful and believes there is 
need for additional research and development. HEW feels that current 
research will contribute little to a solution of the over-­all problem. ICIS, 
therefore, has urged expansion of research in the BW field to eliminate 
present shortcomings and feels that OCDM is the appropriate agency 
for funding such additional research.
The NSC Planning Board recently considered the ICIS memoran­
dum on this subject and requested the President’s Special Assistant for 
Science and Technology to convene a special interdepartmental group 
to discuss technical questions relating to the problems of BW detec­
tion and identification. The group concluded that (a) there are specific 
research areas in this field which warrant exploration from a scientific 
point of view; (b) research programs of HEW and Defense will even­
tually accomplish results necessary for the attainment of departmen­
tal missions in this field; and (c) increased efforts in support of the 
ICIS concern for an early solution to the problem would require either 
expansion of current research or additional research.
Accordingly, the Planning Board has prepared the attached draft 
NSC record of action concurring in the ICIS view that research in the 
field of BW detection and identification is important from the view­
point of national security and directing the heads of all executive 
departments and agencies concerned to consider, in collaboration with 
OCDM, further actions that might be undertaken.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you concur in the draft NSC record of action by initialing the 
voting slip (Tab A) in the appropriate place.
CONCURRENCE:
S/P–Mr. Furnas
