552  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
93.	
Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of State 
(Zoellick) to the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Ross)1
Washington, undated
START Contingencies
Dennis:
The last paragraph of Don Oberdorfer’s story today2 cites a Soviet 
Foreign Ministry official’s remark (presumably made after arrival in 
Washington) that the Soviets would prefer to deal with MIRVed mobiles 
in follow-­on negotiations. It’s not certain that this foreshadows what 
Shevy will tell Baker later today—­but it’s likely.
We should consider where a polite “no, thank you” would leave us 
on some of START’s big ticket issues—­heavies and mobile ICBM sub-
limits. Without a resolution (or even a U.S. proposal) at this Ministerial, 
we would not return to these issues until the May meeting, the same 
meeting we’d want to introduce and perhaps hope to complete a joint 
statement of goals for the follow-­on negotiations. But there will be 
reluctance around town to decide on START II goals until such question 
as heavies are settled for START I.
In addition to the time bind this could put us in, we could find that, 
unless we move quickly to make negotiable proposals on heavies and 
mobile sublimits, the Pentagon will use the opportunity between now 
and May to push for tough limits on those systems (on the grounds that 
we shouldn’t “side step” any more now that the Soviets have turned us 
down).
All this suggests that, if Shevy does indeed turn us down today on 
MIRVed mobiles, the Secretary should immediately seek authority to 
make proposals this week on heavies and mobile sublimits. The Soviets 
might not be able to accept them at this Ministerial; but at least the 
issues would be resolved in May. Otherwise, we could have a June cliff-
hanger. (As we’ve repeatedly discussed, if the Soviets do show interest 
in our Namibia initiative, we’ll also need supplementary guidance this 
week—­on singles, silo MIRVs, and heavies.)
What proposals should the Secretary seek authority to make in the 
event the Soviets reject our MIRVed mobile ban?
1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross Files, 
US-Moscow Ministerial 1990. Secret. Zoellick wrote in the upper right-­hand corner of 
the memorandum: “DR—Let me know if you want me to do some contingency drafting. 
Also, you can reach me tonight, after your 1-­on-1. Bob.”
2 Reference is to Don Oberdorfer, “Shevardnadze Backs ‘Honest Dialogue’ to Solve 
Lithuania Crisis,” Washington Post, April 4, 1990, p. A33.
