36
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
13.
Memorandum From the Director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (Warnke) to Secretary of State Vance1
Geneva, October 19, 1977
SUBJECT
Anti-Satellite Limits
This will acknowledge your memorandum of October 132 on
anti-satellite limits. I am happy to have your approval on pursuing this
subject with the Soviets in the Standing Consultative Commission.
I understand and agree with your desire to strengthen the Moscow
channel for exchanges with the Soviets. I believe, however, that it
would be desirable at the same time to pursue this particular subject in
Washington.
The way this issue was left with Dobrynin last summer, the next
step is for the US to make a substantive proposal on ASAT limits after
which a forum for further negotiations can be established. Our ap-
proach to the Soviets thus should include a brief exposition of our pro-
posal to ban ASAT systems, our proposal for a prompt moratorium on
testing ASAT systems while the talks are under way, and our proposal
for conducting these negotiations in the Standing Consultative Com-
mission. We will therefore be beginning a complex negotiation. The So-
viets in all likelihood will ask questions, seek clarifications, and
perhaps make counter-proposals because of the complexities of this
subject. I believe that concurrent approaches in Washington and
Moscow will avoid the difficulties and potential misunderstanding of
handling these sensitive matters entirely by exchanging cables with
Embassy Moscow.
This is, of course, a US initiative proposed by you to Gromyko in
March.3 While we don’t know yet what the Soviet attitude will be, all
signs point to an uphill struggle to achieve their consent to a compre-
hensive and verifiable agreement. The position adopted by the Presi-
dent is the one which State and ACDA recommended as a means of
dealing with one of the more important arms control problems. It will
help immensely to get these negotiations off to the best possible start
and to convey to the Soviets the impression that we consider this to be
an important issue, that our approach is fair and balanced as well as
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770184–0491.
Secret.
2 Not found.
3 See Document 3.
