1956  1071
status quo Taiwan and refusing negotiation” on subject. Apparent 
US aim is requiring PRC accept present state US occupation Taiwan 
interference liberation off-­shore islands while indefinitely protracting 
these talks. PRC position continued be declaration could consist either 
of general statement on peaceful settlement disputes without resort­
ing threat use force, or if Taiwan area specifically mentioned FMC for 
specific settlement must also be proposed. If US desires agreement on 
announcement should not distort their May 11 draft.
I replied admitting to “stubborn persistence” in seeking unambigu­
ous, unqualified, unlimited in time renunciation of force specifically appli­
cable Taiwan area as well as elsewhere and stating their failure accept our 
April 19 revisions indicated they unwilling accept this simple straight­
forward proposition. His remarks this morning as well as previously 
indicated they did not consider their December 1 draft applicable Taiwan 
area. This one of points ambiguity my April 19 draft intended clarify.
Next meeting Thursday June 8. Proceeding Prague Friday morning 
returning Geneva Tuesday.
Gowen
664.	 Letter 47 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 47
Washington, June 22, 1956
Dear Alex:
In reply to that portion of your letter of May 28 relating to employ­
ment of Ted Liu as a Chinese interpreter, there has been no definite 
decision yet to set up a position for a Chinese interpreter in the State 
Department. However, in view of Mr. Liu’s qualifications, PER is look­
ing into possibilities for placing him. Any decision may have to await 
approval of the FY 1957 budget, but Ralph Clough will be glad to see 
Mr. Liu if he decides to visit Washington.
With reference to the extension of Ekvall’s assignment men­
tioned in your letter No. 37, Defense assured me this morning that 
they will see to it that Ekvall’s assignment to you is continued. They 
have already set aside the funds and established the allotment and 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal.
