562
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Middle East
Foreign Minister Macovescu said he had promised the President he
would provide us news from the report of one of Romania’s officials
(Pungan) who had visited Damascus.2 The report is that President
Assad intends to keep to his stand on the Sadat visit. The Syrians are
making an analysis to determine the consequences of the visit and
cannot say exactly what the outcome will be. Assad is still in favor of
the Geneva conference and believes this is the way to have a global
solution in the Middle East but he is preoccupied that the way Sadat
is moving will not lead to Geneva. He is worried about a separate
agreement.
The Foreign Minister, in referring to the PLO, said that Arafat is
still angry. He has learned that the PLO Central Committee decided
to attack Sadat but keep the criticism within certain limits. The Secretary
asked whether the Romanians have specific knowledge that the criti-
cism was to be within certain limits or is that just the Romanian impres-
sion from observations. Macovescu confirmed that the Romanians have
knowledge that the PLO Central Committee agreed to establish certain
limits on the criticism. The Secretary then said he had heard from UN
Secretary General Waldheim that the PLO in the UN had in the last
48 hours played down the attacks on Sadat. The Foreign Minister said
his Ambassador at the UN had given him similar reports but also that
the PLO representatives at the UN were expressing disturbance about
being possibly left out of a Geneva conference.
The Secretary asked whether the PLO said how they planned to
proceed from now on with regard to the Sadat visit. Minister Macovescu
said no. Mr. Habib asked whether the Romanians sense any change in
the PLO position as to whether they must be invited as the PLO to a
conference. Macovescu replied that he had no recent word from Damas-
cus or Beirut but the PLO representative in New York had said several
weeks ago that the PLO would not reject the idea of going to Geneva
as part of an Arab delegation.
The Secretary asked what the PLO reaction has been to the Iraqis and
Libyans and how recent events have affected those relations. Minister
Macovescu said he had no reading on that subject. The Secretary said
that the US Ambassador will talk to the Syrians in Damascus today to
get their view on how they see the situation developing.
Macovescu said, in summation, that the Syrians and the PLO expect
to have a conference on the Middle East in the near future and they
fear a separate settlement. They even think that the US may be behind
the development of a separate settlement between Israel and Egypt.
2 See Document 187.
