Arms Control and Disarmament 1487 tests, together with the technical system at its disposal (departments, laboratories), necessary for carrying out its functions, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, as well as of ground control posts, con­ trol posts on ships, and specially equipped aircraft provided by the founder states of the Control Organization for the collection of radioac­ tive debris over the high seas. 3. The direction of the entire Control Organization shall be vested in the Commission which must direct and coordinate the activities of all the elements of the Control Organization in such a way that it ensures: (A) The carrying out by ground control posts and ships of con­ tinuous and effective observations over possible nuclear explosions, providing for the timely detection of violations of the Treaty on the Cessation of Nuclear Weapons tests. (B) The carrying out of regular flights over the high seas by specially equipped aircraft provided by the founder states of the Control Organi­ zation for the collection of radioactive debris for the same purpose. (C) The timely processing of documentary data on observations and the information by the governments of the states parties to the treaty concerning violations of this treaty. (D) The organization and the carrying out of the on-­site inspection of unidentified events suspected of being nuclear explosions the com­ position and functions of the Commission. 4. The Commission shall be established by the founder states of the Control Organization. The Commission shall carry out the following basic functions: (A) It shall direct the entire activity of the Control Organization, approve instructions and control provisions and types of equipment (B) It shall review all cases where data provided by the technical system of the Commission give evidence of the existence of events sus­ pected of being nuclear explosions. (C) It shall adopt decisions on the existence of sufficient ground for suspecting that a nuclear explosion has been carried out in an area. (D) It shall inform the government of the state on whose territory a nuclear explosion has been suspected of having taken place and shall request its opinion thereon. Upon considering the reply of the said gov­ ernment, it shall adopt a decision as to the necessity or the lack of neces­ sity for carrying out an inspection of the area where the explosion is suspected of having taken place, by despatching a ground or maritime (by ship) inspection team and by organizing an aircraft flight along the routes agreed upon in advance with the government of the state con­ cerned for the purpose of air sampling radioactive debris. All decisions of the Commission on the above mentioned and other important questions shall be adopted by agreement among the
