258
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The longer term interest in this instance is to close one more av-
enue of nuclear competition and thereby demonstrate to all the world
that the major nuclear powers take seriously our obligations to reduce
the threat of nuclear catastrophe.
My country believes that the time has come to end all explosions of
nuclear devices, no matter what their claimed justification, peaceful or
military, and we appreciate the efforts of other nations to reach this
same goal.
During the past 9 months, I have expressed the special importance
that we attach to controlling nuclear proliferation. But I fear that many
do not understand why the United States feels as it does.
Why is it so important to avoid the chance that 1 or 2 or 10 other
nations might acquire 1 or 2 or 10 nuclear weapons of their own?
Let me try to explain why I deeply believe that this is one of the
greatest challenges that we face in the next quarter of a century.
It’s a truism that nuclear weapons are a powerful deterrent. They
are a deterrent because they threaten. They could be used for terrorism
or blackmail as well as for war. But they threaten not just the intended
enemy, they threaten every nation, combatant or noncombatant alike.
That is why all of us must be concerned.
Let me be frank. The existence of nuclear weapons in the United
States and the Soviet Union, in Great Britain, France, and China, is
something that we cannot undo except by the painstaking process of
negotiation. But the existence of these weapons does not mean that
other nations need to develop their own weapons any more than it pro-
vides a reason for those of us who have them to share them with others.
Rather, it imposes two solemn obligations on the nations which
have the capacity to export nuclear fuel and nuclear technology—the
obligations to meet legitimate energy needs and, in doing so, to ensure
that nothing that we export contributes directly or indirectly to the pro-
duction of nuclear explosives. That is why the supplier nations are
seeking a common policy, and that is why the United States and the So-
viet Union, even as we struggle to find common ground in the SALT
talks, have already moved closer toward agreement and cooperation in
our efforts to limit nuclear proliferation.
I believe that the London Suppliers Group must conclude its work
as it’s presently constituted so that the world security will be safe-
guarded from the pressures of commercial competition. We have
learned it is not enough to safeguard just some facilities or some mate-
rials. Full-scope, comprehensive safeguards are necessary.
Two weeks from now in our own country, more than 30 supplier
and consuming nations will convene for the International Fuel Cycle
