The French naval attaché has informed Admiral Jones of conversations in
Paris between Vice Admiral Kelly, who will be the naval adviser to the
British Delegation to the Preparatory Commission, and the Chief of the
French Naval Staff. These conversations indicate that the French, while
maintaining their thesis of total tonnage in principle, are willing to alter the
Boncour proposal. For the life of any treaty to be concluded, a division of
tonnage would be made into five groups, namely: Capital ships, aircraft
carriers, service auxiliary vessels between 2,000 and 10,000 tons, service
auxiliary vessels under 2,000 tons, and submarines. Since the first two
categories of this division are presumably fixed until 1936 (or for the life of
the treaty) by the Washington Agreement,14 only discussion of the
remaining three classes is left open. The French would desire, furthermore,
as a qualification to the division above mentioned, that any one of the
categories might be increased by a percentage to be agreed upon but that
such percentage, of course, would have to be deducted from one or both of
the other columns; and, moreover, that six months, or preferably a year’s
notice, should be given of any changes in the subgroupings. Some such
scheme, according to the Navy, would be acceptable to this country in
principle and might result in substantial progress toward ultimate agreement
between the naval powers. The pertinent documents on this subject will be
taken to Geneva by Admiral Jones.
Since the third session of the Commission there appear to have been no
developments which would necessitate a departure from the stand we have
previously taken on air and land armaments or any modification of the
instructions in the premises.
KELLOGG
10 J. Theodore Marriner, Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs.
Letters not found in Department files.
11 See pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.
12 See pp. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356] ff.
12a See Foreign Relations, 1927, vol.  II, pp. 615–630  passim.
13 See Foreign Relations, 1927, vol.  I, pp. 1 ff.
