810 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement I have noted and will carry out your suggestions with regard to keeping the Secretary and Robertson informed while they are on their trip. The following are my thoughts with regard to the subject of ­Chinese prisoners in the United States: The quid pro quo for the release of the 13 are not Chinese in United States prisons (they have no real interest other than propaganda in them) but the agreed announcement of the Renunciation of Force and the ­Foreign Ministers’ meeting. We would get a few more releases if and when agreement is reached on the agreed announcement, partic­ ularly if we made some concession that would permit agreement to be reached. We would then probably get the remainder of the 13 if and when they saw agreement in sight on a Foreign Ministers’ meeting. They would probably be willing to make some deal whereby announce­ ment of the completion of the release of the remainder of the 13 would be made prior to the announcement of the Foreign Ministers’ meeting. Do not misunderstand that I am necessarily advocating any of the foregoing which is only what I consider a realistic and cold-­blooded assessment of their position. They have seized on the issue of Chinese in United States pris­ ons only as a convenient and somewhat telling counterattack against our stress on the 13. They have been somewhat feeling their way and are becoming increasingly convinced that they have an effective point. However, for us now to come forward with some release of Chinese in United States prisons would only serve to strengthen their point by demonstrating that after all these months since the agreed announce­ ment the United States is belatedly and partially admitting to the validity of their complaints and its failure “expeditiously” to carry out the Agreement. I do not think that this would result in any addi­ tional release of Americans and would only serve to give Peiping an additional propaganda weapon. Only a full and impartially confirmed release of all Chinese in prison desiring to or willing to return when they heard about this could serve to bring any real pressure to release the remaining Americans. I frankly do not see how such an operation would be practical, even if desirable, and there is no assurance that it would result in the release of all Americans. As you know, I was very doubtful of the wisdom after our ­September 10 announcement of belaboring the question of implemen­ tation the way we did. Not with any intent of recrimination and only for the purpose of attempting to analyze the present situation, I feel that the belaboring of implementation during that period caused them to search frantically for a counter and finally strike on this issue of ­Chinese prisoners. However, since we have reached the situation, I see little choice but to continue to pursue our same tactics. However, we should
