212 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the same map in their respective discussions with Gamasy and Weizman in order to avoid any misunderstanding. The arrangements worked out by them are to be brought to President Carter’s personal attention. The President wishes to obtain a full summary3 of the tentative decisions reached in the Gamasy-Weizman talks. Such a report will be requested from the Israelis, and President Sadat promised also to provide an Egyptian summary of such agreed decisions.4 3 A summary document of the Gamasy-Weizman talks at Camp David, which primarily addressed the military dimensions of an Israeli withdrawal from Sinai, has not been found. For Carter’s commentary on the progress of these talks, see Keeping Faith, p. 381. 4 Brzezinski initialed at the end of this paragraph. 60. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, September 19, 1978 SUBJECT Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 19 September 1978 1. I congratulated him on the success of the Summit. I asked what we could do to help from here. He indicated that we are trying to find ways to help Sadat survive. These are not to be symbolic actions but actions that would really be of support. a. David Aaron has suggested that because there are reports of dissatisfaction within the military about their lot in life that we might help here. Specifically, we might build barracks or otherwise help to improve the material conditions of the soldiers. This goes to a report we promulgated that General Gamasy had found lower ranking officers willing to criticize his standard of living. I said I had my doubts as to whether we could really get at this because barracks wouldn’t do for many of the people; they need better housing for their families, but that I would have a look at just what the dissatisfaction of the Egyptian mili- 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00112R: Subject Files, Box 15, Folder 41: DCI/DDCI MEMRECs/Memos/ Agendas of Brzezinski/Aaron Meetings, August–December 1978. Secret. According to the date stamped on the first page, this memorandum was drafted on September 20.
