Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I and the Soviet Union, despite transient vicissitudes. The Bilateral Agreements include the following: Environmental Protection, Medical Science and Public Health, Artificial Heart Research and Development, Science and Technical Cooperation, Space Cooperation, Agriculture, Transportation, Studies of the World Ocean, Atomic Energy, Energy, and Housing and Other Construction. (Frank Press is engaged in a review of the Agreement on Science and Technical Cooperation and the Agreement on Space Cooperation. On the basis of his review, a program could be developed for increased support to those agreements which have been, or could be made, mutually beneficial.) 7. Some Miscellaneous Possibilities:12 A. The Soviet Union has been interested in opening a banking office in New York to perform deposit and loan functions. US banks are interested in expanding their services in Moscow. There are no legal barriers to this, and we could endorse and facilitate the project.13 B. We could begin to plan with the Soviet Union for a distinguished representation at the 60th Anniversary ceremonies in Moscow next November. This is an event of great personal interest to Brezhnev. C. An expansion of scientific, academic and cultural exchanges would be well received by the Soviet Union, and could have substantial benefits, providing equitable treatment is assured for our exchangees. D. A clarification of visa policy would eliminate some irritants in our relations and would be consistent with our CSCE obligations and general policies on contacts. E. It is possible that the negotiations with the Soviet Union on Civil Aviation arrangements could be moved off dead center if we decided, on further examination, that the pooling proposal could be made to meet present CAB objections. F. It is possible that the Yakutsk Liquified Natural Gas Project could be redesigned in a way that would merit support. This could be examined with the participating US firms and in consultations with Japan.14 G. In any forthcoming announcements concerning weapons procurement or deployment, consideration should be given to the effect we desire these announcements to have upon the Soviet Union. 12 Next to this heading, the President wrote: “Put a good person to work on these. J.” 13 In the left-hand margin next to points A–E, the President wrote: “ok.” 14 In the left-hand margin next to points F and G, the President wrote a question mark.
