1956  1223
situation should not continue any longer. They consider it is time 
Foreign Ministers our countries meet for direct talks. Hence he now for­
mally proposed Foreign Ministers conference between China and US be 
held to discuss question relaxing and eliminating tension Taiwan area 
as well as questions mutual renunciation force by China and America, 
lifting embargo, personal contact and cultural exchange, etc. In making 
this proposal their side was fully conscious duty to people. What is at 
stake is future Sino-­American relations and indeed peace in Far East 
and world. Therefore it his earnest hope my govt would give careful 
consideration to this proposal.
6. I replied when my govt made proposal for these talks he would 
well recall that it put as first item in terms reference question return 
civilians. His govt agreed here this was first item on agenda. His govt 
well aware what we referring to when used term return civilians. There 
had been various indirect exchanges between our govts on subject and 
in 1954 he and I here directly discussed matter. Had been discussion of 
subject here between our respective Consulates and when he and I first 
met here August last year, I had given him list of people with whom 
we concerned in discussion of subject. These were people who denied 
exit permits from his country and people in prison. Our discussions 
here prior issuance announcement Sept 10 last year, so far as Americans 
concerned, centered entirely around these people. Sept 6 last year he 
informed me cases those refused exit permits had been resolved and 
they being given such permits. Thus when we made announcement 
Sept 10 only cases remaining were those in prison. He would well recall 
our long discussions this subject and would well recall history of each 
of words appearing in that announcement, particularly word “expedi­
tiously.” Quite clear intent my govt this subject from very beginning 
not issuance some vague public statement which resolved nothing, but 
in resolution problem itself.
7. I continued, we given that problem to resolve and was on very 
clear understanding my part issuance of that statement would resolve 
problem that I had agreed to its issuance. I willing agree to wording 
therein, which not as explicit as would have liked to see, in deference 
to his views and on understanding it covered problem we given to 
resolve. I still considered that agreement did cover problem. As said 
at time we reached that agreement, however, agreement as such did 
not resolve problem, only carrying out agreement could resolve prob­
lem. This was first agreement reached between us. Its prompt faithful 
execution could have had great potentialities for future our relations. I 
and my govt had most earnestly hoped it would be promptly faithfully 
carried out. During past months here I had over and over again pointed 
out if not being carried out. This morning I pointed out fact regard just 
one case in which not carried out, not only respect commitment release
