928
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
always dodged the issue of “Joint” training responsibility. Whose is it
for the RDJTF? That is still undecided!
4. Comprehensive Readiness Evaluation
Training and readiness evaluation was decentralized. No overall
rehearsal of the Desert One took place. The Report sees this as a major
weakness for the phase at Desert One. Again, this is a “Joint” train-
ing problem.
5. Size of the Helicopter Force
Based on statistical data from RH–53 performance history, the
Report argues that ten helicopters were needed. This problem, of
course, is related to the confusion in the organization for air opera-
tions—Navy and Air Force components and staff support. No truly
competent air staff examined the issue for the JTF.
6. Overall Coordination of Joint Training
Vaught, based in the Pentagon, let two officers, who were not fully
in the JTF, run the joint training at the Western Training site. The
Report considers this a mistake. Gast, as Deputy Commander JTF,
should have moved to the training site and taken this responsibility.
The Report fails to tie this issue to inherent weaknesses of the “Joint”
system of training under JCS procedures.
7. Command and Control Desert One
The late designation of the Air Force component commander as
in command at Desert One, his lack of a command post location, a
deputy, and other command techniques, including communications on
the ground, are cited as major flaws. In my view, the Report understates
this problem, and it is related to the lack of full Desert One rehearsal.
It is also part of the Air Force and Naval component problem.
8. Centralized and Integrated Intelligence Support External to the JTF
The ad hoc and piecemeal effort by CIA in the early phase, the
late tie to NSA, the failure to use DIA fully, and State’s reluctance to
supply data from hostage mail are some of the points made by the
Report. I saw this problem in detail in November. The Report is correct
and perhaps too mild in its criticism. The episode is a preview of what
you will see if we ever have to transit from peace to war as the results
of PRM–11 prescribe.4
4 PRM–11, “Intelligence Structure and Mission,” February 22, 1977, is ibid.
