Costa Rica 411 rise to the serious problem of supplying drinking water and adequate sewerage. They have drawn up a plan to repair the old water system, undertake new construction and install water meters and believe that this plan would satisfy all foreseeable needs for 20 years. Plans are already drawn up and work could be undertaken if they could obtain the approximately $3 million necessary to undertake this project. Sewerage: An effective sewerage system is planned and is under slow construction. If further financing could be obtained this work could be carried out quickly and effectively. The cooperative Inter-American Public Health Service had rendered valuable cooperation in this work. Water Supply: Valuable cooperation has been received from the Point Four program in studying the supply of drinking water to the whole metro­ politan area but its resources are inadequate for the size of the problem, and the Government would be very desirous of obtaining a loan which would enable them to go forward swiftly with this project. German Taxes on Coffee: The Costa Ricans pointed out that Germany had two taxes on coffee that caused the price of this commodity to be extremely high in Germany. They felt that if the United States could in some way use its influence on the Federal Republic to have these taxes removed or lowered that this might increase German Coffee consumption by as much as 2 million bags yearly. Desire of the Costa Rican Government to Exchange Surplus Military Equipment for Transportation and Communication Equipment: The United States Country Team did not feel that the Echandi administration had the firm capability of maintaining internal security and the greatest weakness of the Public Forces was due to the lack of adequate transportation and communication. Recently the desire was expressed by a representative of the present Administration to trade items such as machine guns, rifles and obsolete aircraft for sedans, trucks, radios and two aircraft of the liaison type. They would like to trade in some $200,000 worth of the former items for some $253,000 worth of communications and transportation equipment. This would strengthen the internal security of the country and the exchange of weapons for vehicles would create a good impression for the United States in Costa Rica in the opinion of the Country Team.
