El Salvador 571 President Lemus said that his administration was based on two principles: honesty in Government and better living conditions. He stated that neither he nor any of his Ministers were dipping into the public coffers. He could not say that Government officials might not try to do so in the future, but anyone who did would go to jail. The President expressed his feeling that the three biggest problems in El Salvador were housing, education, and public health, and he felt these really had to be considered as one single problem. His administration had undertaken a bold program to solve these problems, but they had not expected the world economic recession, with the consequent drop in commodity prices, and they hoped some way could be found to enable them to go forward with this program. The administration planned the construction of 2,000 more schools, and since his inauguration 40,000 additional children had been enrolled in the schools. The president said it was necessary to fight communism by accomplishments. The communists promised but did not fulfil their promises. They had ruled Guatemala for ten years but they had achieved nothing. However, in order to deprive them of arguments they could use, it was necessary to improve the living conditions of the masses. In addition to the Government’s bold housing program, it would likewise be necessary for the big landholders to build homes for their tenant farmers. A very few had done so, but not many. The Government was going to press them to do so and if they still did not the Government would find means to compel them to undertake programs of this type either by passing a law, or else by making it possible for them to deduct some part of the cost of construction of these workers’ homes from their taxes. The President on several occasions said tribute to the great assistance which the United States had rendered to El Salvador, particularly in the field of technical cooperation. He indicated a need for help at the agricultural school but at no time did he or any other Salvadoran official mention specific sums or loans, other than to say that they hoped to be able to go forward with their housing, education, and public health programs. The President spoke with feelings of the hardships caused in El Salvador by the drop in world coffee prices. He did not, however, as was frequently the case elsewhere, believe that the United States could correct this situation by some arbitrary action. The President indicated that he strongly favored the union of Central American states as a means of providing all the countries of the area with a broader market for the free government of labor and goods. This would contribute to raising the living standard of the inhabitants of all those countries. He spoke also of the problem of over-­population in El Salvador where 2.5 million people occupy some 8,000 square miles.
