690  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
18. Turning again to pencilled notes, Wang continued that in state­
ment I had made this morning I had remarked that talks have now 
encountered difficulty. I had acknowledged necessity for us to find way 
out of this. However, it might be asked wherein lies root of this present 
difficulty and how we should try to get out of it.
19. Wang said solution to present difficulty should be directed 
towards effective relaxation of tension in Taiwan area rather than in 
reverse direction. However, he did not see anything which leads this 
direction in my remarks this morning.
20. Wang said he could not refrain from pointing out that crux of 
issues between us is one of substance and principle.
21. Wang said we had agreed to make declaration in conformity 
UN Charter of fact we agreed disputes between two countries in 
­Taiwan area should be settled peacefully. That is preliminary step. Next 
step would be for two of us seek practical and feasible ways to realize 
above objectives. That precisely point of view their side.
22. Wang said US on other hand proposes make declaration in 
which so-­called right self defense of US in Taiwan area to be recog­
nized. Instead of ending its occupation Taiwan, US by such declaration 
contemplates legalizing its occupation. That is controversy of principle 
with which we confronted.
23. Wang said Chinese people will never accept any terms in dec­
laration which recognize so-­called right of self-­defense of US in Taiwan 
area. If US refuses give up so-­called right self-­defense in Taiwan area, 
can only create doubts as to whether US sincerely desirous of peaceful 
settlement of disputes between two countries.
24. I said I had just few preliminary comments make on statement 
he had just made. I had no desire enter into debate on matters past his­
tory, which cannot contribute to progress in our discussions here.
25. I said I found it impossible, however, pass by his statement that 
US started war of aggression in Korea in June 1950 and that security of 
China was threatened by US. I simply wanted point out fact that, with 
exception of those associated with that aggression against ROK, virtu­
ally every member UN agreed on who true aggressor was.
26. I said his statement regarding use force and threat to his coun­
try in Taiwan area at time Korean hostilities so entirely ignored action 
taken that time just to prevent spread of hostilities to that area.
27. I said his statement regarding US as attempting turn Taiwan 
into base for aggression against his country also entirely ignored facts. 
Purely defensive character and strictly limited arrangements of collec­
tive self-­defense in Taiwan area by US has been published too and is 
well known by entire world.
