December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
719
Foreign Minister Dayan: There is no point in discussing it with me.
Prime Minister Begin: You will have the full powers of Dr. Khalil.
Let the two foreign ministers meet.
President Carter: I think if we conclude this visit without a public
expression of agreement, there is serious risk of not reaching success. I
understand that you cannot sign the treaty without Knesset approval.
We need to sign some kind of declaration or letter. We need at least an
ad referendum agreement. But if this slips, and I leave, it will [be] hard
to rekindle the forces for success. I hate to let this opportunity go by for
discussing the basic issues. I could stay over until Tuesday, but no later.
I don’t know if you want a joint ceremony with Sadat.
Prime Minister Begin: If we reach agreement, why not? But not be-
fore the Knesset has discussed the matter. If after Secretary Vance goes
to Cairo he comes back with an agreement, good. If there is no agree-
ment, the sky doesn’t fall. We will continue. If we agree, Cairo can ac-
cept, and we will have a common declaration by the three gov-
ernments. We can have a common communique. We can inform the
world that we have reached agreement on all outstanding issues. We
can say that there are no problems with the peace treaty. Then the Is-
raeli Government will bring to the Knesset the treaty for a vote next
week.
President Carter: Would you sign together?
Prime Minister Begin: We can make a declaration without a
meeting. I suggest I don’t go to Cairo for this, or that he come here.
Only when we sign the peace treaty, should we do that. We should be
patient. If we reach agreement, I will make this a matter of confidence
for the Knesset and I will fight for it. But we shouldn’t need to do this to
issue a one sentence statement. You can issue the communique in
Washington if we agree.
Minister Burg: I understand what the President is saying. The Pres-
ident is suggesting that we should take this up in the Cabinet tonight.
Prime Minister Begin: I agree.
President Carter: Let me add a word of caution. If we leave the
Middle East without Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat ap-
pearing together, as demonstration to the Israeli and Egyptian people,
we may miss an opportunity. I don’t care about the communique. I
want the public agreement. If not, you’ll never go to Egypt, and he’ll
never come here. My belief is that my presence has a stabilizing effect. I
want to see some friendship between you. If there is a communique,
and then a Knesset debate, there will be controversy in public. You will
say that Sadat has promised oil, and he is willing to do it, but if you say
that, he may be embarrassed. There will be problems on the debate on
autonomy. The whole agreement could come apart.
