Afghanistan
51
state and needs help. But as far as the Paks can understand, the Shah
is not prepared to give aid. The Saudis have promised but are slow.
5. In this situation, Pakistan stands alone. It may have to make
some gesture to the Soviets such as quitting CENTO. If the people
perceive that Soviets can act adventurously and get away with it,
then there will be increasing pressure for Pakistan to follow an quote
appeasement policy unquote. However, Pakistan has not yet taken
this decision.
6. The Secretary, referring to Shahi’s remarks on Pakistan’s standing
alone, asked what kind of assistance it needed and from whom. Shahi
cited the 1959 bilateral agreement with the U.S. and asserted that the
Soviets were threatening Pakistan by proxy as they did in 1971.6 Paki-
stan thinks there should be a security guarantee. If the Soviets have
an alliance with India, the only remedy lies in quote another super
power supporting its friends and allies unquote. When CENTO was
created, America had the will to act, but today this is questionable. He
noted that Pakistan was not getting military or economic aid and
claimed that all countries with sole exception of the U.S. were willing
to reschedule Pakistan’s debt (sic). He reverted to the Indian threat
and said if the Shah wants to take the leadership, he should enlist Saudi
Arabia and the Persian Gulf countries but Pakistani public opinion will
not allow any approach to India.
7. Finally Agha Shahi remarked that the Pakistanis had heard that
Daoud had wanted to come to the U.S. and that we had turned him
down.7 Quote some people unquote thought this was a clear signal
that Daoud was expendable and that the U.S. was no longer willing
to support Afghanistan as a buffer state. He noted that this was specula-
tion but quote it makes a difference in popular opinion unquote.
8. The Secretary responded that Shahi had raised a number of
serious issues. He would like to consult with the President and his
colleagues because Shahi is entitled to a clear answer. We will be back
in touch and perhaps meet again on June 2 to carry on the discussions.
Vance
6 See footnote 5, Document 18. In the agreement, the United States pledged its
commitment to the “preservation of the independence and integrity of Pakistan” and
to taking “appropriate action, including the use of armed forces, as may be mutually
agreed upon . . . in order to assist the Government of Pakistan at its request.” The full
text is in the Department of State Bulletin, March 23, 1959, pp. 417–418. The allegation
of Soviet “threats” to Pakistan during the Indo-Pakistan War of 1971 may refer to Soviet
support for India during that conflict and for the creation of an independent Bangladesh.
See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XI, South Asia Crisis, 1971, Documents 187, 241,
242, and 252.
7 See Document 6.
