International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
717
their share of the domestic market principally because the segments in
which they have been strong have been growing rapidly. If these seg-
ments continue to grow in importance, and if import penetration in
them is not reduced, then imports might ultimately capture as much of
the total domestic market as they now have of the small car market, i.e.,
38 percent.
Whether correctly or not, the public presently perceives foreign
cars to be fuel-efficient and of higher quality than domestic cars.
Changing this perception will not be easy. The fact that GM’s X-car has
been so successful does not necessarily indicate that the imports can be
beaten back. Much of GM’s gains have come at the expense of Ford and
Chrysler. Chrysler’s K-car, if successful, may snare buyers from Ford’s
presently weak compact line as much as from Toyota, Nissan, or
Honda. Ford is especially vulnerable since its downsizing has lagged
significantly behind either GM or Chrysler.
Outlook for the Longer Term (1984 and beyond)
This is the subject of a separate larger study headed by DOT.
Briefly, the principal problems for this period are related to:
—International Competitiveness—The Japanese (or others) may have
a substantial and persistent cost advantage that translates into the po-
tential for an ever growing share for imports.
—Job Diminution Due to Productivity Gains—The long-term survival
of the US auto industry depends on productivity gains competitive
with those with other countries. To the extent that such gains are real-
ized, fewer workers will be required to produce a given number of cars.
Depending upon the rate of productivity improvement assumed,
1985 auto industry employment could range from 816,000 to 1,042,000.
The former figure is only slightly above the current level of industry
employment. The latter is roughly equivalent to the 1978 level.
—GM Dominance—In 1979, General Motors’ share of domestic car
sales was 59 percent. In May 1980, its share had increased to 62 percent.
If Chrysler survives, and if Ford “shrinks” its North American opera-
tions, the structure of the domestic auto industry is likely to be changed
radically: the “Big Three” will become the “Big One” plus an “Interme-
diate 1-1/2,” plus a “Fringe.” As long as imports provide competition,
this change does not necessarily pose a problem.
II. Description of the Package
The EPG recommends several proposals that will increase employ-
ment, ease the transitional difficulties of the localities and regions, and
improve the investment climate. The proposals are limited to those that
can be done now and, with one exception, to those that do not require
