726 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Unfortunately, at the present time when an industry is faced with serious injury as a result of imports, there is no alternative but to con­ sider raising duties or imposing quotes. Therefore, the Department of State believes that renewed consideration should be given to sponsoring another avenue of relief through adjustment assistance. This alternative might provide for low-­cost loans for modernization and technological improvement, facilities for retraining workers, or conversion to other kinds of manufacture, or even encouragement to relocate factories. Adjustment assistance is the approach being taken in the European Common Market to deal with the problem of internal adjustments to competition. The British have also embarked on a similar program with respect to their domestic textile industry. In short, we have to search constantly for new ways to improve the competitive position of our industry through affirmative actions rather than by building a wall against entry of goods from abroad. Our conclusion is relatively simple. What we do to restrict trade and what other countries fear we may do, will determine to an import­ ant extent whether our foreign economic policy measures are success­ ful, and whether we are successful in the economic contest with the Soviet Union. 161. Memorandum of Discussion at the 409th NSC Meeting1 Washington, June 4, 1959 SUBJECT Discussion at the 409th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, June 4, 1959 Present at the 409th NSC Meeting were the President of the United States, presiding; the Vice President of the United States; the Acting Secretary of State (Dillon); the Acting Secretary of Defense (Gates); and the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also pres­ ent and participating in the Council actions below were the Secretary of the Treasury; the Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Secretary of Commerce (Item 1); and the Chairman, Council on Foreign Economic Policy (Item 1). Also attending the meeting were the Chairman, 1 Source: Agenda item 1: Effects of U.S. Import Trade Policy on National Security. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—7 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
