P. Robinson and Company, attorney’s fees, and the cost of the maintenance of the property, the latter amounting to from $12,000 to $15,000 annually. In considering this position of the Company the Department cannot disregard the fact that the expert selected by the Dominican Government has valued the properties in their present condition at $533,012. If the matter were to be adjusted on the basis of taking the properties over as they are without reference to repairs, it would be difficult for the Department, in the face of the expert’s report, to insist that the Company should take less than $450,000 which is $83,000 under the valuation. This proposal, however, would mean that the Government would perhaps have to make new contracts for the reconditioning of the plant and they may prefer an arrangement by which the plants would be put in operating condition by the issuance of Dominican bonds to cover the cost thereof and thus acquire possession of the plants in working order in one transaction. The Department would therefore be willing to approve the following settlement should it meet with the Dominican Government’s approval. The Department is advised that this would be acceptable to the Company. 3. The Government to buy the plant at the value fixed by the expert, namely $533,012. The Government would then designate the repairs it desires made (the Department presumes that the expert’s valuation was based on putting the plant in an absolutely perfect condition whereas it may be possible to put it in working condition for very much less and that this is what the Dominican Government desires). The repairs would then be made by the Power Company at cost under the supervision of the Dwight P. Robinson Company, the latter to certify to the cost of the repairs and that they have been properly carried out. The Company would be given sufficient bonds at par value to amount to $533,012 at 90 per cent, and a sufficient number of bonds at par value to cover the cost of repairs at 90 per cent would be held in escrow by the Fiscal Agent until he is advised by the Robinson Company that the repairs have been made whereupon he will immediately turn over bonds to the Power Company to the amount certified by the Robinson Company. While the Company would prefer to receive immediately the bonds covering the present value of the property the Department understands that it would be willing, should the Government prefer, to have
