726  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
—Command, Control & Communications (C3) capabilities to man-
age distant operations have been improved by incorporating sophisti-
cated long-­haul systems in naval ships and by establishing C3 facilities 
in places such as South Yemen, Vietnam, and Angola.3
—An overseas base structure has been established although Soviet 
access to certain overseas facilities may be tenuous and even reversible.
These trends strongly indicate real trouble ahead for us, especially 
when they are coupled with the other features of Soviet strategy in the 
third world with which we have become familiar.
(S) In light of this I believe that, in addition to our programs for 
improving our rapid deployment forces, we must look to some broader 
approaches. These include designing a counter-­strategy and ensuring 
continued management attention to this problem within DOD. Obvi-
ously, developing a strategy that effectively counters Soviet power 
projection cannot be done by DOD alone. Indeed, competing with the 
Soviets in a way that raises the costs that they perceive (in terms of 
risk, resources expended, and the effect on their image) will require a 
wide range of political, military and economic activities and policies. 
For example, the effectiveness of our MAP and IMET programs and our 
covert action capability (or absence thereof) will have a large effect on 
whether, or at least at which point in the conflict spectrum, DOD would 
have to be able to intervene in the future.
(S) Finally, examining US and Soviet capabilities to project power 
suggest two problem areas for US military forces that require correction.
—With respect to rapid deployment forces, being able to deploy a 
battalion on day 1 may be more important than being able to deploy 
a larger force on day 10. This may be crucial to preempting a coup 
or threat to our friends, or to deterring the Soviets from intervening 
by making the risks of escalation clear. Accordingly, I have directed 
the JCS to consider how to improve our ability to get small, effective 
forces into a crisis area early. In particular, I have asked the CJCS and 
CMC to consider whether the Marines should have a larger role in such 
planning.4
—A major factor that will influence our ability in the long term 
to react quickly as I have just described is specialized weaponry. We 
are looking at options for arming light, highly mobile US forces of 
the type that may be needed for rapid insertion into crisis areas. New 
designs would take a long time to reach inventory. In some cases, exist-
ing non-­military (or non-US military) equipment may be best. After the 
3 Carter underlined “Yemen, Vietnam, and Angola,” and wrote beneath this para-
graph: “Afghanistan?”
4 Carter wrote “ok” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
