334 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 5. Ratification of the Genocide Treaty. At this point, I would recommend against a hard push involving you personally for ratification of the Genocide Treaty immediately after the Panama Canal Treaties. There is a strong likelihood that we will, by the Spring of 1978, be moving from Panama to SALT in the Senate. I doubt that the Genocide Treaty would move quickly through the Senate, and I think it would be a mistake to have this the subject of a prolonged, controversial and emotional Senate debate. Further, I am not at all certain that either Americans or many people abroad see the Genocide Treaty as being crucial to the progress we desire on human rights. I would recommend that we go slow on plans to push for Senate action on the Genocide Treaty, reassessing this position if it develops that SALT will not be ready for Senate action.7 In the meantime, the Secretary of State can take the appropriate occasion to remind the Senate that we want the Genocide Treaty to move forward. 6. Issuance of Human Rights Directive. I concur in the desirability of issuing the proposed directive. It is an excellent idea. Looking to the implementation of the directive, I think it will be important to tighten up the interdepartmental group, to make it more assertive. This is an issue which I think might be useful to discuss with Cy at the next foreign policy breakfast meeting.8 7 The President noted “I’ll defer to you” in the margin below this sentence. 8 At the end of this paragraph the President wrote: “Send draft around before breakfast—J” and “Fritz—You & Zbig go ahead & act—Thanks—J.C.” 98. Memorandum From the President’s Counsel (Lipshutz) to President Carter1 Washington, December 7, 1977 SUBJECT Human Rights Policy Attached is a proposed “Presidential Decision Memorandum” which I urge you to sign. 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Counsel’s Office, Robert J. Lipshutz Files, 1977–1979, Box 18, Human Rights, 12/77. No classification marking. Sent through Brzezinski, who did not initial the memorandum.
