International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
61
4. Energy and Non-Proliferation. Governments would pledge to re-
duce energy consumption, increase energy supply, share research and
development to these ends, and concert about these measures in the In-
ternational Energy Agency. They would also agree that legitimate nu-
clear needs should be met, that this should be done without enhancing
prospects for nuclear proliferation, and that studies of national and
international means of reconciling these two objectives should be
pursued.
5. North-South. The Summit nations would agree that the level and
quality of aid to LDC’s should be raised, and that resources of the World
Bank should be increased—thus permitting more of its resources to be
devoted to expanding energy and raw materials production. Govern-
ments would agree to negotiate flexibly about individual commodity
stabilization agreements, and to finance these agreements through a
common fund. I hope that the Summit nations can also agree to ask the
World Bank to explore the concept of a world development budget or
program; I’ll have a better feel for other countries’ reactions after the
next meeting of the International Preparatory Group.
The agreements outlined above would launch or reinforce action
to address the main problems that the industrial countries face, and
they would strengthen the international agencies in which that action
must be taken. Taken together, they should convey a persuasive im-
pression of governments that are in control of their destiny, and whose
policies promise a better future for their peoples.
When I have asked journalists what it would take to convince them
that the Summit was a success, their answers have called for a less am-
bitious outcome. What emerges from the Summit will probably also be
less ambitious; we are unlikely to achieve international agreement on
all the above points. But I hope that our main goals can be fulfilled. The
main obstacle at the moment is that the British draft Declaration is in-
adequate; our own is better,4 but the British (as hosts) have the main
drafting responsibility. I am encouraging the Canadians to prepare an
alternative draft which will borrow the best from the British and Amer-
ican drafts, and which I hope can provide a basis for discussion at the
April 25–26 meeting of the International Preparatory Group.
Arms transfers will be taken up in the Four Power Berlin Summit
meeting.5 Human rights will be covered in your NATO speech; it
4 Neither the British nor the U.S. draft declaration was found.
5 The three Western powers occupying Berlin at that time—France, the United
Kingdom, and the United States—along with the Federal Republic of Germany, held a
Four-Power Berlin Summit on May 9 in London. A joint declaration on Berlin issued on
that day is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977,
Book I, pp. 840–841.
