793.00/133: Telegram
[Document 675]
The Chargé in Japan (Neville) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, August 11, 1925—3 p.m.
[Received August 11—7:40 a.m.]
151. The Minister for Foreign Affairs today in conversation stated that so far as the
Extraterritorial Commission was concerned, he found himself in substantial agreement
with the American point of view and had told the British so. In regard to the actual text
of the reply to the Chinese note on this point the Japanese Government would have
some comments to make as they do not agree entirely with the statement contained in
the instructions to MacMurray (Draft 92)22 but they are not differences of principle.
So far as concerns tariff, the Japanese Government would find itself unable to go
beyond the terms of existing treaties or the Washington Conference engagements. All
the considerations urged in this connection had been brought up at Washington and he
did not see that conditions in China warranted any further concessions. Dissension
[Discussion?] on this point was objectionable for at least two good reasons:
(1) China has no government machinery capable of enacting tariff legislation
and a conference that proposed to consider the whole question of tariff would
have to consider methods of levying tariffs which would make the conference
too complicated and might result in its break-down;
(2) Japan and perhaps other powers, who have large vested interests in China,
might find themselves in difficult circumstances if they placed the unfettered
right to levy duties in the hands of irresponsible politicians. Japanese opinion
would not countenance such action.
In addition to these considerations Japan was confronted with interests of great weight
and importance resting on treaty and contractual bases which she would have to take
account of. It would be extremely difficult for Japan to reexamine the bases upon
which treaty obligations rest. He did not see, therefore, how agreement among the
powers would be possible unless all are prepared to cooperate on the only common
ground we now have—the Washington Conference. Peking informed.
NEVILLE
22 See footnote 4, p. 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 658 and Doc. 659].
