358 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV SSBN’s, and SAC knows that creating a survivable SRF from bombers and ICBM’s is not promising. That is another reason SAC shows low interest.4 On targeting priorities, you have read the memos from Huntington and Utgoff,5 and you may want to discuss “economic recovery” versus “military forces” in targeting. This topic becomes scholastic very quickly. Once you move to duration of the war, planning flexibility, C3I, SRF, etc., the targeting priorities are implicitly reversed.6 The subject remains important, however, for the structure of the SIOP. The following list of short questions may be useful in probing the briefers: —How long does it take to plan an LNO from scratch? —Who can plan LNO’s? JCS? SAC? —Could SAC support SACEUR in a theater nuclear campaign? Who would control planning? Where would it take place? —How will targets be identified for LNO’s? —How will damage be assessed after LNO’s have been fired? —Are LNO’s coordinated with actions by other forces? Ground offensives? If so, what is the planning link to the land force commander? —Could we track, target, and hit a Soviet naval task force at sea with an LNO?7 —What constitutes our Secure Reserve Force? How do we know it is “secure?” —What will we target with the SRF?8 —How will we assess SRF9 damage? —Will the SRF be coordinated with theater forces (Europe) after a SIOP exchange? —Could surviving SSBN’s be reloaded with SLBM’s? Where? Would it make sense to build and store extra SLBM’s? Do we have any industrial mobilization for missile production in the event of a long nuclear war? —Do we have LNO’s for Soviet C3I?10 4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this and the previous sentence. 5 Huntington’s memorandum to Brzezinski is printed as Document 71. Utgoff’s memorandum was not found. 6 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence. 7 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence. 8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence and underscored “with.” 9 Brzezinski underlined the words “assess SRF.” 10 Brzezinski circled this sentence.
