Yugoslavia
951
casualties in World War II have overcome great tribulations to secure
their independence, and will continue to endure further if necessary.
“We know how to defend ourselves. As for our independence and
sovereignty, we will make no concessions to anyone, at any time.” He
added “This is why we approve the public stance you have taken.”
10. Vice President Mondale said that when he first came to
Yugoslavia in 1977 he had occasion to express American support for
Yugoslav sovereignty and unity, and also approval for Yugoslavia’s
role as leader in the Non-Aligned Movement. We continue “to stand
ready, as your friend, to be of assistance in ways you might think
proper and appropriate, to achieve your objectives.” He added, “I come
here today, expressly at the direction of the President, to repeat these
assurances of our friendship and our confidence in your leaders.”
11. The Vice President continued that in the past three years our
bilateral relationship has become as good as it had ever been. The
relationship between our two Presidents had gone beyond that which
usually develops between Chiefs of State. President Carter greatly
relied on President Tito’s judgment as a statesman and on his vast
knowledge of the world. We are prepared, the Vice President contin-
ued, further to develop and broaden that relationship through future
high level political meetings or discussions at a technical level, on
economic assistance or in the military area. He noted that Secretary of
the Treasury Miller and Chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Solomon were present. President Kolisevski suggested that
separate discussions be held between Messrs. Miller and Solomon with
Federal Executive Council Vice President Ikonic and with Minister of
Finance Kostic. As for the military area, Kolisevski said that he thought
both sides are adequately in touch. Vice President Mondale agreed,
observing that General Graves had recently visited Belgrade.
12. Turning to the subject of anti-Yugoslav violence in the U.S., Vice
President Mondale noted there are now 17 criminals in U.S. prisons.
The Carter administration is bitterly opposed to terrorism. He could
assure President Kolisevski that at this particularly sensitive time, U.S.
security authorities all over the country have been alerted to increase
protection of Yugoslav establishments. Mr. Aaron added that as a
member of the National Security Council he had taken part in several
meetings with the Department of Justice and could add his assurances
that our police are as alert as they could be.
13. Kolisevski was glad to hear this. Similar assurances had been
received from several countries in Western Europe. This is a very
important subject. Acts of terror can only hinder relationships between
countries. The holding of U.S. hostages in Tehran is a good example
of this. Relations between two countries can be harmed even if the acts
of terror are carried out between agents of other countries. Interference
