Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 271 a positive momentum in our political relationships with the developing nations. 3. On almost every issue, we must find ways to enhance the participation of LDC’s in international decisionmaking in a way that is acceptable to them and to us. Let me say a word about each. First, trade-offs between short-term and longer term interests. We are, as you know, in a period of economic difficulties, both in the United States and abroad. Governments everywhere are under pressure to respond to the immediate plight of their citizens, particularly the need to protect jobs. This results in at least two policy dilemmas for the United States. • It is axiomatic that a liberal trade regime is in the interest of both the developed and the developing nations. Freer trade can promote the long-term development of the resources the world needs, provide lower prices and greater choice for consumers, and increase opportunities for producers in all countries. Trade can be an engine for economic development and a means for developing nations to participate in the international economic system. All this is accepted in principle, as the stated goal of all countries participating in the current multilateral trade negotiations in Geneva. But the harsh political reality is that these longer term benefits are threatened by short-term protectionism. The United States has been in the forefront in encouraging the negotiations to move forward. We must continue to do so, while seeking to cushion the impact of immediate dislocations. In the months ahead the United States will be vigorously pushing for trade liberalizing measures in the current trade negotiations in Geneva. We will be giving special attention to products of interest to LDC’s. And we will do our best to work with other countries to devise trading rules which promote trade between the developed and developing world. • Another example of the need—and the difficulty—in protecting the future against shorter term pressures is the issue of foreign assistance. Our foreign aid program has undergone many changes over the past decade, from the large, capital-intensive programs of the 1960’s to the small programs we now increasingly support—much of which is focused on rural development. This Administration intends to give more priority to development assistance than it received throughout the 1970’s. We see these development programs as an integral part of our overall strategy of promoting flows of development finance, as the most efficient and direct method of transferring resources to countries which do not have full access to private capital markets, and as the most direct way to attack poverty.
