Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
271
a positive momentum in our political relationships with the developing
nations.
3. On almost every issue, we must find ways to enhance the partic-
ipation of LDC’s in international decisionmaking in a way that is ac-
ceptable to them and to us.
Let me say a word about each.
First, trade-offs between short-term and longer term interests.
We are, as you know, in a period of economic difficulties, both in
the United States and abroad. Governments everywhere are under
pressure to respond to the immediate plight of their citizens, particu-
larly the need to protect jobs. This results in at least two policy di-
lemmas for the United States.
• It is axiomatic that a liberal trade regime is in the interest of both
the developed and the developing nations. Freer trade can promote the
long-term development of the resources the world needs, provide
lower prices and greater choice for consumers, and increase opportu-
nities for producers in all countries. Trade can be an engine for eco-
nomic development and a means for developing nations to participate
in the international economic system. All this is accepted in principle,
as the stated goal of all countries participating in the current multila-
teral trade negotiations in Geneva. But the harsh political reality is that
these longer term benefits are threatened by short-term protectionism.
The United States has been in the forefront in encouraging the ne-
gotiations to move forward. We must continue to do so, while seeking
to cushion the impact of immediate dislocations. In the months ahead
the United States will be vigorously pushing for trade liberalizing
measures in the current trade negotiations in Geneva. We will be giving
special attention to products of interest to LDC’s. And we will do our
best to work with other countries to devise trading rules which pro-
mote trade between the developed and developing world.
• Another example of the need—and the difficulty—in protecting
the future against shorter term pressures is the issue of foreign assist-
ance. Our foreign aid program has undergone many changes over the
past decade, from the large, capital-intensive programs of the 1960’s to
the small programs we now increasingly support—much of which is
focused on rural development.
This Administration intends to give more priority to development
assistance than it received throughout the 1970’s. We see these devel-
opment programs as an integral part of our overall strategy of pro-
moting flows of development finance, as the most efficient and direct
method of transferring resources to countries which do not have full
access to private capital markets, and as the most direct way to attack
poverty.
