recognize or have truck with any administration which might be
set up in Peking by those Peking leaders in China who in the
present as in the past have been and are seeking to incite the
Chinese people against the friendly attitude [of the] powers.
5. I readily agreed to attend any such informal conference of
representatives of Washington Conference powers which is
scheduled for morning of 4th. Some such action as suggested by
the British Minister might be effective in opposition to extreme
nationalist and Bolshevik trend of events in China, although a
double-edged weapon with both good and bad potentialities.
6. After my conversation with Chang Tso-lin, reported in my 465,
December 1, 4 p.m., Chinese secretary had a long conversation
with General Wang, chief of the Manchurian military foreign,
affairs department, who appears very close to Chang and who was
present both when Chang called on me and my return visit to him.
To Peck’s inquiry regarding exactly what assistance Chang
considered foreign powers could be to the conservative element in
China at the present time to help them oppose the Soviets, Wang
stated that Marshal Chang had in mind an announcement by the
foreign powers of their sympathetic willingness to discuss treaty
revision just as soon as a government was established in China
capable of giving effect to any international arrangements which
would result from such a discussion. Marshal Chang feared that
Sun and his Red adherents prompted by Karakhan would raise
louder and louder the rallying cry of “down with the unjust
treaties” which being a national issue the conservative leaders in
China would not be able to oppose. An announcement by the
powers as suggested above by Marshal Chang would [,he]
believed, cut under this Bolshevik propaganda and enable him
and other conservatives to make common cause with the foreign
powers against Soviet influence in China. I venture to invite
Department’s attention to paragraph 6, my 465, December 1, 4
p.m., expressing the possibility that some such idea as there
described was in Chang’s mind during his conversation with me
on November 29th. Repeated to Tokyo.
