1016
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
did play with the idea of a complementary initiative. We could en-
courage an initiative along the lines of a federal or confederal relation-
ship between the West Bank and Jordan, which Hussein has advanced
in the past. The Begin government would not accept it (it has residual
claims to sovereignty over the West Bank); but it is consistent with the
Labor approach. The important thing is to seek progress in the Talks
that will increase the incentives for Hussein to be involved in the West
Bank in some way during the next few years, to avoid being frozen out
by an autonomy regime in which he has no part. At the moment, this is
a long-shot. (S)
In the next few months, Saudi Arabia will also be important, both
in showing confidence in the possibility of some success in the talks—
by keeping oil production up; and in trying to play a moderating role in
Arab politics (beginning with the Arab Summit on November 20). In
general, the Saudis have been reluctant to use oil in politics; with the
exchange of Ambassadors—or outright failure of the Talks—it might
not be able to sustain that position. (At the same time, economically
Saudi Arabia probably wants to sustain at least an 8.5 million barrel a
day output, and it will see its oil production decisions in the context of
its total relationship with us). We should keep up our discussions with
the Saudis on the peace process, while continuing efforts on Saudi mili-
tary problems, Gulf security, etc. (S)
At some point, Bob had intended to go to Syria. The object was to
keep Assad informed, and also to indicate the ways in which comple-
tion of Camp David could lead in the direction of a comprehensive
peace. The Syrians would not receive him in the context of Camp
David; it is unlikely that they would soon receive you, either, though it
is something to keep in mind (the Saudis could be helpful in arranging
a visit). (S)
The Talks12
State will be briefing you on the detailed issues. Suffice it to point
out here the tough problems, which include:
—the status of East Jerusalem (for purposes of voting), where
some sort of dual voting might be possible;
—the voting status of returnees from 1967 (as provided for in
Camp David);
—the “legislative” vs. “administrative” character of the Self-
Governing Authority;
12 Hunter sent a follow-up memorandum on the state of the autonomy talks with a
list of strategy suggestions to Linowitz on November 26. (Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 62, Middle East: 8–11/79)
