December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
773
had set a target date before which he could not send anyone to Saudi
Arabia. They (the Saudis) are scared about the Palestinians, the Iraqis,
the Syrians. I had not intended to send Mubarak from Sudan to Saudi
Arabia. I was in the garden when President Numayri called me and
told me of his proposal that Vice President Mubarak go to Saudi Arabia
after Sudan. He said Mubarak was beside him there (when he called).
Why not send him to Saudi Arabia? I said that it goes with the target
date. But then I agreed to do it if Numayri would contact the Saudis. He
did so and they welcomed Mubarak.
Dr. Brzezinski asked when.
Prime Minister Khalil said two days ago.
President Sadat said that before Mubarak went to Europe to report
he met with King Khalid and Abdullah and Sultan. He received an
open reception. King Khalid asked someone in his entourage why will
he go to Jerusalem in 1977. He did not yet know that 1977 or 1978 had
passed. He asked some questions and Mubarak gave him the answers.
Abdullah rode with him on the way back to the airport. He said please
do not tell President Sadat what King Khalid asked you. Mubarak said
that the question is not anything important. Abdullah told him that all
of us are behind Sadat. He then proceeded to Jidda where Fahd was
keen to meet with him. Indoors, the Saudis say one thing; outdoors, it is
something completely different. But this time Fahd went too far in sup-
port. He proposed a plan which he will give to Mubarak when he re-
turns from Europe. The situation in Saudi Arabia is exactly as you ana-
lyzed it. The Saudis are important, first of all, on the Gulf where all
except Kuwait are with me—Oman, Qatar, Abu Dhabi, Bahrain. But
since Saudi Arabia is the big one, they will not proclaim this until the
Saudis do. Secondly, I received yesterday a Japanese delegation, a
Deputy for Economic Aid, to discuss the possibility of economic coop-
eration with us. What they fear is that Saudi Arabia, which is their main
source of oil, may join with the Baghdad group and, for example, boy-
cott them in Japan if they deal with Egypt. I agree they will think twice
before doing that. They will not cut aid off or oil. The most important
thing is that we send this message—Egypt and you too—since others
will try to put pressure on us. There will be a hysteric state for one
month maximum. After the second disengagement agreement, it was
much more vehement than now. You should have heard it.
Dr. Brzezinski said they had mentioned the boycott as applying to
Egyptian firms dealing with Israel. If they try to extend it to the coun-
for the Saudis and Egyptians to manage the “post-treaty situation” in the region, though
he did not provide details of the proposal. Eilts relayed a full report of the briefing, ob-
serving that “pending harder evidence of a shift in the Saudi position, Mubarak’s report
of the Saudi reaction should probably be taken with caution.” (Telegram 5403 from Cairo,
March 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790152–0605)
