Chile 305 CH–40. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Chilean Affairs (Phillips)1 Washington, September 2, 1960. SUBJECT United States Assistance to Chile PARTICIPANTS President Eisenhower Chilean Ambassador Walter Muller Lt. Col. John Eisenhower Robert M. Phillips, ARA/WST Ambassador Muller said he knew the President was extremely busy and had many preoccupations, but he thought that the President might want to hear something nice and which would not require any action. President Alessandri had asked the Ambassador to deliver a personal letter thanking President Eisenhower, the United States Government and people for the generous assistance given to Chile following the recent earthquakes. With the President’s permission, the Ambassador read aloud the text of President Alessandri’s letter, as follows [in translation prepared by the Chilean Embassy]. “Distinguished President and friend: “I have the honor to address Your Excellency, interpreting the feelings of deep gratitude of the people and of the Government of Chile, for the generous assistance of that sister nation in the sad emergency produced by the recent seismic disturbances, tidal waves and volcanic eruptions, which have caused deaths and material damages of extraordinary gravity in vast areas of Chilean territory. “The moral solidarity of your great republic, at a particularly difficult moment of Chilean history, reaffirms our faith in an authentic union among peoples, that will bring realization to the hope for the construction of a better world. “The very valuable material cooperation that the Government and the people of the United States has given us, has helped effectively to take care of the most urgent needs of the victims of the catastrophe and to then undertake the hard task of reconstruction of the devastated zones. “Accept, Excellency, the most sincere thanks of the Government and the people of Chile for the very noble attitude of the Government and people of the United States of America, together with the expression of my profound personal gratitude and of my very highest esteem and friendship. 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Official Use Only.
