National Security Policy 1063 Dr. Kistiakowsky believed that we were equal to or even ahead of the Russians with respect to the scientific information being derived from our earth satellite program. The President agreed but added that the public sometimes asked whether scientific information would enable us to defend ourselves against the USSR. Dr. York said the fact that ATLAS was available two years later than the comparable Russian rocket had attracted a great deal of attention. The President said we know that the Russians were working earlier on the large rocket engine but it was difficult to get the public to appreciate the real significance of missile developments. Mr. Allen said as a result of our recent successes in space activities, we have recouped much U.S. prestige abroad which had been lost after SPUTNIK. Secretary Gates believed it was essen­ tial to separate space activities from military requirements in talking to the public about missile programs. The President noted that such a separation was one of the reasons for creating NASA. Secretary Gates believed the public was somewhat fearful of lunar probes. Dr. York said the Russians had simply demonstrated a capability for lunar probes which we knew they possessed. Mr. Stans wondered whether we were making high enough claims for our scientific achievements in space. The President asked whether PIONEER V was still sending sig­ nals. Dr. York said the satellite was still sending on the small radio. The large radio would be turned on when the satellite was 10 million miles out unless the small radio failed before that time. The President asked when the communications balloon would be put aloft. General Goodpaster said this firing was scheduled for tomorrow. Dr. Scoville was then called upon to summarize the CIA report on the history of USSR long-­range missile development. Dr. Scoville said the Soviets had no guided missile program before or during World War II, although Soviet scientists had worked on liquid fuel propul­ sion systems. The Soviets had been impressed by German achieve­ ments with the V–1 and the V–2. Consequently, immediately after the war they had devoted a major effort to exploiting German scientists and technicians who had been engaged in the German V–1 and V–2 programs. At first these Germans had been exploited in Germany. Later, in 1946, German scientists and technicians had been evacuated to Kaliningrad, near Moscow, where research laboratories had been established to emphasize V–2 development. Here a modification of the V–2 had been tested. The President asked whether the V–2 had any guidance. Dr. Scoville replied that the V–2 had a type of radio inertial guidance but no terminal guidance.
