suggested treaty, and stated that he would give the matter careful
consideration and as soon as possible would let me know his views. I said
that I felt sure that he personally was in full accord with my Government in
its desire to put an end to war, and I hoped he would see his way clear to
joining with us, and the other four powers, in a treaty substantially as we
now suggested, which, if adopted by the six powers, would have a good
chance of being adopted by all the countries of the world; and he replied
that I was correct in thinking that personally he was anxious to do all in his
power toward securing the peace of the world, and would do all that he
possibly could to that end.
I explained to the Prime Minister that my instructions were to deliver this
note and enclosures to him at 5 P.M., to-day, but as his engagements did not
permit him to receive me at that hour, but only at 4 P.M., I had taken the
liberty of delivering the papers at four o’clock, as I wished to have the
honor of handing them in person to the Foreign Minister; but that I should
be glad if he would consider them as delivered at 5 P.M., the time named in
my instructions, and to this he smilingly assented.
I then stated, that, as instructed by my Government, I proposed to give the
note and suggested treaty to the Press this afternoon, so that they might
appear in the Tokyo papers to-morrow morning, and asked whether he had
any objection to this course. He replied that he had no objection.
On coming out of the room of the Minister for Foreign Affairs I met Mr.
Debuchi, who asked me whether I proposed to give to the Press any of the
papers I had handed to Baron Tanaka. I said that I intended to give to the
Press the note and suggested Treaty, and asked if he, Mr. Debuchi, had any
objection. He replied that he did not see any reason why we should not do
so, but merely wanted to know—possibly, I thought, having in mind that he
would give them to the Press if we did not do so.
I have [etc.]
CHARLES MACVEAGH
