Hungary
455
sing this matter in detail with the Foreign Minister in Budapest.3 As
a result, and in part as a follow-on to the technical trade talks begun
in June in Washington with Hungary’s senior trade negotiator, Janos
Nyerges, you are instructed to seek detailed discussions with key Hun-
garian authorities to explain the emigration provisions of the Trade Act
of 1974 and to obtain sufficient additional information about Hungary’s
emigration law, its application of this law, methods of dealing with
bilateral emigration problems, and Hungarian emigration to third
countries including Israel to prepare a comprehensive report that will
serve to answer executive and congressional questions on these topics.
2. You should explain to the Hungarian Government that we have
noted with favor the positive humanitarian spirit with which Hungary
is addressing family reunification matters and also that we have care-
fully considered the recent statements made by various Hungarian
officials (such as Ambassador Bartha’s statement in May to Charge
Mudd)4 on emigration as well as the formulation on emigration con-
tained in the Hungarian proposal for implementation of CSCE in
bilateral relations. You should state that, if in the course of these dis-
cussions an authoritative spokesman of the Hungarian Government
(e.g., Foreign Minister or Prime Minister) were to make an appropriate
statement indicating that the emigration practices of Hungary will
henceforth lead substantially to the achievement of free emigration, we
are prepared to move into negotiation of a trade agreement following
completion of the discussions.
3. You should indicate to the Hungarian Government that the
necessary content of such a statement has been very carefully consid-
ered by the White House to insure that, as a conclusion to your discus-
sions on Hungarian emigration practice, it would serve as a satisfactory
basis for the President to report to Congress that he has received assur-
ances as required by the Trade Act. If the Hungarian Government
prefers to make this statement in confidence, rather than publicly, the
3 Kaiser met with Puja on October 27. In telegram 3749 from Budapest, October 28,
he reported that, with regard to U.S. immigration requirements, Puja “indicated his
satisfaction that they seemed less demanding than had previously been the case.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770396–1113) In telegram 3818
from Budapest, November 2, Kaiser reported that, in his conversation with Puja that
day, the Hungarian Foreign Minister said he had not yet been able to secure the agreement
of the Hungarian leadership to the proposed U.S. language on assurances prior to their
departure for Moscow, but that he would reply to the U.S. proposal as soon as they
return. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770403–0639)
4 In telegram 1907 from Budapest, June 9, the Embassy reported on a conversation
with Bartha regarding divided family cases. Bartha assured Mudd that Hungary would
resolve all outstanding family reunification cases because “resolution of these issues is
an integral part of Hungary’s approach to human relations.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770207–0441)
