Chapter 4, February–April 1990  455
Shevardnadze: Well, on ALCMs, I can’t respond but will do so when 
we see the actual proposals. On non-­deployed missiles and telemetry, 
I think what you have said provides a good base. We should be able to 
resolve those two questions while you are here.
Baker: I can get into some of the details now if you’d like. And 
I could also describe some of our other new positions.
Shevardnadze: Why don’t you.
Baker: I said we wanted to move the whole process forward, and 
we have come with some other ideas. We have proposed a verification 
approach on mobile missiles. We have proposed phasing for imple-
mentation of a START agreement, and we will also propose treaty 
duration. Some of these proposals fill the gaps in American positions in 
START that had not previously been addressed. The point is both the 
President and I want to move this process forward and want to see a 
START treaty.
On SLCMs, I know how important this issue is to you, and I rec-
ognize you made a very positive move in Wyoming. So I came with a 
form of declaration that I’d like to give you. I think it responds directly 
to some of the questions you raised in Wyoming. Also, you have been 
pressing in Geneva for informal discussions of the negotiating goals 
beyond the current START agreement. We have been resisting that. We 
are also ready to begin those talks.
Shevardnadze: This is good news.
Baker: Before I leave Moscow I think it is important to discuss what 
the marching orders are going to be with the negotiators between now 
and the next ministerial. We will be prepared to give our ideas in prin-
ciple on the remaining issues to be resolved and I’d like to hear yours. 
I’ve got two other issues I’d like to take up.
One is of interest to you, one is of interest to us. The one of interest 
to you has to do with visits to our radars at Thule and Fylingdales. You 
raised the possibility of visiting these sites when we were in Wyoming. 
When I got home, I pursued that in our government. It wasn’t an easy 
issue for us because it is hard to see how visits by your officials to these 
sites would put the issue behind us, and many in our government 
argue that such visits would only make the problem worse. I argued 
that you would not exploit the visit for that purpose and that it would 
in fact put the issue behind us. Therefore, I am pleased to tell you that 
we will meet your request. To get agreement I had to agree to request 
from you an opportunity for our experts to visit two of your large-­scale 
radars. The reason for that is that we did not want the visits to be seen 
as a quid-­pro-­quo for your elimination of Krasnoyarsk which is—­as 
you have acknowledged—­a violation. So we want to treat these visits 
as confidence-­building measures just as we have done in the chemical 
weapons area.
