Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I vious summits; by outlining the central objectives of the two sides; by identifying the key messages and accomplishments; and by describing the scenario and strategy for these negotiations. Moreover, we attach at Tab A a more detailed statement of our tangible and intangible maximum objectives for the entire summit; Tab B contains the Soviet text of the proposed joint communique;2 and Tab C contains a memorandum previously prepared by Bill Hyland on the experience of past summits. History and Setting Some months ago, you read Hyland’s memorandum, and I would urge you to reread it (Tab C). In brief, it points out that some summits created unreal expectations and, hence, generated disillusionment (e.g., the first Nixon-Brezhnev Summit of 1972).3 Some were outright failures, notably Paris in 1960 (Khrushchev walked out over the U–2 incident),4 and Vienna in 19615 (Kennedy was browbeaten and assessed to be a weak leader). Despite its relatively low key, Glassboro6 was a rather unusual success in that it helped bring the USSR to recognize the need for a comprehensive strategic arms control process, despite the then-blazing Vietnam conflict. You will be meeting Leonid Brezhnev in a setting of unusual uncertainty and difficulty. Never has the mixed character of the relationship of cooperation and competion been more in evidence. Despite the successful completion of SALT II, U.S.-Soviet relations are clearly strained by a number of conflicting interests. The United States is increasingly skeptical of Soviet intentions because of the momentum of its military programs and its intervention in the Third World. In the past, we could discount Soviet intentions because Soviet capabilities were limited; today, even benign Soviet intentions are becoming increasingly suspect because of the implications of Soviet capabilities. 2 Tabs A and B were not attached. The summit meeting between the President and Brezhnev was scheduled to take place in Vienna June 16–18.
