796 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement whole “mobilization base” thinking for such an emergency is obsolete, adding that a study might suggest an enlargement. I indicated to the President that we would reflect that he had made a request for a study by junior staff officers with the participation of staff from OCDM. He approved this approach. 4. I then presented the attached draft memorandum to the President for his approval. I reminded him that he had directed that this proce­ dure be followed some weeks ago, but that I had delayed taking action at Mr. Harr’s request until we were nearer the point of having a new Chairman of the OCB. Mr. Harr had felt and I had agreed with him that the letter of appointment to the new Chairman might be used as an occasion to indicate that the action concerning progress reports was not a downgrading of the OCB but rather put a heavier requirement upon the OCB. I pointed out to the President that the State Department legislation had now been passed by the Congress and he would soon be in a posi­ tion to appoint Mr. Murphy. The President approved the attached draft. 5. I reported to the President that in connection with current dis­ cussions about aid to Libya and certain possible covert actions in that country there had emerged for the first time to my knowledge the fact that the military perhaps did not consider the Wheelus base in Libya an essential base. I said this was not the final position of the JCS but that the Joint Staff had concluded that although the Wheelus base had very important peacetime functions, especially for training, there was no general war role for it. I told the President that I supposed that this was because of the comparative vulnerability of this base to Soviet IRBMs. The President asked me whether the military wished to abandon it and have the Soviets take it over. I replied that I was sure that the military would not like such a result but that the reexamination was in part forced by an awareness that we probably cannot meet Libyan demands. I repeated that this was not a final judgment but that I thought that the President ought to know that for the first time questions were being raised about the necessity for the base. 6. I reported to the President with respect to a 5412 activity, which is the subject of a specific memorandum. 7. I then discussed paragraphs 12 a and 16 of the Basic Policy paper. As to 12 a, I reported to the President that the Secretaries of State and Defense seem now to be in agreement on the version of 12 a which is attached, calling his attention to the footnote which would appear in the Record of Actions. I said to the President that we thus had an agreement between the principal department heads but that there was
