which Colonel Peel spoke, but he did not wish the impression to go out that
the Conference had resolved itself into a debt collecting agency. He said
that it would be very unfortunate if such a false impression should prevail.
He considered that it would be sufficient to have two sub-committees, one
on likin and one on other Purposes. Mr. MacMurray supported Dr. Yen’s
suggestion, as did Count de Martel and Mr. Cerruti, with the understanding,
however, that the debt question would be examined into. Mr. Hioki
explained that it was far from the thought of the Japanese Delegation to
impose anything that would be disagreeable to the Chinese Delegation, or
that would appear to interfere with the sovereign rights of China. After
further discussion the chairman summed up the results of the meeting by
saying that the subcommittee on Purposes had agreed to have two sub-
committees of technical advisers, or other members whom each Delegation
would choose, one to sit as a sub-committee on Likin and the other as a
sub-committee on Other Purposes. He pointed out that the subcommittee on
Rates, authorized by the Committee on Provisional Measures, had not had a
meeting, but that the first meeting of the sub-committee on Likin would be
held Saturday morning, November 21, 1925.
Proceedings of the Technical Committee on Likin, November 21, 1925.
The First Meeting of the Technical Committee on Likin was held on
Saturday, November 21, 1925, and on the suggestion of Mr. Mac-Murray,
Mr. T. K. Tseng was elected chairman. Mr. Tyndall Wei of the Chinese
Delegation read a paper on “Remarks on the Technical Side of the Question
of Likin”. This paper, together with a series of tables and annexes, may be
found on page 2, et seq. of the Minutes of November 21, 1925 (morning
session). These papers relate to the technical side of the likin question, likin
collections in various provinces, revenue collected by native customs,
goods tax collection on Tientsin-Pukow Railway, and compensation for
discharged officers and employees of likin offices. Mr. Stewart of the
British Delegation inquired whether it was a general principle in the
Chinese scheme that the Central Government should pay the Provinces
annuities in lieu of likin; whether the estimated sum needed for this purpose
was $80,000,000 with an additional $10,000,000 for discharged officers and
employees; whether these annuities would take precedence over
appropriations to be allotted for other purposes, such as, Debt
