Hungary 463 press and prompt a negative reaction in Congress, King recommended making a preemptive announcement of the decision to return the Crown. (Ibid.) Administration officials informed congressional leaders and concerned members of Congress of the decision to return the Crown on November 3. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State, Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and Technology, January 1977 thru December 1980, Lot 81D85, Box 2, Evening Reading) Following notification by administration officials, Representative Mary Rose Oakar (Democrat-Ohio) wrote to President Carter to express her “deep sorrow and disappointment” at the decision to return the Crown and urged him to re-consider. Oakar cited the “tremendous religious and national significance that the Crown has for the people of Hungary,” and claimed that many members of the Hungarian-American community were vehemently opposed to the Crown’s return. She further argued that returning it to the Communist regime contradicted the administration’s stated aim of promoting human rights. Raising questions about the administration’s handling of the matter, Representative Oakar urged Carter to reconsider his decision. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Countries, Box CO–30, CO 67, 1/20/77– 1/20/81) Frank Moore, Assistant to the President for Congressional Liaison, responded to Oakar on behalf of the President on November 7, indicating that the President would take her comments into consideration. (Ibid.) The House Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East, chaired by Representative Lee Hamilton (Democrat-Indiana) held a special hearing on the Crown of St. Stephen and United States-Hungarian relations on November 9. International Relations Committee Chairman Clement J. Zablocki (Democrat-Wisconsin), also participated in the hearing. Representatives Oakar and Frank Horton (Republican-New York) and representatives from several Hungarian-American organizations testified against the President’s decision. Representative Oakar called on Congress to conduct an investigation and urged adoption of H.R. 7983, a bill that would prohibit the return of the Crown without explicit congressional approval. Counselor of the Department of State Matthew Nimetz testified on behalf of the administration. During the hearing, former Hungarian Prime Minister Ferenc Nagy and General Béla Kiraly—the commander of the Hungarian National Guard during the 1956 Revolution—supported the President’s decision. Since “emotions ran high” neither Hamilton nor Zablocki wanted to pursue the matter, Nimetz wrote Secretary of State Vance in a November 9 Evening Report after the hearing. Nimitz also reported that he had assured Zablocki he would be consulted about the details of the return.
