undated
(1) The Japanese Government are gratified to note that the proposals
contained in the memorandum of the Waichiaopu dated August 28, 192532
for the adjustment of the question of wireless telegraphy in China are in
substantial agreement with the plan suggested in the Memoranda of the
Japanese Embassy at Washington, dated December 24, and June 1, 1925,
copies of which have been communicated to the Chinese Government. The
memorandum of the Waichiaopu under examination contemplates the
naturalization of all high power radio stations in China. It intimates that such
stations are to be established with proceeds of foreign loans to be raised for
that purpose, but that, upon completion, they shall be placed under the
exclusive control and administration of the Chinese Government. It is
precisely in support of this line of policy that the Japanese Government have
suggested to the American Government that the two sets of contracts now
held respectively by the Mitsui Bussan Kaisha and the Federal Telegraph
Company be amalgamated into a new and comprehensive loan agreement
with the participation of American, British, French and Japanese radio
interests, and that all features of foreign control or monopoly be excluded
from such a loan agreement.
(2) By the terms of the Waichiaopu’s memorandum it appears that China has
in view the construction of certain new stations for external communication,
in addition to the one recently constructed by the Mitsui Company near
Peking and it is proposed that a loan to be raised to cover the cost of
construction of these stations shall be secured on the revenue of such
establishments and redeemed in annual instalments. The memorandum does
not specify when and where these additional stations are to be set up. In any
case, it seems quite obvious that any further station which may be established
at present or in the near future can not reasonably be expected to yield a
sufficient amount of revenue to meet China’s indebtedness under the
proposed loan. Nor is such an extensive programme believed to be
reconcilable with the avowed policy of the Chinese Government to effect the
financial retrenchment urgently called for in the best interests of the nation.
Its unwisdom will appear all the more striking, when it is considered that on
the whole Pacific Coast of the United States, with its immense volume of
trade, there is only one trans-oceanic radio station open for public use.
Accordingly, it is presumed to be the intention of the Chinese Government to
reserve the plan of constructing any additional high power stations, until the
commercial and industrial condition of the country shall warrant such an
undertaking. The Japanese Government confidently hope that this
presumption will be confirmed by the Chinese Government.
