810 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement revolutionary movements continuing against GON, DEPT suggests AMB make another approach to President pointing out that ratification of Agreement soon by Honduran Congress would have calming effect in CA area, especially at this time when invasion rumors again reaching crescendo. Furthermore, you might wish tell President that U.S. must soon begin to look with grave concern on long delay ratification and that we have special interest in matter since we were involved in assisting countries to arrive at an agreement when Villeda regime threatened. We understand reluctance Honduran Congress pass on any agreement involving Nicaragua, but believe Villeda, in interests of Honduran international relations, especially in posture before OAS, must insist Liberal Congressional leaders that ratification necessary immediately. DEPT is conveying above feeling to Ambassador Davila. Regarding reports of air invasion Nicaragua on [text not declassified] May 6 had [text not declassified] report that such a movement was in final stages of organization in Cuba and was being headed by NICA communists. Admitting that AMB Sevilla may have given us distorted version, DEPT nevertheless views with concern GON’s report that Honduras may be used in asserted movement emanating from Cuba. Embassy instructed tell GOH that in view of fairly firm intelligence its forces should be on special alert for any use of its territory, in violation international treaties.3 Dillon 3 In telegram 432 from Tegucigalpa, May 16, Ambassador Newbegin informed the Department of State that, in the course of a conversation he had that morning with President Villeda, he had told Villeda that concern was increasing within the Department of State about the failure of the Honduran Congress to ratify the agreement with Nicaragua, and that the Department of State was hopeful Villeda would take effective action to obtain prompt action on the matter. (715.00/5–1659) HO–8. Telegram from the Ambassador in Honduras (Newbegin) to the Department of State1 Tegucigalpa, May 20, 1959, 3 p.m. 438. In two-­hour session this afternoon first with President Villeda and then with President of Congress2 and Foreign Minister,3 reviewed full 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 615.173/5–2059. Confidential; Priority. Sent to Managua as telegram 67. 2 Modesto Rodas Alvarado. 3 Andrés Alvarado Puerto.
