870
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
—What aid strategy will best achieve US objectives?
—What FY 1982 funding levels should be envisaged as goals?
—What are the organizational prerequisites for an effective aid
program?
This memorandum addresses the first two questions. A separate
report about organizational issues will be forwarded to you by the end
of November. Decisions on the questions raised in this memorandum
need not wait on that report.
II. Present Programs
Bilateral concessional economic assistance is immediately responsive
to Presidential decisions and permits concentration on geographic and
functional areas of importance to the United States. It has three major
components:
—The development assistance program of AID, which has been
running about $1 billion annually, concentrates around 80% of its re-
sources on meeting basic human needs of the poor in poor countries.
The rest goes for similar programs in middle-income countries, largely
in Latin America. There is a heavy functional concentration (90% of the
total program) on agriculture, health, population, and education—by
Congressional mandate.
—PL–480 food aid, which has been running at almost $1.5 billion
annually, provides food to foreign countries in the form of grants or
concessional loans. About 70% of PL–480’s total dollar resources is allo-
cated to poor countries for humanitarian relief, economic development,
balance of payments support, and support of US political objectives;
the rest goes to such middle-income or affluent countries as Portugal,
Korea, and Israel. The selection of recipients among middle-income
countries has been heavily influenced by foreign policy considerations.
The size of PL–480 is partly determined by domestic agricultural condi-
tions and objectives; these have sometimes led to its being used in ways
that reduce incentives for food production abroad. USDA has an-
nounced its intention to place less emphasis on domestic-oriented goals
in planning future PL–480 programs.
—Security Supporting Assistance (SSA), which has been running
about $2 billion annually, is given for political reasons and is heavily
concentrated in the Middle East, particularly Israel and Egypt. The
funding levels requested for SSA have tended to vary from year to year,
depending on political events. Its size is determined by the executive
branch independently of the levels requested for development assist-
ance; there is a potential trade-off in the Congress between SSA and de-
velopment aid, however, since both are appropriated in the same bill.
Other components of US bilateral concessional assistance run to
around $200 million annually and include the Congressionally funded
