Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1059
219.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Bush1
Washington, June 6, 1991
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING
DATE: June 6, 1991
LOCATION: Cabinet Room
TIME: 3:45–4:45 pm
I. PURPOSE
To review U.S. negotiating positions designed to accelerate com-
pletion of a successful START agreement. These revised positions 
would be incorporated in a letter from you to Gorbachev (draft at Tab 
D)2 that Jim Baker would deliver to Foreign Minister Bessmertnykh this 
weekend.
II. BACKGROUND
It may be possible to wrap up a START treaty by the end of July 
if both sides have the will to do so. There is a relatively large number 
of minor issues that can be resolved quickly in Geneva once there is 
top-down direction from you and Gorbachev to do so. However, there 
are a handful of issues that are particularly stubborn, especially mis-
sile warhead downloading, the definition of new types of missiles, and 
data denial.
These are the focus of your proposed letter to Gorbachev. The idea 
is to follow the model that has been successful on CFE: directly engag-
ing Gorbachev and his stake in the broader U.S.-Soviet relationship to 
overcome the objections of the Soviet hardliners. By the same token, the 
U.S. arms control bureaucracy needs to hear from you directly that you 
want a START treaty that is in the U.S. interest as soon as possible. The 
NSC meeting will be a good place to deliver that message.
The two sides are far apart on these three issues and we do not 
know how much flexibility the Soviets have. Yet in view of Gorbachev’s 
eagerness for a summit, we believe it is important to maintain the link-
age between the signing of START and the summit, and to make a direct 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, H-Files, NSC Meetings Files, NSC0058—June 06, 1991—Strategic Arms 
Reduction Talks. Secret. Attached but not printed is the meeting agenda. A stamped nota-
tion indicates Bush saw the memorandum; beneath the notation, an unknown hand wrote 
“6–6–91.” Gordon, Davis, and Kuehne sent the memorandum to Scowcroft for his signa-
ture under cover of a June 5 memorandum. (Ibid.) According to the Presidential Daily 
Diary, Bush presided over a meeting of the National Security Council from 3:49–4:32 p.m. 
No minutes were found.
2 Attached but not printed. For the final version, see Document 218.
