Comprehensive Test Ban
417
that authenticated data from national seismic stations be used in lieu of
automated seismic installations.
Initial Reactions
It seems to us that we should be able to accept the basic framework
of the Soviet proposal, that is, a treaty and a protocol. But we would
want to press for certain important elements which either now look un-
clear or unsatisfactory in the initial Soviet presentation.
—Treaty duration and withdrawal now seem the central problems
separating us. The treaty should not automatically collapse if France
and China do not accede in three years since no one can realistically ex-
pect them to do so. Nor should the moratorium on PNEs automatically
terminate if the problem of preventing military benefits from PNEs is
not solved since it probably won’t be. We will therefore want to try to
find some way, consistent with our present position, to have both the
treaty and the protocol continue past the initial period unless a party
takes some special step of withdrawal. Unfortunately, on this point, the
Soviet Delegation seemed to envision just a straight termination of the
treaty and the protocol if the various conditions haven’t been met.
The Delegation did not have the impression that the Soviets had fully
thought through all the ramifications.
—Tying the treaty and the protocol together. Obviously it would
not be acceptable for countries to be able to sign the treaty banning
weapon tests but not accept the protocol banning explosions for alleged
peaceful purposes. The protocol would therefore have to be regarded
as an essential and integral part of the treaty. This would also mean that
the protocol banning PNEs should be amendable only in the same way
the treaty could be amended—with the consent of all the participating
nuclear powers. The Delegation immediately raised these questions in-
formally with the Soviets and the initial response indicated possible
flexibility.
Future Work
There will be a break in the talks beginning this Friday,4 and a re-
sumption on December 5. This should give us ample time to figure out
the best strategy and to prepare ourselves for detailed negotiations in
December. The Delegation will shortly be sending its analysis and
recommendations.
One thing seems fairly certain. It will be very much in our interest
to have concrete proposals and texts to provide the Soviets for the next
round. If we can accept Brezhnev’s proposed framework of a treaty and
protocol on PNEs, we should be in a strong position to press the Soviets
4 November 4.
