934 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III ment of LDC Positions on Debt Relief Issues and a CIA research paper on Non-OPEC LDC debt.7 The developing countries, especially India and Pakistan, have called for rescheduling of commercial and official debt and/or debt moratoria. Their proposals have proved unacceptable to the United States, whose current debt policies are based on an April, 1977, EPG recommendation that the United States oppose calls for generalized debt relief as well as the use of debt relief as a normal means of transferring aid resources.8 However, the UNCTAD secretariat is seeking a compromise that would involve an outcome for the Ministerial meeting that would be rather modest from the point of view of the LDCs. In effect, proposals regarding commercial debt (already questioned within the group of developing countries) would be dropped and emphasis placed on 1) adjustment of the terms and conditions of outstanding loans, and 2) a mechanism to continue international discussion of features or guidelines for treatment of severe external debt problems. The main issues that require PRC decision prior to the UNCTAD Ministerial are as follows: 1) Should the U.S. agree to table the USEEC debt proposal, and, if so, should the U.S. accept the use of debt relief on a case-by-case basis as a means of implementing the section of the US/EEC proposal on the structural balance of payments problems of developing countries? 2) Should the U.S. seek Congressional approval for retroactive terms adjustment on a case-by-case basis to provide assistance to poor countries? A decision of secondary importance at this time concerns the possible analysis of a) the role of aid consortia and creditor clubs in debt relief exercises and (b) bisque clauses. The first two decision issues could involve a modification, but would not overturn, current U.S. debt policies. In assessing these decision issues we have to bear in mind the impact of debt policies on 1) other OECD countries, 2) the overall North-South relationship, 3) the credit worthiness of individual debtor countries, and 4) prospective requests for debt reschedulings. Regarding the two main issues before the PRC, the discussion paper poses the following options: 7 Attached but not printed are two papers prepared in the CIA. The first, ER 78–10095, dated February 1978, is entitled “LDC Positions on the Debt Relief Issues.” The second, ER 78–10001, dated January 1978, is entitled “The Non-OPEC Less Developed Countries: External Debt Positions and Prospects.” 8 See Tab 1 to Document 263.
