364  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
entangle talks in such details it would not contribute to progress in our 
talks. Fault for stalling talks which prevented a full exchange of views 
on agenda item two was not theirs and they were not satisfied with 
state of things.
24. I said I was not satisfied either. I had asked him again in this 
meeting questions which I had asked in previous meetings. Instead of 
discussing where these questions should be discussed, referring them 
to third country or referring them to our assistants, these questions 
could be disposed of in a few minutes between us. He had spoken of 
my distorting the interpretation of announcement. If I had distorted it 
in any way that was what I wanted to know. I had asked him to confirm 
to me whether his government interpreted announcement to apply to 
all civilians whether or not they were in prison. This was vital matter 
between our two governments and not one which could be dealt with 
by assistants or third powers. Other three questions I had asked him 
had also been raised by UK Charge in Peiping and he had not received 
any satisfactory replies to them. Certainly Wang could simply say yes, 
Americans in prison had been given text agreed announcement in lan­
guage which they understood. Certainly he could say yes those Ameri­
cans have been given freedom communicate with UK Charge. Certainly 
he could say yes UK Charge would be permitted interview these per­
sons who desired return if my government wanted facts in their cases to 
be investigated. I did not see why we spent so much time on this matter 
either but I did not see why direct replies should be avoided. I never 
suggested that action his government took to implement announce­
ment should disregard Chinese legal processes and it was assumed 
that his government had taken this into consideration when he agreed 
announcement. Again I wished to say I had made no demands. I was 
merely asking how announcement was being implemented.
25. Wang said he had already answered some of questions I had 
raised previously and this was not place for discussing other questions. 
If we continued to put forward all questions dealt with in our meet­
ings in past he would have to say these questions were being used to 
stall progress of meetings. If we discuss questions which should not 
belong within field of discussion in this meeting then their discussion 
for even one minute was a waste of time. He could not understand why 
we repeat work which could be done by the third states after we had 
entrusted these third states in accordance with agreed announcement. 
If we had any reasonable suggestions these could be raised in a meeting 
of assistants instead of continuing discussion here and thus preventing 
progress. No necessity discuss these questions at this meeting because 
if I felt I had reasonable suggestions to make we might as well arrange 
special meeting of assistants to consider any reasonable suggestions.
