658
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of alternative suppliers, food leverage could affect the basic national
policies of a widening circle of nations.
D. International Tensions
There is, however, another side to the coin. Food and population
trends portend threats as well as opportunities for the US. These trends
seem likely to make the world a more turbulent setting for the conduct
of foreign policy—a setting in which the definition and pursuit of US
interests will be more complicated. One aspect of this complexity al-
ready is manifest in the politicization of international economic rela-
tionships and their polarization along North-South lines.
Agitation by the LDCs for more advantageous terms of trade, aid,
and investment between themselves and the industrialized nations,
and for a redistribution of power and authority in international affairs
(as exemplified by demands for a “New International Economic
Order”) is attributable partly to food uncertainty and the pressures of
population growth.4
The poorer food-deficient countries view the world food problem
as one of inequitable distribution and consumption as well as shortage.
They claim that affluent nations’ absorption of a disproportionate share
of world food resources is contributing to the problem, and their solu-
tions are articulated in terms of “distributive justice” as well as in-
creased production.
These countries direct most of their criticism against the industrial
democracies. Colonial legacies of commercial crops, encouragement of
modernization through pursuit of comparative advantage and partici-
pation in the world market economy, and the regular availability—
until quite recently—of surplus US grain on concessionary terms are
some of the factors they cite in support of the contention that the devel-
oping countries were misled into believing there was no need to be con-
cerned about balancing food supply and demand within their borders.
Considerations related to food and population trends thus are
spurring efforts by developing countries to improve their terms of
trade and eliminate alleged inequities from international economic re-
lationships through price preferences or structural arrangements to
compensate for their disadvantageous position. US interests could be
adversely affected even if the developing countries remain incapable of
imposing most of their demands. Political and economic relations be-
tween the US and its industrial allies could also be seriously strained if
differing degrees of dependence on the material resources of devel-
4 See Chapter III, on LDC demands. [Footnote in original. Chapter III is not
printed.]
