March–August 1953
663
least in part due to Mossadeq’s stipulation of an open ballot system fa-
cilitating intimidation and may also have involved a fraudulent count.
The opposition abstained.
2. Another unsettling development has been the emergence of the
Communist Tudeh Party as the leading manipulator of mob pressure,
at least in Tehran, and as an important source of support for Mossadeq
vis-a`-vis his non-Communist opposition. While Mossadeq and Tudeh
still appear to be operating at arm’s length, he clearly accepted Tudeh
collaboration in the recent referendum and in preliminary demonstra-
tions. In the two most recent of these demonstrations, Tudeh made a far
more impressive showing than Mossadeq’s own followers.
3. Finally, there has been a change in the attitudes of the US and the
USSR which has almost certainly necessitated a review of Iranian for-
eign policy. The US attitude toward Mossadeq has gradually hardened,
culminating in President Eisenhower’s warning of 30 June that Iran can
expect no emergency assistance from the US so long as it refuses a rea-
sonable oil settlement with the British.3 This development has not only
helped weaken Mossadeq’s internal position, by undercutting the
widespread belief that the US was backing him, but has also struck at
one of Mossadeq’s own fundamental convictions—namely, that if he
holds on to power long enough and thus proves that he is the man to
deal with, fear of Communism will eventually compel the US to pro-
vide him with oil markets or financial assistance without requiring con-
cessions to the British or other limitations on his freedom of action.
Meanwhile, the new Soviet regime has not only agreed to a doubling of
Soviet-Iranian trade but has also joined in negotiations for a general set-
tlement of outstanding issues between the two countries. These devel-
opments have raised the possibility that Mossadeq might bolster his
popular prestige by obtaining concessions from the USSR and have in-
directly lessened the pressure on him to curry favor with the US.
The Outlook for Mossadeq and the non-Communist Opposition
4. As a general proposition, we believe that the odds still favor
Mossadeq’s retention of power at least through the end of 1953. He is
convinced that Iran needs his leadership and fiercely determined to
maintain it. He is legally entitled to rule by decree until January 1954,
when the plenary powers first granted him by the Majlis in August
1952 expire; appears to have effectively established his authority over
the machinery of government, including the security forces; and still
has a large, undefined residue of popularity and prestige on which to
fall back. His financial problems are unlikely to produce an early crisis
despite his probable continued resort to the printing press to meet cur-
3 See Document 230.
