570 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II which governments failed to produce convincing evidence that the alleged violations are being corrected. Foremost among the cases which will command our attention is that concerning the human rights situation in Uganda. Action which we will support on the Ugandan case will depend largely on recent developments which will be reported to the Commission by the Secretary-General. Other serious cases requiring adequate action will be Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, and Uruguay. In addition to the confidential 1503 procedures, there will be discussed in public forum the situation of the violation of human rights in Democratic Kampuchea. We must assure that appropriate action is taken by the Commission to follow-up its decision to look into the matter which was taken at its last session. (4) Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and on Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief. We intend to give our strong support to the achievement of forward progress in the drafting of the Declaration, which has been proceeding much too slowly. We will emphasize our belief that the issue of religious freedom is among the most important human rights issues in the world today and requires effective attention by the Commission. (5) Study of Reported Violations of Human Rights in Chile. We intend to assure the maintenance of adequate monitoring by the Human Rights Commission of the human rights situation in Chile. As proposed in the resolution adopted by the 33rd UN General Assembly, we will support the substitution of a Special Rapporteur for the Ad Hoc Working Group and the establishment of machinery to deal with the problem of disappeared persons in Chile.4 (6) Report of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. Because the Subcommission plays a key role in the implementation of the procedures established in ECOSOC Resolution 1503 and because much of its expert work provides an essential basis for follow-up recommendations by the Commission, we must assure that adequate time is allocated for discussion of the Subcommission’s report. The Subcommission has been improving in effectiveness and therefore has drawn upon itself undue criticism by governments (such as Argentina) which have been the object of its attention at recent sessions. 4 “Protection of Human Rights in Chile” (A/RES/33/175), adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 20, 1978.
