1955  85
of keeping him without sacrificing his opportunity to go to the War 
College I would certainly want to do so. However, I do not see that 
a few days one way or the other is going to make much difference as 
long as he is leaving in any event, and, therefore, have agreed to his 
leaving in time for him to get back for the opening. I also feel that it 
will be very useful to both of us for him to have the opportunity to 
discuss fully with you in Washington the situation here as we see it. 
He plans to come to the Department just as quickly as he arrives.
I am particularly anxious that he discuss with you the question of 
broadening the scope of representation as suggested in my 364. So I will 
defer any discussion of that in this letter.
I appreciated the information on income tax clearance for depart­
ing aliens. I was aware of this requirement when I was discussing the 
matter with Wang, but I am glad to have the exact information. As you 
will see from the full report of the meeting, the discussion was in the 
context of exit permits. I was trying to make my statement just as strong 
as possible and believe that it is fully correct within the context. It seems 
to me that it goes without saying that before anyone departs he should 
take care of his obligations, including taxes. It just points out that Treas­
ury handles income tax matters in the manner it does. It is in no sense 
a control over the departure of aliens. I intend to stand on statements I 
have made in this regard.
Thanks very much for the Denny article, which we had not seen. 
As you observed, most of the article is deduction on the basis of a few 
scraps of information, and not very good deduction at that.
The Secretary’s last press conference was of tremendous help to 
me. I was able to point out to correspondents here that he said almost 
exactly what I have been saying to them. Please thank the Secretary for 
me. I believe our press problem is now rapidly approaching its proper 
proportion.
Sincerely,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
