Jan. (16) To the Minister in China (tel.) Possibility that the Radio Corporation may be unable to continue with the Federal Telegraph Co. project on the original plan; consequent reason to fear that the Japanese proposal may be the only available alternative. Department’s desire for further comment in view of these possibilities. [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 737, Doc. 738, and Doc. 739] Feb. (61) From the Minister in China (tel.) Suggestion that a conference be held in Peking between representatives of the Chinese Government and of all the companies with which China has radio agreements, to consult as to how best to coordinate the contracts for the most desirable results. [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 737, Doc. 738, and Doc. 739] Feb. (72) From the Minister in China (tel.) Arrival of Davis and Moss. Assertion that, according to Moss, it would seem that China, faced with the possibility of having to accept a radio consortium of four powers, may be willing to accept the Federal contract with a few minor changes. Request for explicit instructions as to the support to be given to Davis and Moss. [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 740] Feb. (24) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions to employ complete frankness in discussions with the representatives of the U. S. interests. Opinion that the radio conference proposal as set forth in telegram No. 61, February 5, might cause the Federal Co.’s valid legal position to be compromised without assuring effective results. [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 742] Feb. 28 To the Japanese Embassy U. S. desire to be reassured as to whether the Japanese proposal of December 24, 1924, would be acceptable to the Chinese Government before giving it further consideration. [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 742] Mar. 12 From Mr. Manton Davis to the Radio Corporation of America Delay in official negotiations because of illness of Minister of Communications; satisfactory progress in unofficial negotiations. Strong Japanese effort to have Federal contract canceled. Outline of proposed traffic arrangement to serve as a basis for settlement of the controversy. (Footnote: Information that Mr. Davis’ suggested traffic arrangement was approved by the Radio Corporation, the Federal [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 744]
