638  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
considerable advance in discussions. We have had prolonged discus­
sion this matter of issuing announcement on this question.
3. Wang said he had glanced over amended draft I had presented 
this morning and while leaving aside details of wording and language, 
he noted that question of principle still remains. He noted I was again 
claiming alleged right of so-­called individual and collective self-­defense 
in Taiwan area.
4. Wang said US is today occupying island of Taiwan which ­Chinese 
territory. Under these circumstances US has absolutely no right speak of 
any self-­defense in Taiwan area.
5. Wang said in my statement this morning I had made reference 
to fact US is member of UN and also made reference to number inter­
national treaties and pacts, but all this could not defend position of US 
in occupying territory of other countries. If US could claim right to self-­
defense in Taiwan area, Wang could say there is no more justice in world.
6. Wang said his side has long expressed itself unmistakeably on 
this matter, that it would never accept this position. Therefore he said 
that amendments presented by me at todays meeting unreasonable and 
unacceptable to his side. Such amendments as had been put forward 
this morning would not help in any way in settlement of matter before 
us. Nor would they help bring closer views of two sides.
7. Wang said I might recall that during discussion of second item 
it was US which initiated proposal of making announcement on renun­
ciation force. PRC side has repeatedly met views of US side and put 
forward new draft of December 1. Thus it could be said PRC side has 
moved several steps forward on this matter.
8. Wang said in this draft of PRC side it clearly stated that on basis 
of UN Charter, both sides should settle disputes between them by 
peaceful means without resorting to threat or use force. This not only 
conforms with desire of people of our two countries but also conforms 
with the desires of peaceloving peoples of world.
9. Wang said however for three meetings in succession US side has 
failed make any comments on his draft and fact that after long recess 
US side should suggest such terms and wording as had long been cate­
gorically rejected by PRC side could not but cause doubt as to whether 
US side has sincere desire arrive at agreement.
10. Wang said at same time he wanted point out that recently 
American military aircraft have been making encroachment on their 
territorial air and American “top brass” have gone to Taiwan to step 
up military preparations. All this conclusively proves that US bent on 
increasing tension in Taiwan area.
11. Wang said further, according press reports, US Air Force Secretary 
Quarles has gone so far as to indicate that outlying islands around Taiwan
