1302 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 778. Telegram unnumbered from Geneva1 Geneva, January 19, 1957 Unnumbered. From Johnson. 1. Wang opened 64th with prepared statement: As talks between us enter third year would not be without purpose if we reviewed at this first session of new year ground talks so far covered. These talks owe origin to Asian African Conference Bandung April 1955, where premier of Wang’s country first made proposal negotiations should be started between China America. Ensuing developments led to ele­ vation on August 1, 1955 of Consular level contact to present talks on Ambassadorial level. Agreed agenda of talks included return civilians and other matters at issue between two sides. Attitude held by each side towards two items throughout entire course negotiations showed who been consistently working devotedly for negotiation and resolu­ tion problems and who been lacking in sincere desire for resolution issues and obstructing progress in talks. Sincere desire his side for settlement problems these talks displayed at first meeting, when his side took special measures of leniency, even before entering into dis­ cussion of substance, to grant early releases of 11 airmen who been convicted of intrusion into territorial air of China to carry out espio­ nage activity. 2. Wang continued China had tens thousands its nationals in US including several thousand students. Since proclamation of PRC, when US Government began actively carrying out policy of hostility towards China, these Chinese nationals had lost freedom of returning to homeland. In violation international law and principles of human­ ity, US Government even issued orders prohibiting Chinese nationals returning motherland, while obstructing and unlawfully persecuting those who desired return. In discussing first item of agenda it was essential that such abnormal state affairs should be corrected. American nationals in China had always been able return their country freely and China had never tried obstruct them doing so. This was entirely in contrast attitude my side towards Chinese nationals. After Agreement September 10 was reached, Wang’s side faithfully carried out, and in addition continuing offer assistance departure of those Americans desiring return, they had also taken further lenient measures in advanc­ ing release of greater part American criminals. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–1957. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Johnson. Sent via pouch. Received on January 24.
