Eastern Europe Region —Opposition to the political establishment in Yugoslavia is unorganized, and factionalized, but is nevertheless worrisome to the Tito regime. Evidence of dissatisfaction, and the employment of harsh measures to suppress it, would bring into the open the regime’s repressive character and make it more difficult for the leadership to argue that Yugoslavia is qualitatively “different” from other communist states. The regime’s attitude toward dissent is colored by its abiding concern regarding the nationalities problem; all dissent is seen as potentially destabilizing. Although such well-known personalities as Milovan Djilas and Mihajlo Mihajlov have long spoken out against government policies and communist practices, the intellectuals and students now criticizing passport policies and supporting the Chartists are not known to the general public. The government has responded cautiously to dissident accusations that it is ignoring the human rights provisions of Helsinki. But it quickly expelled three West Germans who tried to publicize the issue in February, and is making strenuous behind-the-scenes efforts to keep dissent under wraps. The regime is also showing the stick to Yugoslav protesters. Two signers of the petition on passport policy have reportedly lost their jobs, and more punitive actions may be taken. The Constitutional Court rejected their appeal on 24 March. Belgrade’s immediate concern is to limit adverse international publicity, as this would seriously embarrass the regime in view of Yugoslavia’s role as host of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) review meetings.3 It has circulated the word that it may pardon some well known dissenters such as Mihajlov before the meeting as a gesture of Yugoslavia’s good intentions on the human rights front. The Dissidents There have always been individuals in Eastern Europe, even in quiet times, who have called themselves or have been called “dissidents,” and have come forward to criticize the existing socio-political order. In recent months nascent dissident organizations in two countries of Eastern Europe, Poland and Czechoslovakia, have come into the open. The Workers Defense League in Poland, by the very act of adopting a name, has sent a signal that it aspires to, if it is not in fact, a corporate organization. The Charter 77 group in Czechoslovakia has
