Eastern Europe Region
15
—Opposition to the political establishment in Yugoslavia is unorga-
nized, and factionalized, but is nevertheless worrisome to the Tito
regime. Evidence of dissatisfaction, and the employment of harsh
measures to suppress it, would bring into the open the regime’s repres-
sive character and make it more difficult for the leadership to argue
that Yugoslavia is qualitatively “different” from other communist
states. The regime’s attitude toward dissent is colored by its abiding
concern regarding the nationalities problem; all dissent is seen as poten-
tially destabilizing.
Although such well-known personalities as Milovan Djilas and
Mihajlo Mihajlov have long spoken out against government policies
and communist practices, the intellectuals and students now criticizing
passport policies and supporting the Chartists are not known to the
general public.
The government has responded cautiously to dissident accusations
that it is ignoring the human rights provisions of Helsinki. But it quickly
expelled three West Germans who tried to publicize the issue in Febru-
ary, and is making strenuous behind-the-scenes efforts to keep dissent
under wraps. The regime is also showing the stick to Yugoslav protest-
ers. Two signers of the petition on passport policy have reportedly lost
their jobs, and more punitive actions may be taken. The Constitutional
Court rejected their appeal on 24 March. Belgrade’s immediate concern
is to limit adverse international publicity, as this would seriously
embarrass the regime in view of Yugoslavia’s role as host of the Confer-
ence on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) review meetings.3
It has circulated the word that it may pardon some well known dissen-
ters such as Mihajlov before the meeting as a gesture of Yugoslavia’s
good intentions on the human rights front.
The Dissidents
There have always been individuals in Eastern Europe, even in
quiet times, who have called themselves or have been called “dissi-
dents,” and have come forward to criticize the existing socio-political
order. In recent months nascent dissident organizations in two coun-
tries of Eastern Europe, Poland and Czechoslovakia, have come into
the open. The Workers Defense League in Poland, by the very act of
adopting a name, has sent a signal that it aspires to, if it is not in fact,
a corporate organization. The Charter 77 group in Czechoslovakia has
3 It was agreed at Helsinki in August 1975 that the 35 participating nations would
meet in two years to review implementation of the act’s provisions. A preparatory
meeting of experts is scheduled to be held on June 15 in Belgrade to decide on the dates
and agenda for the main follow-up meeting, at, or below, the foreign minister level,
which also is to be held in Belgrade this fall—possibly starting in early October and
lasting up to three months. [Footnote is in the original.]
