International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
93
they talk about does not fit current facts. I have heard Prime Minister
Fukuda’s excellent analysis of the problems of the 1930s. I fear that
people think in terms of Keynesian analysis and are now applying
these old patterns to present circumstances and that pattern of thinking
is not consistent with present facts. Hoover economics has not been up-
dated to deal with such issues as how do we give resources to devel-
oping countries.
Our task as politicians is to make the choices, such as how much of
our GNP we give to the developing countries. These are allocating
problems. Also for instance, we have discussed youth unemployment.
Here there is a problem with the unions, which is part of a generational
problem.
We should think about an inter-generational transfer of resources.
There is a structural problem in unions which is harmful to youths.
How do we transfer resources from the older generation to our youths?
This may be how we have to deal with this problem. The job-creation
programs today are not necessarily sufficient. I have noted Prime Min-
ister Barre’s proposals of a make-work nature for dealing with youth
unemployment. When such projects come to an end, we will still have
youth unemployment. This should be an important issue discussed
here.
Healey: I want to support some of the things that Don MacDonald
has just said. Prime Minister Fukuda has used the words “nagging ap-
prehension”. Chancellor Schmidt spoke of “lack of confidence”. But ex-
cept in the US, who is confident? In other countries there is a certain
malaise, characterized by high savings and low investment, high un-
employment, high inflation and election losses. At our meeting in
Puerto Rico, we were too complacent and this complacency was unjus-
tified. In some of our countries a downturn had begun, from which
President Carter benefited later in the year.
All of us have been taught the relationship between growth and
unemployment, and growth and inflation. But all established relation-
ships seem to have disappeared. The inter-relationships appear to be
different in different countries. Canada and France have recovered
from a recession and have increased output, but also suffer from in-
creasing unemployment. The UK has increases in its labor force and
low growth, yet unemployment is falling when we expected it to be
rising. We do not quite understand this. We have much work to do to
understand these problems and should share the lessons of our
experience.
One key element is high inflation and high unemployment. This
has contributed to the five-fold oil price increase. The OPEC countries
couldn’t spend all the money, therefore it led both to inflation and de-
flation. We must finance the counterpart to the oil surplus or have de-
