510  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
told that in the trials he recently held, Trujillo had said he was ready to 
invite observers to attend, but failed to make good on this. He agreed 
that the key is whether Trujillo wants to get out. He said there are indi-
cations that Trujillo is telling a double story. Mr. Farland confirmed that 
Trujillo had once made a statement that he was going to retire at once, 
but then did not do so.
Ambassador Farland said that the economic situation is now dete-
riorating rapidly. The Dominican Republic is basically a very prosper-
ous little country, but now, however, Trujillo has gained possession of 
all the sugar interests. The dissident group are “sitting on their pocket-
books” and Trujillo, because of the recent fall in sugar prices, can now 
get no credit. Much of his money is in the form of local sugar plants. 
He said it must be recognized that Trujillo has done a great deal for this 
country. He said that if he were to run tomorrow he could be elected. 
The fact is that he controls all news outlets, and it would be a year 
before free elections could be meaningful.
Mr. Rubottom said that Trujillo is involved in all sorts of efforts all 
over the hemisphere to create disorder. The President commented that 
Castro is also, and he would like to see them both sawed off. Mr. Dillon 
commented that the State Department is about ready to propose some 
additional action against Castro.
General Persons commented that if there were an invasion of the 
Dominican Republic from the outside, Smathers and Pawley think that 
Castro would come in. Mr. Rubottom recalled that under the existing 
military contingency plan we would send in our forces into the area to 
keep Castro out.
The President said that the problem is to find a way to give a 
chance for a new party to form. Mr. Farland said that various members 
of the underground had been in touch with him for two years or more. 
They are very anti-Castro, but they fear that Castro would try to carry 
out a coup after a junta came in. The President commented that if a 
junta were to act, the Army might join them, to get even with elements 
of the palace guard.
