Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
741
schedule bilateral games—track with the Kenyans, swimming with the
Australians, and the like—and it was agreed that these suggestions
would be followed-up. (S)
On the remaining issues before the group, it was agreed that we
should make clear to the Allies that, aside from political-level contacts,
we intended to maintain our basic practice of minimal contacts with the
Soviets and hoped they will do the same; State promised an options
paper on the issue of debt relief for Pakistan;5 and all thought it would
be useful to press the Allies harder on the NATO defense response to
Afghanistan, especially the Belgians and Dutch who were apparently
not going to make their three percent defense commitment. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then reminded the participants that the President
had endorsed the following division of labor concepts for coordinating
U.S. and Allied contributions to the security of the Persian Gulf region:
1. Most important is that our Allies increase their commitments to
NATO’s defense. This is the greatest contribution they can make while
the U.S. is building a security system for the Persian Gulf region. (S)
2. Facilitating U.S. enroute access for military contingencies in the
region is the next most helpful thing the Allies can contribute. They
should be pressed to provide that access. (S)
3. On military exercises and deployments, we should encourage
our Allies to go through with those they have already planned but not
to do more at this time. (S)
4. We should encourage the British, French, and Australians to im-
prove their rapid deployment capabilities, but we should not en-
courage them to go beyond their current plan. (S)
5. We should encourage the Allies to expand their security assist-
ance to key regional countries, particularly Turkey, but also Oman, So-
malia, Djibouti, and Sudan. We should encourage them to maintain at
least the same level of economic aid to Egypt, Turkey, and Pakistan and
to expand economic aid with the smaller countries in the region. (S)
Finally, David Aaron observed that another matter of trans-
atlantic concern in the next months was CSCE and the CDE. It was
agreed that there would be a follow-on to this meeting next week6
which would discuss how this issue might affect our relations with the
Allies and, if required, what steps we should take after the President’s
call to Trudeau on Canadian grain exports.7 (S)
5 Not found.
6 There is no indication that a follow-on meeting took place during the next week.
7 In the margin below this paragraph, the President wrote: “We must convince the
Allies that there will be no business as usual until they help us force the Soviet troops out
of Afghanistan. They must face up to this choice. Otherwise, we will all fail, & the Soviets
will win this struggle—(they will still have a bear by the tail in Afghanistan). J.”
