3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
841
drawal cannot take place in any way other than by the guaranteed
agreement on the stopping of aggression and the entering into force of
that agreement. “There can be no thought of simultaneity of these two
things; the concept is devoid of sense.”
16. Gromyko then referred to statements that the US side is “still”
not convinced that armed intrusions into Afghanistan are taking place
from Pakistan. He acknowledged that the terrain was difficult and the
border complicated but insisted that the intrusions were nevertheless
taking place and that no thinking person would seriously assert the
contrary. One only need read statements being made in Washington
and also by the Pakistani president. He also attacked a statement by
President Zia to the effect that it was not within his power to stop the
intrusions, asking whether this meant he was unable to manage the sit-
uation in his own country and what one could expect in the way of ad-
ventures from such a country. But the point is, he said, that no one be-
lieves in Zia’s inability to stop the intrusions: this is a deliberate
distortion of the situation.
17. Gromyko asked that Secretary Muskie think over what he had
had to say. If the US also wants a political settlement of the issue, he
said, there is a possibility for settling it. What is required is for Pakistan
to stop the carrying out of intrusions from its territory. The Soviet
Union has no doubt that a word from the USG to that effect would be of
great significance for stopping the action. Gromyko then stressed the
importance of a meeting between representatives of Pakistan and Af-
ghanistan in order to reach agreement on the complex of issues in-
volved, criticized Pakistan’s rejection of such a meeting, and expressed
the view that the USG could play a realistic role in initiating a dialogue
between Pakistan and Afghanistan. He also noted that such a dialogue
between Iran and Afghanistan was desirable but added that he
doubted a US role was possible in the case of Iran.
18. Responding to Gromyko’s earlier question about the introduc-
tion of third party forces, I noted that Afghanistan is currently occupied
by Soviet troops, that it is a very primitive country and that when the
Soviet troops pull out someone must be there to maintain order. Of the
possibilities which might be explored, it seemed to me that the UN
might offer one approach. As for his reference to our endeavoring to
persuade Pakistan to sign an agreement on “stopping the aggression,”5
I thought if he reread the Secretary’s letter carefully would find that
that possibility was not excluded so [long?] as there were other actions
on the part of the Soviets. While I said I thought it unnecessary to com-
ment on all of the positions he had stated with which we disagree, I
5 An unknown hand corrected the previous phrase by adding “As” and “Pakistan.”
They wrote “corrected para” in the right-hand margin adjacent to the paragraph.
