Chapter 2, January–June 1989 83 Tab A Paper Prepared by the Ad Hoc Interagency Group on National Defense Strategy18 Washington, May 9, 1989 NSR–12, PART IV (C) The Defense PCC directed that the response to Part IV of NSR–12 focus on six key sets of questions in the areas of START, Defense and Space, Conventional Forces, and Chemical Weapons. This report frames, and briefly discusses, the issues with respect to those questions. START (S) The Reagan Administration set out four fundamental criteria for a START agreement: deep reductions, greater stability, equality and effective verification. One of these—­insistence on equal rights and limits under an agreement (consistent with the Jackson Amendment)—­has not been brought into question. However, there are tensions among the other three criteria. For example, reductions to too low a level could jeopardize stability, rather than enhance it. There have also been criticisms that the general U.S. approach in START may not actually lead to enhanced stability—­that it might not, for instance, lower the Soviet weapon-­to-­target ratio or that it might not allow us to deploy the forces necessary for deterrence. Finally, there are questions as to how to balance U.S. verification needs against our other security requirements. The following questions discuss these concerns. Question #1: General Approach to START What do deep START reductions, as currently envisioned, accomplish, and at what cost or savings? What will they contribute to: deterrence, stability, and constraining the threat? Should we be trying to reduce strategic offensive capability without at the same time significantly reducing Soviet weapon-­to-­target ratios (by downloading/ de-MIRVing or other measures)? Will START restrict the U.S. to too low a number of SSBNs? Is channeling strategic forces away from ballistic missiles and toward air breathing systems in the U.S. security interest given the asymmetry in air defenses and our probable inability to establish limits on air defenses that are both verifiable and protect U.S. capability? (S) When the START talks recessed in late 1988, the United States left on the table a negotiating position which sought deep reductions 18 Secret; Noforn; Wnintel. Brackets are in the original.
