Non-Proliferation
985
ances (guarantees that the nuclear powers will not use or threaten to
use their nuclear arsenals against nonnuclear weapons states). (C NF)
In part because of the controversial Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act
of 1978, the United States is uniquely vulnerable to criticism on issues
relating to the Third World’s demand for ready access to nuclear fuel
and technology under the provisions of Article IV. Of all other sup-
pliers, only Canada has been nearly as active in attempting to slow the
spread of advanced nuclear technology. The Soviets, as members of the
London Suppliers Group, have been quietly supportive of these efforts.
But because their role as a nuclear supplier outside the Warsaw Pact
area has so far been limited, they are in a far less exposed position than
the United States. (C NF)
Moscow will be tempted to exploit these differences to its political
advantage. Because it still has a strong stake in the survival and effec-
tiveness of the global NPT regime, however, its actual efforts to this end
will probably be relatively restrained. The fact that the Soviets can
count on the United States bearing the brunt of Third World criticism in
any event makes such restraint all the more likely. (C NF)
The importance attached to the review conference and the issues
that will be aired there has been demonstrated by the attention that has
been given to preparing for the meeting by both the developing and in-
dustrialized nations in recent months. It has also been reflected in the
failure of most NPT signatories to agree on who should preside over
the meeting. The choice could be critical to the outcome of the confer-
ence, for it was only through the strong personal intervention of the
president of the first NPT review conference, Inga Thorsson of Sweden,
that that meeting managed to produce a final declaration five years
ago. (U)
Not surprisingly, most industrialized nations favor reappointment
of Thorsson, but her candidacy has been challenged in recent weeks by
a number of developing countries who support selection of an Iraqi
diplomat for the post. The issue seems unlikely to be resolved before
the conference opens. (U)
Although the portents are even less auspicious than they were in
1975, the serious approach to the meeting evinced by most likely partic-
ipants is reassuring. So too is the fact that none of the countries most
likely to participate has demonstrated a specific intent to disrupt the
meeting. In view of what appears to be a continued broad consensus on
the basic value of the NPT (whatever specific flaws may be perceived),
there is about an even chance that the conference participants will be
able to produce some sort of final declaration. But there also is a good
chance that the developing nations will insist that the text of the docu-
ment contain language more explicitly critical of the performance of the
