1296
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The Prime Minister asked what changes there had been in Begin
and Shamir.
Dr. Brzezinski recounted his discussion with Begin at Camp David,
when Begin had told him that his (Begin’s) arm would fall off and his
eye would fall out before he would give up the Sinai settlements. But 10
days later, Begin agreed that a number of them should be dismantled.
He (Begin) accepted autonomy for the West Bank; now we are trying to
make that a reality. In five years more, it will be possible to translate an
intolerable reality towards accommodation. But to start a new process
would mean going back three years.
The Prime Minister said that the problem is that this view as-
sumes the process of Camp David occurs in a vacuum. Begin sabo-
tages it. They need something explicit on the end result—i.e. self-
determination. With the vacuum, one party is in control, and tries to
sabotage. There is a need for a mechanism guaranteeing fulfillment in
the right directions—either self-determination at the end, or allowing
an assembly in the West Bank and Gaza, with a platform shaped by two
guidelines: self-determination and security for Israel.
The President said they had discussed this subject enough. He
would summarize: first, some Israeli positions are not acceptable to
Jordan. These can be negotiated, though some would not change—e.g.
Jerusalem. Palestinian mayors can say that self-determination is their
position, and they will not change, but are willing to negotiate to
achieve that goal. This doesn’t have to be under Camp David; they can
say what they need. Only 1% of the American people know that the
Palestinians cannot assemble and talk. But if there were a group of rep-
resentatives of the Palestinians who could say they insist on an alterna-
tive—self-determination—we want them there as soon as possible.
First is the need for them to peaceably assemble. If Jordan says, all
right, it does not accept the Camp David Accords, but will help create a
peaceful assembly, this kind of rhetoric would help us make progress.
Without it, Israel is firm on the West Bank; Egypt tries, poorly, to speak
for the Palestinians; and we try to get Israel out of the West Bank, etc.—
without any way to deal with the Palestinians.
Secretary Muskie said the first phase of Camp David—the Egypt-
Israel treaty—the Jordanians say is a fact and will continue. The second
phase—Palestinian rights negotiations—are stalled because there is an
absent party. We can make it a fresh start by following the President’s
idea. How else can we get to talk? Jordan says to give up on the talks for
another approach. Negotiations are needed. Two parties are already
talking; but the third is not there. Which is more likely to work: an on-
going process or a new one which is not conceived? This is the choice. It
is difficult to do the talks bilaterally with Egypt, so the talks are stalled;
the Palestinians are not there or represented there. That can be a fresh
