658
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
believe that stopping ships at sea in a blockade would be operationally
sustainable. Moreover, he thought it would put pressure on us from
our Allies to desist, but if we simply go forward and mine the harbors,
we could maintain the mining even if they were occasionally swept.
Mining would have the virtue of being an accomplished fact and,
moreover, could be done without loss of life which the President
thought is an important factor for safeguarding the lives of the hostages.
At the same time, we would have to tell the Iranians that if the hostages
are hurt, then military action would be swift and would be severe.
The President said that we have to think of counteractions to Iranian
threats against the hostages, but the most important thing is to convince
the Allies that we are going to take these steps rather than the Iranians.
Turning to the possibility of a rescue, the President said he had a
bad feeling about the rescue operation. He thought that it would be
extremely difficult to stay undetected and in Iran for 24 hours. He says
that it sends shivers down his spine.
He wondered whether we had explored the other options such as
paratroopers and moving the carriers further into the Gulf so that the
helicopters could move in in one operation to pick up the hostages.
General Jones said yes, that we had looked at those options and dis-
carded them as being impractical. General Jones said that their confi-
dence in the rescue operation has gone up even since the briefing at
Camp David.9
The President asked why.
The Chairman said there were two reasons. First, the two individu-
als which we agreed would be infiltrated into Iran have been there
and have looked around. They say it is perfectly safe to wander about
the streets. The abnormal has become the normal. They were never
threatened nor were they watched. They surveilled the Foreign Minis-
try, and they even went into the foyer. They went in routinely and got
directions from one of the militant guards. Their conclusion is that the
situation is so relaxed and so fluid that the operation could be con-
ducted with low risk of detection.
The Chairman said the other reason was that the Otter mission
was very successful.10 Moreover, they were looking at a modification
of the plan which would involve caching fuel out in the middle of
nowhere. He said, under those circumstances, we would still have to
hide the helicopters in the shed for a day, but the caching of fuel would
mean that the operation would be significantly less complicated.
9 See Document 217.
10 See footnote 6, Document 217.
