Panama  919
ARA will maintain continuing liaison with the Department of the 
Army’s representatives to assure that the President’s wishes are car-
ried out.
Recommendation:
That you sign the attached Memorandum for the President (Tab 
A), submitting for his consideration a letter addressed to Panamanian 
President de la Guardia, starting that he has approved certain changes 
in operating policies of the Canal Zone authorities and recommend-
ing that the message be released to the press upon delivery by our 
Ambassador in Panama.
PM–22.	
Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the 
President1

Washington, October 28, 1959.
SUBJECT
Recommendation That You Sign A Letter To President de la Guardia of Panama.
In view of the decisions taken at your October 12 meeting on 
United States-Panamanian relations, which has resulted in revisions in 
certain operating policies of the Canal Zone authorities, I recommend 
that you approve the enclosed letter addressed to President Ernesto de 
la Guardia of Panama.
The proposed message refers to a meeting on September 1, 1959 
of United States and Panamanian representatives2 in which President 
de la Guardia actively participated. At that time steps were discussed 
which would help minimize certain sources of friction between our 
two countries. As a result of your October 12 meeting, the Canal Zone 
authorities have begun to take the necessary action to implement the 
steps discussed at the September 1 meeting, i.e. that the Zone revise the 
third country purchasing practices, and that luxury item sales through 
Zone outlets be limited insofar as possible. This information would be 
conveyed orally to the Panamanian President at the time of delivery 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.19/10–2859. Confidential. Drafted 
by Sharp.
2 In a letter dated September 4, 1959, Ambassador Harrington informed Deputy 
Assistant Secretary of State William P. Snow of the details of the meeting on September 
1 and the decisions taken. (ARA/OAP Files, Lot 64 D 67, “Panama Relations. August–
September 1959”)
