September 1953–December 1954
863
Attachment
Memorandum of Conversation
Tehran, December 4, 1953.
PARTICIPANTS
Ambassador Henderson
Mr. Roy M. Melbourne, First Secretary of Embassy
Dr. Baqai, Leader of Workers’ Party
TRANSLATOR
Mr. Christian Chapman, Third Secretary of Embassy
At the request of Dr. Baqai, leader of the Workers’ Party, Ambas-
sador Henderson received him on the evening of December 4, 1953. The
conversation was carried on in French, which the Doctor speaks quite
fluently, and lasted three hours.
Baqai excused himself to have to give a lengthy introduction in
order to explain clearly his position.
Everyone agreed, he said, that Iran was a sick country. Most gener-
ally this sickness is ascribed to a lack of education, or a lack of hygiene,
or to malnutrition, or to other similar causes. However, the more he
and his collaborators studied the problem, the more they became con-
vinced that the real problem lay in the psychology of despair which
grips the people. Iranians have lost hope for the future. This, according
to Dr. Baqai, is the real issue and it is to combat this mentality and atti-
tude that he organized his party. He feels he has been partially suc-
cessful in accomplishing this end. While previously all those who were
actively discontented with things as they were joined the Tudeh party,
more and more have come to join his. Thus, his party has acted as a
screen against the Tudeh.
His position towards Communism and towards Dr. Mosadeq, he
continued, is well enough known, so that he need not amplify on the
subject. However, he considers that the manner in which the trial of
Mosadeq has been handled by the military court, the press, and the
radio is a grave error. No difference is made between the two periods of
Mosadeq’s regime, between the first fifteen months which lasted until
July 1952 (the event surrounding the abortive Ghavam Government)
and the second period, which lasted until August 19, 1953. In the first
period, Dr. Baqai considers that Dr. Mosadeq accurately reflected the
national will or movement; he was a symbol of national resurgence. But
after July 1952 he became entangled with the communists and in the
last few days of his regime finished by committing treason. His connec-
