438
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
this decision. We give large amounts of assistance to Pakistan. One
can say that great amounts of military equipment now in the hands
of Pakistani troops come from China. In order to strengthen our links
with Pakistan, we have built a highway in the most difficult terrain
through the mountains. The question of continuing Chinese aid to
Pakistan does not exist. Moreover, Chinese armaments are rather poor
in quality. While the United States has decided to give aid to Pakistan,
you must now convince Pakistan this is a sincere and genuine US effort
and make them believe that they will benefit from modern US weapons.
I know that the Pakistanis have many grievances against the United
States. This developed to the point that Pakistan withdrew from
CENTO. Have you approached Pakistan on the aid question?
DR. BROWN: We have given them some information and will give
them more. Pakistan has indicated that they did not wish to have a
visit from a survey team until they have received answers to their
questions on the magnitude and type of supplies we have in mind.
DENG: You should directly approach Pakistan to raise this ques-
tion. I would like to cite an episode. It was through the work of Pakistan
that Henry Kissinger came to China to talk about normalization and
to set the trip of President Nixon.5 Since you were able to talk with
them about this, you should be able to talk to them now.
DR. BROWN: I am aware of this Pakistani help, and this will help
put aside some of our reservations.
DENG: You may recall that I raised the question of aid to Pakistan
with President Carter.6 He said the US will give aid in proportion to
the population of the two countries. I said this was not feasible. The
Pakistanis and Indians are afraid of each other. If the population ratio
formula should be used, Pakistan will be in an increasingly inferior
position. We hope that since the United States decided to give aid to
Pakistan, it will really satisfy Pakistan’s requirements. We hope your
aid to Pakistan will not be affected too much by India’s reaction. This
is especially important since Indira Gandhi has come into office. We
hope the US will not mention the Pakistani nuclear program because
India has already said that the United States has supplied them with
enriched uranium.
DR. BROWN: We will continue to maintain our opposition against
Pakistani nuclear development, but we nonetheless will also provide
aid to Pakistan. But we must also remember that Soviet actions are
directed not only at Pakistan but also at Iran. The United States is in
5 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–7, Documents on South Asia, 1969–1972,
Document 90.
6 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIII, China, Document 204.
