Romania Romania’s willingness to resist Soviet pressures to participate in or approve of Soviet actions in Poland. More broadly, EB also feels that it is important to support projects which increase the world’s overall energy supply and which can contribute, as this project can, to helping Romania maintain its energy independence from the Soviet Union. We recognize that Romania’s human rights record is poor, but we see no signs that it is worse today than in the past when we voted in favor of other non-BHN loans for Romania. In fact, there are small signs of improvement. In the area of emigration, in particular, Romania’s record has continued to improve. Other positive steps have taken place precisely in those areas which we identified in 1979 as of greatest concern. Most notably, —There have been no cases confirmed by the Embassy of psychiatric abuse within the last three years and a Romanian emigre doctor, who was the source of many reports of abuses, has withdrawn his allegations. —A Congressional staff study delegation, which was invited to visit Romania to study the Hungarian minority situation, and toured the Hungarian areas extensively, found there was no evidence of a government policy of discrimination. —The so-called Jewish economic criminals were amnestied this year, and those who requested to emigrate have been granted permission to do so; and —Two free trade union activists were released from jail within the past month. While one can debate whether these developments constitute rapid enough progress, one must also keep in mind that repression and authoritarian government in Romania did not begin in 1945. We have expressed our human rights concerns to the Romanians here and in Bucharest, and will continue to do so. Most recently, on December 16, Counselor Ridgway and Deputy Assistant Secretary Barry specifically raised our legislative requirements on IBRD loans with Director of the Americas Bogdan (Tab B).3 Ambassador Aggrey also made a major demarche in Bucharest in November on six specific
