Panama 925 October 21,3 called Panama’s attention to the march once more, and asked the Government to take all action to avoid untoward incidents which might occur. Notwithstanding assurances, the Zone authorities made plans to protect the security of the Zone and Canal. On November 3, after a peaceful demonstration by Boyd, Castillero and a small group of sympathizers, an unruly mob attempted to force entry of the Zone to plant the Panamanian flag and apparently spontaneous violence took place at the Canal Zone border. Rebuffed at the Zone, about 150 people went to the Embassy and desecrated the United States flag, causing damage to other United States installations, public and private. When Zone police and firemen were overrun by the mob, Governor Potter called on CINCARIB to protect the Zone. No further incidents occurred, but approximately 80 people were injured on both sides. Our Embassy protested the flag incident4 and Panama counter-­protested5 that a prior analogous incident to its flag caused the mob to get out of control. Analysis of the events disclosed that Panama’s Guardia National, its sole law enforcement agency, was conspicuously absent from the scene of violence until late on November 3, but from then on controlled Panamanian crowds well. Radio intercepts made on November 3 reveal that the Guardia was instructed to avoid the areas where the crowds were rioting. The Government apparently was unwilling or unable, or both, to control the situation. From November 4 on the Panamanian press and radio undertook a massive vilification campaign against us, which the Government felt would be turned against it, if attempts were made to tone it down. The highly emotional populace was apparently in command of the situation and reports were received of further riots against the Zone scheduled for November 18 and 28. (None materialized on the 18th.) In spite of demarches to President de la Guardia and to Ambassador Aries (who had returned to Washington), it was still apparent that the Panamanian government feared for its future if it were to act forcefully to prevent further anti-United States demonstrations, fanned by press, radio, and demagogues. In order to strengthen President de la Guardia’s resolve and for other reasons, Mr. Merchant went to Panama November 20–21,6 and discussed outstanding issues with Panama. A device for the Government to attempt a pacification of the people was afforded by the statement reaffirming titular sovereignty,7 3 For the text of the United States’ Aide-Memoire, see the Department of State
