708
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
a belief that the Central Intelligence Agency wanted to sabotage the
U.S.-Romanian special relationship. (Intelligence Information Cable,
March 25; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 45, Romania: 1980)
Forwarding the report to Brzezinski on March 28, Stephen Larrabee of
the National Security Council Staff, recommended that Washington
reduce some of the suspicion by rescheduling Vance’s visit to Bucharest
as part of the high-level consultations on which Ceausescu placed great
emphasis, and by receiving Deputy Prime Minister Cornel Burtica at
the White House during his April visit to Washington. (Ibid.)
223.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 14, 1980
SUBJECT
Romanian Request for Military Supply Relationship (S)
As I noted in my Evening Report (Tab B),2 the Romanians have
again approached us about entering into a military supply relationship
with them. Our military attache, acting on instructions, met with
Romanian MOD Chief of Intelligence, Admiral Dinu (see cable at Tab
A)3 on March 5 to hear what the Romanians had in mind. In essence,
Admiral Dinu reaffirmed the approach the Romanians had made sev-
eral years ago when they had provided the U.S. with a list of desired
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 66, Romania, 4/79–3/80. Secret; Outside System. Sent for information. A copy
was sent to Kimmitt. A stamped notation indicates Brzezinski saw the memorandum.
2 Dated March 4. Attached but not printed.
3 Not attached. The Defense Attaché in Bucharest reported his conversation with
the Romanian officer in a March 6 telegram to the Defense Intelligence Agency at the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe,
USSR, and East/West, Box 29, Romania 6/77–10/80)
