668  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Baker: This, too, required the breaking of a lot of china on our part. 
And I am going to present it to you on the same basis of the ALCMs. 
If you can tell me that this declaration as it stands is satisfactory, then 
I can add the following sentence to it. And that sentence reads: the 
number of declared SLCMs will not exceed 1000 for the duration of the 
treaty. It may be a higher number than you had in mind, but it contains 
a number that is good for the life of the treaty. You know that the pre-
sentation of a number, is something we said we really couldn’t do, but 
now we’re doing it. We’re doing it because we’ve heard what you’ve 
said. We heard what Gorbachev said in Malta. We’ve heard you talk 
about the difficulty of ratification before the Supreme Soviet, and I’ve 
pushed as far as I can go.
The commitment to meet the 600 kilometer range in ALCMs and 
have a common numerical limit on nuclear SLCMs are two big issues 
that I understood from both you and Akhromeyev were the key issues 
from your standpoint. I think, and I hope, that this ought to bring 
agreement now on ALCMs and SLCMs. At the very least, I’m hoping 
that you will give me a very early response by next week. As I’ve said 
before, I don’t want to come to Moscow with these issues unresolved. 
Now, I have basically given you everything that I had in my bag, and 
my bag is now empty.
Shevardnadze: Well, maybe I’ll not comment on everything you’ve 
said one by one. Just like you, we have our own military, and they’ve 
been very critical. I’ve spent a lot of time discussing these things with 
them. But I have to say on some aspects, on range and others, you have 
moved in a major way. Let me study what you’ve said. I’ll make sure 
you get an answer very, very soon. And I welcome the way in which 
you have presented this. We can see now that it is possible to discuss 
this and other issues before your visit, and I think to do it very produc-
tively. I don’t want to be in a position like I was after Washington, hav-
ing to come back empty-­handed, but it is clear we need to use our time 
more efficiently than we did in advance of the Washington Ministerial. 
The most difficult thing I can see at first sight is that you are rejecting 
any limit on the number of ALCM-­carrying heavy bombers, and that 
leaves open the channel in the arms race. At least that’s a preliminary 
kind of comment.
Baker: I just hope that what I’ve done closes out the issues. I’ve 
moved as far as I can; our people feel very, very strongly about the issue 
of no bomber limit. Primarily, because they thought we had passed this 
issue and we had resolved it already.
One other item in arms control that I’d like to bring up right now. 
I know that we are very short in time but let me just mention the chem-
ical weapons one. We are very close on this, but what I really need to 
know is if you are going to agree with us on the two percent question,
