February 1951–February 1952
59
serves of arms and equipment necessary for a successful coup d’e´tat.
The Tudeh Party may eventually be capable of seriously interfering,
through strikes and sabotage, with the supply of Iranian oil to the West.
At present, however, disorders on a scale which would seriously re-
duce this supply are improbable so long as the government retains ef-
fective control of the security forces.
b. The USSR’s agitation in Azerbaijan and the other northern prov-
inces has apparently heightened fear of a Soviet invasion rather than
generated a desire for revolt; despite their grievances against the cen-
tral government and their landlords, the people of these provinces
would generally oppose the return of the Russians or their Iranian
disciples.
c. Although there have been periodic reports of an imminent
Kurdish revolt, there is no firm evidence that the USSR has succeeded
in transforming traditional Kurdish hatred of the authorities into an ac-
tive revolutionary spirit and in securing the cooperation of the Kurdish
tribes. Even if the Kurds did revolt, they would probably be ineffective
outside their own tribal areas.
d. The present capabilities of other elements in Iran for directly
challenging the government’s authority are also limited. The ultra-
nationalists, though they have successfully exploited popular senti-
ment to get their way on the explosive oil issue and have gained polit-
ical influence in the process, do not now have the organized strength to
establish continuing political control over the government or to defy
the security forces. The non-Kurdish tribes could present a serious
threat only if they were able to submerge their differences and act in
unison. Individual tribal uprisings, however, could be put down so
long as the security forces remained loyal. In any event, it is doubtful
that any of the tribes could operate beyond its own territory unless a
breakdown of the central government had taken place.
9. The USSR might conceivably launch an invasion of Iran with
guerrilla forces under the lead of the exiled Barzani Kurds and Aber-
baijan Democrats. These exiled elements are few in number, however,
and would not be militarily effective unless supported by large
numbers of Soviet “volunteers.”
10. Development of greater internal stability in Iran will at best re-
quire a number of years. Expanded US economic and technical assist-
ance might bolster the position of those Iranian leaders who have been
advocating internal reform. In terms of material improvement, how-
ever, such US assistance would have to be looked upon as a long-range
investment. Progress would undoubtedly continue to be hampered by
Iranian lack of skill, by graft and political maneuvering, by resistance to
change by both the vested interests and the population at large, and by
lack of perseverance. There is a real danger that Western advisers, as in
