International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
195
next year. We have an economic package of $21 billion. His economic
advisers tell him that in the final quarter, we will see about $3 billion
being felt, since we need time to implement it. In the first quarter of
1978, about $8 billion will be felt, and it will take the next two quarters
to feel the rest. He thinks this is adequate, with tax reform and a low-
ering of tax rates, which will be effective over the years. There is also
the trade balance, unemployment, and inflation. He believes that un-
employment will continue to go down. But on the inflation question, he
is not sure. The year in agriculture has been one of our best ever. This
will mean lower prices for food, which will affect the overall rate of in-
flation. On labor contracts (with coal still to come), we have more or
less managed to get by; and will have one to two years without a re-
newal of major negotiations, since many labor contracts are for three
years.
Mike Blumenthal can talk on trade negotiations. Our assessment is
for the need for quick and substantial progress at the MTN. His impres-
sion is that the French don’t want to see major action, quickly, or as
much as do we. Is this erroneous? As a farmer, he can understand
France’s problems with agriculture. This is difficult to handle. We are
trying to work out a formula, with worldwide grain reserves and a
sugar agreement. These are difficult problems. We are eager for
progress at the MTN. Bob Strauss is a very vigorous negotiator; he will
be no impediment to progress! Maybe he will even want to move fur-
ther than France prefers.
Secretary Blumenthal said he has one comment, on the first part of
Barre’s comments. We see the overall situation of most developed
countries in the same way. He would add on freedom of maneuver: it is
narrow for any nation, now, including the U.S. There are several objec-
tives: getting inflation and unemployment down, handling energy, get-
ting order in our international accounts and having a strong dollar—
and these are not totally consistent with one another. For example, vig-
orous action to restrict imports of energy, if done too fast, would slow
down the U.S. economy, and lead to unemployment and other actions.
We do not have much elbow room. There is the problem of high im-
ports on our balance of trade; a high current account deficit; the energy
situation. These cannot be corrected quickly, but we are trying.
Progress at MTN is of considerable importance. There is pressure
on the President because of the imbalance. Domestic groups seek re-
straints (it is not just the French feeling these pressures). Therefore the
timetable—an ambitious one—is important. It will finally show some
progress, and itself is a major accomplishment. We will do all that we
can; and hope that France will help MTN keep on its calendar. There
are ways to agree to a formula while leaving some things open. One can
