644 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The President then remarked that the capability to cover the trench is okay in his view, but that he would not want to try to explain the covered trench concept in Vienna. He then remarked that if we proceed with the largest M–X missile allowed under SALT and the cruise missile improvements as well, we will be in a good position to expand our forces if SALT breaks down. He also noted that at this point he really didn’t know how many TRIDENTs we might ultimately need, or if the TRIDENT II missile would be needed. Finally the President remarked that the $75–80B figures that Harold Brown is citing in the memo he forwarded are going to come as a big shock to the public and Congress since so far we have only been talking about numbers like $25B. (TS) Secretary Brown responded that the figures we are giving are the acquisition costs for a number of systems that will be purchased over a number of years. He suggested that perhaps it would be better to think about strategic costs in year-­by-­year terms and wondered if we wouldn’t have a different attitude towards our domestic programs if their costs were presented in terms of sums for a large number of years. He then presented figures comparing the costs of the systems being proposed today to those of the corresponding submarine and land-­ based missile systems we built in the ’60s. These comparisons showed that those original systems would be quite expensive in ’80 dollars and that the strategic modernization effort we made in the late ’50s and early ’60s was really massive. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski said that we clearly cannot solve the whole problem today but perhaps some parts of the overall question can be resolved. The President responded that he would hate to see us give up land-­ based systems and that he agreed with the concerns that have been expressed in the memos that had been sent him that this would be a serious political blow. He stated that it would be worth a great deal of effort on our part to avoid such a setback. He also stated that over the years a mystique had built up about the M–X and that not going forward with it would also be a political blow. The question of exactly what kind of a force mix we might want is another issue and a very complex one that he is not ready to decide. The basing issue in particular is complex, and though he liked the open trench idea, he must analyze this concept further. He remarked that the environmental questions are going to be very tough and he cited a problem that had been related to him during the weekend with the opening of a single copper mine in Utah. He said that this mine had been blocked by the environmentalists by the expedient of having a series of people file suits against it over a long period of time. He said that he thought that the statements that had been made that the governor of Utah was for the M–X deployment were a little glib and that one could conclude that the problem was much bigger, if you consider the problems we have had in places like Michigan. The
