National Security Policy  597
jet medium bombers. Prototypes of several new fighter types and two 
new jet light bombers have been displayed since 1956, but none of these 
aircraft has been identified in an operational unit.
176. The increasing availability of nuclear weapons and guided 
missiles during 1959–1963 will bring further changes in equipment 
and organization of Soviet ground and tactical air forces and a steady 
improvement in their capabilities. We believe that these changes will be 
evolutionary in nature, and do not anticipate any major alterations in 
size or deployment. While nuclear weapons and guided missiles prob­
ably will be used in support of tactical operations, conventional field 
artillery and unguided rockets will continue to provide the major direct 
fire support for units in close combat. Tactical Aviation will probably 
receive new supersonic fighters and bombers, but both fighters and 
bombers are expected to decline in numbers as increasing reliance is 
placed on guided missiles.
177. The USSR has sizable airborne forces, estimated at 10 divi­
sions and a total strength of about 100,000 men. Airborne troops are 
well-­equipped, but the air transport component has lagged far behind 
combat air units in the Soviet aircraft re-­equipment program. Aviation 
of Airborne Troops now comprises approximately 500 light transports 
of the CAB, COACH, and CRATE types, 200 BULL medium bomb­
ers converted to transport use, 200 helicopters and 200 gliders. This 
strength could be augmented substantially by other military and civil 
transports.
178. The appearance of new transports and air-­transportable equip­
ment indicates that the USSR is now paying increasing attention to the 
development of its airborne forces. Soviet airlift capabilities will prob­
ably increase considerably during 1959–1963 as additional helicopters 
and transports are introduced. The BULL will probably be employed as 
an interim medium transport until late in the period, when it will have 
been replaced by the CAMP twin-­turboprop assault transport (which 
has, however, not yet appeared in units) and possibly other advanced 
types. Better auxiliary transport will also become available as improved 
aircraft are introduced into civil aviation. In 1957, a number of new 
transports were displayed, including the CAT and COOT turboprop 
medium transports, a four turbojet transport designated COOKER, 
and a turboprop heavy transport, the CLEAT. Of these aircraft, only 
the COOT is now in service, and there is some evidence that technical 
difficulties have caused the transport program to proceed more slowly 
than previously estimated.23
23 For estimated performance characteristics of Soviet transport aircraft, see Annex, 
Table 8. [Footnote is in the original.]
