March–August 1953
511
b. Defense (assisted by the JCS): (1) Plans for a show of force by peri-
odic flights of carrier or land-based aircraft over key centers in Iran,
under Condition I.
(2) Recommendations as to possible levels of increased logistic
support through augmentation of arms aid to Iran under Conditions I
and II.
(3) Recommendations as to the possible levels of additional arms
aid to appropriate Middle East countries under Conditions I and II.
(4) Plans for the deployment of 1½ Air Force wings to southern
Turkey with the mission of assisting Middle East governments in pre-
venting the spread of communist power to their countries, under Con-
dition II.
(5) Plans for the deployment of one Division (reinforced) with nec-
essary supporting air and naval forces to the vicinity of Basra with the
mission of assisting Middle East governments in preventing the spread
of communist power to their countries.
(6) In coordination with State, plans for early military discussions
with the British military authorities re joint action in support of the Ira-
nian Government under Conditions I and II.
c. CIA: (1) Intensify, and if possible expand, their current special
political operations, directed toward counteracting and reducing
Tudeh influence in Iran.
(2) Take steps to move appropriate quantities of para-military
equipment to bases as close to Iran as possible.
(3) Continue to increase its capability to conduct para-military op-
erations in Iran under Condition II.
(4) Conduct joint planning with the MAAG mission in Iran for
para-military operations in Iran under Condition II.
(5) As considered desirable in the light of U.S. national objectives
in Iran, continue joint planning with the British clandestine services for
coordinated action under Condition II.
(6) Plans for transporting arms and mate´riel to Iran under Condi-
tions I and II.
d. PSB: PSB will be requested to supervise the preparation of plans
for specific psychological measures in Iran and in the Middle East
under Conditions I and II.
Walter B. Smith8
Under Secretary
8 Printed from a copy that indicates Smith signed the original.
