366 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 41. He said, “yes, of course.” It was provided that agreed announce­ ment be given wide publicity. 42. I said may be some did not see announcement and there was special responsibility on part his government to see that those in prison had been given copies of announcement. I simply wanted to know if that had been done. 43. Wang said he had told me that agreed announcement provided for wide publicity which meant that everyone should know about it. He had told me his side was faithfully carrying out agreement. This question was one of those which arose out of implementation of agree­ ment. Didn’t I trust them to faithfully implement agreement? 44. I said I was not raising question of trust and accepted his state­ ment. I naturally had a question because some of those Americans released from prison had not heard of agreed announcement. I merely wanted him to assure me that the appropriate authorities in his country had made sure the text of agreed announcement was given to prisoners. I was willing accept his assurances this had been done. 45. Wang said his side would implement fully anything required of them by agreed announcement. He did not believe information on which I had based my statement was accurate. 46. I replied I had merely passed on to him information which those who had been released had given to us. I hoped he would assure him­ self that others had been informed. I hoped I could accept his statement regarding implementation of agreed announcement as indicating per­ sons in jail would have freedom to communicate with UK Charge and that he would be permitted to interview them. UK Charge had received no communication from any of individuals concerned although almost one month had now passed since agreed announcement issued. This was difficult for us to understand. 47. Following long pause Wang said he had nothing to say in this regard. He asked if I had anything to say on points he had raised. 48. I asked if he were unable to give me an answer to these two questions. I did not want to discuss them at length. 49. Wang said he did not consider it necessary to answer these questions here. As he had suggested, they could be handled in a meet­ ing of assistants or through third powers. 50. I said these questions had already been raised by UK Charge and no replies received. I hoped he could assure me that replies would be received by UK Charge promptly. If he received replies it would not be necessary raise questions here. 51. Wang said he had nothing to say. 52. I said this was very disappointing to me. Regarding remainder of his statement I wished to study it carefully because it was long and
