538 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 47. Wang said on other hand there exists in Taiwan area conflict of policy between China and US. We are agreed position in issues between two countries should be settled in accordance purposes and principles UN Charter, we are agreed conflicting policies should not lead to war between us, in international matter between China and US. 48. Wang said clear distinction should be made between these two points. It is second point our talks should strive to settle rather than first. He would appreciate further comments on PRC draft. 49. I replied I was still trying get to heart of matter. If Wang can express willingness negotiate concerning Taiwan area, why could he not say that before negotiations threat of force in area be removed? 50. Wang replied that third paragraph his draft is best answer. 51. I said I had nothing further for today’s meeting. I had tried get into concrete discussion of wording and was sorry there had not been more progress. 52. Wang replied he believed he had answered all questions. He also hoped progress would be made. We had already used up a great deal of time. He would appreciate it if at next meeting I would put forth concrete opinion on PRC draft. Did I find this agreeable? 53. I replied way to make progress is to get down to specific word­ ing. I set forth in great detail my views concerning Wang’s draft. I had produced draft that I thought came close to meeting two points of view. I had not demanded he accept my draft. I had carefully tried determine points to which there was objection in order bring agreement closer. I would continue strive for agreement as I hoped he would. 54. Wang said could he take it then that I was willing make further progress on basis PRC draft? 55. I said I had nothing more to say. 56. Wang said could he take it that at next meeting we would con­ tinue discuss his draft? 57. I said I was willing continue discussion in attempt reach agree­ ment on a draft. Question was not my draft or his draft. Question is to try to reach agreement. I would approach problem in that spirit and hoped he would do the same. 58. Wang said was I willing continue strive for agreement on basis his draft. Question was yes or no. 59. I said question was not yes or no. I had answered question. 60. Wang said he was not clear what I had answered. He hoped we would be able make concrete progress on this question. 61. I said I certainly hoped so. I would try my best.
