The cotton and woolen associations, and perhaps others, have counselled their
members to report any attempt to force the giving of information to the associations,
which will take the matter up with the French Government. They encourage non-
compliance with the demands made. The “Conseillers du Commerce Extérieur” have at
a number of meetings discussed the character of the investigations carried on. Protests
have reached them from a number of trade syndicates, some of which have proposed
that, at least, the application of the American law be made less brusk by agreement to
allow the trade syndicates to report on the cost of production, their conclusions being
accepted, and the individual merchant being freed from interference. (This does not
seem to be a satisfactory way out. CLLJ.) III. ESTIMATE OF THE EFFECT OF THE LEGISLATION
Obviously, the American officers sent to enforce the laws to which the French take
exception have no option. It may also be urged that this is a “good law”, in that it
protects the income of the United States.
 
The legislation certainly does not promote friendly international relations. The
opposition aroused seems to be addressed primarily against the activities of the agents
of the Tariff Commission and incidentally against the representatives of the Treasury.
Perhaps the activities of the latter might have been accepted if there had been no
feeling aroused that the information given was to be used to the disadvantage of French
exports in the fixing of future tariff rates—but even that is doubtful. French exporters
and French Government officials question the propriety of the action taken by certain
of the representatives of the Tariff Commission, and have protested against them. The
criticism which some of these representatives have aroused comes not only from
individual firms, but from the trade syndicates.
It is a fair question whether legislation by France attempting to do the same thing in
America which our officials have attempted to do in France would be accepted without
vigorous protest by the American business public.
Take an example: There is now a fairly large export of aluminium ingots from the
United States to France. There is also an important French aluminium industry.
Suppose a French official attempted to get from the American Aluminum Company
their costs of production, assuming that he acted under French law. What would his
reception be? This is an extreme example, since the American Aluminum Company has
refused to give any information on this subject even to the United States Government.
But the reaction toward the inquiry would be the same even in branches of industry
where control is not so completely in the hands of a small group.
The practical effect of the activities under the existing American legislation is to dry up
sources of commercial information formerly open to the representatives of the United
