1979 655 would be smaller, which should lead to smaller environmental problems. (C) David Aaron pointed out that there are two basic possibilities for systems that rotate missiles among a large number of shelters—­we can proceed with systems that use very fast transporters, allowing very rapid rotation between shelters, or go with systems that use slow transporters in which case there might be a requirement for decoys to help hide the movements of our missiles. (U) The President commented that while he now sees the problems with covered trenches as somewhat smaller than he had before, nonetheless it looks like a surface system would be more acceptable for environmental reasons. (C) Dr. Brzezinski noted that for safety reasons it might still be necessary to fence off the roads or rails connecting the shelters. It was noted that while railroad tracks aren’t generally fenced off today, we might have a tough time introducing a railroad system into the country now, given current concerns about environmental impact. (U) General Jones noted that the track mobile concept being considered does not involve putting the entire system on military bases. The President asked why not—­to which Jones responded that there aren’t that many large military bases, and the cost for such a system would be very much larger if it had to be broken into numerous small deployments. The President asked why it was necessary to have 20 miles of track for each missile. He was told that approximately 40 shelters would be needed for each missile, and that they could not be spaced closer together than approximately a half a mile, given yields of current Soviet warheads. The idea is to ensure that a single warhead will not destroy on the average more than one shelter. (C) Frank Press noted that there was not enough area on military bases to allow for deployment of the 3–4,000 square mile system envisioned. Secretary Brown responded that the suitable bases could provide approximately one-­third of the total area required. He also noted that it would not be a good idea to go to a substantially smaller deployment because the purpose was to reach deployment levels that would discourage the sort of scenario that Admiral Turner had described. (C) Bill Perry noted that if we made the planned deployment, we could create a situation in which the Soviets would have to use up all of their ICBMs in order to destroy our ICBMs—­this would leave our bomber and SLBM forces facing the corresponding forces on their side, a situation that they certainly wouldn’t like. Thus, they would be deterred from making such an attack in the first place. (S) In response to Secretary Brown’s request for a discussion of the open trench, Bill Perry said that they were looking at the possibility of putting an open trench system in Nevada and Utah. The President
