274
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
1. Summary: Ambassador conveyed talking points to Prime Min-
ister Dec. 20. Fukuda outlined drastic fiscal policy measures he was
taking to reach 7 percent growth target and expressed hope they would
meet core of U.S. concerns. He was not specific on current account
target. He said Ushiba would continue work on specific measures
about which he had conveyed latest U.S. views to FonOff earlier.
Meeting closed with expressions of hope that issues would be resolved
to make mid-January Strauss visit possible. End summary.
2. Ambassador saw Prime Minister afternoon Dec. 20 to convey
points in reftel.
3. Prime Minister thanked Ambassador for his help in preparing
Ushiba mission and securing access for him to so many important
Americans. He said he felt the visit had promoted good U.S.-Japan rela-
tions. Some issues remain to be dealt with but he is doing his best to re-
solve them by the end of the year or early next year.
4. Fukuda said his basic problem is how to deal with Japanese
economy for next year. The seven percent growth target is the highest
of any of the industrial democracies and he was now busily at work
trying to develop measures to achieve it. He said his basic thinking was
that Japan could not rely on exports but had to stimulate domestic de-
mand. There are real problems in knowing how to best create domestic
demand; long term investment which would usually be the major pillar
is not too promising; consumption, while it will grow at a stable rate
cannot be the leading factor; therefore the government sector must pro-
vide the main stimulus. He is therefore planning drastic emergency
measures in fiscal policy to bring Japan to the seven percent target.
Japan will be covering a 37 percent deficit by issuing bonds. Fukuda
sees these measures as quite exceptional in the international commu-
nity but since he sees the current situation as a real emergency he is
planning major stimulus which will increase imports. As to exports,
government cannot legally control them in a free market economy but
he hopes for “correct” export practices assisted by the strong yen. A
possible oil price hike might also affect import prices and all together
should have a favorable impact on the current account balance. He said
he hoped U.S. would agree that he was making extraordinary efforts
responsive to the core of U.S. concerns on the macro-economic level.
5. He noted that Ushiba would be continuing to work on the other
issues outside the macro-economic field.
6. Prime Minister made no specific comments on Ambassador’s
presentation except to inquire what timing we envision for Strauss
visit. Ambassador confirmed that if mutually satisfactory progress was
made we would envision a visit around middle of January.
7. Prime Minister also inquired about prospects for U.S. domestic
economy and trade balance for 1978.
