1955 91 in China review of whose cases completed. He would also agree to announcement of results this review prior to announcement on agree­ ment regarding return civilians both sides. When I asked Wang to clarify this statement he said his govern­ ment had basically accepted an arrangement proposed by me and had worked it out in practical form. If we could reach agreement on this draft agreement he could promptly inform me of results of review cases of those Americans on whom reviews completed. If agreement could be reached at today’s meeting he could tell me results today. I said I had understood at second meeting when he gave me names of Americans in China divided into various categories that his statement concerning reviewing cases and informing me of results did not apply to those persons under category (D) described as American military personnel committing crimes. I also mentioned our previous exchange on this in which I had pointed out that classification two persons in this category was erroneous as they were in fact civilians. Wang replied as he had repeatedly informed me his government prepared review all cases involving Americans in China. Asked to repeat this statement he said reviews not confined to any single cat­ egory of Americans but applied to all and repeated “all cases being reviewed”. I said to Wang we had come here to discuss return of civilians to their respective countries. I had informed him measures taken by my country including the one man he had mentioned as being detained. Said it was difficult for me to understand why it not possible for him to do same regarding American nationals his country. If he was in posi­ tion now to inform me under certain conditions regarding steps taken regarding some of our nationals it was obviously not completion of review procedure that prevented our being given this information. I would hope that results he able give me of review these cases would be such that he could make same statement to me as I made to him. That is that his government not preventing departure any American in China who desired return to US. I had told him categorically my government had taken all necessary remaining steps to permit return of any Chinese nationals without exception to his country. At outset of talks I hoped and expected he could make same statement to me regarding Amer­ icans in China. My government took action it did regarding Chinese nationals in US in order promptly dispose of question under agenda item one. I said it difficult reconcile situation still facing American nationals in China with statement of his Prime Minister to which he had referred that number of Americans in China small and question could be easily settled. I was expecting it possible equalize situation our two groups of nationals and thus lay basis for mutually acceptable agreement on third
