256 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement amortizations, however, will probably require unusually heavy payments this year, perhaps about $20 million more than last year. About $25 million of the total payments due are owed to private U.S. banks. The Chilean Government has indicated that it may be able to secure private U.S. bank loans to cover the latter amount especially since the U.S. copper companies have expressed a willingness to assist in obtaining such loans by granting any windfall profits from the recent devaluation of the peso for the service of these loans. In summary, it appears that the Chilean Government will have adequate resources to meet its balance of payments requirements during 1959 and that with a serious effort at stabilization imports can be reduced from their present high levels so that there may actually be no need to borrow from the private U.S. banks on balance of payments grounds. The budgetary deficit is a problem for Chile to resolve in cooperation with the IMF and it certainly cannot be financed by U.S. funds. Therefore, we take the initial position that no additional balance of payments loans should be made to Chile from U.S. official sources during 1959. It is clearly recognized that the new Administration requires same evidence of support from this Government especially since Alessandri has based his political future on close economic cooperation with the United States. Alessandri is a political independent who commands no real party allegiance and has shaky and heterogeneous congressional support. He was elected over a strong, leftist communist supported candidate by a very narrow margin, and there is real reason to believe that in the event of his failure, a drastic swing to the far left in Chile might occur. To meet the political and economic requirements of this situation, we propose that the Chileans be informed at an appropriate point in the negotiations that the Eximbank would be willing to open credit lines to cover acceptable economic development projects on condition that Chile reach prior agreement with the IMF on a renewal of the standby and show satisfactory performance under its terms. We believe that a credit of between $30 and $50 million would be appropriate, but no indication of the amount should be given to the Chileans until after the agreement with the IMF is signed. The announcement of credits would not need to wait until negotiations for the individual projects are concluded. In addition, the possibility of loans from the DLF can be pointed out to the Chileans. There should be no great difficulty in working out excellent development projects as the Eximbank has on file applications for over $40 million, including a paper mill and electric power works. The IBRD has been considering for some time large-­scale highway and railroad projects on which action has been deferred because of inflation. The DLF has on file applications totaling $l8 million and a recent report by the USOM in Santiago indicates the existence of other projects suitable for DLF consideration to the extent of $108 million.
