Human Rights 447 the current statute is adequate.6 The Tab 2 and Tab 3 amendments go too far.7 They would be palatable only if an “extraordinary circumstances” exception were added to them, but in that event they would be unnecessary since the Tab 1 amendment would suffice. The Tab 4 amendment imposes additional reporting requirements: monthly rather than the current quarterly reports and identification of end-users.8 I think we should take the position that quarterly reports should suffice but that we would be willing to provide end-user information. The L paper at Tab 49 says it would be infeasible to provide such information but I have pressed L on this, and they concede it could be done without much difficulty. PM and the regional bureaus oppose the amendments. HA supports them but would not object to the modifications I have adumbrated above. 6 Christopher underlined this sentence and added in the margin: “and preferable. I hesitate to abandon willingly the little flexibility we have. Discuss with Doug how best to support Zablocki.” 7 Tabs 2 and 3 are attached but not printed. The amendment at Tab 2 sought to amend Section 502B to provide that “under no circumstances” would the United States provide international military education and training to any nation engaging in a consistent pattern of gross violation of human rights. The amendment at Tab 3 prohibited the extension of security assistance to forces performing “police, intelligence, or other internal security functions.” 8 Tab 4 is attached but not printed. The amendment at Tab 4 sought to amend Section 502B in order to accelerate the reporting schedule on Munitions List items and on “FMS ‘exports’ to forces performing ‘police, intelligence or other internal security functions.’ ” 9 Reference is to the section of the paper (see footnote 8 above) summarizing the Executive Branch position on the reporting requirement: “While the Executive Branch is prepared to accede to such reporting requirements as the Congress may impose, reports based solely on the identity of the end-user of exported or sold items are inherently infeasible, especially in the case of commercial exports of Munitions List items, where the licensing system has long been premised not on the identity of the ultimate end-user but on the country of destination and the nature of the item sought to be exported.”
