and intersections of trails. This control is explained at times as being exercised to prevent smuggling but it is applied irrespective of direction in which the traveller is proceeding. The result is that Peruvians cannot circulate in the interior without being subjected to constant carbineer observation and interference. This control is exercised even in the presence of American observers and is just as effective as if the travel [permits were?] revoked. Right here in Arica transit to the pier for the purpose of proceeding to the transport upon which the Peruvian Commissioner makes his headquarters which was the subject of an agreement embodied in a memorandum on September 4th last, is even yet precarious and is interrupted by frequent incidents several of which were recently the subject of formal correspondence. Item 9. Flag flying. The best evidence that Peruvians dare not fly their flag is the fact that they do not fly it although the flags of many other nations are constantly displayed in the plebiscitary territory. An attempt to fly the Peruvian flag means an incident like that reported by Udy at Putre; see October 21, midnight.62 Parades. The only time that Peruvians have ventured to parade was at Tacna on March 5. Parade was disgracefully mobbed. On this occasion Chile carefully furnished the form without the substance of police protection. No one was punished. Returning Peruvian electors were brutally mobbed in Tacna on January 6; see General Pershing’s January 863 and 12.62 On several subsequent occasions groups of returning voters were escorted through the streets of Tacna by police in order to protect them from injury, but these were not parades. Propaganda. The sale of La Voz del Sur, the Peruvian paper, has been constantly interrupted by incidents. Peruvian propagandists have been constantly interfered with. The second report of the investigation committee (Kreger,64 December 16, transmitted December 26)62 deals with several instances of interference with propaganda.
