202
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
64.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 15, 1979
SUBJECT
VOA Expansion (U)
You will recall that we directed VOA to re-examine its language
priorities and readjust its output to support basic U.S. foreign policy
objectives a few months ago. Tom Tuch, deputy director of VOA, have
me a brief rundown today of where things stand. Persian-language
broadcasts were resumed in April and now go out ½ hour2 of original
programming per day. There is not much evidence of impact yet in
either Iran or Afghanistan. An additional hour of Persian will be added
this winter. In addition, additional resources are being allocated to
Chinese-language broadcasting and an hour of English to the Caribbean
is being added during FY 1980. (C)
Next priority is Azeri, but it is being put off until 1981 because of
budgetary stringency. Cost of adding Azeri (with impact in both Iran
and USSR) is $250,000 per year and 8 slots. ICA says it cannot reprogram
during FY 1980 to do this. (C)
In light of what we know the Soviets are doing in the area immedi-
ately to the south of their borders, we seem to be going at expanding
our own impact in a very leisurely way. If all we need is $250,000 to
start Azeri, it seems to me it would be very much in our national
interest to do it. We also need to push VOA into doing something
about building new and more powerful transmitters in the South Asian
area (approved in March 1977), for whatever they are programming,
their signal is weak and they are not competing with the vastly more
powerful broadcasts out of the USSR. (C)
At some point, it seems to me, we need to make the effort to get
a little more zip and pep into this whole effort. But the present time
may not be opportune. (U)
I stand ready to propose ways of raising these issues whenever
you want them raised. What is your advice?—
LET IT RIDE
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
America: 1–9/79. Confidential. Sent for action.
2 DavidAaroncircled“½hour”and wrote “ridiculous!” at the top ofthe memorandum.
