66
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“Because we are free, we can never be indifferent to the fate of
freedom elsewhere. Our moral sense dictates a clear-cut preference for
those societies which share with us an abiding respect for individual
human rights. We do not seek to intimidate, but it is clear that a world
which others can dominate with impunity would be inhospitable to de-
cency and a threat to the well-being of all people.
“The world is still engaged in a massive armaments race designed
to ensure continuing equivalent strength among potential adversaries.
We pledge perseverance and wisdom in our efforts to limit the world’s
armaments to those necessary for each nation’s domestic safety. And
we will move this year a step toward our ultimate goal—the elimina-
tion of all nuclear weapons from this Earth. We urge all other people to
join us, for success can mean life instead of death.” (Public Papers:
Carter, 1977, Book I, pages 2–3)
President Carter spoke at 12:05 p.m. from the East Front of the
Capitol. Immediately before the address Chief Justice of the United
States Warren Burger administered the oath of office. The address was
broadcast on radio and television. In his personal diary, the President
characterized the speech:
“I think the inauguration speech itself, perhaps one of the briefest
on record for the first inauguration of a president, was quite compatible
with my announcement speech in December 1974, and also with my ac-
ceptance speech at the Democratic convention. It accurately expressed
some of the major themes of my administration.” (Carter, White House
Diary, page 10)
In a separate videotaped address to global audiences, the Presi-
dent reinforced the themes of the inaugural address:
“I have chosen the occasion of my inauguration as President to
speak not only to my own countrymen—which is traditional—but also
to you, citizens of the world who did not participate in our election but
who will nevertheless be affected by my decisions.
“I also believe that as friends you are entitled to know how the
power and influence of the United States will be exercised by its new
Government.
“I want to assure you that the relations of the United States with
the other countries and peoples of the world will be guided during my
own administration by our desire to shape a world order that is more
responsive to human aspirations. The United States will meet its obli-
gation to help create a stable, just, and peaceful world order.
“We will not seek to dominate nor dictate to others. As we Amer-
icans have concluded one chapter in our Nation’s history and are be-
ginning to work on another, we have, I believe, acquired a more mature
perspective on the problems of the world. It is a perspective which rec-
