112 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 45. Telegram From the Consulate in Frankfurt to the Department of State1 Frankfurt, November 21, 1979, 2339Z 11239. Pass to IWG. Subject: (S) Debriefing of Hostages. 1. (S) Entire text. 2. The treatment of the hostages varied from harsh to mild, with the women receiving considerably worse treatment than the Marines. During lengthy interrogation, three of the women were threatened at gunpoint and all but Gross were verbally threatened. One woman was subjected to a form of Russian roulette. The military hostages were not threatened. In contrast to harsh treatment during interrogation, the women’s physical needs were met. The Marines feared their lives were in danger during the first day but were less fearful in the following days. The women, in contrast, were not concerned the first day but became increasingly fearful as the days progressed. 3. The captors relayed no oral or written personal messages to the hostages. Although some asked if they could communicate with their families, they were told they could not. 4. All the hostages were given a few hours of revolutionary propaganda just prior to their release. The students showed them one onehour movie and one video half-hour tape of the revolution and students’ demonstrating. They also had photographs of SAVAK’s atrocities and books on the revolution. The films had a significant impact because the hostages had spent two weeks without communicating. 5. The assault on the Embassy appeared to be well-planned in advance. The students brought bolt-cutters with them to cut the chain of the front gate. While many of the Iranians appeared to be students, as they claimed, several among them appeared to possess a high degree of organizational ability and set up separate guard groups and shift schedules. There was a high degree of discipline and orders were usually strictly obeyed. It is possible that a handful of students had been trained in logistics and psychology of conducting a hostage terrorist 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Release of Hostages—Under Secretary Newsom. Secret; Immediate; Stadis. Sent via SY Channel. A stamped notation on the top of the first page reads: “Mr. Newsom has seen, Dec 2 1979.” Two other telegrams from Frankfurt provided details of the hostages’ experiences. (Telegram 11217 from Frankfurt, November 21; Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Hostages Released—Escaped; telegram 11261 from Frankfurt, November 22; Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Release of Hostages—Under Secretary Newsom)
