958 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI for two), and unique equipment for reconfiguring the B–1 bomb bay bulkhead and for loading long-­range nuclear ALCM pylons on a B–1 will not be located at airbases for B–1 heavy bombers not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs.  The Soviet position in Geneva calls for additional changes to the B-1, including elimination of attachment points for moving the bomb bay bulkhead, and elimination of ALCM pylon attachment points (except for two). This is not a practical approach. We need to go back to the Houston solution. – On the B–2, the situation is simpler because that aircraft has not been tested with long-­range nuclear ALCMs. That fact provides confidence that this aircraft is not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs. But the Soviet delegation in Geneva continues to press for exhibition of the B-2 in circumstances where it has not been tested with long-­range nuclear ALCMs.  Specifically, what you and I discussed in Houston on – the B–2 was: a type of heavy bomber which has not been flight tested with long-­range nuclear ALCMs will not be subject to exhibition or inspection.  The Soviet position in Geneva calls for exhibition of bombers tested with long-­range non-­nuclear ALCMs. Again, we need to go back to the Houston solution. – On PPCM, we discussed in Washington a solution in which, in the context of the package, the US would accept the Soviet position that PPCM be established in the Soviet Union at facilities that produce mobile ICBMs and their silo-­based variants, and in the US at facilities producing the accountable stages of mobile ICBMs and their silo-­ based variants, or such assembled missiles. In the context of the overall Houston package and in response to your concerns, I agreed we would no longer press our long-­standing proposal for PPCM at solid rocket motor plants.  The US currently has no mobile ICBMs. But for purposes of reciprocity we are prepared to retain the existing PPCM at Magna, Utah and establish PFCM at the facility producing the accountable stage of the peacekeeper ICBM. This would give each side two PPCM sites when START enters into force.  This was spelled out in my letter, and your subsequent letter described PPCM as definitively agreed.  Now the Soviet delegation in Geneva has raised an issue concerning the US small ICBM, which is still a prototype and has not been tested from a mobile launcher. We need to go back to the Houston solution. – On the definition of new types of ICBMs and SLBMs, your letter states that to take into account our concern the Soviet side would
