Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII There is also a report that in the west a convoy of Soviet equipment crossed into Afghanistan from the Kushka area on Saturday. The convoy consisted of more than 500 vehicles, including tanks, and was reportedly moving through Herat. Aerial reconnaissance was reported south of that city, and helicopters were evacuating casualties, indicating the Soviets had encountered resistance. At the same time, [1 line not declassified] a motorized rifle division headquartered at Kizyl-Arvat vacating its garrisons and traveling by road and rail in the direction of Kushka. If the Soviet motorized rifle divisions from Termez and Kushka and the additional airborne unit from Kokayty have indeed all moved into Afghanistan, there are now more than 30,000 Soviet combat troops in the country. If the division from Kizyl-Arvat also crosses the border, the total could jump to between 40,000 and 45,000. The Kabul area Soviet forces in Kabul appear to be adopting a less conspicuous profile. Armed Afghan irregulars are guarding many government buildings, but the Soviets have secured key facilities and have set up a defensive ring around the perimeter of the city. Soviet military flights to Afghanistan are continuing but at reduced levels. Most of the remaining flights are probably transporting supplies. On Thursday and Saturday, several Soviet transports apparently carried Soviet casualties to the USSR. [1 line not declassified] 250 Soviets have been killed or injured in the fighting so far. Afghan Army units in the capital reportedly have virtually disintegrated and other units southeast of Kabul apparently have turned on Soviet forces. The U.S. Embassy in Kabul reports that there are also rumors of growing resistance to the Soviet presence in other areas of the country. We have been unable to confirm Pakistani press reports that the Soviets have been involved in counterinsurgency operations in northeastern Afghanistan. Insurgent activity throughout the country appears to be at a low level. Soviet commentary The first major Soviet media commentary on events in Afghanistan, which was carried by TASS yesterday, represents a significant escalation of Soviet rhetoric against the US. The TASS release, which previewed an article in today’s Pravda by A. Petrov—a pseudonym indicating high-level government approval— alleges that a “limited Soviet military contingent” has been sent to
