Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —We need to do a better job of explaining, at home and abroad, the complexities of our policy and the reasons for some apparent inconsistencies. The memorandum was written by my staff and we take responsibility for its judgments. But we have solicited the opinions of many others—in HA, D, EB, H, T, IO, the regional Bureaus, and AID. Most were eager to express what they do and don’t like about how the policy is working and the paper tries to reflect their opinions, with indications of important disagreements within this building. Some still think the overall tone and thrust are wrong. Comments range from “Pollyannaish” to “overly negative”. We believe this memorandum might be useful at the White House, and suggest that it be sent under cover of a Tarnoff-Brzezinski memorandum.6 Attachment Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance7 Washington, undated SUBJECT The Human Rights Policy: An Interim Assessment The human rights policy is off to a good start but, to no one’s surprise, problems remain. In the following paragraphs we apply hindsight to the year’s experience, with deliberate emphasis on problem areas and what now needs to be done. I. What Are We Actually Doing? Human rights advocacy has become a standard, visible, and important feature of our diplomacy. The President has repeatedly emphasized that it is a cardinal tenet of his foreign policy—a theme you and other key officials have elaborated in speeches. Early in the Administration we signed the UN Covenants and the American Convention on 6 There is no indication as to whether Vance approved or disapproved the recommendation; however, Tarnoff transmitted a copy of Lake’s action memorandum to Brzezinski under a January 30 covering memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780040–0102) 7 Confidential. Drafted by Jennone Walker on January 16. Sent through Christopher. Neither Lake nor Christopher initialed the memorandum.
