988
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
economic issues.5 In his opening remarks Manley specifically requested
that I convey to you his compliments on “your superb performance in
Panama,” during which you gave so many speeches to so many people,
providing something different and pertinent on each occasion. The
tone of our meetings with Manley, and subsequently with Patterson
and his team, was cordial. Our exchanges were frank, and often re-
vealed substantial differences of approach.
This meeting was an attempt to find ways to improve the current
North/South relationship through an informal exchange of views on
both the substance and procedures of the dialogue. In view of the com-
plexity of the problems that beset the dialogue I did not expect to, nor
did we, achieve a breakthrough at the Kingston meetings. But I believe
that over time such informal consultations can help us reduce our polit-
ical and economic differences with the LDCs. The meeting has sup-
ported most of the points made in my memo to you of July 3.6 And I be-
lieve that most of the talking points on North/South issues that were
sent to you on the same date remain valid. However, many of the issues
that the Jamaicans raised will come up during the Bonn Summit and
some will soon require significant U.S. policy decisions.
The Jamaicans made clear that they were not speaking for the
Group of 77, but would convey their best interpretation of the G–77 po-
sition, even though focusing occasionally on issues of particular con-
cern to Jamaica. Patterson placed the highest priority on: 1. agreement
on a Common Fund, 2. debt relief, 3. energy. Manley and Patterson also
stressed the importance of trade, referring to Manley’s agreement with
you in Panama on the need for trade liberalization.7 During the discus-
sions they further emphasized the importance of negotiations on inter-
national commodity agreements, the institutions for conducting the
North/South dialogue and cooperation for development with OPEC
and the Eastern European countries—on the last point they made a spe-
cific proposal for greater East/West cooperation. They clearly favored
expanded flows from developed countries. They responded in a con-
structive manner to subjects that we had raised in our papers, espe-
cially private investment and illicit payments.
5 A memorandum of conversation of a July 7 meeting among Cooper, Manley, and
U.S. and Jamaican officials is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Mate-
rial, International Economics, Guy Erb File, Box 37, Manley (Prime Minister Michael)
Summit: 7/78–1/79. A draft memorandum of conversation of a July 7 discussion among
Cooper, Manley, Hormats, and Erb is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secre-
tariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N.
Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81D134, Box 3, Memorandum of Conversation, Jul–Dec, 1978.
6 See Document 310.
7 See Document 306.
