664 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII When the Soviets moved into Afghanistan, they promised simply to withdraw when foreign interference ceased. Moscow is now close to demanding a formally negotiated guarantee by the US and Afghanistan’s neighbors acceptable to Kabul as a pre-condition for withdrawal, and has increasingly identified itself with maintaining the current regime. Willingness to Talk Both the British and the French came away from their probes in Moscow in early March impressed that the Soviets stopped short of rejecting the notion of negotiations on Afghanistan outright. Gromyko’s public use on March 14 of much the same language as Zemskov’s March 3 non-paper to the British—which said that the USSR had no objection to political efforts to settle questions about Afghanistan— had the effect of committing Moscow at least to hearing out further Western demarches.2 Moscow seems to have been surprised by the amount of interest which Brezhnev’s February 22 reference to guarantees evoked in the West,3 and the Soviets probably decided not to kill off Western speculation about negotiation in the hope that divergent views might emerge thus allowing Moscow greater room for diplomatic maneuvering between the West Europeans and Washington. What emerged from the French and British contacts was the impression that the Soviets have not developed an initiative of their own for settlement or negotiation. In general, their current position seems to be a piecemeal series of responses to British and French queries on withdrawal of Soviet troops, guarantees and neutralization. Soviet Terms for Withdrawal The original December 27 Soviet position was simply that Soviet troops would be withdrawn when the stated reason for their dispatch in the first place—outside interference—had ceased. Over the past 2 For Gromyko’s March 14 statement, see footnote 5, below. The March 3 Soviet oral note was delivered to the British in both Moscow (by Deputy Foreign Minister Zemskov) and London; the British Embassy in Washington then provided a copy to the Department. The main points of the note were as follows: “above all, one cannot speak seriously about any political solution of the Afghan problem without a complete and guaranteed cessation of all forms of outside interference, including armed interference, directed against the Government of Afghanistan, that is without removing the causes which are that the bottom of the tension around Afghanistan. Thus it is now up to the countries involved in the subversive anti-Afghan activities and in the aggression unleashed against Afghanistan to cease that aggression and to respond positively to the constructive initiatives of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.” (Telegram 62066 to Moscow, March 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0607) 3 See Document 216.
