926  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
D. On the basis of the estimated reliability and accuracy of the 
Soviet ICBM, a program to provide 400–500 ICBMs on launcher (540–
680 in operational inventory) in mid-1961 would give the USSR a very 
high assurance of being able to inflict severe damage on SAC opera­
tional air bases and unhardened ICBM sites beyond the range of 1,100 
n.m. missiles, or considerably less assurance of being able to inflict such 
damage on hardened ICBM sites as well as unhardened sites and air 
bases. If the USSR were to exercise this attack capability, it would still 
have to expect retaliation from bombers then on airborne alert, from all 
or some of the few semihardened and hardened ICBM sites then oper­
ational, and from aircraft carriers and missile-­launching submarines 
then at sea. We believe that Soviet planners would not regard this as a 
“decisive military superiority,” although it would certainly be a power­
ful threat with strong psychological and political effects throughout the 
world.3 (Paras. 35, 39, and Annex A, Para. 2)
E. Such a force goal could be realized in mid-­1961 only through a 
crash program requiring diversion of resources from other programs to 
which the Soviet rulers have attached great importance, and a level of 
activity that would tend to stimulate US countermeasures. There is no 
indication that such a Soviet effort is now underway. We do not believe 
that the Soviet rulers would make such a heavy investment in a pro­
gram unlikely to achieve a “decisive military superiority.”4 (Para. 40)
F. Every present indication suggests that the Soviet ICBM pro­
gram, while not a crash program, is designed to provide a substantial 
ICBM capability at an early date. The goal of the program is probably 
an ICBM force as large as Soviet planners deem necessary to provide 
a substantial deterrent and pre-­emptive attack capability. In our view, 
this would be consistent with the present deliberate and orderly tempo 
of the Soviet ICBM test-­firing program, with current Soviet military 
doctrine, and with the USSR’s observed policy of maintaining a balance 
among military capabilities designed to accomplish various missions.5 
(Para. 41)
G. We conclude that the present Soviet ICBM program would pro­
vide on the order of 140–200 ICBMs on launcher in mid-­1961. Within this 
range, there is a difference of view among the members of the United 
3 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF does not concur in the last sentence 
of Conclusion D, Conclusions E and F, and the last sentence of Conclusion H. For his posi­
tion, see his footnote following Conclusion H. [Footnote is in the original.]
4 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF does not concur in the last sentence 
of Conclusion D, Conclusions E and F, and the last sentence of Conclusion H. For his posi­
tion, see his footnote following Conclusion H. [Footnote is in the original.]
5 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF does not concur in the last sentence 
of Conclusion D, Conclusions E and F, and the last sentence of Conclusion H. For his posi­
tion, see his footnote following Conclusion H. [Footnote is in the original.]
