September 18–December 16, 1978
219
commented that his colleagues were studying the Camp David docu-
ments “phrase by phrase.” He said the Front members would compare
their analyses and draw conclusions.
11. The Syrian Government has not yet reacted officially to the con-
ference although the media have again begun calling Sadat a “traitor”
and a “capitulationist.” A senior Baath Party official published a
sharply negative commentary on the Camp David results. Not surpris-
ingly, the reactions of many politically aware Syrians are more mod-
erate than their leadership. They recognize that Egypt got a good deal
in the Sinai but are concerned with the absence of any mention of the
Golan. Despite Syria’s opposition to Sadat, these Syrians believe that
Sadat had publicly committed himself to work on behalf of all Arabs.
12. A definitive Syrian reaction is not expected until after the Front
meetings conclude but it will, undoubtedly, be very negative. Assad is
known to believe that once Egypt is excluded from the Arab-Israeli
equation, Israel will have little incentive to compromise further.
(Confidential)
13. Lebanon. Reports are circulating in Beirut that Sarkis intends to
call for the renewal of the ADF mandate which expires in October but
hopes to blunt Lebanese rightist criticism by circumscribing the Syrian
role. The Phalangist radio and other sources report that Sarkis is ex-
pected to try to reduce the number of Syrian troops operating in Leb-
anon and confine the Syrians to assembly areas from which they would
be used as a ready reaction force in support of Lebanese forces. Even if
Sarkis succeeds in restricting the Syrian role, this would not satisfy
hardline rightists. Dany Shamun warned after leaving a meeting with
Sarkis that it would be “a gross mistake” for Sarkis to renew the ADF
mandate. (Confidential)
Christopher
tion calling for the Front’s member states to break political and economic relations with
Egypt and for the transfer of Arab League headquarters from Cairo. A full summary of
the summit’s resolutions is in telegram 5738 from Damascus, September 27; National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780395–0045)
