1314
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
391.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to
Secretary of State Muskie1
Washington, July 22, 1980
SUBJECT
U.S. Response to Begin’s Moving his Office to East Jerusalem
The Problem
Sam Lewis reports2 that Begin is determined to go through with
moving his office to East Jerusalem, despite our representations. There
are now indications that the move may take place by early August. We
need to devise a measured but firm U.S. response which will show both
Arabs and Israelis that we stand by our position on Jerusalem. At the
same time it will be in our interest to avoid pushing matters to the point
where Begin would be given an issue he could use to bolster his failing
position at home and use against the Administration.
Background
Begin has been thinking about moving his office to East Jerusalem
for some time. Sam Lewis has had several talks with him about it, most
recently on June 25,3 but all attempts to dissuade Begin have been un-
availing, as have our talks here with Ambassador Evron and Interior
Minister Burg. Sam believes that there is virtually no chance that Begin
or his advisors will be swayed by a senior level appeal from the United
States. His estimate is that a message from the President would at best
meet with a polite rebuff.
Begin’s reasons for wanting to make the move appear to be:
—The move is necessary to prove to the world that Israel’s annexa-
tion of East Jerusalem is irreversible and that efforts by the world com-
munity, in particular the UN, will have no effect.
—Concern to make the move while he still has enough time as
Prime Minister to carry it through and make it permanent. (Begin
knows that the Labor Party will not make the move if it comes to office
but apparently believes that he can face it with a fait accompli which it
will be unwilling or unable to reverse.)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 51, Israel: 7/80. Secret. The memorandum was attached to a July 23 memo-
randum from Hunter to Brzezinski, describing it as a “bootleg” copy.
2 See telegram 13390 from Tel Aviv, July 22. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D800352–0101)
3 See footnote 5, Document 388.
