North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
1033
327.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Secretary Vance’s Letter on North-South Issues (U)
Since receiving your guidance to support a PRC on the North-
South issues that Secretary Vance raised in his letter of December 26
(Tab A),2 we have reviewed the State papers within the NSC. I have
also had several conversations with Hormats, Lake and others at
State. (U)
The State approach focuses on constructive initiatives that could
build a record of modest but solid U.S. achievement on North-South
developmental issues. Owen, I, and others have reviewed each of these
proposed steps and concluded that most of the initiatives are already in
motion; a few are new ideas worth exploring. We will continue to mon-
itor each of the useful initiatives, new or old, to insure that they receive
needed support. On some issues, we may find that a PRC is necessary
to determine an Administration position on specific issues, but a deci-
sion on the need for and the timing of such a PRC can be deferred until
staff work has been completed. (C)
I have emphasized to State that the initiatives in support of internal
LDC development—useful as they might be—do not respond ade-
quately to the political dimension of the North-South dialogue. As the
North-South cluster has indicated to you previously (Thornton memo
of November 8, #6746)3 we believe that U.S. policy must also include a
response to the international reforms that LDCs call for if we are to have
a significant impact on our multilateral relations with developing na-
tions. (C)
S/P is drawing up a strategy indicating how and when each of the
initiatives might be related to upcoming phases and events in the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 44, North-South: 4/78–2/79. Confidential. Sent for information. Sent through Owen.
Brzezinski wrote at the top of the page: “Monitor closely. Don’t let it become a substitute
for NSC coordination of policy. ZB.” A separate handwritten notation below Brzezinski’s
comment reads: “1–22–79.”
2 Printed as Document 325.
3 See Document 320.
