Venezuela 1211 more desirable for the Department of Defense to administer all military credits, including the type represented by the Venezuelan transaction. Douglas Dillon VE–13. National Intelligence Estimate1  Washington, September 9, 1958. NIE 89–58 THE VENEZUELAN SITUATION AND PROSPECTS2 THE PROBLEM To analyze the political situation in Venezuela and to estimate the prospects for the establishment of a constitutional regime and the probable political character of such a regime. CONCLUSIONS 1. Venezuela’s present political situation reflects the strains inherent in a transition, in one generation, from an oligarchic social order toward a democratic welfare state. Long-­term dictatorships have been the rule in that country, except for a brief interval of democracy, 1941– 1948. (Paras. 12–14) 2. In 1948 the elected Acción Democrática government was overthrown by a military coup because it attempted to subordinate the military to the civil power. The Pérez Jiménez dictatorship which followed it was overthrown in January 1958 when the armed forces withdrew their support in the face of a universal civilian demand enforced by a general strike. (Paras. 14–17) 3. The stated mission of the present ruling Junta is to bring about the establishment of a democratic constitutional government through 1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet, this estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Department of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff participated in its preparation. The members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in the estimate on September 9, 1958, with the exception of the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction. 2 The title of this estimate, when used separately from the text, is classified. For Official Use Only. [Footnote is in the source text.]
