El Salvador 575 ES–5. Memorandum of Conversation by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, March 11, 1959. SUBJECT Visit of President Lemus of El Salvador PARTICIPANTS President Lemus of El Salvador; Foreign Minister Ortiz Mancia; Minister of ­Economy Rochac; Minister of Public Works Parker; Economic Adviser Jorge Sol; Ambassador Castro; Acting Secretary Herter; Ambassador Kalijarvi; Mr. Rubottom The Acting Secretary, after greeting the President and his party, commented on how much Secretary Dulles had appreciated the indication from President Lemus of his desire to call on him at the Walter Reed Hospital. He added that the Secretary was still under treatment and had not actually seen any of the members of his own staff in the last few days; therefore it would not be possible for him to have the pleasure of receiving the President, as much as he would have liked doing so. Governor Herter then voiced his awareness of the excellent speech made the day before to the Council of the Organization of American States by President Lemus2 and offered to make arrangements for the President or any member of his party to meet with Allan Dulles, Director of the Central intelligence Agency. President Lemus indicated an interest, if time permitted, and added that he would like for the Foreign Minister to meet with Mr. Dulles, even if he were unable to do so. The President pointed out the relationship between the communist problem and the socio-­economic problem in his country and other countries. Mr. Rubottom mentioned that the whole thrust of the U.S. policy was designed to attack the communist problem at its roots by helping the governments and the peoples to raise living standards and offer hope for the future. Governor Herter expressed his hope that the President would express some of these same ideas in his speech before the Congress, and the President indicated that he intended to do just that.3 The President stressed his interest in the economic integration of Latin America, and especially the five countries of Central America, as
