El Salvador  575
ES–5.	
Memorandum of Conversation by the Assistant Secretary 
of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
 
Washington, March 11, 1959.
SUBJECT
Visit of President Lemus of El Salvador
PARTICIPANTS
President Lemus of El Salvador; Foreign Minister Ortiz Mancia; Minister of 
­Economy Rochac; Minister of Public Works Parker; Economic Adviser Jorge Sol; 
Ambassador Castro; Acting Secretary Herter; Ambassador Kalijarvi; Mr. Rubottom
The Acting Secretary, after greeting the President and his party, 
commented on how much Secretary Dulles had appreciated the indi-
cation from President Lemus of his desire to call on him at the Walter 
Reed Hospital. He added that the Secretary was still under treatment 
and had not actually seen any of the members of his own staff in the last 
few days; therefore it would not be possible for him to have the plea-
sure of receiving the President, as much as he would have liked doing 
so. Governor Herter then voiced his awareness of the excellent speech 
made the day before to the Council of the Organization of American 
States by President Lemus2 and offered to make arrangements for 
the President or any member of his party to meet with Allan Dulles, 
Director of the Central intelligence Agency.
President Lemus indicated an interest, if time permitted, and added 
that he would like for the Foreign Minister to meet with Mr. Dulles, 
even if he were unable to do so. The President pointed out the relation-
ship between the communist problem and the socio-­economic problem 
in his country and other countries.
Mr. Rubottom mentioned that the whole thrust of the U.S. policy 
was designed to attack the communist problem at its roots by help-
ing the governments and the peoples to raise living standards and 
offer hope for the future. Governor Herter expressed his hope that the 
President would express some of these same ideas in his speech before 
the Congress, and the President indicated that he intended to do just 
that.3 The President stressed his interest in the economic integration of 
Latin America, and especially the five countries of Central America, as 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.11/3–1159. Confidential. Approved 
by Acting Secretary of State Herter on March 24, 1959.
2 For the text of President Lemus’ speech before the Council of the Organization of 
American States on March 10, 1959, see PAU doc. C-­a 302 (Protocolar 10 March 1959), p. 8.
3 For the text of President Lemus’ speech before a joint meeting on Congress, March 11, 
1959, see the Congressional Record, 86th Cong., 1st sess., 1959, vol. 105, pt. 3, p. 3899.
