International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1131
Attachment
Summary Prepared in the Department of State2
Washington, May 1980
THE GLOBAL 2000 STUDY
Background
The Global 2000 Study responds to a directive by President Carter
in his 1977 Environmental Message.3 It is an attempt to project world-
wide trends and conditions with respect to natural resource avail-
ability, population and environmental quality to the end of this cen-
tury. It is based on extensive data collection and the application of the
Government’s current modeling capability. The Study, according to the
President, is also to serve as the foundation of the Government’s future
long-term planning.
The Global 2000 Study is different from all previous U.S. studies of
population, resources and environmental trends in that this task ex-
amines these closely related topics as a whole, rather than as separate
and independent topics. In addition to describing trends and high-
lighting potential future global problems, the Study assesses the Gov-
ernment’s capabilities for carrying out projections and analyses of this
type.
Findings
The Study concludes that: if present trends continue, the world in
2000 will be more crowded, more polluted, less stable ecologically and
more vulnerable to disruptions than the world we live in now. Serious
stresses involving population, resources and environment are clearly
visible ahead. The Study acknowledges the existence of greatly height-
ened worldwide awareness of potential problems in these areas, and
also the wide spectrum of new policies and programs which are being
implemented to cope with them. Nonetheless, barring revolutionary
2 No classification marking.
3 The President’s directive: “Environmental problems do not stop at national
boundaries. In the past decade we and other nations have come to recognize the urgency
of international efforts to protect our common environment. As part of this process, I am
directing the Council on Environmental Quality and the Department of State, working in
cooperation with the Environmental Protection Agency, the National Science Founda-
tion, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and other appropriate
agencies, to make a one-year study of the probable changes in the world’s population, natural re-
sources, and environment through the end of the century. This study will serve as the foundation
of our longer-term planning . . .” (Emphasis added). [Footnote in the original. See footnote
4, Document 284.]
