National Security Policy 327 to June 30, 1958 and that the Office of Defense Mobilization and the Federal Civil Defense Administration had not been merged until July 1, 1958. Next year these two Status Reports would be combined. Continuing, Governor Hoegh pointed out that the emergency agencies, proposed to be set up in event of war or national emergency, were being evaluated in the light of the findings of OPERATION ALERT 1958. Recommendations as to the emergency agencies would be made to the President on October 10, 1958. Likewise, Mobilization Plans C and D-Minus were being reviewed. The results of the review of these plans would be ready by November 1, 1958 at which time all the President’s Emergency Action Documents would be completed. As to the program to strengthen the U.S. Mobilization Base, Governor Hoegh pointed out that it had been agreed that while we could fight a World War II type of war with our present mobilization base, further study was being undertaken with respect to the adequacy of the mobilization base in the event of general nuclear war. The program for the relocation of federal agencies, said Governor Hoegh, was likewise being re-­evaluated in the light of OPERATION ALERT 1958. Recommendations on this subject would be made to the President and the Cabinet on October 10. As Mr. Gray had pointed out, warning times were of the very greatest importance and the relocation plans needed a complete new look and evaluation. We did have, how­ ever, at the present time a continuing operational capability for nine­ teen agencies in the event of war. Finally, Governor Hoegh pointed out that the results of the plan to disperse federal facilities had practically negligible results. The one exception was the Atomic Energy Commission which had relocated out of Washington. Turning to the status of the federal civil defense program as of June 30, 1958 Governor Hoegh stated that the situation described in the Status Report was still far from satisfactory despite marked improve­ ment in the course of the last fiscal year. Governor Hoegh illustrated this point by providing certain highlights of developments in that fiscal year. He stated that the passage of the Durham Bill on August 8 was a landmark in the development of the national civil defense program. No funds, however, had yet been provided for the shelter program and it would be necessary to go back to the Congress with a presentation on this program early in January 1959. At this point Secretary Dulles interrupted and indicated that he would have to leave the meeting at 10 o’clock and wanted to raise one issue before being obliged to leave. He said he wished to deal with the statement on Page 18 of the Report on the Mobilization Program
