North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
1029
325.
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 26, 1978
Dear Zbig:
The United States will participate over the next two years in a
number of major international conferences on issues affecting the de-
veloping countries, including UNCTAD V, the World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development,2 the UN Conference on Sci-
ence and Technology for Development (UNCSTD), UNIDO III,3 and a
special session of the UN to approve an International Development
Strategy for the next decade and beyond.4 The Tokyo Summit is also
likely to devote time to North-South issues. We will confront both old
and new demands from the developing countries to support policies
which they believe will enhance their development prospects and in-
crease their participation in the management of the world economy.
Realistically, we will be hard pressed over the same period to ful-
fill our current commitments on foreign assistance, meet our arrearages
on the multilateral development banks, and obtain Congressional ap-
proval of an MTN package and various commodity agreements. We
will have to be very cautious about making major new commitments
(particularly if the Common Fund is successfully negotiated).
Given the large number of North-South events, and the tight con-
straints within which we must operate, I believe we must plan an
overall approach to our North-South activities over the next two years,
relating possible initiatives to scheduled international conferences and
carefully managing our public statements. Such advance preparation
will enable us to play an active rather than defensive role, consistent
with our interests. Within the State Department I have asked Tony
Lake, Director of the Policy Planning Staff, and Bob Hormats, Senior
Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Bureau of Economic and Business Af-
fairs, to draft a statement of the Administration’s North-South policy
and a strategy to explain that policy over the next two years to the
American public, the Congress, and to developed and developing
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 44, North-South: 4/78–2/79. No classification marking.
2 The World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development took place in
Rome July 12–20, 1979.
3 The UNIDO Third General Conference (UNIDO III) took place in New Delhi
January 21–February 9, 1980.
4 The Eleventh Special Session of the UN General Assembly, which considered the
International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
took place August 25–September 15, 1980.
