National Security Policy  601
dual-­purpose surface-­to-­air/surface-­to-­surface missiles. Nuclear pro­
pulsion will be applied to submarines, and improvements in sub­
marine hull design are expected early in the period. We believe that 
antisonar coatings have probably been applied to some Soviet subma­
rines. To meet the threat from US missile-­launching submarines, the 
USSR probably will continue to emphasize improvement of its anti­
submarine warfare capability. This could include construction of new 
and better antisubmarine vessels including “killer” submarines, use of 
specialized aircraft and helicopters, development of improved detec­
tion systems (both sonar and radar) and more sophisticated antisubma­
rine weapons including guided missiles. Naval Aviation will probably 
receive aircraft of improved performance as they become available, as 
well as improved air-­to-­surface missiles.
188. Submarine construction. The USSR will probably continue to 
place primary emphasis on submarines in its naval construction pro­
gram. Since 1950 the Soviets have built about 290 submarines of the 
medium-­range “Q” class and the long-­range “W” and “Z” classes.24 
Construction of “Z” class submarines ended in 1955, but the “W” class 
and “Q” class programs continued into 1957. Their termination prob­
ably marked the initiation of new submarine programs. A new class 
of conventionally-­powered long-­range submarine has been in produc­
tion at Leningrad since the beginning of 1958. This class (designated 
“F”) is apparently a torpedo-­attack type, larger than the “Z” class and 
with improved sonar. Four “F” class submarines are believed to have 
reached operational status. Additional submarine programs believed to 
be under way include a nuclear-­propelled type and submarines specif­
ically designed to employ guided missiles.
189. Although the evidence is not firm, we believe that the USSR 
may already have commissioned one or more nuclear-­powered sub­
marines. Soviet capabilities in this field have been indicated by the 
development of the icebreaker Lenin, which will probably become 
operational in 1959. The Lenin is powered by three nuclear reactors 
of a type which would be suitable, with some redesign, for use in a 
submarine. We estimate that by mid-1963 the USSR will have about 25 
nuclear-­powered submarines.
190. Construction of conventional submarines will probably con­
tinue but, because of the greater complexity of nuclear-­powered and 
missile submarines, annual submarine production almost certainly will 
not reach the high levels of recent years. Considering such factors as the 
decommissioning of obsolete boats, the possible conversion of some 
additional submarines to missile use, and the development of new 
24 For estimated characteristics and performance of these submarines, see Annex, 
Table 12. [Footnote is in the original.]
