1977  57
estimated to be very effective, the improvements projected for Soviet 
air defense by the mid to late 1980’s are likely to reduce its effectiveness 
significantly. Thus, a significant improvement over the current B–52 
force is probably required. I agree.
Examination of the backup study supporting Harold’s memo indi-
cates that arming the B–52 force with cruise missiles would significantly 
improve it.4 In particular, it would extend the period during which the 
B–52 can be expected to remain effective against projected Soviet air 
defenses. In addition, since all of the study’s preferred alternatives for 
modernizing the bomber force include arming at least some portion of 
the B–52 force with cruise missiles, I conclude that we should extend the 
B–52’s usefulness in this way whether or not we proceed with the B–1.
The result, however, is to also extend the period available for the pro-
duction of the B–1 or the development and production of a different system. 
Thus, unless you believe there is a pressing need to buy the B–1 in order 
to improve perceptions, there is no argument forcing your hand; your 
decision can be made on the basis of the relative economic and political 
costs of the alternatives.
If you are reasonably certain that we are eventually going to build 
a significant force of 150 or more B–1’s, the smallest political costs 
would probably be realized by going ahead now and building up to a 
production rate of two aircraft per month.
On the other hand, if you have doubts about whether or not we 
will eventually build a significant force of B–1’s, you should probably 
accept the short-­term penalties involved in choosing a delay. Clearly 
the political and economic losses involved will be much larger if we 
proceed with production only to discover that the B–1 will not handle 
the threat or that another alternative would have met our needs at con-
siderably less cost.
Dealing with the Uncertainties
Obviously, there are large uncertainties on both scores, and a delay 
of several years could provide an opportunity to resolve some of them. 
Moreover, it is more likely than not that we will find during such a 
delay that building the B–1 is not a good idea.
—Specifically, we will know more about how the strategic balance, 
SALT, and Soviet air defenses are going to evolve. A slowdown in the 
evolution of the Soviet threat would militate against the B–1.
—We can also have a better idea of whether the electronic counter-
measures—(ECM) that the B–1 is crucially dependent on—­will work. 
I have reason to believe that the Soviets can build air defense systems 
4 Not found attached.
