Yugoslavia sider candidly why Ethiopia was pushed to seek aid from the other side. The withdrawal of US aid had been a big blow. Ethiopia was a very poor country, with a per capita income of about $50 per year. Thus it needed aid wherever it could get it. The US should also encourage Ethiopian nonalignment. Mengistu was strongly committed to nonalignment, but there are many younger people near the top who may not be. The important thing now is to maintain a dialogue. Secretary Vance thanked Minic for Yugoslavia’s assistance on Mr. Aaron’s recent trip to Ethiopia. He agreed that the solution to the conflict would have to come through negotiations and noted that Soviet and Cuban troops would have to be withdrawn. He expressed concern about the apparent ineffectiveness of the OAU mediation effort, which had largely fallen through. He was not sure that the OAU could handle the problem, and asked what the role of outside powers should be if the instrument the Africans prefer to use cannot be effective. Minic replied that the OAU is in a period of crisis, and that its problems parallel those of the current conflict. He agreed that the OAU should assume responsibility for solving the problem. Outside interference is “most obnoxious”. Friendly advice and influence are not out of line, but the OAU should play the main role. Yugoslavia is in contact with Foreign Minister Garba of Nigeria, who understands the problem very well. (Secretary Vance said that we are also in close contact with Garba.) Garba has asked for patience, but the Yugoslavs believe that the OAU cannot do much and others should try to help. Minic will carry messages from Tito to Siad Barre and Mengistu and to President Numayri of the Sudan, who is also very concerned. Minic promised to inform us of the results of his visit.7 Secretary Vance said that it will be worthwhile to talk with the Sudan, which has offered to mediate. Garba has indicated that he will call on the ad hoc committee to meet with the entire OAU board. We should press for a solution along the lines discussed by President Carter and Tito, and he would look forward to Minic’s report. Minic said he hoped India could play a role, and Foreign Minister Vajpayee will become more active, if Prime Minister Desai agrees. Vance said he had also discussed this matter with Vajpayee during the President’s visit to India. 7 On April 14, Belovski met with Newsom to deliver a letter from Minic to Vance on his trip to Ethiopia, Somalia, the Sudan, and the Soviet Union. The meeting and letter
