66
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
subsidies may have to have three parts: (1) limits on grain subsidies in-
cluded in a grains arrangement; (2) limits on certain other commodity
export subsidies contained in ad hoc or commodity specific arrange-
ments; (3) a general arrangement on subsidies to include all other
products and at least by reference other ad hoc arrangements.
The US problems with US-Community subsidies are essentially of
two kinds: (a) their subsidies on sales to the United States and (b) their
competition with us in third countries.
A) Community Subsidies on Agricultural Sales to the US
The crucial commodities are dairy products and hams, which are
both presently covered under countervailing duty waivers which ex-
pire in 1979. While the preferred resolution would be an overall code
on subsidies/countervailing which would cover agricultural products,
the EC, for domestic political reasons, will not be able to subject its agri-
cultural exports, particularly in dairy, to a general code. Another ap-
proach would be to negotiate an ad hoc set of arrangements on cheese
and hams, and possibly beef and processed foods, by which they
would limit their subsidies in our market. This could be based on EC
observance of minimum export prices as negotiated on cheese and then
dropped in the spring of 1975. The EC has such arrangements with
Switzerland and Spain. Their demands will undoubtedly include a
trade-off on US dairy quotas and some requirement of injury in US
countervailing duties.
B) Community Agricultural Subsidies to Third Countries
Apart from grains and flour—which would be dealt with in a
grains arrangement—this is not a major problem, but it does have to be
handled. The key may be an approach based on avoiding predatory
marketing. The challenge is to devise an agreed consultative mecha-
nism which would dry up excessive subsidies in time to avoid market
disruption. One approach would be to accept EC subsidized sales to an
agreed list of LDC’s as aid devices along with a tight EC agreement to
respect world prices (as defined during the negotiation) by avoiding
market expansion—or taking away existing commercial markets—for
all other sales. These rules could be elaborated in the more general sub-
sidies code.
Procedure
We must promptly get to the substantive agriculture issues. My
proposal to break the procedural impasse at Geneva would be to seek,
in return for our accepting the grains agreement approach and com-
modity discussions for other variable levy items, EC agreement to in-
clusion of non-variable levy agricultural products under the agreed
tariff-cutting formula. Total US exports to the EC in these items amount
to over $1 billion, with citrus and tobacco being particularly important.
