3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
777
270.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, March 20, 1980, 1054Z
4496. Subj: Soviet Reply to Demarche on Sverdlovsk BW Incident.
Refs: (A) Moscow 4225, (B) State 68654.2
1. (S-entire text.)
2. In replying to our demarche on the Sverdlovsk incident, the
Foreign Ministry confirmed that an outbreak of anthrax occurred in
Sverdlovsk in March/April 1979 but said this was due to natural
causes, denied that it had anything to do with the Biological Weapons
Convention and charged that the raising of the issue by the United
States creates the impression that someone is trying to cast a shadow on
the efficacy of the Biological Weapons Convention. The reply was
given to the Acting DCM in the form of an oral statement this morning
(March 20) by Viktor Komplektov, Chief of the Foreign Ministry USA
Department. Because Komplektov insisted that the appointment take
place before 12 noon, we imagine the Soviets may be planning shortly
to release the text of the statement to the press.
3. Following is the Embassy’s informal translation of the oral state-
ment, a copy of which was given us as a non-paper.
Begin text:
In connection with the representation of the Embassy of the USA
in Moscow of 17 March 1980, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
USSR is instructed to state the following.
The Soviet side firmly rejects the efforts of the Government of the
USA to place in doubt the conscientious fulfillment by the Soviet Union
of the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition of Bacteriolog-
ical Weapons. With regard to this Convention, just as with other inter-
national agreements in which the Soviet Union participates, the Soviet
side strictly fulfills all provisions of the documents under which it has
accepted the relevant obligations.
In accordance with the legislation and practice of the Soviet Union,
the observance of the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction, ratified by
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 83, USSR: 3/20–31/80. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent with a request that
the Department repeat to Geneva. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was re-
ceived in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Documents 267 and 269.
