3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
550
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
nated. The same thing happened in coverage of Giscard’s arrival in
Moscow. In live coverage, Brezhnev was seen taking very slow, small
steps as he moved through the arrival ceremony, and at one point he
did not seem to know where to go. The “Vremya” film eliminated all of
this. During “Vremya” coverage of the Giscard/Brezhnev document
signing ceremony, the camera, which until recently would have fo-
cused all but exclusively on the top leaders, stayed on Brezhnev for no
more than a few seconds at a time and repeatedly panned across the
other Soviet leaders and French delegation members who were wit-
nessing the signing.
4. Coverage of the May day ceremonies was also altered this year.
On past such occasions, the cameras have zeroed in on the leaders as
soon as they arrived, and before they mounted the steps of Lenin’s
Mausoleum. This year, there were no close-ups until well after
Brezhnev had reached the reviewing platform. During the concluding
ceremonies of the demonstration, the leadership was not shown at all.
5. Brezhnev at hockey matches. As earlier reported, he was at the
rink almost every night during the World Hockey Championships,
usually accompanied by Chernenko and Ustinov. On some nights,
however, only his personal physician has been with him, according to
the FRG Ambassador, who met Brezhnev’s doctor when Leonid Il’ich
visited the FRG last year. Brezhnev, Suslov, Ustinov and Chernenko at-
tended the USSR-Sweden game and sat through the entire thing, but
we understand that Brezhnev’s box was empty for the final game of the
championships, between the USSR and Czechoslovakia (the Soviet
team had already won the championship).
6. Views of Roy Medvedev. According to U.S. correspondent Fred
Coleman (protect), who saw Medvedev after the recent Supreme Soviet
meeting, Medvedev said:
—Ryabov was ousted from the Secretariat, Medvedev had heard,
because of “disagreement with elders;” he would not elaborate;
—he had “solid information” that Brezhnev fell seriously ill just
before the Giscard visit was postponed; Brezhnev was given a “mas-
sive” dose of antibiotics;
—contingency plans were made within the senior leadership;
Medvedev is convinced that it was agreed Kosygin should replace
Brezhnev as Chairman of the SS Presidium, so that Kosygin could sign
SALT II; this even though Kosygin would just as soon retire;
—Medvedev had heard other rumors, but was not sure of them;
namely: Ustinov would become Chairman of the Council of Ministers
and Andropov would become General Secretary (this as part of the
contingency planning); alternatively, that Ustinov would become Gen-
eral Secretary and Ryabov might eventually become Chairman of the
Council of Ministers;
