International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 233 then or as soon thereafter as possible, to be announced simultaneously in Washington and Tokyo. Yoshino (the diplomat who brought Fukuda’s letter) and I agreed that there should be no evident connection between agreement on such a package and a Presidential trip to Japan. I made clear that there could be no trip without prior agreement on a package. He made clear that if this agreement were reached, the Japanese government would hope you could visit Japan—preferably in 1978 and, if not, in 1979.3 We don’t know whether the Japanese are prepared to do what is necessary to reduce the surplus substantially. Yoshino, who is honest and close to Fukuda, was encouraging; other reports are not. We will only find out by trying. 3 In his October 27 memorandum to Brzezinski (see footnote 2 above), Tarnoff noted that, in addition to Owen, Yoshino had met with Cooper, Solomon, Strauss, and Wallich “to get a sense of what GOJ actions the USG thought would be necessary and sufficient in the current situation.” 71. Letter From President Carter to Japanese Prime Minister Fukuda1 Washington, October 31, 1977 Dear Mr. Prime Minister, Thank you for your letter of October 19.2 I am glad that you wrote me so frankly about the need for close consultation, cooperation, and the avoidance of misunderstandings. I agree fully with you. No element of US foreign policy is more important than the connection between Japan and the United States. I intend to do everything I can to keep that connection in good working order. To this end, I hope that you will keep me informed of the domestic economic and political situation in Japan, and I will keep you advised of economic and political trends in the United States that bear on our relationship. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda, 2–12/77. No classification marking. 2 See footnote 2, Document 70.
