490 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I key decisions regarding the defense budget and other foreign policy issues (SALT, China, the Arab/Israeli dispute). [Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.] 101. Remarks by President Carter1 Washington, December 6, 1978 Universal Declaration of Human Rights What I have to say today is fundamentally very simple. It’s something I’ve said many times, including my acceptance speech when I was nominated as President and my inaugural speech when I became President.2 But it cannot be said too often or too firmly nor too strongly. As long as I am President, the Government of the United States will continue throughout the world to enhance human rights. No force on Earth can separate us from that commitment. This week we commemorate the 30th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We rededicate ourselves—in the words of Eleanor Roosevelt, who was the chairperson of the Human Rights Commission—to the Universal Declaration as, and I quote from her, “a common standard of achievement for all peoples of all nations.” The Universal Declaration and the human rights conventions that derive from it do not describe the world as it is. But these documents are very important, nonetheless. They are a beacon, a guide to a future of personal security, political freedom, and social justice. For millions of people around the globe that beacon is still quite distant, a glimmer of light on a dark horizon of deprivation and repression. The reports of Amnesty International, the International Commis- 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 2161–2165. The President spoke at noon in the East Room at the White House at a ceremony commemorating the 30th anniversary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Prior to delivering these remarks, the President hosted a reception and briefing by administration officials for human rights activists, members of Congress, and administration officials involved in human rights policy formation. For the text of comments made by the President, Vance, Brzezinski, and Derian at the briefing, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 176. 2 See Documents 7 and 15.
