508
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
quested to recommend the composition of the Air Force organization to
be deployed to southern Turkey under this contingency.
(3) Deploy U.S. ground forces on the order of one Division, rein-
forced, and necessary supporting air and naval forces to the vicinity of
Basra with a mission of assisting Middle East governments in pre-
venting the spread of communist power to their countries. This would
be accomplished by the physical presence of U.S. military power, dem-
onstrations of strength and as a last resort, when authorized by proper
authority, combat operations. CINCNELM has been requested to make
appropriate recommendation with regard to this course of action but
his reply has not yet been received. Our present state of preparedness is
such that the 82nd Airborne Division, the 2nd Marine Division or an in-
fantry division in Europe could be moved on short notice provided the
necessary shipping were made available. The movement of any one of
these divisions would take approximately 60 days. The logistic support
required to maintain the deployment of these forces could be accom-
plished only at the expense of critical supplies now destined for Korea.
Similarly, any force deployments to the Middle East would necessitate
a substantial upward revision of U.S. force ceilings or a reduction of
our commitments elsewhere.
b. Economic: The U.S. Government would provide such economic
assistance as required to sustain and strengthen whatever non-
communist Iranian Government remained after the communist coup.
Specific plans for this eventuality cannot be prepared in advance, but it
is likely that requirements for such aid would follow the general pat-
tern, though on a reduced scale, of the economic assistance being given
the ROK Government. The early appointment of an over-all coordi-
nator for economic aid would, on the basis of Korean experience,
greatly increase the effectiveness of any specific economic measures
which might be undertaken in such a contingency.
c. Diplomatic: (1) The United States Government will not recognize
a communist government of Iran and will publicly support anti-
communist Iranian elements in Iran or abroad. Such support might in-
volve the recognition of an Iranian Government in exile. Since the Shah
might be a useful rallying point for such a Government, arrangements
to facilitate his escape from Tehran in an emergency are under consid-
eration. In addition, there will probably always be some prominent Ira-
nian public figures outside Iran (such as the Iranian Ambassador to the
United States) who could participate in such a movement. For political
and security reasons, no advance planning in this regard can be at-
tempted with any Iranian leaders, including the Shah.
(2) Any anti-communist Iranian Government will under such cir-
cumstances undoubtedly appeal to the United Nations for diplomatic
and military support. This appeal should be exploited in the United
