1955  345
260.	 Letter 17 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 17
Washington, October 3, 1955
Dear Alex:
We are pushing hard to get something out to you today for the 
October 5 meeting. I feel it is not fair to make you wait until the last day 
preceding the meeting, especially since I believe the time spread now 
is six hours since Washington reverted to Standard Time on Septem­
ber 25. We think the telegrams will give you adequate guidance and 
sufficient leeway. There will be considerable for you to say on the non-­
implementation of the Agreed Announcement. The amended statement 
on the use of force item will undoubtedly lead to extensive comments. 
The item on unaccounted for U.S. military personnel can be dropped 
to a spot below the embargo item if this seems advisable to you. We 
are now thrashing out with Defense a final version of the statement 
on the unaccounted for personnel. Every word is important and there 
is quite a bit of give-­and-­take with Defense on it. Defense is naturally 
concerned at the reaction in this country, especially among the relatives 
and Congress. When we got the corrected copy of your recommended 
draft (about half of which had been omitted in the original garbled text 
of your message) we found much in it that was useful and telling. So 
we worked out a draft which represents a meld of our revised text and 
what we consider the best of yours. This is being cleared with Defense 
urgently now and we hope to be able to get it to you by the close of 
business today unless Defense raises further objections.
The British are doing their best to be helpful on the problem of 
access and assistance to the imprisoned Americans. They are being 
brought into the picture increasingly. I am seeing Barbara Salt of the Brit­
ish Embassy (who is handling Far Eastern matters until Hubert Graves 
gets here) every two or three days. I am giving her a pretty full rundown 
on your discussions with Wang on the implementation of Item One. The 
substance of this is being telegraphed to O’Neill in Peiping, who feels 
that he will be in a better position to determine what tack he should take 
there if he has this for his confidential background. About September 
29 O’Neill had received no letter or appeal from any American. He has 
no confirmation of Chang Han-­fu’s assertion that all remaining Ameri­
can prisoners have been notified of the Agreed Announcement. O’Neill 
doubts if representations or attempted publicity on his part would be 
useful at this stage. But he is inclined to think that he should make a 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret. Printed from 
an unsigned copy.
