362 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 coming from the other side. I am afraid we will find ourselves taking a starting position in any real negotiations that should have been our final position; we will then feel compelled to give away still more to demonstrate good faith. 137. Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff1 Washington, undated US POSITION 1.) The safe and immediate departure from Iran of all US employees of the Embassy in Tehran and other Americans held hostage is essential to a resolution of other issues. 2.) The US understands and sympathizes with the grievances felt by many Iranian citizens concerning the practices of the former regime. The US is prepared to work out in advance firm understandings on a forum in which those grievances may subsequently be aired, so that the hostages could be released with confidence that those grievances will be heard in an appropriate forum after the release has taken place. The US will not concur in any hearing that involves the hostages. The US is prepared to cooperate in seeking through the auspices of the UN to establish such a forum or commission to hear Iran’s grievances and to produce a report on them. The USG will cooperate with such a group in accordance with its laws, international law and the Charter of the UN. 3.) The US Government will facilitate any legal action brought by the Government of Iran in courts of the United States to account for assets within the custody or control of the former Shah that may be judged to belong to the national treasury of Iran by advising the courts, and other interested parties, that the US Government recognizes the right of the Government of Iran to bring such claims before the courts and to request the courts’ assistance in obtaining information about such assets from financial institutions and other parties. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 31, Subject File, Iran [Retained] 1/80. Secret. In the upper right corner of the paper, an unknown hand wrote: “Approved by President and Secretary after their review of column 4 of the spread sheet. Given to Waldheim 1/7 and sent to London to be faxed to Sadiq al-Mahdi.” For the spreadsheet, see footnotes 2, 3, and 5, Document 136.
