National Security Policy 583 possibly higher, and especially for jamming at lower frequencies nor­ mally used in Western long-­range radio communications. The Soviets are now producing magnetrons and traveling wave tubes suitable for jamming in the microwave frequencies, and research in this field is con­ tinuing. They are also currently employing passive detection equipment believed capable of detecting signals from the very low frequencies up into the microware spectrum. By 1963, the USSR will have in opera­ tional use equipment capable of jamming at frequencies from 10 kc/s through 36,000 mc/s, including all frequencies likely to be employed by Western communications, radar, and navigation equipment. 135. In recent months a trend toward greater frequency diversi­ fication in Soviet radar and radio equipment has appeared, in con­ trast to the earlier concentration of frequencies in a few narrow bands. The USSR is capable of further increasing the spread of frequencies employed and of developing improved antijamming techniques, but through 1963 Soviet electronic systems will probably still be subject to disruption by properly employed techniques. STRENGTHS AND CAPABILITIES OF SOVIET FORCES 136. High command. Top control over all administrative and oper­ ational activity in the Soviet military establishment is vested in a sin­ gle authority, the Minister of Defense. Directly under the Minister of Defense is a single general staff, organized along functional lines into operations, intelligence, communications, military transportation, organization and mobilization, historical, and topographical sections. The major administrative elements of the Soviet armed forces include the chief directorates of ground, air, air defense, and naval forces, each headed by a commander-­in-­chief who reports directly to the Minister of Defense. Operational control flows in a direct chain of command from the Minister of Defense to the commanders of the major operational elements: military districts, groups of forces, naval fleets, air defense forces, Long Range Aviation, and possibly airborne forces. 137. Despite extreme centralization of responsibility, the Soviet command system retains sufficient flexibility to effect integrated employment of all types of forces in either largeor small-­scale opera­ tions. Constant attention to new requirements will bring about signifi­ cant changes in armament and some realignment among components, but we anticipate no radical alteration of the Soviet high command structure in the near future. In the following paragraphs, the differ­ ent types of Soviet forces are discussed in terms of their capabilities to perform those military missions which we believe would be assigned by the Soviet high command, i.e., long-­range attack, air defense, major land campaigns, and naval warfare.
