870 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Begin, Burg, and Dayan urges that we get this response to him for delivery4 Saturday before the Sunday Cabinet meeting in Israel. He and the Israelis to whom he has spoken believe there is considerable advantage in closing this chapter promptly. I have cleared the proposed response below with Bob Strauss and Jim Leonard. When the Secretary is satisfied with a text, would you please send his decision directly to Tel Aviv and Cairo with an info copy to us. 3. Begin text: The position of the United States with respect to the West Bank/Gaza negotiations is based on the Framework for Peace in the Middle East5 and on the joint letter of March 26, 1979,6 addressed by President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin to President Carter. While as sovereign powers Egypt and Israel obviously have the right to reach agreements without U.S. assistance, the letter of March 26 confirms the understanding of President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin “that the United States Government will participate fully in all stages of negotiations.” We consider this to mean that the parties wish the United States to be a “full partner” in the negotiations with Egypt and Israel. As President Carter said on April 24 when he announced7 his appointment of Ambassador Robert Strauss to serve as Ambassador-at-large for the United States’ participation in these negotiations, “I have personally promised President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin that the United States will contribute our good offices to see that those negotiations are as successful as those which resulted in the treaty which was signed between Israel and Egypt last month.” Our purpose is to help the parties specified in the Framework reach agreement on a transitional regime for the West Bank and Gaza. As in the past, we will welcome any progress toward this goal that can be made by the parties. We are prepared, as we have been asked to do, to play the same kind of role that we have played in the negotiations which led to the two frameworks and the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty. Should the parties agree among themselves to invite the United States to sign an agreement in any capacity, the United States would respond in accordance with its consti- 4 Vance and Brzezinski approved the text of the response on June 16. (Telegram Secto 5006 from Vance in Vienna, June 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790272–0324) Lewis read the text over the telephone to both Begin and Dayan on June 16. On the conversation which followed, Lewis reported, “Dayan said it sounded quite satisfactory to him” and that Begin “also thought it would be alright, but characteristically, he wanted to study it in written form more carefully.” Lewis also reported that he would deliver the text to Burg after the Sabbath had ended. (Telegram 12947 from Tel Aviv, June 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790272–1120) Burg’s more critical response is in telegram 13198 from Tel Aviv, June 20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850052–2703) 5 See Document 57. 6 See Document 239. 7 See Document 246.
