Human Rights 593 human rights situation in the countries covered. (All posts should have copies of the 1978 reports. Any that do not should request them by cable from the Department or from a U.S. Mission closer at hand.) 3. We want the 1979 reports to be as good as posts and the Department can make them. We recognize this imposes a significant work requirement on many posts, and assure all posts in advance that their contributions to this project are essential and appreciated. This will be especially true this year for the countries on whom reports were not submitted in 1978. For those especially, we recommend that posts begin immediately to gather information for the draft reports. 4. The format and presentation of the 1978 reports is applicable to the 1979 reports and should be followed in both form and substance, with changes noted below. In most cases posts can base their 1979 report on the 1978 report as submitted to the Congress. The new reports should recapitulate information from previous reports essential to provide context for the 1979 period, and should concentrate on trends, conditions, and practices in the December 1, 1978 to December 1, 1979 period. 5. The following guidelines refer to general areas in which we would like the 1979 reports strengthened: A) Introductory section. It is important that this section provide a brief overall human rights description of the country. While avoiding detail, it should provide a capsule assessment of the current overall human rights situation and trends. The country should be described in general terms so that the human rights situation can be seen in the perspective of such factors as the country’s history, political and educational levels, financial resources, judicial institutions, and religious or cultural context. The reader should be able to judge how well the country is doing on human rights in light of available resources and past performance. B) In discussing political prisoners, posts should distinguish if appropriate between “prisoners of conscience” and those who have been convicted or detained because of politically-motivated acts of violence, and comment on the fairness of treatment and trials of both categories. Any other distinctions posts deem relevant should be included. C) The existence of discrimination on grounds such as race, language, religion, economic or social class, or national origin should be described as may be relevant. D) In preparing section 2., posts should draw on AID’s country development strategy statements. E) We are deleting the reference to freedom of “thought” under section 3.A., since this concept does not lend itself to objective analysis. F) Women’s rights. This needs to be covered with greater specificity in all reports. We do not wish to create a separate section for this,
