Human Rights
593
human rights situation in the countries covered. (All posts should have
copies of the 1978 reports. Any that do not should request them by
cable from the Department or from a U.S. Mission closer at hand.)
3. We want the 1979 reports to be as good as posts and the Depart-
ment can make them. We recognize this imposes a significant work re-
quirement on many posts, and assure all posts in advance that their
contributions to this project are essential and appreciated. This will be
especially true this year for the countries on whom reports were not
submitted in 1978. For those especially, we recommend that posts
begin immediately to gather information for the draft reports.
4. The format and presentation of the 1978 reports is applicable to
the 1979 reports and should be followed in both form and substance,
with changes noted below. In most cases posts can base their 1979 re-
port on the 1978 report as submitted to the Congress. The new reports
should recapitulate information from previous reports essential to pro-
vide context for the 1979 period, and should concentrate on trends, con-
ditions, and practices in the December 1, 1978 to December 1, 1979
period.
5. The following guidelines refer to general areas in which we
would like the 1979 reports strengthened:
A) Introductory section. It is important that this section provide a
brief overall human rights description of the country. While avoiding
detail, it should provide a capsule assessment of the current overall
human rights situation and trends. The country should be described in
general terms so that the human rights situation can be seen in the per-
spective of such factors as the country’s history, political and educa-
tional levels, financial resources, judicial institutions, and religious or
cultural context. The reader should be able to judge how well the
country is doing on human rights in light of available resources and
past performance.
B) In discussing political prisoners, posts should distinguish if ap-
propriate between “prisoners of conscience” and those who have been
convicted or detained because of politically-motivated acts of violence,
and comment on the fairness of treatment and trials of both categories.
Any other distinctions posts deem relevant should be included.
C) The existence of discrimination on grounds such as race, lan-
guage, religion, economic or social class, or national origin should be
described as may be relevant.
D) In preparing section 2., posts should draw on AID’s country de-
velopment strategy statements.
E) We are deleting the reference to freedom of “thought” under
section 3.A., since this concept does not lend itself to objective analysis.
F) Women’s rights. This needs to be covered with greater speci-
ficity in all reports. We do not wish to create a separate section for this,
