German Democratic Republic which there was now some hope, we might take some small further steps such as granting permission for new GDR Trade Offices in New York and an expansion of cultural relations. Our general stance, he said, has been to maintain a low profile, with some maintaining that the less we do with the GDR the better. Others such as the Embassy, however, have argued for a more activist policy, a position supported by even some West Germans. 3. Noting that our relations with the GDR were marginal compared to those with the FRG, Woessner (EUR/CE) advised that we continue to proceed slowly with the GDR, taking one step at a time, the Consular Convention being the first. This did not have to mean, he added, that we ignore the GDR or present it with a hostile face. 4. Brown (EUR/SOV) asked how rapidly the GDR wished to proceed with the relationship. Woessner replied that the GDR wants to move very rapidly, the motivating drive being the desire for increased access to Western trade and technology. He was not persuaded, however, that the GDR’s aspirations in this regard were realistic. Gray (EUR/CE) postulated that, through a slight westward shift of its trade patterns, the GDR might also be seeking greater maneuverability visa-vis the Soviet Union, particularly greater satisfaction in the economic sphere of its own national interests. Goodby added that this was precisely the impression he had gotten from GDR Foreign Trade State Secretary Beil and from certain West Germans. Kaplan (S/P) interjected that such maneuverability was illusory and, to the extent that it was achieved, might not always be in directions compatible with U.S. interests. The key factors inhibiting maneuverability for the GDR were, he added, the central importance of the GDR for Moscow’s policy toward Germany and Central Europe, the GDR’s paranoia about possible “infection” from the West and the fact that the Soviets, who fear the development of a “quadrilateral entente” (the US, Europe, Japan and China), are more fearful than ever about Germany on its Western flank. However exaggerated these Soviet and the GDR fears, they render prospects for East German maneuverability marginal. Noting that these margins are important, Barkley (EUR/CE) said it might be wise to engage the GDR, if only to test how fast and how far the GDR wants and is able to go. Greenwald (HA) added that another contributing factor to an increased opening to the West by the GDR might be its continued desire for increased political legitimacy and respectability. Such increased legitimacy for the GDR, Brown suggested might be one reason why the Soviets might allow the GDR greater leeway vis-a-vis the non-FRG West. Others include trade, a preoccupation with China, and a desire to lessen the GDR’s dependence on the FRG. 5. Concluding on the basis of the foregoing discussion that it appeared that the FRG, the Soviets and the GDR wanted to move the
