328
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
comprehensive effort has yet been undertaken by the US to establish
designs, facilities and procedures to cope with this unique situation.
It would be appropriate to consider possible safeguards in the con-
text of a mutual cessation of testing, such as the ones which were
adopted following the LTBT. These safeguards would include at-
tempting to maintain an R&D and production capability, simulation,
and readiness to resume testing if necessary; and pursuit of an aggres-
sive program to improve US verification capabilities.
C. Significance of Low-Yield Clandestine Testing. Although the signif-
icance to deterrence and stability of a possible decline in nuclear
weapons design capability and a stockpile reliability is difficult to
assess, it is in this area that concerns about possible asymmetries are
most acute. [5 lines not declassified]
Thus it is important to examine the military importance of testing
in these low-yield ranges. There are defense needs for very low-yield
nuclear weapons such as the HARPOON anti-ship missile, anti-
submarine torpedoes, air defense weapons and precision guided air-to-
surface weapons. These warheads could be developed with testing in
the sub-kiloton range, and it is obvious that such testing would con-
tribute significantly to maintaining a viable weapons design capability
and some stockpile reliability problems could be solved. [5 lines not
declassified]
It is questionable whether such [less than 1 line not declassified]
testing would provide such sufficient military advantages that the So-
viet leadership would be willing to assume the risk of violating the CTB
Treaty with its attendant costs to their relationship with the US and
their international stature. Nevertheless, it might be possible to signifi-
cantly reduce such incentives and asymmetries by defining nuclear
tests under a CTB as applying to events of nuclear origin [1 line not de-
classified] At least at these larger yields, however, the treaty should
clearly be labeled a threshold ban rather than a CTB, and the perception
that testing would continue would reduce the non-proliferation ben-
efits. It could be defended, however, as [7 lines not declassified] Little
work has been done on this definitional issue, and further study would
be necessary to determine whether a definition could be found that
would minimize possible asymmetries in the areas of stockpile reli-
ability and maintaining design capability without significantly under-
mining the non-proliferation impact of a CTB. Alternatively, it can be
argued that the Soviets would not exploit such opportunities and that,
in any event, the national security significance of these potential asym-
metries would be outweighed by the beneficial impact of a CTB on
US-Soviet relations and in limiting nuclear proliferation.
D. Nuclear-Weapons States Participation
Even after a bilateral/multilateral CTB has been achieved, it is
likely that China, France, and perhaps other nations would continue to
