Chemical and Biological Weapons
229
Afghanistan.3 Thus, CD involvement can help to bring pressure on
them in the bilateral. The allies have consistently indicated their strong
desire for CD involvement, both before and since the Afghanistan inva-
sion.4 They want serious verification provisions and will strongly sup-
port us. France has just entered the CD arena; French views and in-
terests on this subject are similar to our own. By accommodating these
allied pressures, we will gain political credit and improve our position
vis-a-vis the Soviets. The nonaligned do not understand many of the
issues, and this provides an opportunity to educate them and expose
the weakness of the Soviet position; the majority is likely to support us.
The PRC will take its seat for the first time this year, and has expressed
an interest in CW; this provides an opportunity to work with them on
an arms control issue. If we maintain our present position, the PRC will
be frustrated and complain of superpower dominance. (C)
General Pustay said that the JCS views the problem in a military
context; the Soviets are well ahead in CW capabilities and we can nei-
ther deter or respond in kind. Only the bilateral forum can provide a
negotiated solution. If we yield now to pressures for multilateral in-
volvement, we will create expectations for a treaty which may well be
translated into later pressures for relaxation of our substantive posi-
tion. It is better to take minimum losses now than larger losses later.
The Joint Chiefs also believe that the U.S. should review our entire posi-
tion on CW in light of the lack of progress, and reconsider the question
of CW modernization. (C)
Davis said that the Secretary of Defense supports the Joint Chiefs
on modernization and on the need to proceed with a binary facility. But
OSD does not believe that the tactical question of CD involvement is
linked to these issues, and need not prejudice them. (C)
3 Reports that the Soviet Union’s ally Vietnam had employed chemical weapons
against tribes in Laos and Cambodia had been publicized by the ACDA and the CIA on
December 12, 1979. On December 20, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a Resolu-
tion condemning such actions. (“Statement by the ACDA Assistant Director for Multi-
lateral Affairs (Davies) Before a Subcommittee of the House Committee on Foreign Af-
fairs: Use of Chemical Weapons in Indochina, December 12, 1979,” “Central Intelligence
Agency Paper: Chemical Warfare in Laos, December 12, 1979,” and “House Resolution
512: Use of Chemical Agents in Indochina, December 20, 1979,” in Documents on Disarma-
ment, 1979, pp. 810–814, 820–821) Regarding the use of chemical weapons in Afghanistan
by Soviet forces, telegram 20775 to Conakry and other posts, January 24, contains the text
of Department of State Press Secretary Hodding Carter III’s statement concerning “un-
confirmed” press reports that the Soviets had used chemical weapons in Afghanistan. He
linked these reports to previous allegations about the use of chemical weapons by Laos
and Vietnam. Carter said that if the reports were true, “such action would be an outra-
geous and inhuman act against defenseless peoples” and made the conclusion of a chem-
ical weapons convention more “urgent.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800042–0556)
4 The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan on December 24, 1979. Documentation is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XII, Afghanistan.
