Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II both the UN and OAS to deal with human rights issues. We should now be consulting with others—at the UN, in the OAS, and with other regional leaders (e.g., in black Africa)—about their suggestions for effective human rights strategies in their areas, in the context of their own cultural, economic, and political situations. We also should intensify consultations with West Europeans and Canadians—private and official—about what all of us can do to promote human rights. Perhaps even more important, we should draw more attention to what we are doing to correct our own human rights problems. The general perception seems to be that we’ve done nothing but allude to our domestic problems in a few speeches. The President’s program is better than that, but its human rights impact is dulled because we seldom talk of welfare or tax reform, or proposals for urban renewal, or for youth employment, under a human rights heading. We should make a point of stressing that these are part of our commitment to improve the lot of individual Americans. Generalized conclusions on such a complex of issues are very risky, and certain to be controversial. But this is the balance S/P draws: —The human rights policy may be the best thing this Administration has going for it. It has enormously improved America’s international standing and our claim to moral leadership. It already has done quite a lot to help individuals, in widely varying situations, and to contribute to political dynamics that can lead to further improvements. While the potential damage to other American interests needs to be kept in mind, no actual harm has yet been done. That suggests to us that such damage can in fact be avoided. —Any serious human rights policy will be subject to conflicting criticisms. Limiting ourselves to rhetoric and quiet diplomacy would produce (and deserve) charges of superficiality and hypocrisy. Using material pressure (i.e., economic and military assistance) produces charges of moral arrogance. Softening our human rights advocacy in some cases to protect other American interests produces accusations of double standards. Adjusting our tactics in order to try to be effective in different situations produces accusations of inconsistency. There is some justice in most of these criticisms. Any policy as difficult and complex as this inevitably has a debit side. The balance, however, is decidedly positive, and we do not believe a major change of course is called for. —But we have not done a good enough job of articulating publicly what we are doing, and why, and the possibilities and limits of what we can hope to accomplish. Both the policy and its execution are far more complex than we have managed to convey. Opinion shapers (in-
