908 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI bomber/ALCM issues, principally OSI of the B–2. Other issues that need resolution in connection with this meeting would be the sublimit on ICBM warheads, inspection issues connected with SSI, downloading, initial accountability of silos (again), additional silos for heavy ICBMs (again), solid rocket motor vs stage, cooperative measures and perhaps space launch issues (we are still awaiting guidance on this). In addition, any of the pending ad ref deals which fall apart must also be added to the list. 8. The question of questions for us, of course, is are we serious about setting a date of something like January 14 for signature? The near-­ unanimous view here is that this would be wildly optimistic. We understand, of course, that events unrelated to start may drive the schedule. We also understand that policy makers dismiss things like conforming texts and preparing 500 pages of flawless text on treaty paper as mechanical trivia disposed of in a couple of all-­night sessions. Our position has always been that doing this properly will require at least 2–3 weeks after the negotiations are essentially completed. 9. To have any chance of meeting a January deadline, two things must happen. First, the December meetings in Washington must break the back of all the issues noted above. Second, the backstopping process must be greatly accelerated. Although the back-­stoppers are no doubt working hard, from our perspective, response times are far too long. To note just one example, we asked for a response to our heavy bomber definition—­what seemed to us a relatively routine matter—­by October 12, and we are still waiting. We have just received a cable on expediting the backstopping process, so perhaps the necessary changes are already underway, but response times must be measured from here on in hours and days, not weeks. 10. One final thought on this delicate subject would be that, if events force a signing of something in January, we might be faced with having to tidy up some details in Geneva afterward. Of course, this is thinking the unthinkable and we promised ourselves and congress we would never do that again, but we also promised never to repeat the frantic and somewhat sloppy INF endgame. If it comes to that, we could cite the extraordinary circumstances involved and probably still have a happy ending. Burt
