January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1353
405.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts1
Washington, September 19, 1980, 0138Z
249328. Subject: U.S. Policy Review on Syria.
1. (S-entire text).
2. At an inter-agency group meeting on September 82 Washington
agencies reviewed U.S. policy toward Syria and the implications for
U.S. interests of the Assad regime’s problematic future. What follows
reflects the meeting’s consensus about the prognosis for the Assad re-
gime and how we can best position ourselves to protect our interests
over what is clearly an uncertain future for Syria. Selected addressees
will be receiving specific instructions to follow up recommended ac-
tions with host governments.
3. The I–G meeting produced broad consensus on following:
A. U.S. and Syrian interests:
—Key U.S. interests with respect to Syria are tied to U.S. regional
objectives of avoiding Arab-Israeli hostilities and promoting a compre-
hensive settlement, denying the USSR greater access to and control
over Syrian policy, and achievement of an acceptable resolution of Leb-
anon’s problems. We also have a strong interest in minimizing the risks
that Syria will be drawn irrevocably into association with a constella-
tion of radical Arab forces (most particularly Iraq) which could pose
major dangers for the stability of the Gulf.
—U.S. endorsement and promotion of the Camp David approach
to an Arab-Israeli settlement has led most Syrians to believe that the
U.S. has paid inadequate attention to Syria’s vital interests (recovery of
the Golan, a Palestinian settlement that will protect Syrian interests and
enhance Syrian influence in the region, and a resolution of the Lebanese
crisis which will safeguard Syria’s security interests and predominate
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 89, Syria: 8–11/80. Secret; Immediate; Special Encryption; Nodis. Sent to
Amman, Damascus, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, and Tel Aviv. Sent for information
Immediate to London, Paris, Rome, Bonn, and the White House. Printed from a copy that
indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Drafted by Jim
Collins (NEA/ARN); cleared by W. Nathanial Howell (NEA/ARN), Draper, George Q.
Lumsden (NEA/ARP), Kirby, Sick, Joseph V. Montville (INR/NESA), and in NEA/EGY
and CIA; approved by Draper. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P870143–0750) Sick wrote in the upper right-hand corner of the telegram: “Syria: OK. (ZB
“reluctantly” cleared—see ER item) ¶ 2 added at my request.” Brzezinski indicated his
approval of the telegram on a September 11 action memorandum sent to him from
Hunter, adding a handwritten note: “reluctantly. I still wonder if needed.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 89, Syria:
8–11/80)
2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found.
