Afghanistan 161 warning.) We will probably accept a positive recommendation from him.3 (S) 2. We will cut out the middle man (the German) and instruct Amstutz to approach Soviet Counselor Safronchuk, who is supposed to be the Soviet point man in the dump-Amin operation and who foreshadowed this entire matter to Amstutz in a previous conversation.4 (S) State will prepare (and we will clear) instructions to Amstutz for the meeting. He is to raise the question of safety of Americans (appropriately, since the Soviets are the dean of the corps in Kabul) and tell him that we expect the Soviets not to make a propaganda issue out of the withdrawal of US dependents. He will then determine whether the GDR Ambassador was in fact speaking with the full sanction of the Soviets. He will also convey these points: We do not believe that any cosmetic changes in the Afghan Government will solve the Soviets’ problem; we will not give our blessing to any such government; we believe that a restoration of a truly neutral Afghan Government would be in our mutual interests; and we have no interest in seeing a government in Afghanistan that would pose a threat to legitimate Soviet interests.5 (S) It would be premature to make further decisions about how we will handle this signal until we get a reading on the Safronchuk conversation. We will, however, be giving thought to a number of other questions, not least of all the impact of a Soviet move on the SALT debate. We will also keep our covert action options under review, 3 Saturday was July 21. In telegram 189714 to Moscow and Kabul, July 21, the Department relayed Amstutz’s approval of evacuating approximately 100 U.S. dependents and non-essential personnel from Kabul. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790333–0446) In telegram 5631 from Kabul, July 25, the Embassy reported that an Afghan diplomatic note demanded a staff reduction of Embassy Kabul. Amstutz described the note as evidence of the “inept, if not stupid, leadership of the DRA, exemplified by Prime Minister/Foreign Minister Hafizullah Amin, person now desperately trying to survive politically.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghanistan (July 79)) 4 Brzezinski wrote “OK” in the right margin next to this paragraph. 5 Brzezinski drew a vertical line and a checkmark in the right margin next to the last sentence of the paragraph. Safronchuk and Amstutz met on August 11. The Embassy reported their conversation in telegram 6152 from Kabul, August 13. According to the telegram, neither the question of the safety of Americans in Afghanistan nor the information passed by the GDR Ambassador arose during the conversation. Safronchuk did acknowledge the possibility that the Soviets would have to deal with a successor regime in the future, but asserted that the USSR “would not under any circumstances” introduce combat troops to support the Afghan Government. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790367–0048) No record of a meeting with Safronchuk was found that might reflect more directly the points Amstutz was to convey per the NSC instructions.
