108 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement evidence of an intention on our part to create a new, special fund to be used exclusively in Latin America; a statement that the funds already authorized for the Development Loan Fund are adequate for the time being would not be well received. I would hope that the leaders of both parties would agree to the authorization procedure. No appropriation would be sought until the next session of Congress in 1961 by which time the results of Bogotá would be available and the Inter-American Development Bank would be in business. In the event agreement could not be obtained I would then recommend that their agreement be sought to obtain a Joint Resolution phrased in the most definitive way possible, again having in mind an adequate basis for the Bogotá meeting. The Bureau of the Budget prefers that we not seek an authorization, but limit ourselves to a joint resolution. a) Short term action: In order to start some projects immediately in Latin America and to meet other emerging needs in the present world situation, it is important that the total Mutual Security Program appropriation request be obtained from the Congress, particularly the full $700 million requested for the Development Loan Fund. (The House has cut this $700 million request by $150 million.) How the final appropriation of the $700 million for the Development Loan Fund can best be achieved is a matter of legislative tactics that can best be worked out with the legislative leaders, including (a) action by the Senate, either within the Appropriations Committee, on the floor of the Senate or within the Conference Committee to assure a $700 million appropriation, or (b) an increase by the President in his pending $700 million request. Such a request could be made under the existing Development Loan Fund authorization. b) Presentation to the Congress: There are differing views regarding the manner in which either an authorization or a joint resolution should be presented to the Congress. The Vice President has informed us that he feels strongly that there should be a special Presidential message on this subject in order to indicate clear administration initiative. On the other hand, the Secretary of the Treasury feels strongly that any presentation should be by the State Department and that there should be no special messages on the subject from the President. From the point of view of the State Department a special message from the President would improve the United States position at the OAS Foreign Ministers Meeting at Costa Rica when the subject of Soviet intervention in Cuba comes up.2 However, the major interest of the State Department is in securing the necessary legislation rather than in the method of its presentation. Douglas Dillon Acting Secretary 2 Apparent reference to the Seventh Meeting of Consultation of Foreign Ministers of the American Republics, which met in San José, Costa Rica, August 21–29, 1960; for documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. VI, Cuba.
