606
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
6. International Monetary Policy: Continuing negotiations on substi-
tution account (i.e., giving SDRs a larger role to play, thus reducing
somewhat the role of the dollar as a reserve currency).
208.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 11, 1979
SUBJECT
US-Japanese Economic Relations (U)
This memorandum reports meetings I had in Tokyo with the
Prime Minister and cabinet ministers, and subsequent discussions with
the Japanese Foreign Minister and others in Washington,2 to prepare
for your May meeting with Ohira. Here is the scenario we talked about:
1. Trade. Bob Strauss would go to Tokyo before3 the Ohira visit to:
a. conclude negotiations with Japan about government procure-
ment and tariff staging (the two outstanding MTN issues);
b. get Japanese agreement to other specific actions in the trade field
(e.g., improving import procedures), which would be an earnest of
good intent. (C)
Bob’s visit will be contingent on a clear indication that the Japanese
are prepared to make serious concessions. (C)
2. Longer-Term Agreement. Against this background of progress,
you and Ohira would, if you approve, conclude an agreement with
these elements during his visit:
a. Ohira would state Japan’s intent to reduce its external surplus by
increasing its imports of manufactures and by shifting to greater reli-
ance on domestic demand in sustaining its growth. Ohira’s statement
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 41, Japan: 1–4/79. Confidential. Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of
the page: “ok. J.” Brzezinski also initialed at the top of the page. The memorandum was
sent to Brzezinski for forwarding to Carter under cover of an April 11 note from Owen,
who reported that Platt had seen the memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 A memorandum of conversation of Owen’s March 19 meeting with Japanese Min-
istry of Finance officials is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Special Projects File, Henry Owen, Box 22, Memcons: 1–4/79. Sonoda visited Washington
April 6–10 for meetings preparatory to Ohira’s visit in May.
3 Carter underlined the word “before.”
