reducing armaments. It may best serve the avowed purpose of
these drafts and facilitate the work of the Conference if I offered
at this time certain frank comments on a type of provisions
common to all of them. I refer most particularly to those
provisions in both drafts which envisage utilizing the machinery
and authority of the League of Nations in carrying out the
provisions of a final treaty either through providing for security,
the punishment of an aggressor state, or international inspection
and control of armaments.
During the discussions of the past few days I have been greatly
impressed by the obvious conviction of many delegations [that]
the solution of the armament problem can best be found through
utilizing in full measure the machinery and authority of the
League of Nations. The sincerity of this conviction commands
our fullest respect, not only our respect, but a growing belief that
this very confidence in the efficacy of the League as an organ of
peace may indicate that these nations are feeling their way
forward surely to a solution of their problem. The American
delegation believes that the possibilities of such a solution
deserve the most careful friendly examination and if it be found
that this is the way to accomplish the task it will rejoice in every
measure of success that may be achieved. Moreover, my
Government is deeply and genuinely sensible of the friendliness
and good will which has been shown throughout these discussions
in an effort to deal in a practical manner with the problem created
by the fact that the United States is not a member of the League
of Nations. As has been brought out in these discussions this
constitutes a difficult problem and it may be that even infinite
goodwill will not suffice to obtain the advantages sought by those
who wish to use the authority of the League and at the same time
make adequate [provision?] for the existing difficulties created by
America’s nonmembership. I am confident, however, that if this
extremely difficult problem cannot be solved it will be through no
lack of careful study and goodwill. There are other governments
which are not members of the League, but the American
Government is the only one among them which is here
