The following brief comment is made upon the Memorandum transmitted with your
despatch No. 5038.
(1) Is sufficiently covered in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2,
which points out that Customs Attachés make investigations only in
connection with goods which have actually been entered at the American
customs. Their activities are in no sense designed to elicit economic or other
information which is not directly connected with the verification of
valuations of dutiable goods which have been declared to the American
Government.
(2) The infrequency and the purpose of the cost of production investigations
made by Customs Attachés are fully explained in the Circular Instruction of
April 2.
With reference to the question of principle raised in point three, your attention is drawn
to the fact that this Government has not objected to investigations by Canadian
Customs officers in the United States.
With regard to point four, the distinction between Customs Attachés and Tariff
Commission representatives is clearly drawn in the Department’s circular instruction of
April 2, and should be emphasized to the French Government.
With regard to Section II of the Memorandum, relating to the action proposed by
France, it may be observed that the Treasury has ruled that affidavits and certificates by
trade associations, etc., as to market value or cost of production do not satisfy the
requirements of American law, and that, therefore, the Secretary of the Treasury has no
legal authority to accept such substitutes for examination of records by accredited
representatives of this Government.
In view of the interest that has been taken in this matter by the International Chamber
of Commerce, it is suggested that you make available to Mr. Basil Miles46 the
substance of the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, and the pertinent parts of
this instruction in order that the American representatives at future meetings of the
International Chamber of Commerce may be fully advised as to the provisions of the
Tariff Act of 1922 affecting Customs Attachés and Tariff Commission representatives,
and of the policy of this Government of putting these provisions into effect. You are
authorized to cooperate with Mr. Miles in all proper ways to impress the International
Chamber of Commerce with the sincere efforts which have been made by this
Government to remove, as far as possible, the causes of the misunderstandings which
have arisen abroad on account of this law.
I am [etc.]
