substantially the same as the views embodied in this paragraph. (File No.
893.5045/259.)
893.5045/272: Telegram
[Document 571]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 12, 1925—noon.
[Received December 13—12:15 p.m.]
525. 1. It was not necessary to take the independent action indicated in the fourth
paragraph of my telegram No. 89, December 10, to Tokyo,35 as the Japanese Minister
announced at an informal conference with the British Minister, the senior minister, and
myself that the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs had decided to consent to having
the reports published subject to certain conditions regarding arrangements as to action
by the Shanghai Municipal Council on the lines indicated in my 500, November 27, 7
p.m.
2. The diplomatic body at a meeting yesterday morning authorized me and my British
and Japanese colleagues to approach the Shanghai Municipal Council through the
members on the Council of our own nationalities with a view to having the Council
adopt the following measures in order to settle the affair of May 30: (1) The
responsible police officers should offer their resignations to the Council and that body
should accept the resignations with expressions of appreciation for previous
meritorious services; (2) reasonable amounts should be offered to the Chinese victims,
such payments to be given not as compensation but as a compassionate grant. There is
reason for hoping that these suggestions will be promptly accepted by the Council. It is
proposed that when the senior minister is informed that these proposals have been
accepted he will announce the arrangement and release for publication the report of
June 24 by the diplomatic commission without annexes, the note by which the senior
minister on September 15 informed the Chinese Government of the terms of reference
and extended to the Chinese an invitation to take part in the judicial inquiry, and a
summary of the findings of fact given in the reports of the three judges on the
commission. At the same time the senior minister will announce that as soon as
necessary copies can be made the reports themselves will be released in full.
3. This telegram is repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY
