North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
885
Tab F
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter39
Washington, November 10, 1977
SUBJECT
The Future of U.S. Foreign Assistance
You are receiving an NSC memorandum presenting three alterna-
tive strategies to guide future U.S. foreign assistance programs as well
as alternative planning figures for FY 1982 funding levels.
I would like to reiterate my personal support for Strategy #2,
which concentrates on poor people, with a priority for low income
countries but with flexibility to maintain or initiate programs in some
middle income nations as well. I believe this approach would permit us
to respond to the needs of the greatest number of poor people and also
maintain necessary foreign policy flexibility. In addition I believe this
strategy can be successfully defended in Congress, because it will be fo-
cused on basic human needs in sectors such as health and agriculture,
because middle income nations would be expected to devote a signifi-
cant amount of their own resources to projects that we help fund, and
because our loans to these countries would be on stiffer terms than
those for poorer countries.
If we confine ourselves only to low income nations (Strategy #1),
we will lose the opportunity for programs in areas like the Caribbean,
which you have designated as high priority. On the other hand, if we
pursue the so-called “multipurpose” approach (Strategy #3), I believe
that our programs will be too diffuse and that both program effec-
tiveness and congressional support will suffer accordingly.
On funding, I strongly recommend the middle option—a mod-
erate increase in assistance with a planning figure of around $8 billion
in 1977 dollars or $10 billion in 1982 figures. In my estimation this
amount is sufficient to meet your pledge for “substantial increases.”
However, I would hope that you will permit this planning figure to be
revised upward if we can demonstrate that increased amounts of aid
can be used effectively.
39 Confidential.
