us. Authority should be given by law to provide them at their request with
engineering advisers for the construction of roads and bridges. In some of
these countries already wonderful progress is being made in road building,
but the engineering features are often very exacting and the financing
difficult. Private interests should look with favor on all reasonable loans
sought by these countries to open such main lines of travel.
This general subject has been promoted by the Pan American Congress of
Highways, which will convene again at Rio de Janeiro in July, 1928. It is
desirable that the Congress should provide for the appointment of delegates
to represent the Government of the United States.
CUBAN PARCEL POST
We have a temporary parcel-post convention with Cuba. The advantage of it
is all on our side. During 1926 we shipped twelve times as many parcels,
weighing twenty-four times as much, as we received. This convention was
made on the understanding that we would repeal an old law prohibiting the
importation of cigars and cigarettes in quantities less than 3,000 enacted in
1866 to discourage smuggling, for which it has long been unnecessary. This
law unjustly discriminates against an important industry of Cuba. Its repeal
has been recommended by the Treasury and Post Office Departments.
Unless this is done our merchants and railroads will find themselves
deprived of this large parcel-post business after the 1st of next March, the
date of the expiration of the convention, which has been extended upon the
specific understanding that it would expire at that time unless this
legislation was enacted. We purchase large quantities of tobacco made in
Cuba. It is not probable that our purchases would be any larger if this law
was repealed, while it would be an advantage to many other industries in
the United States.
INSULAR POSSESSIONS
Conditions in the Philippine Islands have been steadily improved.
Contentment and good order prevail. Roads, irrigation works, harbor
improvements, and public buildings are being constructed. Public education
and sanitation have been advanced. The Government is in a sound financial
condition. These immediate results were especially due to the
