150
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
To implement it, however, one must look at alternatives. Detailed plans
have never been developed.
Boutros Ghali said that one of the American viewpoints seems to
be to postpone all basic problems regarding the Palestinians for five
years. The Egyptian view is to have some general principles so that the
program can be sold to the Palestinians and the other Arabs. If it is dif-
ferent in Sinai and the West Bank, it makes it difficult for Egypt. Egypt
would like the maximum of general principles which can give security
and guarantee to the Palestinians. He suggested that a freeze and aboli-
tion be applied to Sinai settlements as well.
El-Baz said Egypt accepts the concept of freezing. The starting
point should be that settlements are illegal and ways should be sought
to liquidate the settlements everywhere. In the West Bank one must
look for a special formula to liquidate the settlements over a period of
time.
Dr. Brzezinski said we are not entirely seeking to postpone these
issues. We recognize there is a difference in the West Bank/Gaza, and
the problem that this poses for Egypt. The Egyptian judgment will have
to prevail. The resolution of the Sinai and West Bank problems cannot
be identical. The emotional context of the West Bank problem is diffi-
cult. The United States is seeking to reverse fundamental trends. We
would like to solve the Sinai effort right away, depending on the Egyp-
tian judgment. In the West Bank, we want to begin a process that
is a fundamental reversal. In five-years time, the situation should be
greatly changed.
Kamel observed that any proposal on settlements should include a
freeze and a statement that they are illegal. Quandt asked if the Egyp-
tians want the Sinai settlements dealt with separately. Kamel re-
sponded in the negative.
El-Reedy asked about the reaction to Palestinians outside the West
Bank. Should there be a role for them? Saunders said that the people
must begin to think of alternatives. The present situation is unsatisfac-
tory. The process we are talking about begins something called Pales-
tinian. El-Araby referred to the displaced persons and to the refugees.
Saunders said we are talking about more than a million people. How
can all of them be moved? The displaced persons number about
100,000; the West Bank cannot absorb all of these. Time will be needed
to settle the matter. Quandt observed that Dayan agrees with the Egyp-
tians on this matter. There will be terrible human difficulties. But all
agree that the Palestinians have rights. El-Araby said these rights and
principles should be reaffirmed and then a mechanism should be set up
to implement them. El-Baz talked of restating the principle and
working out modalities for implementation. Atherton commented that
if one gets a framework and a reversal of present trends, some Pales-
