Yugoslavia
913
serving as a policymaking tool.3 An analysis of US and NATO options
should be ready for review by January 25. Meanwhile DoD is preparing
logistical contingency plans to meet the situation in which the Yugo-
slavs might ask us for increased military supplies.4 [classification not
declassified]
5. We have all been asked to keep a very low profile with respect
to any contingency military planning, the fact of which should not be
discussed publicly. Public discussion of such would be deeply resented
by the Yugoslavs and at this stage would be unnecessarily provocative
to the Soviets. Accordingly, while generally alerting relevant offices
and analysts in NFAC and keeping tabs on intelligence support work
that has already been commissioned in INR and DIA, I do not recom-
mend at this point the establishment of any formal mechanism for
intelligence support of military contingency planning. Once intelligence
requirements become clearer later this week, we can see whether ad
hoc responses will suffice or whether some more permanent mecha-
nism needs to be created. [classification not declassified]
6. The closest political monitoring of Yugoslavia is, of course, going
forward. For the time being, the only specific tasks laid on CIA by the
IWG were (a) to provide a brief update on the state of the Yugoslav
economy, with special reference to its credit standing. Work done by
OER in support of NIE 15–795 provides a solid basis for such a paper
and I have asked OER to provide a summary and update of the eco-
nomic section of that estimate for delivery to the IWG by COB today;
(b) DoD and CIA have been asked by David Aaron to provide him
with a report on the status of US-Yugoslav intelligence exchanges. To
the extent that such exchanges have occurred, they have been handled
primarily by DoD and Ambassador Eagleburger and I shall coordinate
a reply with State and DoD; (c) I assume also that the DDO will
be represented in some way in anti-terrorist planning which is now
3 On January 22, Bartholomew sent a memorandum to Vance in preparation for a
January 23 VBB luncheon meeting. At Tab 1 of the memorandum, covering Yugoslavia,
Bartholomew suggested that, while the immediate crisis brought on by Tito’s failing
health might have subsided, the additional time be used to “strengthen the West’s ties
with Yugoslavia in tangible ways” and “further prepare for post-Tito scenarios, including
covert or overt Soviet intervention.” The memorandum listed three areas of particular
attention: economic; military cooperation; and Soviet intervention scenarios. (Department
of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980,
Lot 84D241, Box 2, Vance/Brown/Brzezinski Luncheons 1–3/80) Larrabee sent a similar
memorandum to Brzezinski on January 22. (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material,
Subject File, Box 34, Meetings—Vance/Brown/Brzezinski: 1/80–2/80) The Yugoslavia
discussion in the VBB was postponed to February 8.
4 See footnote 2, Document 275.
5 See Document 269.
