National Security Policy  967
a raw materials capability and have had considerable basic technical 
assistance and training from the Soviets. However, assuming that the 
Chinese Communists have a modest but high priority plutonium pro­
duction effort underway, they could be in a position as early as 1964 to 
test a crude nuclear device chiefly of their own development. Even the 
initial testing of a nuclear device by Communist China would have an 
important psychological impact, particularly in Asia.
32. The Chinese Communists will probably seek to achieve their 
objectives by political and subversive means, while not precluding the 
use of force to exploit targets of opportunity or to respond to situa­
tions which they might interpret as a threat to their position in Asia. 
They will continue to employ a broad range of tactics. Along with 
occasional manifestations of “Bandung reasonableness,” however, the 
foreign policy of a restive, increasingly powerful, and ideologically 
extreme Communist China is virtually certain, as recent events have 
foreshadowed, to include frequent manifestations of truculence and of 
impatience to emerge as an acknowledged world power. The Offshore 
Islands situation will not lie quiescent indefinitely, and we shall prob­
ably see more, rather than less, of the range of pressures now exempli­
fied on the Indian border, in Laos, and in Indonesia.
33. Over the next several years a number of additional nations, par­
ticularly those newly constituted, will probably recognize Communist 
China. Moreover, if disarmament negotiations are continued or lim­
ited agreements are reached, there will be a strong desire among 
other nations to include Communist China under such agreements. In 
light of these factors Communist China’s admission to the UN will be 
extremely difficult to prevent.
34. Non-­Communist Asia. The ruthlessness and aggressiveness 
of recent Communist Chinese domestic and foreign policies, such as 
the commune program, Tibet, and the Sino Indian border crisis, have 
substantially increased apprehensions throughout Asia of Communist 
Chinese strength and intentions. This increased alarm has produced 
some strengthening of border security measures and some decrease 
in regional frictions, and has led some neutralist countries to be more 
sympathetic to the US.
35. Several individual countries—most notably Laos, Cambodia, 
Indonesia, and Singapore—remain unstable and particularly vulnera­
ble to Communist influence. Elsewhere the outlook is more hopeful. 
The succession problems of South Vietnam and Nationalist China 
can probably be met, although that of the ROK is more doubtful. In 
Thailand, Burma, and the Philippines, there are indigenous forces that 
will tend to maintain fair stability.
36. Of the non-­Communist countries in the area, Japan alone com­
bines large and growing economic power with a good prospect of
