354 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I our forebears, live in a time when those who would destroy liberty are restrained less by their respect for freedom itself than by their knowledge that those of us who cherish freedom are strong. We are a great nation made up of talented people. We can readily afford the necessary costs of our military forces, as well as an increased level, if needed, to prevent any adversary from destabilizing the peace of the world. The money we spend on defense is not wasted any more than is the cost of maintaining a police force in a local community to keep the peace. This investment purchases our freedom to fulfill the worthy goals of our Nation. Southerners, whose ancestors a hundred years ago knew the horrors of a homeland devastated by war, are particularly determined that war shall never come to us again. All Americans understand the basic lesson of history: that we need to be resolute and able to protect ourselves, to prevent threats and domination by others. No matter how peaceful and secure and easy the circumstances of our lives now seem, we have no guarantee that the blessings will endure. That is why we will always maintain the strength which, God willing, we shall never need to use. Thank you very much. 73. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, April 7, 1978 SUBJECT NSC Weekly Report #53 1. Opinions To achieve your foreign policy objectives—a more peaceful world based on a reduction of arms, a deeper understanding with the Soviet Union, and restraint and the resolution of conflicts in the third world— it will take more than simply negotiating each of these matters in their isolation and in terms of the technical questions they pose. To have full 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 2–4/78. Secret. The President initialed the top right-hand corner of the memorandum.
