222  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
to bombers would enhance stability by reducing their ability to launch 
nuclear surprise attacks.
However, in sharp contrast to the Soviets who have by far the 
world’s most modern and extensive air defense network, the U.S. has 
virtually no air defense and has no plans to deploy one. Thus, our 
START current position could result in a sharp asymmetry. It would 
encourage the Soviets to concentrate on forces that would have almost 
a free ride in attacking the U.S., while forcing us to face defenses that 
would heavily attrit our bombers and cruise missiles.
ICBM Modernization and Mobile Missiles
The silo-­based missiles on both sides are highly vulnerable to 
attack. None of the START provisions under consideration would lead 
to a significant improvement in their survivability. Your proposal to 
Congress to fund two mobile ICBMs was a response to this problem.
The current U.S. position in START, however, would ban all mobile 
ICBMs. Accordingly, there is a fundamental tension between our cur-
rent START proposal to ban mobile ICBMs and our modernization pro-
gram that would deploy two such mobile missiles.
Our START position reflects the difficulty of verifying limits on 
mobile missiles (especially under a “political verification” approach), 
reinforced by concerns that the U.S. might not—­for domestic political 
reasons—­be able to deploy mobile ICBMs of its own. Your ICBM mod-
ernization program, which would rebase the MX missile from silos to 
trains and would deploy a new road-­mobile ICBM, reflects your deter-
mination to strengthen strategic stability by enhancing the survivabil-
ity of our ICBM force.
Although monitoring improvements are possible, mobile missiles 
do pose substantial verification problems. At present, the intelligence 
community has great uncertainties in its estimates of Soviet road, and 
especially rail, mobile ICBMs. Since steps that increase the detectability 
of missiles also increases their exposure to attack, measures that would 
significantly improve verification typically erode the survivability of 
these missiles, thus undercutting their essential rationale. If we follow 
a “political verification” approach, this dilemma may be insuperable.
Our arms control approach to mobile missiles also is likely to play 
a central role in determining the sustainability of our ICBM moderniza-
tion program in Congress. In addition, our approach will likely shape 
the prospects for reaching agreement with the Soviets on a START Treaty 
since they already are deploying two mobile ICBMs of their own.
Verification Woes
Our current START proposal reflects a very stringent and demand-
ing verification standard, especially with respect to certain missile
