1979  663
do require radical reform of defense decisionmaking to achieve a new 
level of innovative capacity and to squelch time-­honored forms of 
resource misallocation. Trying to find the “most cost-­effective options” 
among many dozens of discrete choices tossed up by the established 
system will only exhaust the leadership and defeat it in detail. At best 
we may sub-­optimize at the wrong level of performance. (S)
It would be useful for you to mention the defense investment 
study to Harold at one of your regular meetings. You should solicit his 
reaction to its basic messages, and urge him to send it over to us for 
comment. If it withstands critical examination, it could be then made 
“background reading” for the DOD budget review and possibly incor-
porated into another NSC meeting, as was CNA 78 in the last one.3 (C)
3 The NSC discussed the 1978 Comprehensive Net Assessment on June 5. See 
­Document 142.
144.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth and Victor Utgoff of the 
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for 
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 19, 1979
SUBJECT
DOD’s Military Investment Balance Paper (S)
On 5 July, Harold Brown sent to the President a paper on the 
US-Soviet defense investment balance prepared by OSD’s Net Assess-
ment Office.2 We have reviewed that paper carefully and spoken at 
length with the authoring office and CIA analysts who supplied critical 
input data. For reasons developed below we believe the paper should 
be replaced by a short memo from Harold Brown to the President. (S)
The overall message of the OSD paper is valid. The USSR has been 
investing more in military strength than the US for at least a decade. 
Its military investment effort—­that is, spending on military RDT&E, 
procurement, and construction—­now exceeds ours by around 75%, 
measured in dollars. Moreover, there is no evidence that the steady 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Ermarth, Box 3, Defense (Items in the System): 7/79–6/80. Secret. Sent for action.
2 Not found.
