Chapter 4, February–April 1990  577
turnaround. Now Soviet people were in favor of a very rigorous system 
of verification. Therefore, he urged the Secretary to take account of the 
moral, political and psychological aspects of the negotiations and the 
prospective agreements.
START: Mobile ICBM Verification
Moving to other START issues, Shevardnadze said he wanted 
to address mobile ICBM verification. He recalled that during the 
Secretary’s February visit to Moscow he had put forward new U.S. pro-
posals for verifying mobile ICBM launchers. The Soviets had studied 
these carefully and had come to the conclusion that it would be possible 
to work on the basis of the U.S. approach. We should turn it over to our 
experts in order to find a definitive formula.
The Secretary replied that this was good news and agreed that 
the experts should engage in order to work out specific language. 
Shevardnadze commented that today or the following day the Ministers 
would have good results.
START: Non-Circumvention
Shevardnadze said he next wanted to turn to the question of non-­
circumvention. In Moscow the Soviet side had proposed that the non-­
circumvention provisions apply only to future reductions. What was 
implied was that the obligations the U.S. had assumed in the past with 
respect to Third countries would not be affected.
The Secretary replied that the U.S. approach proceeded from a 
few basic premises. First, we had programs of cooperation with our 
allies—­in particular, an obligation to cooperate with the UK to support 
its deterrent, an obligation that dated back thirty years. This was a com-
mitment we intended to keep. We were not in a position to accept con-
straints on this commitment, as it was one that had been made over a 
period of decades by successive U.S. Presidents. During this period the 
U.S. and USSR had reached agreements in SALT I and SALT II, neither 
of which affected continuing patterns of cooperation between the U.S. 
and its allies. Therefore, we saw so no need for any non-­circumvention 
provision since customary international law made clear that states had 
an obligation not to circumvent the intent of a treaty; it was the U.S. 
intention scrupulously to comply with treaty obligations.
In Moscow, the Secretary continued, the Soviets had made an 
important statement recognizing that the pattern of cooperation 
between the U.S. and the UK would continue. This could open the way 
to a solution. The U.S. had looked into what it could do in START to 
address Soviet concerns without affecting longstanding U.S. commit-
ments to the UK. As a result, the Secretary said he had proposals for 
language in the START Treaty. He presented Shevardnadze with the
