Lieutenant-Commander J. L. Callan, U. S. N. As a result of the deliberations of the Aeronautical Commission a Convention was prepared and was signed by certain countries on October 13, 1919. The Convention lays down certain rules for the regulation of aircraft engaged in international traffic. Annexes to the Convention prescribe a number of technical rules and regulations regarding the marking of planes, the granting of certificates of airworthiness, qualifications of pilots, signals and other requirements intended to promote safety in international traffic by aircraft. The signature of the Convention was, by its terms, left open until April 12, 1920, and the time was subsequently prolonged until June 1, 1920. According to the records of the Department of State, between October 13, 1919 and June 1, 1920, the Convention was signed on the part of the following countries in addition to the United States: The British Empire, France, Italy, Japan, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, China, Cuba, Ecuador, Greece, Guatemala, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Rumania, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Siam, Czechoslovakia and Uruguay.

I am informed that the Convention, as well as the Additional Protocol of May 1, 1920, to the Convention, went into force on July 11, 1922, the following signatory States having deposited their ratifications: Belgium, Bolivia, The British Empire, France, Greece, Japan, Portugal, Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, and Siam. After the Convention as drafted had been thoroughly examined by representatives of the interested Departments of this Government it was decided to authorize Ambassador Wallace to sign the Convention and the Additional Protocol of May 1, 1920, with reservations as indicated below. Article 3 of the Convention recognizes the right of each of the contracting States, for military reasons or in the interest of public safety, to prohibit the aircraft of the other contracting States under the penalties provided by its legislation and without distinction in this respect between its private aircraft and those of the other contracting States, from flying over certain areas of its territory. It was thought that the United States might desire to make some
