796 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement Could this statement be interpreted as agreement on my part to seek­ ing of what they termed practical and feasible means for settlement of issues between our two states—that is, to seek holding of Foreign Ministers’ conference? 29. I said first, if I understood him rightly, he had said if we were to include in our declaration the most important matter between us it would give impression of prejudging results any settlement. Should I interpret that as meaning that he not willing make clear that our dec­ laration did cover the most important dispute between us—that is, the dispute in Taiwan area? 30. I said next he said that our declaration should not involve domestic matters. Of course we both recognized, I believed, that ques­ tion of whether our dispute in Taiwan area did involve a domestic mat­ ter from standpoint his government or an international matter did go to very heart our dispute there. 31. I said I had told him that it not my intent to prejudice or pre­ judge his view regard that matter. However if it his intent that in this declaration the U.S. recognize and accept his view of its being solely a domestic matter, was that not again jumping ahead of ourselves and asking U.S. to concede to his views on this matter at this stage? 32. I said with regard self-­defense clause, I had again pointed out this morning that all it said was that, in making this declaration, each of us was doing so without prejudice to what each us considers inherent right self-­defense. 33. I said now for my own government to state that in context this declaration did not, as I pointed out this morning, mean that he was accepting merits any and all my claims in this regard any more than it meant my government accepting merits any and all his claims that regard. I thought that was keeping very strictly to principle of not pre­ judging merits of any our disputes in issuing this declaration. 34. I said however in light his statements here as well as public statements made by his government I could only interpret his demand for withdrawal that clause to mean recognition by U.S. that its claims this regard in Taiwan area did not have merit. That was prejudging question. It was something it obvious my government could not accept. 35. I said he had quoted me as saying that it not my intent require him abandon his views with regard disputes in Taiwan area, regarding holding of Foreign Ministers’ conference, et cetera. What I had said, and I repeating, was that it not my intent in this declaration to require him abandon his views or to prejudice them in any way in these regards. 36. I said it not my intent interpret declaration, or use it as pre­ text for interpreting it, that he had abandoned his views in any these regards. I was sure that nobody would so interpret it. Declaration
