278 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI press reports that we had decided to deemphasize and delay START. To suspicious minds in Moscow, the V/S measures fit this theory and are the mechanism which the U.S. has decided to use to cause the delay. Unfortunately, the lack of any apparent progress in U.S. thinking on treaty issues serves as further corroboration of this theory. We are making our best arguments to counteract these suspicions. However, many technical objections are being raised by other agencies here to early progress, so a strong push from the top will be needed to follow through. I think the Soviets will not give a totally negative response, but it is important that we not get bogged down in long negotiations on these ideas. I assume we are looking for relatively quick resolutions. The proposal to notify strategic exercises will be by far the easiest to conclude, while those on telemetry PPM and RV counting would be the most useful. Can we sign agreements on these subjects prior to a resolution of the Krasnoyarsk issue? 10. It is important that the net result of the V/S initiative is to reassure people on the general subject of verification, not feed a verification frenzy. The discussions with the Senate observers, which went quite well, gave no indication that the unrealistic heights to which expectations about verification were raised during the Reagan administration are being brought down to more realistic levels. This must be done if we are to have any hope of success and some of the staffers do seem aware of the problem. Mobile ICBMs 11. The major new position the Soviets have given us thus far drops the concept of deployment areas for road-­mobiles, but accepts our position requiring notifications for any launcher movements out of restricted areas. The latter is a major improvement over their previous position which allowed 30 percent of the road-­mobile force out for routine movements with no notification. 12. I do not believe the Soviets would agree to a ban on either road-­ mobile or rail-­mobile systems and a proposal to ban MIRVed mobiles would be a major complication in the negotiations. However, I continue to believe that we can largely have whatever we want in terms of a verification regime. Our leverage in this area now is higher than it is likely to be later, so it is important that we decide soon whether or not to make major changes in the existing verification concept, and that we begin filling in the gaps in our position. The permitted levels of warheads on mobile ICBMs (and perhaps of mobile ICBM launchers as well) will be a difficult issue. There is clearly some fat in the Soviet proposed limits of 1600 and 800, although the recent Soviet proposal that would permit 5 rail garrisons, plus the latest IC estimates regarding SS-25 levels, suggest Soviet plans for a very substantial mobile ICBM force. Getting them down to the levels we are likely to want will be difficult.
