324  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
when you and Secretary McElroy were discussing alternatives to the 
present Strategic Concept.
This policy paper is an extremely important one, not because of the 
use which might be made of it during a period of hostilities, but because 
of the influence it has upon the development of a Strategic Concept 
and upon US military capabilities including force levels, weapon sys­
tems and strategic and tactical planning. It is the logical intermediary 
between Basic National Policy and the Strategic Concept and will, in 
large measure, determine the Strategic Concept since the latter depends 
for its characteristics upon the nature of the objectives which the US 
sets for itself in military situations.
The present statement of US war aims deals only with general war 
with the Soviet Bloc, and does not consider our objectives in any mili­
tary engagement short of general war. In my judgment this is an incom­
plete treatment of this important subject, and the resulting gap can have 
serious consequences. So long as there is no stated objective for the case 
of limited operations, the development of doctrine and capabilities for 
such operations is inhibited. The policy statement is used as a guide 
for the planning of the whole range of US military activities. Under the 
present policy the emphasis is placed upon general war capability to 
the virtual exclusion of those factors necessary to provide the flexible 
capability called for in Basic National Policy, and this emphasis makes 
itself felt in inter-service competition for resources and in the overall 
structuring of US military strength. Thus a range of military alterna­
tives is not available, the free choice of foreign policy alternatives may 
be correspondingly restricted, and at a time of serious threat the US 
may well be prevented from responding effectively to any military 
aggression short of general war.
I believe US war aims policy should consider three kinds of 
war, (1) general war initiated by the USSR; (2) major war initiated by 
Communist China; and (3) other war with the Sino-Soviet bloc; and 
that our objectives should be spelled out carefully and in detail in order 
to give the military the maximum guidance necessary for the develop­
ment of an overall flexible capability consistent with the requirements 
of Basic National Policy.
Recommendation:
That I be authorized during Planning Board discussions of NSC 
5410/1 to take a position along the lines described above.
