Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
711
Talking with Vaught we have only been able to determine with cer-
tainty 7 of the crews from the helicopters. It’s likely that one helicopter
is down, probably they think with mechanical trouble someplace down
in the southern part of Iran. We’re doing everything we can to figure
out the identification of it . . . figure out a rescue way, but it looks as
though we do not have the eighth helicopter crew identified. They
talked with the helicopter crews at the Desert One and they said there
are six there. The seventh is returning to the carrier from having landed
down below . . . they think the other one went down from mechanical
trouble, which probably means they are on the ground and can be
retrieved though.
Carter: Now can we detect them on the ground . . . can we find
them on the ground?
Jones: We should be able to if they landed OK . . . we should be
able to with radios and the rest . . . to be able to find them. We’re
going to try every effort to see . . . to locate them, to include the
helicopters that are coming back to the coast . . . to pick up radios,
NSA to try to pick up any radio contact from them. They should be
able to pick them up, should be able to get them if everything goes
OK. But we are expending all of our efforts towards two things. Getting
the people out of Desert One, and two, to identify this eighth crew
and get it rescued. I have talked to Admiral Long, who’s talking to
the carrier task force commander to do everything they can to avoid
any casualties on Iranians, and only as a last resort to engage. In that
regard, because of the endangering of our hostages. Still the report . . .
and of course it’s still sketchy until we get everybody figured out . . .
that there were no Iranians that were killed or injured at Desert One,
but we’ll have to confirm that a little later.
Carter: Is everyone off the ground now at Desert One?
Jones: No, they are having to . . . it’s been I guess 15 or 20 minutes
since I talked to Vaught . . . they may be off the ground, but they were
having to move everybody from that 130 to another 130, and helicopter
and 130 people had to get off. I would expect them to be off fairly
shortly. I asked him for a report as soon as they all get off and headed
south. I will pass that word on.
Carter: OK. Thank you David.
Jones: Yes sir.
[electronic click] [new call]
Long: Long speaking.
Johnson: Ah sir, General Johnson here. The Chairman asked me
to check, sir, if we had a confirmation on the one helicopter making it
back to the Nimitz sir.
Long: We have not received a report yet that they . . . the first helo
is back aboard Nimitz.
