LXXVIII  Summaries of Compilations
from “luxury items” from abroad sold through Canal Zone sales outlets. 
In essence, the Panamanian Government felt that the Canal Zone admin-
istration discriminated against Panamanians, and that Panama was not 
profiting from the operations of the canal as it should. The Panamanian 
Foreign Minister repeated these complaints in July 1959 in rejecting a 
U.S. aide-­memoire responding to the Panamanian complaints. (PM-18) 
Foreign Minister Moreno brought the dispute into the open with public 
statements at Santiago, Chile, in August and in New York in September 
1959 charging the United States with non-­compliance with its treaty 
agreements. (PM–25) Meanwhile, the Panamanian Government contin-
ued to press for the right to fly the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone. 
(PM-24)
The Panamanian complaints engendered a good deal of high-­level 
concern and policy debate in Washington. Panama was of critical stra-
tegic importance to the United States because of the canal, and concerns 
about the political stability of the Panamanian Government were mag-
nified in May 1959 when a group of 80 armed revolutionaries, Cuban– 
led and supported, landed on the north coast of Panama and attempted 
to overthrow the government. (PM–14) Panamanian concerns and 
complaints found a sympathetic ear in President Eisenhower, who 
took a keen and continuing interest in the problems and was inclined 
throughout the period to accede to most of the Panamanian requests for 
change. (PM–19, 20, 22, 37) Eisenhower saw little reason to refuse the 
Panamanian request to have the Panamanian flag fly with the U.S. flag 
in the Canal Zone. (PM–26, 49)
The President received conflicting advice from his advisers on 
these questions, however. The Department of State, led by Secretary 
of State Herter, argued consistently for a more generous interpretation 
of the terms of the 1955 understandings with Panama, and pointed up 
the importance of accepting the Panamanian position on the flag issue. 
(PM–20, 28, 32, 37, 40, 50) Secretary of the Army Wilber M. Brucker, on 
the other hand, functioned in the capacity of President of the Panama 
Canal Company and represented the interests of the Canal Zone gov-
ernment. The tenor of his advice to the President was, by and large, 
to hold the line against the Panamanian demands, most of which the 
Department of the Army viewed as unwarranted. (PM–20, 29) Brucker 
was strongly opposed to raising the Panamanian flag in the Canal 
Zone, which he argued would be viewed as a sign of weakness and a 
concession in the direction of eventual Panamanian control of the canal. 
(PM–39, 52) Brucker pointed to the fact that there was strong support in 
Congress for his position on the flag issue (PM–52)
The tensions involved in relations with Panama, which were high-
lighted in the policy debate, led the Eisenhower administration to 
reconsider the possibility of building an alternative sea-­level canal in
