96
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
A number of US oil companies have already shown some interest in the
situation, and Mossadeq might well be able to persuade some company
to operate in Iran on his terms. Such a development would create wide-
spread British antagonism against the US. There is also a possibility
that Mossadeq might attempt to obtain Soviet specialists to run the oil
installations.
8. There is little doubt that sooner or later efforts will be made by
the British, the Shah, and deputies in the Majlis to undermine Mos-
sadeq’s position. However, in view of Mossadeq’s popular backing, it
is unlikely that the Shah and the Majlis would dare oppose him while
tension over the oil issue remains high. Mossadeq is more likely to
force the oil issue by extreme action than permit himself to be under-
mined by the Shah and the Majlis on other internal issues. It is therefore
unlikely that Mossadeq can be overthrown during this critical period
except by violence or by the establishment of a semi-dictatorial regime
under the aegis of the Shah. Such a course of action would involve risks
which the Shah has thus far shown no willingness to take.
29.
Memorandum From Henry Villard of the Policy Planning
Staff to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Staff (Nitze)1
Washington, May 24, 1951.
IRANIAN SITUATION
On the basis of a talk with Allen Dulles last night, and with one of
his operatives just returned from Iran, I offer the following further com-
ments in respect to the oil nationalization situation:
1. Nationalization has gone so far in the minds of the Iranians that
there is no prospect whatever of a “negotiated” settlement. Feeling is
running so high that the best that might be salvaged from the present
situation is an operating contract for the British, although even this is
only a possibility. We might as well reconcile ourselves to a fait ac-
compli as far as nationalization is concerned but should not allow the
principle of compensation to go by default.
2. The Iranians have not yet faced up to the problem of production,
operation and marketing of the oil supplies. The main objective has
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 888.2553/5–245. Top
Secret.
