Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 and I know Senator Muskie very well. The appointment was terrific, a real ten strike. Was this your own idea? (U) The President. Sometimes other people around here think of good ideas, but this was something I thought of myself. (U) Ambassador Watson. Well, you deserve real congratulations for it! My second point is the need to find some way to go on with a strategic dialogue with the Soviets, particularly if the SALT process flounders. Both my DCM2 and I think it would be a good idea to form high level groups of strategists from both sides to continue the dialogue process. There has to be some way to follow up and to talk together, especially if SALT won’t apply. (C) (Dr. Brzezinski entered the Oval Office.) As far as the sanctions which we are undertaking against the Soviets, I am completely with you all the way, even though many of them will lose their effectiveness as time goes on. But we have no choice, it seems to me, except to continue them, and not to make any basic changes in what we are doing. (C) The President. I think we ought to hold firm on that. (C) Ambassador Watson. My third point (turning to Dr. Brzezinski) and here you might disagree with me, because I’m going to mention China. The Soviets have a paranoid fear of China. They have a long border with that country and they are irrational on the subject. They do not talk about China. In fact, during my tour there no Soviet has even mentioned the subject to me. So I think it important that we do not take actions that will be misunderstood by them and that we maintain an evenhanded policy and not hurt them in this regard just to hurt them. (C) The President. All the actions we have taken toward China are based on our desire to improve relations with that very important country. We are not normalizing our relations with the Chinese just in order to hurt the Soviets. (C) Ambassador Watson. I am no historian, and Dr. Brzezinski certainly knows more about the subject than I do, but it seems to me that the Chinese have a tendency to jump around from bed to bed. And I think we ought to make sure that they are lashed down to our bed before we undertake actions which we might regret later on. (C) Dr. Brzezinski. You have to remember that we are very sexy peo- Ambassador Watson. The fourth point I would like to make, if I may, is to raise the confusion and conflict between the NSC and the State Department. This is bad for our country and, when such confusion exists, 2 Garrison.
