National Security Policy  311
Paragraph 6 a, second sentence. The President wished this sentence 
amended by adding after the words “numbered forces”, “as specifi­
cally approved by the President.”
Paragraph 6 a, third sentence. I felt it unnecessary to take the 
President’s time with this item.
Paragraph 6 d. The President felt that the new factors to be consid­
ered by an authorizing commander were helpful to the document.
Paragraph 6 g. The President indicated that he did not understand 
this paragraph and wants more information with respect to it. He 
expressed great concern about security and would not be inclined to 
approve this paragraph unless there were convincing evidence of the 
need for it.
Section B, paragraph 2. The President felt it was not necessary to 
make any change in this paragraph although he felt it was not entirely 
clear.
Section B, paragraph 3 a (2). This paragraph cites as an example of 
an attack which would be a basis for a decision by an authorizing com­
mander within the context of the paper, “a submarine attempts sub­
merged penetration of a major port or harbor in the U.S., its territories 
and possessions.” The President was quite emphatic in rejecting this as 
an example of what might be considered an attack. He pointed out that 
we had various other methods of dealing with a submerged submarine, 
if it were identified and located, without the use of nuclear weapons. 
He felt that this was similar to U.S. planes flying over the Caspian Sea.
Section B, paragraph 3 c. This paragraph gave the President some 
concern and he asked first why it was not possible simply to shoot the 
plane down or destroy the submarine without resort to nuclear weap­
ons. However, as he thought about it, he thought perhaps that it might 
be appropriate to employ nuclear warheads on antiaircraft weapons 
and nuclear depth charges.
Section B, paragraph 4 a (1). (General Goodpaster joined us for dis­
cussion of this item, at my request). The President was disinclined to 
accept this paragraph as written feeling that it was too broad, general, 
and unqualified. He asked that it be tightened up measurably before 
again being submitted to him for approval. He particularly would not 
wish to have this paragraph in effect authorize a nuclear attack on the 
Soviet Union when the attack that had been launched upon the U.S. 
forces did not involve or threaten to involve the continental U.S.
Section C, paragraph 3 b. The President was not willing to accept 
this paragraph without a means of authentication having been speci­
fied for the authorizing commander. He recalled the Orson Wells radio 
episode. He spoke at some length of the seriousness of nuclear strikes 
on the basis of incorrect or misleading information. He would wish that
