30  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
I replied expressing regret Wang felt it necessary discuss matters 
outside terms of reference this meeting. Said I spoke to him of ill feel­
ing people in US, as I knew it, arising from issue we now discussing. 
I added I did not intend engage in controversy, just wanted frankly 
explain to him factual situation.
Referring to Wang’s remark that my statement on freedom Chi­
nese depart as being “general”, I said if general it was because it was 
broad, categorical and without exception. I said I was unclear what 
Wang meant by an unfair solution. I said there had been restraints on 
some Chinese and these no longer exist. Told him again if he knew of 
exception would be glad investigate. Also pointed out all Chinese in US 
have complete freedom communicate, nothing prevents their writing 
parents in China or communicating any way they desire. I informed 
him that for long period US Govt had directly aided Chinese in US to 
pay travel to mainland China. Where students did not have money US 
Govt has helped by paying all or part of travel expenses. From April 1, 
1949 to June 30, 1951 637 students assisted by US Govt to go mainland 
China via Hong Kong. From July 1, 1951 to December 31, 1954 figure 
was 109. From January 1, 1955 to June 30, 1955; total 767. I emphasized 
this not total of those returning mainland China, just those given finan­
cial assistance by US Government.
I dwelt on strong contrast present time between situation Chinese 
in US and Americans in China and found it hard to understand why he 
described it as unfair to China. As I had said previously, no Chinese to 
best knowledge my government being prevented departing. Whatever 
reasons may be this contrasts considerably with situation in China of 
those Americans on list given Wang. Added I hoped Wang accepted 
these remarks in spirit in which given.
Wang replied on their part they respect present talks with all sin­
cerity. They willing settle questions. That is why he did not want make 
any statement irritating to American people nor hear any statement 
which would irritate Chinese people. He did not want to bring up old 
debates at conference table. He had thought it useful make few remarks 
referring to ill feeling of American people. Also glad to note I not desir­
ous any more debate this subject. This also our desire Wang said. He 
concluded that he would make few comments on Chinese students in 
US at next meeting.
I then proposed since we both had work to do to make next meet­
ing more fruitful that we postpone our sessions until Monday at 10 a.m. 
Regarding press, I suggested following press agreement and that con­
cerning day’s meeting we give only subject discussed and time next
