310 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV undoubtedly follow its natural tendencies to give priority to its natural disaster functions rather than to its civil defense functions. (2) It will open the way for OMB to undermine a decision in favor of Program 3 by pleading the need to cut costs and maintain only the present level of spending when budget time comes. A decision in favor of Equivalent Survivability as a policy would prevent this, since existing programs and spending levels quite clearly do not provide equivalent survivability. 3. Review alternative US civil defense programs and make recommendations to the President. Five alternative programs (one of which has two variants) are set forth on pp. 10–11 of the Summary and in Chapter VI of the Report. Two of them (Programs 4 and 5) involve such substantial increased expenditures that they are undoubtedly not politically feasible, and Program 5 is undesirable in any event. One thing which might be worth suggesting, however, is a study of the longer-­term desirability of a program like Program 4, that is, incorporating shelters into new construction. This is what the Soviets are doing; it is also what the Germans and some others are attempting to do. It would not be a pleasant situation to be in if by the year 2000 we were the only major country which did not have a shelter capability for a substantial segment of its urban population. Program 1, Minimal Civil Defense, can also be excluded, since no one except ACDA is likely to support it and since the President has already said that he is in favor of a strong civil defense. The differences between Programs 2a and 2b are relatively minor, involving the extent to which, within existing funding levels, efforts are concentrated on population relocation planning. In terms of output, under Program 2a existing planning activities would be completed in the mid-­to-­late 1980s; under Program 2b they would be completed by the mid-1980s. Under both programs, there would have to be a surge period of about one year to implement the plans. State is likely to support either Program 2a or Program 2b. OMB will definitely support Program 2b with the argument that there are a lot of kinks and uncertainties in relocation planning which should be worked out before it would be worthwhile to embark on Program 3. All the other agencies will support Program 3. Harold Brown has, indeed, already endorsed the population relocation segment of this program within the DOD, and DCPA is, presumably, going ahead implementing this decision. In effect, PRC approval of Program 3 will ratify Harold’s decision on an interagency basis and thus help DOD ward off the OMB budget cutters this Fall. The other smaller segment of Program 3 is devoted to continuity of government and is designed
