Colombia 379 All who have studied the problem agree that what is needed most is transportation, communication and possibly other specialized material. A few small obsolete helicopters now in the Colombian Air Force have been used successfully in a number of anti-­bandit operations, and no doubt if they were available in sufficient numbers and with sufficient lead and altitude capability the Colombian military would have the mobility badly needed to meet violence when and where it occurs, regardless of terrain. Both papers recognize the need of a public relations program to help civilian understanding and support in violence areas. Such a program would supplement the work of the Equipoz Polivalentes. We agree in principle on the need for a coordinated public relations effort in the anti-­violence campaign. However, President Lleras has indicated a personal aversion to government propaganda (perhaps because government propaganda has so frequently been discredited in the past) and I have reasonable doubts that he would accept the proposal for a public relations adviser per se—­especially if the latter were to be a foreign national. Also, I think it would be politically objectionable for the U.S. to be directly and overtly involved in this activity. I think any advise we give on public relations as related to the anti-­violence program, should be confirmed to such recommendations as can be given in a report to the President and to such ad hoc guidance as can be given through our established U.S. missions to Colombia. I agree with your personal reaction that neither of the two papers seems to represent a very comprehensive presentation. For your information the military Advisory Group to Colombia at the direction of the Commander in Chief Caribbean (stemming from a DOD request) is preparing recommendations for equipment and training under the MAP program for FY 1961 to combat this banditry problem. These recommendations are being coordinated with a Colombian Armed Forces plan to combat banditry. In making these recommendations every effort is being made to insure that the whole Colombian Government, especially the Army and Air Force, will coordinate in using the equipment against banditry in an organized and coordinated manner. These recommendations will be cleared with me before going forward through military channels. It is expected that these recommendations will form the basis for a specific DOD proposal on how to help Colombia and that they will be appropriately coordinated with the State Department in Washington. I apologize for the length of the letter. Nevertheless, the history and background of the problem is such that I think the above comments at this may be helpful to you and to those in the Department directly concerned.
