Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I The Agency for International Development has been reorganized under the leadership of Governor John Gilligan. More authority is being delegated to our AID missions abroad. Tighter controls are now imposed on financial and operational procedures. In addition, AID has eliminated some complex and cumbersome procedures which have slowed our ability to design and implement projects. The United States has encouraged the multilateral banks to better take into account the lessons of the past—both successes and failures. The Administration has also shared congressional concerns about high salary levels of bank employees. We want the banks to look especially hard at more effective ways to reach poor people directly, as well as to operate in the most cost effective ways. In our security programs we have tightened management controls and have instituted an interagency committee to provide coordinated recommendations to me and the President on all aspects of our arms transfer and security assistance programs.3 Finally, because we recognize that science and technology offer many opportunities for expanding the development process, President Carter has proposed the creation of a new U.S. foundation on technological collaboration.4 This foundation will support the application of our research to development problems. And it will improve the access of the developing countries to American science and technology. We will continue to seek ways to improve the management and delivery of our foreign assistance programs. Accountability to the Congress and to the public is an essential element of our approach. Other Key Issues There are several other important questions relating to our foreign assistance programs which I would like to discuss. First, there is a growing belief that we are both giving more aid and at the same time losing control over where it goes. Let me put this issue in perspective. Clearly, we are not shouldering a disproportionate burden of global aid flows. While in absolute terms the U.S. aid program is larger than that of any other nation, as a percentage of GNP we rank in the bottom 25% of all non-Communist country donors. Concerning control, we are very active in attempting to steer multilateral assistance in directions we think best for our nation and for global development. We have often been successful in encouraging the 3 Presumable reference to the Arms Export Control Board. 4 Presumable reference to the proposed Foundation for International Technological Cooperation (FITC).
