Hungary
495
(who was making a speech in Kansas on energy). The President had
specifically told Dr. Brzezinski to tell DPM Huszar how happy he was
to have a Hungarian statesman visiting the White House. (U)
DPM Huszar thanked Dr. Brzezinski. He informed him that on
Friday he had met with First Secretary Kadar to discuss his upcoming
trip to the United States. During the meeting Kadar had asked him to
convey his best regards to President Carter. Huszar then added that
he fully understood the busy schedule which the President had and
asked that Dr. Brzezinski convey to him his best regards. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski stressed the importance that the United States
attached to relations with Hungary, both symbolically and substan-
tively. The US felt that relations had been developing well. The return
of the Crown had been important symbolically in contributing to the
improvement of relations. (U)
DPM Huszar agreed. He felt that relations were developing well.
The return of the Crown and the Coronation Jewels had had an impor-
tant impact on relations. He understood that Dr. Brzezinski had also
played an important role in the decision and he wished to thank him
for his contribution. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski said that he was pleased to have played a role and
noted that perhaps his ethnic background had been helpful. (U)
DPM Huszar then gave Dr. Brzezinski a gift of a coin commemorat-
ing the return of the Crown. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski stated that he had been to Hungary several times.
He had been impressed with the Hungarians’ sense of history and the
importance that they attached to history. He had been particularly
pleased to see a monument to General Bem. (U)
DPM Huszar noted that Bem was a common national hero. The
Hungarian people referred to him as Father Bem. He then turned to
political relations, noting that he could not say very much new, but
that this was good. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski interjected that it was often more important who
said it, not whether it was old or new. (U)
DPM Huszar commented that political relations were improving
and that meetings between officials of the two countries were becoming
more frequent. He was glad that Representatives and Senators were
visiting Hungary in increasing numbers. In this connection he noted
that he was the third Hungarian Prime Minister to visit the United
States. Continuing, he stressed that he wanted to say that the Hungarian
Government was officially prepared to raise the level of political
relations. He had come to the United States with this specific task.
Beyond this, however, he had no specific agenda; there were no agree-
ments to be signed. He was glad to have the opportunity for an
