570 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI First and foremost, the papers walk back from the understanding that we reached at the political level in Moscow. They seek to return us to approaches that for many years had been unworkable. Let me give you two examples. In Moscow our joint statement on SLCMs said that they would be dealt with by parallel, politically binding declarations. That’s an exact quote. Now, with six to seven weeks before the Summit we’re hit out of the blue with a paper that calls for legally binding numerical limits in a protocol to the treaty. Another example: The bracketed SLCM declaration that we worked out set aside verification. Now the paper proposes detailed verification measures which have been a stumbling block on SLCMs for many years. One more example: On ALCMs, the exact language of the joint statement in Moscow was “agreement reached on all remaining issues with the exception of the range threshold.” Yet, the ALCMs paper that you gave us reopens the counting rules, even the numbers of heavy bombers and a number of other issues as well. You told me in Namibia and you repeated again last night that we won’t be able to meet our deadline unless you and I do it and unless there is a necessary commitment at the political level. Now I am asking myself if we would be able to resolve everything that remains to be done in the next seven weeks if after you and I agree the experts are free to roll things back. I just don’t see how we can agree to something at the political level and then have the experts roll it back. I want to say this, not in the larger group, but here. I didn’t want to go upstairs and go through this because I wanted you to know how serious and troubling this matter is to me. Shevardnadze: Well, let me briefly comment and we can continue then with the experts. As regard ALCMs, I intend to reaffirm with the experts present that the Moscow agreement remains in effect. The only condition is the range threshold. If there’s no agreement acceptable to us on range then the rest of the package is destroyed. I have explained why we have taken this position, and it clearly is a very firm position. We simply can’t remake our entire anti-­aircraft position. It’s not just a technical problem; it would be extraordinarily costly for us to do that. If we find something mutually acceptable, we can reach agreement on the other questions as well, including the counting rule. We have reaffirmed that the Moscow variants or agreement is in effect. After our meeting in Moscow, our experts have come up with a number of other possibilities. It can be examined, maybe it could be more acceptable. That does not mean that we reject and nullify what was agreed to in Moscow. The counting rule is in effect. Let the experts look at the other options that have been developed as well. But the range is fundamental. There’s no reserve here.
