Chapter 7, January–May 1991  975
missile would allow us to retain all of these missiles. Additionally, the 
U.S. may want to lock in now the right to download its SLBMs to meet 
possible “START II” limits. An approach that allowed each side to down-
load 1500–2000 RVs on 2–3 types of missiles would protect this option.
Downloading also could have significant drawbacks. It could facil-
itate a Soviet ability to break out of START limits on relatively short 
notice. Some would argue that the Soviets would position themselves 
to be able to exploit that potential, while the U.S. would not. The Soviets 
proposed a number of provisions that might have marginally limited 
the breakout potential for missiles downloaded; however, since the U.S. 
cannot accept START obligations that would require either the destruc-
tion of RVs or the redesign of missile front ends as adjuncts to down-
loading, these avenues to constrain breakout options are foreclosed.
Downloading also could have political liabilities that would 
become an added ratification burden. Critics will argue that permit-
ting downloading in START amounts to tearing another hole in already 
porous START limits. In this connection, they may point to the tacit 
“downloading” embedded in already agreed START limits, notably the 
agreement to count the Soviet SS–N–23 at 4 RVs (vice 10), the SS–18 
at 10 RVs (vice 12 or 14), the D–5 at 8 RVs, (vice 10 or 12), and the 
Peacekeeper at 10 RVs (vice 12).
Options
1. Current U.S. Proposal. Each side would be allowed to download 
up to two RVs from two existing types (one ICBM and one SLBM). 
Downloading of heavy ICBMs and mobile ICBMs would be banned. 
Although there is no explicit limit on the aggregate number of RVs that 
could be downloaded, under this approach the U.S. could download a 
total of about 1500–1900 RVs (depending on the D–5 backfit on Trident 
submarines), and the Soviets could download about 500–700 RVs. (This 
proposal was tabled before the recent Soviet declaration that the SS–N–18 
should count as carrying three instead of seven RVs.)
2. Current Soviet Proposal. (please review closely) Each side would 
be allowed to download up to five RVs from two existing types of bal-
listic missiles. Downloading of heavy ICBMs would be banned. There 
would be an aggregate downloading limit of 1250 RVs. The SS–N–18 
would not be counted as a downloaded missile.
3. DoD Proposal. Each side would be allowed to download up to two 
RVs from three existing types of ballistic missiles, except for the SS–N–18 
from which four RVs could be downloaded (i.e., treat SS–N–18 as a down-
loaded missile). Downloading of heavy ICBMs would be banned; down-
loading of mobiles would be permitted. Although there would be no 
explicit aggregate limit, the Soviets could download about 900–1300 RVs, 
and the U.S. theoretically could download about 1900 RVs.
