824 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI That way I believe that we’ll be able to concentrate our efforts on these questions and begin to move them. Following our meeting we can set up a Bartholomew-Karpov mechanism for preparing for the October ministerial. It’s a little different approach then you were suggesting, but not much. And I think it really is inspired by the same kind of concern. In any case, I think we ought to exchange letters on the respective problems that you and we both ought to be focused upon and then we could meet in September to discuss these and the priorities and how to resolve the outstanding issues that we’re each concerned about. And then we could commission Bartholomew and Karpov to prepare for October. Shevardnadze: Why not combine the two approaches? Let’s exchange the lists now. We’ll inform you of the problems we see, you’ll inform us of yours. Let’s have Bartholomew and Karpov then get together and then we can meet in New York and try to crack some these political issues. Baker: That’s good. Because I think it’s true that without the two of us we won’t crack them. Shevardnadze: That’s why I’d like to have our deputies in on this so that we’re not just dealing with cables, but that the deputies can report directly to us. Baker: I agree. [Omitted here are discussions not related to START.] Shevardnadze: Well, let me say a few words about START then. We have some complaints about the way things have been going in START and undoubtedly you have some as well. The main issue that concerns us is non-­circumvention. In order to have real clarity we had hoped, and we have had some talks with the British, and we hope to find a formula to satisfy both your needs and ours. The formula or form or language of that statement can [be] worked out by our delegations—­they can come up with it. But the critical thing from our standpoint is that there has to be some limitation in this sphere. We can’t be in a position where you can give any kind of strategic arms you want to your alliance partner. We also have this problem on continuous monitoring of ICBM production facilities. Here I’d like to say there are some new elements. Baker: You’re talking about Perimeter Portal of Monitoring? Shevardnadze: Yes. What we want is to make sure the system of verification is effective and as simple as possible and not too expensive. Let me inform you as regards rail-­mobile ICBMs, we decided to cease production on January 1. This, we believe, would make it possible to approach verification and information on mobile missile production differently. We had talked about a separate agreement on mutual information on this issue, and I think what we’re doing now may open up
