760 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Insofar as the Soviets are concerned, we should keep reiterating that Afghanistan is the litmus test of Soviet intentions—though without putting ourselves in the position of emphasizing Soviet failure to respond. If the Soviet Union wishes accommodation, we are ready for the solution of the Afghanistan problem, which combines transitional security arrangements with a total Soviet withdrawal. In any case, we cannot afford any zig-zags in our policy toward the Soviet Union, and a tough public posture by you and by Muskie is essential, especially if we are at the same time to be able to argue credibly that we are prepared to seek arms control arrangements with the Soviets as a matter of mature realism. With respect to Cuba, it seems to me that renewed provocations by Castro should be very firmly rebuffed; and the forcible deportation to Cuba, through the use of the U.S. Navy, of some Cuban criminals might be an appropriately dramatic step, designed to signal Castro that there are limits beyond which the U.S. cannot be pushed. In the Caribbean, we need to be able to act promptly and credibly, without the appearance of indecisiveness with which we are (unfairly) charged over Nicaragua. IV. Initiatives that we might take: There are some initiatives that you could take that might be helpful in demonstrating effective Presidential leadership in the area of foreign affairs. The following come to mind and you may wish to indicate here (by marginal notes) as well as above, whether you want me to develop any of these further: (1) The hostage crisis: I think we should think about a more aggressive strategy—though recognizing the political liabilities of an effort that does not work. We might explore the possibility through our various intermediaries of a meeting between Muskie and some responsible Iranian official, if anyone emerges in the next three months. Indeed such a meeting, if held in October, could have significant impact even if it did not lead to the immediate release of the hostages—provided, of course, that a legitimate and realistic process toward resolutions is the result. There are undoubtedly some other ideas; but the problem is that without some initiative we will surely be accused of permitting the crisis to have become routine. (2) We might explore secretly with the Soviets the possibility of some major withdrawal of forces from Afghanistan just prior to the elections. Though such an eventuality is not likely, it is conceivable that the Soviets might reach the conclusion that Reagan will be too dangerous, especially given his repudiation of arms control. One must be extremely careful how one undertakes any such probes because they could contribute to the impression of zig-zagging. That is why they
