Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
747
(3) secondary issues for which responsibility should be clearly
fixed, and which need only be monitored by you in a general way.
I suggest that, however you decide to order these issues, you use a listing
such as this to make sure that responsibility for each issue is clearly fixed
among Chris, the Under Secretaries, and the Assistant Secretaries.
I hope this listing of issues also provides useful background in de-
ciding on specific accomplishments to pursue and in choosing speech
topics.
Presidential campaigns are not periods conducive to grand accom-
plishments. This period is no exception. The Soviets, the Europeans,
Middle Eastern leaders and others—as in similar periods before—will
prefer to wait for our election results before committing themselves to
us on most issues.
But much can still be done:
—In a few areas, tangible accomplishments are possible.
—We can position ourselves—and, to some degree, events—for
early accomplishments in the second term.
—As an essential means to this positioning, you are in an extraor-
dinarily strong position to explain publicly our policies in important
areas, clearly and directly.
Unhappily, the specific accomplishments which might be pos-
sible—e.g., in southern Africa, in Law of the Sea negotiations—do not
generally lie in areas of current, central concern: our relations with our
allies, East-West relations, our position in the Middle East and South-
west Asia, and the state of the international economy.
Despite this fact, the major problems we face in these central areas
require your putting them at the core of your personal agenda.
We must give our allies, our adversaries and our public a clear sense of a
strategy for dealing with expanded Soviet capabilities and involvement;
with the economic challenges afflicting the industrial democracies; and
with the Third World instabilities and tensions that involve the in-
terests of the superpowers and their allies.
By the end of the year, we can realistically seek to be in a position
in which:
—We and the allies are closer to agreement on the strategic impli-
cations of Afghanistan. There will not be complete agreement and we
will still need to be pressing on them our view of the relationship be-
tween deterrence and detente, but the current trans-Atlantic sniping
can at least be muted. The temptation to score points off each other in
our and some of our allies’ electoral campaigns will continue to be
strong; succumbing will continue to be shortsighted and, in the long
run, politically damaging.
