XLIV
Note on U.S. Covert Actions
reaffirmed the DCI’s responsibility for the coordination, control, and
conduct of covert operations and directed him to obtain policy ap-
proval from the 40 Committee for all major and “politically sensitive”
covert operations. He was also made responsible for ensuring an an-
nual review by the 40 Committee of all approved covert operations.
The 40 Committee met regularly early in the Nixon administration,
but over time the number of formal meetings declined and business
came to be conducted via couriers and telephone votes. The Committee
actually met only for major new proposals. As required, the DCI sub-
mitted annual status reports to the 40 Committee for each approved op-
eration. According to the 1976 Church Committee Final Report, the 40
Committee considered only about 25 percent of the CIA’s individual
covert action projects, concentrating on major projects that provided
broad policy guidelines for all covert actions. Congress received
briefings on only a few proposed projects. Not all major operations,
moreover, were brought before the 40 Committee: President Nixon in
1970 instructed the DCI to promote a coup d’ etat against Chilean Presi-
dent Salvador Allende without Committee coordination or approval.14
Presidential Findings Since 1974 and the Operations Advisory Group
The Hughes-Ryan amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of
1974 brought about a major change in the way the U.S. Government ap-
proved covert actions, requiring explicit approval by the President for
each action and expanding Congressional oversight and control of the
CIA. The CIA was authorized to spend appropriated funds on covert
actions only after the President had signed a “finding” and informed
Congress that the proposed operation was important to national
security.15
Executive Order 11905, issued by President Ford on February 18,
1976, in the wake of major Congressional investigations of CIA activ-
ities by the Church and Pike Committees, replaced the 40 Committee
with the Operations Advisory Group, composed of the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs, the Secretaries of State and De-
fense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the DCI, who re-
tained responsibility for the planning and implementation of covert op-
erations. The OAG was required to hold formal meetings to develop
recommendations for the President regarding a covert action and to
conduct periodic reviews of previously-approved operations. EO 11905
also banned all U.S. Government employees from involvement in polit-
14 Final Report of the Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect
to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate, Book I, Foreign and Military Intelligence,
pp. 54–55, 57.
15 Public Law 93–559.
