726
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
To make maximum use of this broad interest in the hunger issue, a
mechanism is needed which reports directly to you and is coordinated
with Stu Eizenstat’s proposed Cabinet-level Group on Food and Agri-
cultural Policy. This would assure that preliminary planning for a Pres-
idential world hunger initiative adequately involves the Executive Of-
fice, the line Agencies, the Congress, international organizations, and
the private sector. Since Stu received your views on his proposed on-
going mechanism, we have reached an agreement with him.12 In order
to ensure coordination, I should be a member of the Full Committee
as well as continue to serve as White House Coordinator on World
Hunger.
III. Assumptions
In developing the process for shaping such an initiative, we are
making the following assumptions:
1. That you wish to demonstrate publicly in the near future your
commitment to do something about world hunger—perhaps within
the next 2 months. We sense that you do not want another study but
prefer a series of actions.
2. That you view world hunger as a global issue, including concern
for malnutrition at home as well as abroad.
3. That you intend your interest in world hunger to be understood
as part of your overall concern for basic human needs, not an isolated
issue. Your initiative would thus be one major further step in demon-
strating concretely your commitment to improve the quality of life
throughout the world.
IV. Strategy
If you agree with the above assumptions, we propose the follow-
ing actions:
1. Development of a Policy Statement on World Hunger
There is broad agreement among experts in the field that one of the
most important Presidential actions would be to make a crisp, concise
statement of United States policy with regard to world hunger. Your in-
volvement is critical to mobilizing national and international efforts to
alleviate global hunger. Recent food-related legislation, ample current
grain supplies, and the constructive developing country attitudes man-
ifested at the June meeting of the World Food Council offer you an op-
portunity to play a timely leadership role.
A statement based on policy options developed by the Depart-
ments and the Executive Office of the President could specify actions
such as:
12 See Document 224.
