893.5045/105: Telegram [Document 593] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, June 27, 1925—3 p.m. [Received June 28—10 a.m.] 251. My number 228, June 15, 10 a.m. paragraphs 3 to 5 inclusive. 1. At meeting of Heads of Legation this morning apparently called at the request of Japanese Minister, latter stated agent of Chang Hsueh-liang52 had informed him through his military attachés that in view of Communist activities and the like Chang Hsueh-liang considered situation in Shanghai would grow worse unless it was soon settled and that he desired to place his services at disposal of Heads of Legation to assist in bringing about a speedy and happy conclusion of the Shanghai incidents. 2. While Italian, French and Belgian Ministers in general way seemed to favor a polite but vague reply to Chang Hsueh-liang in no manner accepting his proffered assistance, yet they appeared quite favorable to requesting from him a more precise statement of whatever he might have in mind. I observed that I was opposed to our flirting with Chang Hsueh-liang or any factional leader in China; that I had reported to the Department my statements at meeting of Heads of Legation on June 14th last regarding the position of the United States in the above regard and that my Government had informed me that my statements had exactly expressed its attitude; that therefore I suggested the reply to Chang Hsueh-liang while of course polite should not be of a tenor to encourage a further démarche of this description on his part. The British Chargé d’Affaires expressed himself as entirely concurring in my view as being that likewise of his Government, adding a further caution against statement on our part which might give any factional leaders reason to believe we desired further communications from them of the nature of Chang Hsueh-liang’s or that we were prepared to accord any measure of support thereto. The Heads of Legation then authorized the Japanese Minister to reply to Chang Hsuehliang’s agent in the tenor of the suggestion made by Mr. Palairet and myself. 3. Repeated to Tokyo. MAYER
