388 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement October 12 news release attributed to Peoples’ Daily alleging that “the Chinese side is faithfully carrying out the Agreement” appears to represent attempt cover up PRC non-­compliance by directing attention to 47 Americans who have not applied for exit permits “who can leave China at any time”. The Agreed Announcement deals with those who want to leave, not those who do not. Implication in later paragraph this news release that Agreed Announcement provides for examination case of Americans, one by one, is not supported by language of Announcement. US Government can only conclude that PRC is deliberately misleading public as to its obligations and actions under Agreed Announcement. Record shows that PRC so far has evaded rather than implemented requirements of Agreed Announcement. US Government bound to take increasingly serious view PRC failure implement provisions Agreed Announcement if this failure should be further protracted. 2. Department will send you for possible introduction at later meet­ ing text draft parallel declarations renouncing use of force particularly in Taiwan area. If Wang adopts anticipated line that Taiwan is domestic issue and only necessity is that US forces withdraw from Taiwan area you may wish reply along following general line: “US and PRC views status Taiwan and US relationship to area differ sharply. Immediate and urgent problem is not attempt reconcile these views, but remove danger of resort to force which might provoke international conflict. It is impossible freely negotiate under threat of force. Only if this threat removed is there any hope of constructive solu­ tion of basic political problems.” 3. You are given discretion as to whether you should make presen­ tation on unaccounted for military personnel at 21st meeting. Essential that this presentation be made at some point. 4. While Department does not insist on rigid adherence fixed order agenda items under Point 2, it is US position that there is no basis for con­ structive exchange views on trade embargo question while threat of use of military force by PRC remains. Hence, there is no point in discussing this issue in absence renunciation use force by PRC. It is believed post­ ponement discussion this item should be put on this practical basis. In taking this position, however, you need not object to Wang presentation this item. 5. While it would be our purpose to avoid any discussion of the embargo item until after we have gotten some positive assurances about renunciation of force, you are authorized, if you deem it necessary to keep conversations going, to indicate that we recognize that the formula­ tion of declaration on renunciation of force is a matter of delicacy which would require considerable thought and that while any positive conclu­ sion on the matter of trade would inherently have to depend greatly on the Chicom response on renunciation of force, nevertheless while the
