120
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Brzezinski agreed that we should not discourage regional institu-
tions, but he suggested that the healthiest approach would be a hands-
off one, where the Latin Americans would approach us—instead of we,
them—to pay attention to the regional institutions.
Solomon and Brzezinski agreed that the President should redefine
our relationship rather than renounce it. Solomon said that the only vi-
able regional economic institution was the Inter-American Develop-
ment Bank, and a sign of its relative importance is the fact that Secre-
tary Blumenthal will attend its annual ministerial meeting whereas he
would not attend the one at the Asian Development Bank.5 Even the
IDB has diversified its relationships—bringing on donors from Europe
and Japan—although we are still the biggest contributor. But in trade or
aid, it is hard to see a special relationship.
David Aaron pressed the issue of the special relationship a couple
of steps further. One implication of a change in strategy would involve
a shift in the distribution of U.S. resources abroad. Secondly, he noted
that there was, in fact, a collective consciousness in Latin America.
Brzezinski said that we should not deceive ourselves. The con-
sciousness is only collective when it is negative and in opposition to the
U.S. Constructive relations demand greater specificity.
—In ideology, we want to show an affinity for democratic states.
—Security considerations demand that we recognize the geopo-
litical importance of Brazil and perhaps the special importance of the
Caribbean to the United States.
—Economically, we need a more diversified strategy.
However, Brzezinski said we should not try to package these clus-
ters of interests into a single policy.
Weil from Commerce agreed.
Relationships With Military Regimes
Christopher applied the approach suggested by Brzezinski to this
next issue. He suggested that we adjust our relations so as to differen-
tiate according to the kind of regime: warm relations with civilian and
democratic governments, normal relations with nonrepressive military
regimes, and cool but correct relations with repressive governments.
Brzezinski agreed, noting that Brazil was not so repressive as is
commonly thought. Duncan and General Brown also agreed with
5 The IDB Board of Governors was scheduled to meet in Guatemala City May 30–
June 1, while the ADB representatives were scheduled to meet at ADB headquarters in
Manila April 21–23.
