438 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I a top-flight negotiator (but one loyal to you and one whose success will be your success).3 This challenge will not be overcome on a part-time basis, and endless exercises in drawing up draft declarations are no substitute for direct political negotiations, with someone holding noses to the grindstone. C. The Soviet Union Here we confront three basic choices: (a) the scope of what we negotiate and seek to ratify; (b) the human rights issue; (c) rules of detente and the Soviet involvement in Africa. We should not tie the three issues together, but we should be consistent and firm on each. On negotiations, the key issue which you ought to review is whether the chances for SALT would be increased or decreased if SALT is coupled with CTB. On the basis of the last two weeks’ discussions, I believe that you will have a unified administration behind you on SALT, and a disunited or disingenuous one on CTB. Moreover, I fear that opposition to SALT would be reinforced, and not diluted, by opposition to CTB. Thus the more effective sequence might be SALT signing, then China, then SALT ratification, and then CTB. However, this entails a political judgment on which you might prefer to consult with the Vice President and Ham.4 In the meantime, we are proceeding energetically on both SALT and CTB. On human rights, the Soviet rejection of our Shcharanskiy overture (and we should now let the word out to the Jewish community that we tried),5 the other trials, and the insulting Pravda postcard campaign directed at you (see below Facts)6 indicate that the Soviets have concluded that they can safely ignore our earlier protestations. I think the time is ripe for a strong statement of condemnation of the Soviets—and let the Soviets link this to SALT if they choose. (I do not understand the 3 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, the President added a question mark and drew an arrow from it to the sentence. 4 Hamilton Jordan. 5 In the right-hand margin, the President wrote “ok” and drew an arrow from it to this portion of the sentence. On July 7, the Department released a statement reading, in part: “The U.S. Government has repeatedly made its concern for Mr. Shcharanskiy known, both privately to the Soviet Government and publicly. Our interest in him is natural in view of his activities on behalf of human rights, particularly for the right to emigrate which we and the American people have a firm commitment to promote.” (Department of State Bulletin, August 1978, p. 28) 6 In the “Facts” section of the weekly report, Brzezinski noted: “Komsomolskaya Pravda has organized an insulting campaign, directed at you personally. I know of no precedent for it. I understand that we have now received from 7,000 to 9,000 postcards, as per the attached Xerox (Tab A). I believe that our displeasure at this personal campaign should be explicitly registered with the Soviets.”
