360  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Burt said he wanted to understand the Soviet concern. If you had 
a garrison of 100 km and the agreement set a limit at 80, you wouldn’t 
want to rip up 20 km. Was that right?
Nazarkin said that was right. The maximum existing length would 
set the limit for the future.
Burt said the two sides seemed to agree on the need to establish a 
limit.
Nazarkin agreed on the need for limits, but felt they should apply 
to future practices, not present practices.
Burt asked whether existing practices would be subject to any lim-
its under the Soviet approach.
Nazarkin said the sizes of existing garrisons would be recorded in 
the MOU. They could neither be enlarged nor made smaller. Turning 
to the U.S.-­proposed element 1B, Nazarkin said the Soviet side could 
accept the U.S. formulation with the addition of “whose nature, scope, 
and procedures are to be agreed upon by the two sides.”
Burt said the U.S. side would study the Soviet modification, but it 
looked pretty good.
Koltunov, turning to element 2A (“the number of restricted areas 
for road-­mobile ICBMs and their launchers shall not be limited”), said 
that, the fewer there were of restricted areas, the easier they would be 
to verify. What number did the U.S. want if not five?
Brooks pointed out that the U.S. was not yet certain about the bas-
ing mode for its road-­mobile system. One approach would be to have 
a smaller number of road-­mobile launchers in a restricted area than 
we believe to be the practice of the Soviet side. Thus, there could be 
different numbers of restricted areas for the two sides even if they had 
the same number of missiles and launchers. In the U.S. view, what was 
important was that the numbers be known, their size constrained, and 
their locations declared. This would provide the necessary verification 
without foreclosing options for U.S. road-­mobile basing, which is sev-
eral years in the future.
Khromov asked whether the U.S. believed the number of restricted 
areas should be limited in principle.
Brooks said no. Limiting the number of areas was not needed for 
verification. Also, the U.S. approach would avoid trying to force the 
sides to change existing practices.
Koltunov asked whether, if the sides agreed not to limit the num-
ber of restricted areas, the U.S. side could accept the Soviet view that 
a missile base should be comprised of no more than five RAs and a 
maintenance facility and that restricted areas should be limited in size 
to 100 square km.
Brooks said not completely.
