February 1951–February 1952
19
in Iran specifically and the Near East in general. The chance of such an
overt invasion of Iran would not appear probable but can not be com-
pletely overlooked.
5.
Paper Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated.
SUMMARY APPRAISAL OF THE CURRENT SITUATION IN IRAN
The assassination of Prime Minister Razmara seriously worsens an
already grave situation in Iran. Political and economic insecurity com-
bine with chauvinist and fanatical religious emotions to produce an at-
mosphere extremely favorable to Soviet subversion. Nationalization of
the oil industry possibly combined with further assassinations of top
Iran officials, including even the Shah, could easily lead to a complete
breakdown of the Iran government and social order, from which a
pro-Soviet regime might well emerge leaving Iran as a satellite state.
Assuming that we can for the moment discount the likelihood of
direct Soviet military intervention, the
following developments
threaten, unless remedial measures can be promptly taken.
1. Continuation of the present uncertain situation under which
Iran faces the threats of chaos and disintegration, with the ever-present
danger of anti-US elements gaining control of the government.
2. A serious worsening of the internal situation and further assassi-
nations, including that of the Shah and Prime Minister Ala. Such devel-
opments could well result in a complete breakdown of the central gov-
ernment and general disintegration.
3. The actual assumption of control over the central government by
pro-Soviet elements and the absorption of Iran into the Soviet orbit as a
satellite state. In our opinion, the most effective courses of action in
these various contingencies are as follows:
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A, Box 11, Folder 14,
Iran 1951–1953. Top Secret. The paper is undated but is attached to a working draft dated
March 13. This is apparently the paper presented to Department of State officials on
March 14. See Document 8.
