Human Rights cerned. The Reports have sought to describe the human rights situation in the context of a country’s history, political conditions, education levels, economic resources and development, judicial institutions, and religious and cultural traditions. Efforts have been made to improve the Reports each year, in terms of comprehensiveness, additional factual information, and coverage of aspects of human rights in which Members and Committees of the Congress have taken special interest. Each year when the Reports appear, our posts give copies to their host governments, and many foreign embassies receive them in Washington. Frequently delivery of the Report leads to a discussion of the U.S. human rights policy and enables U.S. officials to call attention to the overall objectives and concerns of that policy, as spelled out by the Congress and the Administration. In many cases this dialogue continues over time in relation to specific issues, for which the Human Rights Reports provide general background. In some cases, described below, foreign countries have objected strongly to certain portions of a Report, particularly when it describes serious violations of human rights. In a few other cases, governments have objected expressly to the fact that Reports are prepared at all, regarding them as interference in internal affairs. We explain that the Reports cover a wide range of countries, that no country has been singled out for criticism, and that all are described using a standard format. There have been both benefits and costs associated with the annual preparation and submission of these public Reports. The benefits are as follows: First, the Department’s view on current human rights practices of foreign assistance recipients aids Congressional evaluation of budget requests, and the Reports also furnish a useful reference in Executive Branch decisions on foreign assistance. Second, the preparation of the Reports stimulates within the Department a disciplined and regular fact-finding and analysis process. Third, the Reports enumerate human rights practices in considerable detail, communicating our concerns with a high degree of specificity to the governments involved. The Reports themselves often provide an impetus for bilateral discussions with host governments concerning the specific abuses cited. Fourth, the American public is better informed regarding these conditions as a result of the publication of the Reports. Finally, the Reports have come to symbolize the continuing importance of human rights concerns to our foreign policy decision-making. We have also experienced the following costs: First, when the statute required Reports only on countries receiving aid, many countries with poor human rights records, particu-
