262  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
will be presented to the NSC upon completion, will be pertinent in this 
regard.
4. The Department of Defense fully recognizes the need for flex­
ibility in U.S. forces, to the maximum degree attainable within avail­
able resources, in order to deter or meet limited war. Both the limited 
war study and our recent thorough examination of our force struc­
ture have revealed a significant U.S. and allied capability to cope with 
a wide variety of limited war situations, and efforts are continuing 
toward the improvement of this capability.
5. Certain problem areas relating to limited military operations are 
raised by the study on this subject, and others are highlighted in the 
memorandum from the Chairman of the Planning Board. These prob­
lem areas have significant bearing on our capabilities for limited war and 
must receive continuing attention in our national planning—­military, 
political, and economic—­in order to insure the most effective use of 
available resources. The questions raised will receive continuing atten­
tion in our military planning.
6. In earlier NSC discussions a question was raised concerning the 
implications of increasing doubt on the part of our European allies that 
the United States would risk its own devastation by “massive retali­
ation” in response to aggression not directly involving U.S. territory. 
There was expressed the possible need for a modification of U.S. strat­
egy in order to convince our allies that their security is not subject to an 
“all-­or-­nothing” decision by the United States. The problem raises the 
issue of whether limited war with the USSR is possible.
7. The Department of Defense has given careful consideration to 
this question. It is our considered opinion that war with the USSR can­
not be held to limited operations and limited objectives. Moreover, to 
imply that we might seek to hold a war with the USSR to limited oper­
ations and limited objectives would involve a dangerous weakening 
of our deterrent position and certainly have a deleterious effect on the 
attitude of our allies.
8. Because of the almost certain adverse effect on our over-­all 
deterrent inherent in any modification of strategy, the Department of 
Defense does not favor any such modification at this time for the pur­
pose of reassuring our allies, nor does it favor any revision of the mili­
tary paragraphs of NSC 5810/1 which can be interpreted as a departure 
from current strategy. The Department of Defense does subscribe to 
any measures designed to allay doubts on the part of our allies as to 
the firmness of our purpose and intentions and to reinforce their con­
fidence and determination, along the lines contemplated in paragraph 
17 of NSC 5810/1, which states in part: “. . . In particular, to counter 
existing uncertainty, the United States should reaffirm that its nuclear 
weapons will be used, as necessary, to defend the Free World interests.”
