3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
686
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
combat in third countries as anything other than taking unilateral ad-
vantage of us? (C)
I understand what you are saying, Bessmertnykh said, but you
also must grasp that detente is not the bible for us. You know what our
bible is. Certain things are more important to us than other things. Even
though we get no benefit from it—it is you, not we, who use Angolan
oil—we still have to do it. We understand that it may be costly and that
it may require sacrifice on our part, but nevertheless we must do it. (C)
In that case, I said, you must also grasp that the United States
cannot ignore your actions in areas such as Cuba, where our vital in-
terests are involved. Reciprocity has to be the basic key to sound rela-
tions between the superpowers and it should be obvious that sooner or
later we will react to Soviet insensitivity to our interests by being insen-
sitive to its interests. (C)
I understand what you are saying, Bessmertnykh repeated. We
are, of course, concerned that you do not take actions which will cause
us practical problems, but you should understand that we must sup-
port progressive forces throughout the world. We feel that it is our duty
to do so, and no action of your Government will dissuade us from ful-
filling our duty. (C)
The Soviet Union must equally understand, I rejoined, that a So-
viet three-legged policy of detente, of arming itself to the teeth, and of
adventurism in the Third World cannot be maintained indefinitely.
Something has to give. The change in climate with regard to the USSR,
both in the United States and in Western Europe, is a direct result of
policies pursued by the Soviet Government. The resurgence of what
Moscow likes to call “anti-detente forces” has been engendered by pol-
icies which Moscow itself is pursuing. (C)
You should not assume that we will change our policy, Bessmert-
nykh repeated. We have our aims in the world, and these will be car-
ried out. Militarily, we only really worry about the United States. China
is not a problem to us. The Gobi Desert is flat, he said, running his palm
across the luncheon table. We could be in Peking in two days. Western
Europe would be a matter of five minutes. (C)
It may take you two days to get to Peking, I retorted, but what
would you do after you got there? Bessmertnykh laughed and said he
had not fully thought out that matter. (C)
Realizing that he had gone farther than he intended, Bessmertnykh
quickly backtracked, and emphasized that this conversation was meant
to be frank and completely informal in nature. I replied that this was
certainly my understanding. (U)
At this point, the luncheon ended. (U)
