508
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“You can tell that I’m pleased, and I know that the world is waiting
for your accurate explanation of the results.”
The President replied to one question about the reaction of the con-
gressional leadership to the announcement before indicating that he
would answer one additional question. Answering a question about
the Taiwanese response, the President commented:
“I doubt if there will be massive applause in Taiwan, but we are
going to do everything we can to assure the Taiwanese that we put at
top—as one of the top priorities in our own relationships with the
People’s Republic and them—that the well-being of the people of
Taiwan will not be damaged.
“To answer the other question, I don’t think this will have any ad-
verse effect at all on the SALT negotiations as an independent matter.
And I think that the Soviets, as I said earlier, have been expecting this
development. They were not surprised, and we have kept them in-
formed recently. Their reaction has not been adverse, and we will pro-
ceed aggressively as we have in recent months, in fact throughout my
own administration, to conclude a successful SALT agreement.” (Public
Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pages 2267–2268)
On December 19, at 4:30 p.m., the President participated in a taped
interview for broadcast on the CBS television network. CBS Evening
News anchor Walter Cronkite conducted the interview from the CBS
studios in New York; the President was in the Map Room at the White
House. Cronkite began the interview by noting that the United States
had not received any commitment from the government in Beijing that
it would not “use force to take Taiwan.” He asked the President if the
current, or a subsequent, government in China attempted reunification,
would the United States deploy force to help the Taiwanese resist.
Carter responded:
“In the first place, the People’s Republic of China does not have the
capability of launching a 120-mile attack across the ocean against Tai-
wan, who are heavily fortified and also heavily armed. And we have
made it clear to the People’s Republic that after this year, when the
treaty does expire, this coming year, that we will sell to Taiwan defen-
sive weapons.
“I think it is accurate to say also, Walter, that the major interest that
the People’s Republic of China has in the Western Pacific is peace and
good relationships with us. They know our firm expectations, clearly
expressed to them, that the differences between China and Taiwan will
be settled peacefully. And I think to violate that understanding with us
would be to wipe out all the benefits to them and to Asia of peace and
their new relationship with us.
“We have, obviously, a desire and a commitment to maintain
peace in the Western Pacific. And as would be the case with an alterca-
