892
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
achieve full understanding so far.4 The Yugoslavs were interested in
obtaining up-to-date equipment because at some point in the future
they might have to face a better equipped adversary. (S)
Mr. Aaron stressed the great importance that the US attached to
Yugoslav independence and integrity. This was the basis of the US
interest in pursuing a military supply relationship with Yugoslavia; it
would allow Yugoslavia to strengthen its independence. While there
had been some difficulties, the US, for its part, was determined to
overcome them. We wanted to put the problems behind us and use
the institutional mechanisms created by the Memorandum of Under-
standing to lay the basis for improved cooperation in the military
field. (S)
General Vujatovic agreed. In his view the US and Yugoslavia should
attempt to put aside past problems and concentrate on the cooperative
aspects of the relationship. (C)
Mr. Aaron said that when he was in Yugoslavia with the Vice
President he had not had enough time to see very much. The next
time he visited Yugoslavia he hoped to see more, particularly defense
installations. (C)
General Vujatovic replied that Mr. Aaron would be welcome in
Yugoslavia and that he would try to arrange to show him whatever
he would like to see. (S)
Mr. Aaron said that he would particularly like to see units with
new American equipment. (S)
General Vujatovic noted that at present Yugoslavia did not have
such units. (U)
Mr. Aaron remarked that he would have to talk to Mr. Siena about
that. (U)
General Vujatovic said that the Yugoslavs had included visits to
defense installations when General Rogers was in Yugoslavia. General
Rogers had seemed quite pleased with his visit. Continuing, General
4 In telegram 7163 from Belgrade, September 24, Eagleburger reported that the
Yugoslav Government had decided to purchase 1,000 Dragon anti-tank missiles to be
delivered by the end of 1979. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D790438–1013) A week later, however, Vujatovic informed the Embassy that the Yugoslav
Government had changed its mind and would not be purchasing any Dragon missiles
either in 1979, or in subsequent years. (Telegram 7387 from Belgrade, October 2; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790451–1096) During their conversation,
Vujatovic informed Eagleburger that the Yugoslav Government found USG proposal
for the Dragon missile sale was unacceptable, and therefore had to cancel its order. He
added that “it is obvious that the leaders of the U.S. want an independent Yugoslavia,
but when it comes to practical application, there is always a tremendous burden of
procedural problems.” (Telegram 7520 from Belgrade, October 5; National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790460–1288)
