1979  575
General Seignious asked whether such information had ever leaked, 
and who knew now whether or not China was in the SIOP.
Dr. Brzezinski questioned whether this was a change of great mag-
nitude and asked what it would take to accomplish it.
Secretary Brown commented that taking China out of the SIOP 
could be accomplished quite simply in the preparation of the next SIOP 
revision. Approximately a hundred people would have significant 
knowledge of the change effected, but many more could be aware that 
a change had taken place.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if we must say that China had been taken out 
of the SIOP.
Secretary Brown answered we could ask for an RNO against China 
and simply retarget the current SIOP weapons used against China. He 
noted that this would be useful, but that if it came out it would still 
raise political problems. For example, as in the matter of arms transfers, 
would not removal of China from the SIOP per se imply some change in 
our “even handedness” toward Moscow and Peking?
Dr. Brzezinski favored making the move and proposed a further 
question—­should Cuba be in the SIOP?
General Jones pointed out that at present [2 lines not declassified]
Dr. Brzezinski responded by noting that Cuba’s absence from the 
“black book” would require someone to remind the National Command 
Authority that military targets in Cuba might have to be attacked; for 
example, general purpose forces with possible strategic implications.
Secretary Brown said we could put a Cuban option in the black book 
simply by inserting a page.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether China and Cuba could be treated in a 
like manner, [less than 1 line not declassified]
General Jones observed that China is in any case covered by [less 
than 1 line not declassified] attack options [less than 1 line not declassified]
Secretary Brown proposed to structure a decision paper for the Pres-
ident in which the option for attacking China would be changed [1 line 
not declassified] and the current SIOP weapons targeted against China 
would be retargeted against the Soviet Union.
Deputy Secretary Christopher questioned the assumption made in 
the background paper that removing China from the SIOP, if it became 
public, would not have a lasting effect on US/Soviet relations.
Secretary Brown noted his agreement with Christopher and that 
he had not repeated this statement in his summary of the paper. He 
observed further that if the Soviets became upset over major US exer-
cises, one should expect them to be disturbed over a change of China’s 
status in our strategic targeting.
