3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
619
agree in principle, but as for specific timing for the next meeting, that
could always be discussed and agreed upon later.
Naturally, Brezhnev would like to see the President visit the Soviet
Union, and therefore tendered him an invitation to visit the Soviet
Union whenever he considered this to be appropriate and at a time
when such a visit was convenient for both sides. As for the President’s
wish for regular contacts between the two countries at other high
levels, he could see no problem with that suggestion. The two Foreign
Ministers could continue their established practice of meetings and, if
necessary, they could meet even more frequently, depending on the ex-
istence of specific matters requiring discussion. As for the idea the Pres-
ident had expressed concerning meetings between the military leaders
of the two states, Brezhnev could state now that in principle he was not
opposed to expanding contacts along that line as well, if that would be
useful and properly reflect the development of Soviet-American rela-
tions. After all, the development of contacts of that kind was something
new, and it must be properly understood and appreciated by public
opinion in our two countries and in the world at large.
General, Further Contacts
President Carter wanted to say first of all that he had enjoyed get-
ting to know Brezhnev personally and that he believed their meeting
here in Vienna had been successful and will have great historic benefit
for the world in the future. (Upon hearing this remark, Brezhnev seized
the President’s hand and shook it vigorously.) The President noted that
Brezhnev had invited him to come to the Soviet Union, and [he?] would
like to do so, but since our President had made the last visit to the So-
viet Union, he would ask if it would be possible for Brezhnev to visit us
in the United States.
Brezhnev responded that it certainly will be possible. Whenever
conditions for such a visit were ripe, he would be pleased to hop
aboard an airplane and come to the United States. This was something
he could not refuse.
The President said that we have appreciated this almost unprece-
dented chance for our military leaders to meet. We had not attached
particularly great significance to their meeting, but thought that when
circumstances in the future dictated such meetings, they might be very
important.
China
The President now wanted to discuss the China situation. We be-
lieved that our having normal relations with China was good for us,
good for China, good for the Soviet Union and for world stability and
peace.
