Afghanistan
615
Afghanistan has ceased.2 On the face of it, Brezhnev’s statement was
probably not intended as a signal of Soviet interest in negotiation
on the issue. However, Moscow may have been impressed by the
subsequent Western reaction to even such a slight shift in the Soviet
position and is now attempting to play on this interest to imply reason-
ableness in the Kremlin.
Similarly, the Soviets have given little public play to the West
European proposal for the “neutralization” of Afghanistan.3 They have
not, however, dismissed it outright nor have they ruled out the idea
of future discussion or negotiations. Indeed, in his discussion with
Armand Hammer, Brezhnev reportedly expressed an interest in
mutually acceptable solutions.4 Thus, it would appear that the Soviets
are trying to dangle the prospect of a political solution to the Afghan
situation in order, in the short run, to divide western opinion and
policy, and, in the longer run, to keep open the possibility of a negoti-
ated agreement that in effect would place a world seal of approval on
the Soviet intervention and the resulting permanent satellization of
Afghanistan.
At the same time, the Soviets are intent upon limiting the damage
Afghanistan has wreaked on its relations with the West and the Third
World. Moscow has repeatedly stressed that detente remains its basic
policy line. Similarly, one Soviet article has tried to allay West European
fears of an increased Soviet threat to the oil rich Persian Gulf by resur-
recting its 1976 proposal that the security of the area be internationally
guaranteed.5 Moscow has also attempted to deflect Arab displeasure
by hammering away at the betrayal of the Palestinian cause allegedly
2 See Document 216.
3 The Foreign Ministers of the nine European Community nations, meeting in Rome
on February 19, issued a statement proposing a neutral Afghanistan under international
guarantees if the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw its troops. (Paul Lewis, “Europeans
Propose a Neutral Afghanistan With Guarantees to Allow Soviet to Leave,” New York
Times, February 20, 1980, p. A8) In addition, Vance visited Bonn, Rome, Paris, and
London February 19–22 to discuss Afghanistan with European leaders. For his February
20 joint press conference with German Foreign Minister Genscher, see the Department
of State Bulletin, April 1980, pp. 39–40.
4 Hammer, the head of Occidental Petroleum, had significant business interests in
the Soviet Union. His meeting with Brezhnev in Moscow, February 27, was reported in
telegram 3231 from Moscow, February 27. During the meeting, Brezhnev told Hammer
that if the United States and Afghanistan’s neighbors would guarantee nonintervention in
Afghan affairs, “we can come to a settlement,” provided that, subsequently, Afghanistan’s
military capabilities would be limited to defensive needs. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0629) The meeting was also reported in the New
York Times; see Jane Seaberry, “Hammer Expects Crisis With Soviets to End Soon,” New
York Times, March 4, 1980, p. D6.
5 Not further identified.
