1292  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Mr. Mann said this sounded like a step in the right direction but he 
doubted that import controls alone would be enough to cope with the 
problem. He also emphasized the importance of consulting with the 
IMF before taking any step such as this and the need to insure that such 
action is not discriminatory against U.S. products.
Perez Guerrero said that he had come up from Caracas only last 
night and that he would return this evening. He had already talked 
with the IMF staff technicians and there seemed to be a possibility, he 
said, that a small IMF mission might go to Venezuela to discuss these 
matters. He made note of Mr. Mann’s remarks about avoiding discrim-
ination and pointed out that the tax would apply to domestic goods 
as well as to imports. Perez Guerrero noted that this was not a matter 
calling for U.S. approval and that this meeting was designed merely to 
continue our customary policy of confiding in one another with respect 
to our problems and the actions proposed to meet them.
Mr. Ingersoll raised the question of the consistency of this pro-
posed action with our bi-­lateral Trade Agreement. Perez Guerrero said 
that, of course, a lot of the items to be licensed are included in the bi-­
lateral but that neither the temporary, emergency licensing system nor 
the non-­discriminatory excise tax would contravene that agreement.
Mr. Mann said that while this might help, he felt that other actions 
were imperative, especially the restoration of confidence in relations 
between the foreign oil companies and the Venezuelan Government. 
He said that the increasing oversupply of oil on the world markets cou-
pled with the increasing efforts of such areas as the European Common 
Market to reserve their markets for preferred suppliers in their own 
political orbit, all augured ill for the competitive position of Venezuelan 
oil unless there is a high degree of cooperation between the Government 
and the private producers.
Perez Guerrero said that President Betancourt, Perez Alfonso, and 
others in his Government were trying to deal with these problems. He 
said that he, himself, was much more optimistic than Mr. Mann with 
respect to future markets for Venezuelan oil.
Perez Guerrero spoke of various, recurring rumors that the Bolivar 
will shortly be devalued and said, in a most emphatic tone, that there 
will be no devaluation. Such will be avoided at all costs.
Both Perez Guerrero and Mr. Mann agreed on the extremely 
sensitive nature of the information which had been discussed con-
cerning proposed import restrictions. It was recognized by all pres-
ent that a serious and embarrassing scandal could result if there were 
any leak of this information before the official announcement by the 
Venezuelan Government.
