150 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 34. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, September 2, 1977 SUBJECT Secretary Brown’s Memorandum on Choosing a Single ALCM Development Program Secretary Brown has responded to your request for more information concerning his proposal to continue with both the ALCM and the ALCM–B cruise missile programs. His memo (Tab A) provides information on all the questions you raised in your memo (Tab B)2 except that pertaining to tentative deployment plans, which are still being worked out. For your information, however, we have determined at the staff level that a tentative deployment plan has been proposed—­to convert 150 B–52 G’s into ALCM carriers by 1986. The conversion would start in earnest in 1981, building to a rate of about three aircraft per month, and would involve buying about 2400 missiles (which would allow 20 per aircraft plus an allowance for spare and pipeline missiles). We have also determined a fact which is not stated explicitly in Harold’s memo—­current plans are that if we proceed to a fly-­off between the two ALCM candidates, our choice of a single contractor for production will be made not just on technical factors, but also on the basis of firm production price bids. I believe that the information at hand is as reasonable a basis for decision as can be expected in the near term; in my view the determining factors in the decision whether to have one or two ALCM programs turns on two risks—1) the risk that a technical problem will delay the program significantly and 2) the risk that production costs will be much higher than now anticipated. Here is our account of these risks. Technological Risk. While there may be an occasional short delay in either of these programs, it seems very unlikely that any of the engineering problems yet to be solved will prove very difficult. Even in the unlikely event we were to run into serious problems, our strategic posture will not be so close to the margin that our security would be affected by a delay of even several years’ duration. The issue, however, is that the political and corresponding fiscal consequences of failing 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 42, Missiles: 8–9/77. Secret. Sent for action. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum. 2 See Tab 4, Document 33.
