3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 704 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI At the same time, there is much evidence that the land border, the air space and the territorial waters of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea have been violated from the Thai side. In light of this, Mr. President, we would like to hope that the United States, which has close ties with Thailand, will give its leadership good advice, so that the hostile actions against a neighboring country will cease and the territory of Thailand will not be used as a base for sending Pol Pot bands into Kampuchea. Such a policy would serve the interests of normalizing the situation not only on the border between Kampuchea and Thailand, but also in Southeast Asia as a whole. This would be in accord with the understanding jointly confirmed by us in Vienna regarding the importance of efforts to facilitate the removal of existing centers of international tension and to prevent new ones from arising. Respectfully, L.I. Brezhnev3 3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 243. Message From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron) to President Carter1 Washington, December 24, 1979, 1724Z WH92270. Deliver as soon as possible. Subject: Reply From Brezhnev on Iran Sanctions. President Brezhnev has replied to your letter2 in the message below received via State Department channels. It is not particularly helpful but it does not threaten a veto and the tone is quite moderate. With a Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the offing, I do not believe they want a struggle with us in the Security Council. They may even 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 18, U.S.S.R.—Carter/Brezhnev Correspondence (9/79–2/80). Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Sent from the White House Situation Room. Aaron sent the cable with instructions that it be delivered “as soon as possible” to Carter, who was at Camp David, December 21–28. Aaron was forwarding to Carter Brezhnev’s response, which was sent to the Department as telegram 27895 from Moscow, December 24. Carter initialed Aaron’s telegram. 2 See footnote 3 below.
