Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1045
3. Participants:
U.S.	
	
USSR
Amb. L.F. Brooks	
Amb. Yu. K. Nazarkin
4. Brooks said that he had received only sketchy reports from ongo-
ing discussions in Washington between General Moiseyev and various 
U.S. officials.2 As Brooks understood it, a START working group had 
been formed which had discussed new types, ALCMs, and data denial. 
Brooks had been told that, in that working group, Colonel Koltunov 
had objected strongly to the U.S. ALCM position. Brooks asked if 
Nazarkin could elaborate.
5. Nazarkin said he was not aware of the specific issues Koltunov 
had raised. The Soviet side, however, did not intend to reopen any set-
tled ALCM issues. Thus, Nazarkin presumed that Koltunov was refer-
ring only to unresolved issues.
6. Brooks asked the travel plans of deputy minister Obukhov. 
Nazarkin professed not to know when or if Obukhov would return 
to Moscow. (Comment: Other Soviets had suggested Obukhov would 
leave in early June. End comment.)
7. Nazarkin asked Brooks how long it would take to finish their work 
if CFE were resolved. Brooks said that, with the exception of data denial, 
he thought three to four weeks was feasible. Data denial was more com-
plex and Brooks was reluctant to speculate, given the continuing diffi-
culty Washington was having in establishing a U.S. position. Brooks then 
asked Nazarkin to assess the mood on the Soviet delegation.
8. Nazarkin said that, as other Soviets had made clear, the Soviet 
side was discouraged by U.S. inability to engage. Nonetheless, Nazarkin 
continued, he personally remained hopeful. The sides had already 
solved such enormously difficult issues as heavy missiles, SLCMs, and 
ALCMs. The remaining issues were nothing in comparison to what 
had already been accomplished. Nazarkin said that what was neces-
sary now was for the U.S. side to show some movement. The Soviet 
side had additional flexibility in its instructions, but was not authorized 
to employ it until there was movement on the U.S. side. (Comment: 
Nazarkin did not specify the area of additional flexibility; Brooks had 
the impression it was general. End comment.) In Nazarkin’s view three 
to four weeks would be enough time to complete the treaty, possibly 
including data denial if the U.S. side accepted the Soviet approach.
9. Brooks recalled a suggestion Nazarkin had made the day before 
that new types of mobile ICBMs not have their warhead attributions 
2 Reference is to Soviet Chief of the General Staff General Mikhail Moiseyev, who 
was in Washington May 20–21 to negotiate outstanding U.S.-Soviet differences over the 
CFE Treaty.
