418 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement orientation of Costa Rica, as described above, this balance is believed to be in harmony with United States objectives. However, there are certain phases of assistance in the military field to which additional attention might well be given. These will be dealt with in a separate despatch.6 Non-United States assistance activities in Costa Rica are carried out by several international organizations including the United Nations Technical Assistance Board, the Food and Agriculture Organization, UNESCO, World Health Organization, UNICEF, the International Labor Organization, and the International Rank of Reconstruction and Development. In addition CARE has a small program in the country, and there are small assistance efforts by certain European countries. Through the serious and careful study of USOM, considerable progress has been made during the year on the primary problem of determining just what activities are carried on by these various non- United States agencies and the extent to which they may be duplicating or overlapping United States programs. In general there do not appear to be any serious problems of imbalance between these and comparable non-United States programs in the country. However, as set forth under “e” below, it is believed that there is substantial room for improvement in the coordination attempted by the Costa Rican Government itself in order that the most effective use of those international organization assistance programs can be made. b. Capability to Utilize Assistance. A majority of U.S. assistance is applied through the “Servicio” technique. These “Servicios,” such as STICA for agriculture and SCISP for health, are joint U.S.-Costa Rican administrative agencies, which make it possible to apply technical assistance on a daily operational basis. This close operational relationship of U.S. technicians with their Costa Rican counterparts greatly facilitates achieving the ultimate goal of full administrative and operational responsibility by the Costa Ricans themselves. It assures the most effective use of our technical assistance as well as a much larger degree of complementary participation in the project by the host government. c. Implementation of U. S. Policy. A careful review of the proposed U.S. assistance program for FY1960 (especially of the ICA program, which comprises the majority of such assistance) has been made and it is the Embassy’s opinion that all projects have a direct relationship with U.S. policy objectives. They are especially directed toward promoting the growth of a dynamic, diversified economy based on the free enterprise system. They will undoubtedly also assist in meeting the special policy objectives outlined above. For example, during the Eisenhower study group visit the problem of expanding rural credit for diversification of 6 The despatch under reference was not further identified.
