International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 29 velopmental plans are to have any hope, and massive debt problems avoided. (3) Our own failure to develop a domestic program of structural adjustment, as you have been discussing in the broad context of fighting inflation. (4) Our half-hearted implementation of the anti-dumping and countervailing duty statutes. Virtually every industry complaint centers on “unfair” competition by foreign governments, and present law provides ready remedies whenever such situations can be demonstrated. (5) Our MTN strategy has not been geared effectively toward dealing with our domestic problems. Its focus on agriculture is no help in dealing with problems of government intervention—notably export subsidies—in the industrial sector. A Proposed Strategy (1) A whole new program of structural reform must be at the center. History indicates that such a program can be worked out. It has been done in many specific cases outside the trade area—Studebaker, Armour Packing, and numerous Department of Defense cases. Three features are necessary: —More money, though not necessarily a huge amount. —An aggressive individual to manage the program, or perhaps different individuals for each key industry (starting with shoes). —A focus on communities, rather than on firms or workers per se, as is done by the Defense Department. (2) A tough Treasury stance on anti-dumping and countervailing. This might diffuse much of the pressure on steel, and some on shoes. (3) Reorientation of our MTN strategy to downplay agriculture and focus instead on export subsidies and other government interventions. Such a reorientation could be announced at the summit, and provide major help for our domestic effort. (4) Where necessary, until the adjustment program becomes effective and credible, limited resort to import restraints. —Firming up of Japan’s commitment to reduce its color TV exports by 0.5 million sets in 1977. I could call Tokyo on this personally, to follow up the commitment made to me during the Mondale trip,2 and 2 Bergsten discussed his observations while accompanying Mondale on his trip to Western Europe and Japan in a February 2 memorandum to Blumenthal. On the issue of Japanese TV exports, Bergsten reported that “Fukuda assured us that they will keep color TV exports under control. MITI gave me the details: a 10 percent cutback from 1976 via “administrative guidance.” But we will have to watch them like hawks, on this and steel.” (National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten, 1977–1979, Box 1, POL–5 Visits 1977) For the results of Mondale’s trip to Western Europe and Japan, see Document 5.
