390 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 129. Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to President Carter1 Washington, April 28, 1978 SUBJECT Visit of Prime Minister Fukuda The appreciation of the Japanese yen vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar over the past six months has caused Prime Minister Fukuda both economic and political difficulties. About six weeks ago, he instructed his cabinet to seek out every possible opportunity to make high-level representations to the U.S. about the need for U.S. action to stabilize the dollar.2 Japanese irritation was exacerbated by the fact that the U.S. was intervening by selling Deutschemarks but not by selling yen. It is neither politically feasible nor economically appropriate for us to intervene to support the yen-dollar rate, especially while Japan is running large trade and current account surpluses. For the time being, Japanese concern over the yen-dollar rate has eased because the dollar has been slightly firmer for the past month. Recognizing that the U.S. is not prepared to commit itself to support the dollar against the yen through intervention, Fukuda has now established a public posture which will enable him to treat our announced 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 8, Japan: Prime Minister Fukuda, 4/30/78–5/6/78: Cables and Memos. Confidential. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “ok. J.” The memorandum was sent to Carter under cover of a May 1 memorandum from Owen, who noted that “the daily consultation referred to in this memo would be between the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as the US Treasury’s agent, and its opposite number, the Bank of Japan. Communication between our Treasury Department and the Japanese Finance Ministry would also be more frequent. It may not amount to much substantively, but it will give Fukuda something to take home and therefore it could be important politically.” (Ibid.) 2 In his March 31 reply to Carter’s March 27 letter (see footnote 1, Document 124), Fukuda asserted that Japan’s ability to reduce its current account surplus depended upon the major industrialized nations strengthening “their concerted action for stabilizing the world economy, especially the international monetary situation. I sincerely hope that the United States, which is the key currency country, gives due considerations to it.” (Letter from Fukuda to Carter, March 31; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 11, Japan: Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda, 1–12/78) According to telegram 6538 from Tokyo, April 15, during an April 14 meeting with Schultze, Fukuda “spoke candidly about his expectation that U.S. as world’s largest country whose currency is key currency would show greater concern about decline of dollar lest further declines lead to oil price increase, reversal of progress of last five years and resultant political confusion and chaos.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780161–1041)
