Peru  1079
everything possible to help the Beltran Cabinet succeed. This means 
primarily consistent encouragement of the Peruvian Government to 
develop an effective economic and social program and prompt favor-
able action on our part on soundly conceived development projects 
which require foreign financing.
2. Some way must be found to give the Indians and mestizos a 
stake in the free enterprise system. The Indians are more contented 
when they have their own land—the Vicar General of the Catholic 
Church in Puno asserts that the higher incidence of land ownership 
among the Indians in Puno as opposed to that in Arequipa and Cuzco 
is one of the primary reasons communism is not making as much head-
way in Puno. Such measures as agrarian reform, housing, and highway 
construction to open new areas as proposed by the Beltran Cabinet, will 
help considerably. These and other programs that will demonstrate that 
the free enterprise system will assure a higher standard of living and 
a better distribution of the wealth will do more than anything else to 
make communism less attractive as a solution. We should encourage 
such programs and identify ourselves with them. We should encourage 
not only Government officials to adopt such measures but also opinion 
leaders whenever the opportunity presents itself.
3. The cooperative agriculture program (SCIPA) should be strength-
ened, especially its program of supervised credit. The credit program 
of the Maryknoll Fathers in Puno and the SCIPA supervised agricul-
tural credit program in general have been successful and opened up an 
avenue for improvement of the standard of living which as a practical 
matter has not existed for the lower classes. We should not make the 
mistake of expanding too rapidly and possibly discrediting the pro-
gram, but we should broaden this program as rapidly as is consistent 
with sound management. Other ICA programs are making a sound and 
welcome contribution, but increased and better production is needed 
more than anything else in Peru not only to raise the standard of living 
but to combat communist activities.
4. Our information effort should be concentrated primarily on 
identifying the United States with the aspirations of Peru and creating a 
climate for economic measures and reforms that will achieve these aspi-
rations. This can probably best be done by U.S. officials encouraging 
the Government to adopt such measures and, once proposed, helping 
through our information program to develop a favorable atmosphere 
for them. Some of the unpopularity of the Prado Government during its 
first three years has rubbed off on the United States because of our sup-
port of his administration. Our reputation is even more at stake with 
Pedro Beltran as Prime Minister because he and his announced policy 
and his actions are closely identified with the United States. This will be 
a distinct advantage to us if he succeeds and we should help build a cli-
mate to help him succeed. At the same time we do the constructive job
