712 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II cific programs and specific budget items for: emergency assistance, including food-security arrangements for poor countries; humanitarian assistance directed to malnourished poor people and combined with local self-help projects for these families to raise their incomes; food for development, both to support major developmental projects such as land reform and to support long-term developmental policies by the governments of poor countries; and supporting assistance for situations, such as the Middle East, where the United States’ strategic interests are involved. The legislation would provide for multiple-year commitments and reserve stocks of American food to back up these commitments. The legislation also would provide for active participation by voluntary organizations and land-grant universities and for collaboration between the Department of State/Agency for International Development and the Department of Agriculture in administering foreign food assistance. —Recommendations for introducing effective management of foreign food assistance. Now the lines of responsibility and authority in Washington and the field seem designed to maximize conflict and minimize accomplishment. The P.L. 480 Interagency Staff Committee—a group composed of non-policy-level people, many of whom have inadequate knowledge of food and agriculture and the countries to which our food assistance is directed—should be abolished. After consulting with Secretary Vance and Governor Gilligan, I will recommend to you an arrangement between State/AID and the Department of Agriculture which will establish executive responsibility for P.L. 480 and will bring together our foreign policy and developmental interests with professional knowledge of food and agriculture in developing countries. Scientific and Technical Collaboration On June 20 the National Research Council (NRC) submitted to you an excellent analysis of the world food and nutrition situation and recommended actions by the United States Government to deal with that situation.8 The NRC stressed the need to expand food production in poor countries and to improve the distribution of the benefits of that increased production to satisfy nutritional needs of the poor. The NRC also emphasized that efficient food production here and abroad requires sustained scientific and technical collaboration between the United States and other countries. In fact, such collaboration supports both our developmental interests and our commercial interests. Already the Department of Agriculture has collaborative arrangements with some 20 countries outside the group of countries served by 8 See Document 212.
