438 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI want to close bases and cut weapons so the troops will have to come out of Europe. There will be enormous political pressure to pull out. Sununu: The first fight will be in the Budget Committee that will decree the budget level. Baker: We can win if the President wants. My way accommodates both. Cheney: The first day I was in Brussels I had to put out fires that the significant US reductions were trouble. The East Europeans, the Soviets, the West Europeans all want us to stay. Everybody but Congress. The President: They don’t want us to pull out down to 200,000? Cheney: According to the intelligence, the Warsaw Pact is basically irrelevant. DIA says that the Warsaw Pact no longer possesses any offensive capability. This will pose a bigger Hill problem. The President: Isn’t this good news? So we sit here with 275,000 troops, no reaction to Soviet actions, the world is changing and we’re going to change with it. Baker: Going to take a decision to do this, you have to tell the Allies quietly and that it’s not in CFE I. The President: Instead of being concerned about Eastern Europe we should be asking what’s in it for us. Why do we always need the same number of troops and bombs? We should test the Soviets. Ask them to do something we think they’ll never do. Otherwise we’ll pass up the opportunity, be cut unilaterally and get nothing for it. We shouldn’t be seen as begrudging change but reacting boldly. We have an enormous opportunity to do something dramatically different. We can’t let the FRG or the UK drive us. Darman: If you go to the Hill, they’ll pocket the change. They have the certainty that we’ll get something for it. If you go too soon, they’ll pocket it. Baker: What about Korean withdrawals? Cheney: The military situation there is just different than in Europe. Powell: We can reduce there too but the numbers aren’t large. Baker: Go to 200,000 as a potential and get into Europe later. The President: What would the Soviets have to do for the US to go below 200,000? Powell: They would have to truly restructure their forces and change their mobilization capability. The President: What happens when the Soviets are gone from Eastern Europe? They are trying to preserve the USSR. What do they have to do to demonstrate this? Are we thinking about this? I don’t want to miss an opportunity. Baker: There is less chance that Congress will pocket any reduction proposal if it’s part of an arms control negotiation.
